ST. JAMES, MINNESOTA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2026 S-5 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ordinance 034, fourth series, passed 12-16-
2025
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Rules of interpretation
   
10.03   Application for future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Severability
   
10.07   Reference to other sections
   
10.08   Reference to offices
   
10.09   Errors and omissions
   
10.10   Official time
   
10.11   Reasonable time
   
10.12   Ordinances repealed
   
10.13   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.14   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.15   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
10.16   Ordinances which amend or supplement a code
   
10.17   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights, and liabilities
   
10.18   Copies of code
   
10.19   Adoption of statutes and rules, and supplements by reference
   
10.20   Enforcement
 
   
10.98   Supplement administrative penalties
   
10.99   General penalty and enforcement
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   (A)   All ordinances of a permanent, and general, nature of the city, as
revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered, and consolidated into component
codes, titles, chapters, and sections, shall be known, and designated, as the
“St. James City Code”, for which designation “code of ordinances”, “codified
ordinances”, or “code” may be substituted. Code title, chapter, and section
headings do not constitute any part of the law as contained in the code.
   (B)   All references to codes, titles, chapters, and sections are to the
components of the code, unless otherwise specified. Any component code may be
referred to, and cited by, its name, such as the “Traffic Code”. Sections may
be referred to, and cited by, the designation “§” followed by the number, such
as “§
10.01”. Headings and captions used in this code, other than the title, chapter,
and section numbers, are employed for reference purposes only, and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.02 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   Generally. Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication
required, the same rules of construction, definition, and application shall
govern the interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of
state law.
   (B)   Specific rules of interpretation. The construction of all ordinances
of this city shall be by the following rules, unless that construction is
plainly repugnant to the intent of the legislative body, or of the context of
the same ordinance.
      (1)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other, as if
written “and/or”, whenever the context requires.
      (2)   Acts by assistants. When a statute, code provisions, or ordinance
requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent, or deputy as well, may do
as the principal, that requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of the
act by an authorized agent, or deputy.
      (3)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
      (4)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of
terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated, unless expressly so
limited.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION FOR FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted which amend, or supplement, this code, unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code, other than the title, chapter, and
section numbers, are employed for reference purposes only, and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, or
ordinary, and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar, and appropriate, meaning in law shall be understood according to
their technical import.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different
meaning.
      CITY. The City of St. James, Minnesota. The term CITY, when used in this
code, may also be used to refer to the City Council, and its authorized
representatives.
      CODE, THIS CODE, or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This city code as modified
by amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters, or sections.
      COUNTY. Watonwan County, Minnesota.
      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
      MONTH. A calendar month.
      OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an OATH, and in those cases, the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED. All terms shall mean a pledge
taken by the person, and administered by an individual authorized by state law.
      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION, or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission, or department of this city, unless the context clearly
requires otherwise.
      PERSON. Extends to, and includes, an individual, person, persons, firm,
corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee, or receiver. Whenever used in any
clause prescribing, and imposing, a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER, as
applied to any unincorporated entity, shall mean the partners, or members,
thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers, or agents, thereof.
      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before, or next after, respectively.
      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
      STATE. The State of Minnesota.
      SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading
in the chapter analysis, and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.
      WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
      YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.
§ 10.06 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now, or later, amended, or its application
to any person or circumstance, is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision, or
application.
§ 10.07 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, that
reference shall extend, and apply, to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered, unless the subject matter is
changed, or materially altered, by the amendment, or revision.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office, or officer, shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of this city exercising the powers, duties, or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions, or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.09 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word, or words, necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word, or words, to which no meaning
can be attached; or the use of a word, or words, when another word, or words,
was clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected,
and the word, or words, supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with
the manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though
the correct words were contained in the text as originally published. No
alteration shall be made, or permitted, if any question exists regarding the
nature, or extent, of the error.
§ 10.10 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws,
shall be the official time within this city for the transaction of all city
business.
§ 10.11 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time, or requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME OR
NOTICE shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act, or the giving of the notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
is a legal holiday or a Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.12 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from, and after, the effective date of this code.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary, or special, nature, and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code, shall remain in full force,
and effect, unless herein repealed expressly, or by necessary implication.
§ 10.14 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication shall
take effect from, and after, the due publication thereof, unless otherwise
expressly provided.
§ 10.15 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance, or part of an ordinance, shall be repealed, or
modified, by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance, or part of an ordinance,
thus repealed, or modified, shall continue in force until the publication of
the ordinance repealing, or modifying, it when publication is required to give
effect to it, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall, in any way, be affected, released, or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force,
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
§ 10.16 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT A CODE.
   (A)   If the City Council shall desire to amend any existing chapter, or
section, of this code, the chapter, or section, shall be specifically repealed,
and a new chapter, or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in
its place.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter, or section, shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of the chapter, or section. In addition to this
indication, as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption, or
title, shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.17 PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS, AND LIABILITIES.
   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date of
this code shall be prosecuted, and remain punishable, as provided by those
laws. This code does not affect any rights, or liabilities, accrued, penalties
incurred, or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code. The
liabilities, proceedings, and rights are continued; punishments, penalties, or
forfeitures shall be enforced, and imposed, as if this code had not been
enacted. In particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize highway
rights-of-way, contracts entered into, or franchises granted, the acceptance,
establishment, or vacation of any highway, and the election of corporate
officers, shall remain valid in all respects, as if this code had not been
enacted.
§ 10.18 COPIES OF CODE.
   The official copy of this code shall be kept in the office of the City
Clerk-Treasurer for public inspection. The City Clerk-Treasurer shall provide a
copy for sale for a reasonable charge.
§ 10.19 ADOPTION OF STATUTES AND RULES, AND SUPPLEMENTS BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   It is the intention of the City Council that, when adopting this code
of ordinances, all future amendments to any state, or federal, rules and
statutes adopted by reference in this code, or referenced in this code, are
hereby adopted by reference, or referenced as if they had been in existence at
the time this code was adopted, unless there is clear intention expressed in
the code to the contrary.
   (B)   It is the intention of the City Council that, when adopting the code
of ordinances, all future supplements are hereby adopted as if they had been in
existence at the time this code was enacted, unless there is clear intention
expressed in the code to the contrary.
§ 10.20 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Any licensed peace officer of the city’s Police Department, or the
County Sheriff, or any Deputy Sheriff, shall have the authority to enforce any
provision of this code.
   (B)   As permitted by M.S. § 626.862, as it may be amended from time to
time, the City Clerk-Treasurer shall have the authority to administer, and
enforce, this code. In addition, under that statutory authority, certain
individuals designated within the code, or by the City Clerk-Treasurer or City
Council, shall have the authority to administer, and enforce, the provisions
specified. All, and any, person, or persons, designated may issue a citation in
lieu of arrest, or continued detention, to enforce any provision of the code.
   (C)   The City Clerk-Treasurer, and any city official or employee designated
by this code who has the responsibility to perform a duty under this code, may,
with the permission of a licensee of a business, or owner of any property, or
resident of a dwelling, or other person in control of any premises, inspect, or
otherwise enter, any property to enforce compliance with this code.
   (D)   If the licensee, owner, resident, or other person in control of a
premises objects to the inspection of, or entrance to, the property, the City
Clerk-Treasurer, peace officer, or any employee, or official, charged with the
duty of enforcing the provisions of this code may, upon a showing that probable
cause exists for the issuance of a valid search warrant from a court of
competent jurisdiction, petition, and obtain, a search warrant before
conducting the inspection, or otherwise entering the property. This warrant
shall be only to determine whether the provisions of this code enacted to
protect the health, safety, and welfare of the people are being complied with,
and to enforce these provisions only, and no criminal charges shall be made as
a result of the warrant. No warrant shall be issued unless there be probable
cause to issue the warrant. Probable cause occurs if the search is reasonable.
Probable cause does not depend on specific knowledge of the condition of a
particular property.
   (E)   Every licensee, owner, resident, or other person in control of
property within the city shall permit, at reasonable times, inspections of, or
entrance to, the property by the City Clerk-Treasurer, or any other authorized
city officer or employee, only to determine whether the provisions of this code
enacted to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the people are being
complied with, and to enforce these provisions. Unreasonable refusal to permit
the inspection of, or entrance to, the property shall be grounds for
termination of any, and all, permits, licenses, or city service to the
property. Mailed notice shall be given to the licensee, owner, resident, or
other person in control of the property, stating the grounds for the
termination, and the licensee, owner, resident, or other person in control of
the property shall be given an opportunity to appear before the City Clerk-
Treasurer to object to the termination before it occurs, subject to appeal of
the City Clerk-Treasurer’s decision to the City Council at a regularly
scheduled, or special, meeting.
   (F)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of
the city to enter private property in urgent emergency situations where there
is an imminent danger in order to protect the public health, safety, and
welfare.
§ 10.98 SUPPLEMENT ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES.
   (A)   In addition to those administrative penalties established in this
code, and the enforcement powers granted in §
10.20, the City Council is authorized to create, by resolution, adopted by a
majority of the members of the Council, supplemental administrative penalties.
The resolution may not proscribe administrative penalties for traffic offenses
designated by M.S. § 169.999, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (B)   These administrative penalty procedures in this section are intended
to provide the public, and the city, with an informal, cost effective, and
expeditious alternative to traditional criminal charges for violations of
certain provisions of this code. The procedures are intended to be voluntary on
the part of those who have been charged with those offenses.
   (C)   Administrative penalties for violations of various provisions of the
code, other than those penalties established in the code, or in statutes that
are adopted by reference, may be established from time to time by resolution of
a majority of the members of the City Council. In order to be effective, an
administrative penalty for a particular violation must be established before
the violation occurred.
   (D)   In the discretion of the peace officer, City Clerk-Treasurer, or other
person giving notice of an alleged violation of a provision of this code, in a
written notice of an alleged violation, sent by first class mail to the person
who is alleged to have violated the code, the person giving notice may request
the payment of a voluntary administrative penalty for the violation directly to
the City Clerk-Treasurer within 14 days of the notice of the violation. In the
sole discretion of the person giving the notice of the alleged violation, the
time for payment may be extended an additional 14 days, whether or not
requested by the person to whom the notice has been given. In addition to the
administrative penalty, the person giving notice may request in the notice to
the alleged violator to adopt a compliance plan to correct the situation
resulting in the alleged violation, and may provide that, if the alleged
violator corrects the situation resulting in the alleged violation within the
time specified in the notice, that the payment of the administrative penalty
will be waived.
   (E)   At any time before the payment of the administrative penalty is due,
the person who has been given notice of an alleged violation may request to
appear before the City Council to contest the request for payment of the
penalty. After a hearing before the Council, the Council may determine to
withdraw the request for payment, or to renew the request for payment. Because
the payment of the administrative penalty is voluntary, there shall be no
appeal from the decision of the Council.
   (F)   At any time after the date the payment of the administrative penalty
is due, if the administrative penalty remains unpaid, or the situation creating
the alleged violation remains uncorrected, the city, through its Attorney, may
bring criminal charges in accordance with state law and this code. Likewise,
the city, in its discretion, may bring criminal charges in the first instance,
rather than requesting the payment of an administrative penalty, even if a
penalty for the particular violation has been established by Council
resolution. If the administrative penalty is paid, or if any requested
correction of the situation resulting in the violation is completed, no
criminal charges shall be initiated by the city for the alleged violation.
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of this
code, for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The penalty, which may be imposed for
any crime which is a misdemeanor under this code, including state statutes
specifically adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not more than 90
days, or a fine of not more than $1,000, or both.
   (B)   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of this
code, including state statutes specifically adopted by reference, which is
designated to be a petty misdemeanor, shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
petty misdemeanor. The penalty, which may be imposed for any petty offense
which is a petty misdemeanor, shall be a sentence of a fine of not more than
$300.
   (C)   Pursuant to M.S. § 631.48, as it may be amended from time to time, in
either the case of a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor, the costs of
prosecution may be added. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon
each day during which a violation occurs, or continues.
   (D)   The failure of any officer, or employee, of the city to perform any
official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer, or employee,
to the penalty imposed for a violation.
   (E)   In addition to any penalties provided for in this section, or in §
10.98, if any person, firm, or corporation fails to comply with any provision
of this code, the Council, or any city official designated by it, may institute
appropriate proceedings at law, or at equity, to restrain, correct, or abate
the violation.
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
      
31.   EMPLOYEES AND OFFICIALS
      
32.   ORGANIZATIONS
      
33.   PUBLIC SAFETY AND LAW ENFORCEMENT
      
34.   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
      
35.   FINANCES AND TAXATION
      
36.   GENERAL CITY POLICIES
      
37.   SCHEDULES AND FINES
CHAPTER 30: MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
Section
   
30.01   Mayor and Council members; deadlines
   
30.02   Limits and boundaries of election districts
   
30.03   Council meetings
   
30.04   Council procedure at regular meetings
   
30.05   Salaries of Mayor and Council members
   
30.06   Consent agendas
§ 30.01 MAYOR AND COUNCIL MEMBERS; DEADLINES.
   Effective upon the passage of this section, the filings for candidates for
Mayor and Council member shall be in compliance with M.S. §§ 204B.01 et seq.,
as they are amended from time to time.
(Ord. 35, third series, passed 6-21-2016)
§ 30.02 LIMITS AND BOUNDARIES OF ELECTION DISTRICTS.
   (A)   The city is divided into two wards called the first and second ward,
respectively.
   (B)   The limits, and boundaries, of the first and second ward are hereby
amended as follows (see image below for the map of the first and second wards):
      (1)   First ward. The first ward of the city is all of the area that lies
west of Armstrong Boulevard North and Armstrong Boulevard South, excluding
property south of Tenth Avenue South; and
      (2)   Second ward. The second ward of the city is all of the area that
lies east of Armstrong Boulevard North and Armstrong Boulevard South, including
property south of Tenth Avenue South.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f834e1dc79263ef9aedf32528f6efbd946a22a13/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1536.png]
 
(Ord. 25, third series, passed 3-20-2012; Ord. 003, fourth series, passed 3-15-
2022)
§ 30.03 COUNCIL MEETINGS.
   (A)   Regular meetings. Regular meetings of the Council shall be held twice
a month at a time established by resolution of the Council at the
organizational meeting in January of each year. The place of the meeting shall
be the Council Chambers in the City Hall, unless otherwise designated by action
of the Council.
   (B)   Special meetings. Special meetings of the Council may be called by the
Mayor, or by any two other members of the Council by writing, filed with the
City Clerk-Treasurer stating the time, place, and purpose of the meeting.
Notice of a special meeting shall be given by the City Clerk-Treasurer to each
member of the Council by mailing a copy of the filing to all members who did
not sign, or issue, the call at least four days prior to the time stated
therein, or by personal service at least 72 hours prior to the projected time
of meeting. Special meetings may be held without prior written notice to the
Council when all Council members are present at the meeting, or consent thereto
in writing. Any such consent shall be filed with the City Clerk-Treasurer prior
to the beginning of the meeting. Any special meeting attended by all Council
members shall be a valid meeting for the transaction of any business that may
come before the meeting. Meetings of the Council, which are adjourned from time
to time, shall not be subject to the foregoing notice requirements; nor shall
special meetings which, in the judgment of the Council, require immediate
consideration to meet an emergency require such notice, but may be called by
telephone communication, or any other expeditious means. Notice to the public,
and to news media, shall be given as required by statute.
(Prior Code, § 2.02) (Ord. 99B, second series, passed 10-17-1989)
§ 30.04 COUNCIL PROCEDURES AT REGULAR MEETINGS.
   (A)   The City Clerk-Treasurer shall prepare the following items:
      (1)   An agenda for the forthcoming meeting;
      (2)   A statement showing the condition of each fund as of the close of
business of the preceding month;
      (3)   A compiled list of all claimants who have filed verified accounts
claiming payment for goods, or services, rendered the city during the preceding
month; and
      (4)   A copy of all minutes to be considered, and reports of department
heads.
   (B)   The City Clerk-Treasurer shall forthwith cause to be delivered to the
Mayor and each Council member copies of all of the documents. Robert’s Rules of
Order (revised) shall govern all Council meetings as to procedural matters not
set forth in the Charter or city code. The order of business at regular
meetings shall be as follows:
      (1)   Call to order;
      (2)   Roll call;
      (3)   Determination of a quorum;
      (4)   Approval of minutes (actual reading may be waived by majority vote
of the Council member present if each member of the Council was furnished with
a copy thereof, as herein before set forth;
      (5)   Consent items;
      (6)   Schedule bid lettings;
      (7)   Scheduled hearings;
      (8)   Administrative appeals;
      (9)   Financial reports;
      (10)   Licenses and permits;
      (11)   Old business;
      (12)   New business; and
      (13)   Reports of boards, commissions, and department heads.
   (C)   Matters inappropriate for consideration at a meeting, or not in the
order specified, shall not be considered, except:
      (1)   With the unanimous consent of the members of the Council; or
      (2)   Scheduled public hearings, or bid lettings, at the time stated in
the notice.
(Prior Code, § 2.03)
§ 30.05 SALARIES OF MAYOR AND COUNCIL MEMBERS.
   Salaries of the Mayor and Council members, effective January 1, 2022, are to
be set by resolution to be amended from time to time. Salaries of the Mayor and
Council members shall be paid monthly.
(Prior Code, § 2.10) (Ord. 27, second series, passed 12-21-1981)
§ 30.06 CONSENT AGENDAS.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of the city code, §
30.04, as to matters which, in the discretion of the City Clerk-Treasurer, do
not require separate, or individual, action, and which matters are
appropriately set apart, marked, or labeled “consent agenda”, only one action
by motion, or resolution, of the Council shall be required. The Council shall
be free to remove any consent agenda item(s) for separate action, or set it (or
them) over to a subsequent meeting.
(Prior Code, § 2.13) (Ord. 99B, second series, passed 10-17-1989)
CHAPTER 31: EMPLOYEES AND OFFICIALS
Section
   
31.01   City Clerk-Treasurer; execution of contracts, placement of city seal
   
31.02   Criminal history, driver’s license record; employees, volunteers
   
31.03   Personnel rules and regulations
§ 31.01 CITY CLERK-TREASURER; EXECUTION OF CONTRACTS, PLACEMENT OF CITY SEAL.
   All contracts, to which the city is a party, shall be sealed with the city
seal. The seal shall be kept in the custody of the City Clerk-Treasurer, and
affixed by him or her. The official city seal shall be a circular disc, having
engraved thereupon “City of St. James”, and such other words, figures, and
emblems as the Council may, by resolution, designate.
(Prior Code, § 2.04)
§ 31.02 CRIMINAL HISTORY, DRIVER’S LICENSE RECORD; EMPLOYEES, VOLUNTEERS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to authorize the Police
Department to conduct computerized history, and driver’s license history,
background checks on applicants for employment positions in the city,
volunteers in the city programs providing services to children or vulnerable
adults, and applicants for city permits, licenses, or other approvals. Nothing
in this section shall be construed to preclude the city from conducting
comprehensive background investigations, including, but not limited to,
accessing public data through other automated, and non-automated, sources, and
contacting references of applicants for city employment positions, or for city
permits, licenses, or other approvals. Nothing in this section shall be
construed to preclude the city from periodically conducting a driver’s license
inquiry upon employees, or volunteers, where possession of a valid driver’s
license is an essential qualification of the position.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a
different meaning.
      COMPUTERIZED CRIMINAL HISTORY. Criminal histories obtained through the
State Bureau of Criminal Apprehension’s computerized criminal history system.
      DRIVER’S LICENSE HISTORY. A listing of driver’s license violations
recorded by the State Department of Public Safety.
   (C)   Authorization. The Police Department is authorized to conduct
computerized criminal history, and driver’s license histories, on applicants
for city employment, on volunteers working with children or vulnerable adults,
and on applicants for city permits, licenses, or other approvals. Before the
investigation is undertaken, the applicant must authorize the Police
Department, in writing, to undertake the investigation, and to release the
information to the City Council, and other city staff as appropriate. Should
the city reject the application due, partially or solely, to the applicant’s
prior conviction of a crime, the city shall notify the applicant, in writing,
of the following:
      (1)   The grounds, and reason, for denial;
      (2)   The applicable complaint and grievance procedure set forth in M.S.
§ 364.06, as it may be amended from time to time;
      (3)   The earliest date the applicant may reapply for employment; and
      (4)   All competent evidence of rehabilitation will be considered upon
reapplication.
(Prior Code, § 2.52) (Ord. 204, second series, passed 7-17-2007)
§ 31.03 PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Council may, by resolution, establish personnel rules setting forth the
rights, duties, and responsibilities of employees. The rules may, from time to
time, be amended.
(Prior Code, § 2.70) (Ord. 54, second series, passed 11-20-1984)
CHAPTER 32: ORGANIZATIONS
Section
City Departments
   
32.01   Departments generally
   
32.02   City Attorney
   
32.03   Building Department
   
32.04   Public Works Department
   
32.05   Water Department
City Boards and Commissions
   
32.20   City boards and commissions generally
   
32.21   Planning and Zoning Commission
   
32.22   Airport Commission and Airport Zoning Board of Adjustment
CITY DEPARTMENTS
§ 32.01 DEPARTMENTS GENERALLY.
   (A)   Control. All departments of the city are under the overall control of
the Council through the City Manager.
   (B)   Appointment. Except as otherwise provided by the Charter or city code,
all department heads and employees shall be appointed by the City Manager. All
appointments shall be for an indeterminate term, and subject to any applicable
civil service regulations.
   (C)   Compensation. All wages and salaries shall be fixed, and determined,
by the Council.
   (D)   Table of organization and lines of responsibility. The Council may, by
resolution, adopt, amend, and, from time to time, revise a table of
organization, and define lines of responsibility, and authority, for the
efficient governmental organization of the city.
(Prior Code, § 2.20) (Ord. 27, second series, passed 12-21-1981)
§ 32.02 CITY ATTORNEY.
   The Council shall appoint a City Attorney, who shall serve at the pleasure
of the Council. The City Attorney shall perform such duties as are required of
him or her by law, or referred to him or her by the Council. It shall be the
official duty of the City Attorney to act as the revisor of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 2.23)
§ 32.03 BUILDING DEPARTMENT.
   The Building Department is hereby established. The head of the Building
Department shall be the Building Inspector, whose title in various codes shall
include the “administrative authority” and “Building Official”, together with
such assistants and staff members, as may be authorized from time to time by
the Council. It shall be the duty, and power, of the Building Inspector to
carry out the provisions of the State Building Code, and the ordinances of the
city relating to construction. The Building Inspector shall submit a periodic
report to the Council covering the work of his or her Department for intervals
required by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 2.24)
§ 32.04 PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT.
   The Public Works Department is hereby established. The head of this
Department shall be known as the Superintendent of Public Works, who shall be
designated by the City Manager, subject to approval by the Council. The
activities of this Department shall be such as are assigned to it by the
Council, and may include electricity, sanitary and storm sewerage, and water
utilities, engineering, parks, and streets. The City Manager may designate the
Superintendents of the Water Department, Parks and Recreation Department,
Street Department, Light Department, and Sewerage Department. The designations
shall be subject to approval by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 2.26)
§ 32.05 WATER DEPARTMENT.
   The Water Department, under the control of the Public Works Department, is
hereby established. The head of this Department shall be known as the Water
Superintendent, to be designated by the City Manager, subject to approval by
the Council. The Water Superintendent shall have, under the general management
and control of the Public Works Department, the supervision of the operation,
and maintenance, of all water facilities, and of all skilled, and unskilled,
labor required for the Department, and he or she shall be responsible for, and
have custody of, all property of the Department, including water plant and
water lines, and equipment, and crews for the maintenance and operation
thereof. It is the duty of the Water Superintendent on, or before, the date of
the first regular Council meeting in each month, to file with the Council a
report as to all activities of his or her Department during the preceding month
together, with any recommendations as to repairs or improvements he or she
deems advisable. The Water Superintendent shall also make, and file, such other
reports as may be required by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 2.27) (Ord. 27, second series, passed 12-21-1981)
CITY BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
§ 32.20 CITY BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS GENERALLY.
   All board and commission appointments shall be made by the Mayor, and the
appointment confirmed by the Council at the first regular meeting in January of
each year. The term of each appointee shall be established, and stated, at the
time of his or her appointment, and terms of present board and commission
members may be re-established, and changed, so as to give effect to this
section. No board or commission member shall be appointed to more than two full
consecutive terms. New appointees shall assume office on January 1, December 31
being the date of expiration of terms; provided, however, that all appointees
to boards and commissions shall hold office until their successor is appointed,
and qualified. All vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as for an
expired term, but the appointment shall be effective immediately when made, and
only for the unexpired term. No appointed board or commission member shall be a
full-time employee of the city, except those who are members by virtue of their
office. All appointed board and commission members, except as otherwise
authorized by statute, shall serve without remuneration, but may be reimbursed
for out-of-pocket expenses incurred in the performance of their duties when
such expenses have been authorized by the Council before they were incurred.
The chairperson and secretary shall be chosen from, and by, the board or
commission membership at its first regular meeting in January of each year to
serve for the current calendar year. The chairperson and secretary shall be
chosen from, and by, the board or commission membership annually to serve for
one year; provided, that no chairperson shall be elected who has not completed
at least one year as a member of the board or commission, except in the case of
a newly created board or commission. Any board or commission member may be
removed by the Council for misfeasance, malfeasance, or non-feasance in office,
and his or her position filled as any other vacancy. Each board and commission
shall hold its regular meetings at a time established, and approved, by the
Council. The City Manager, City Clerk-Treasurer, or designated member of the
Council may, by action of the Council, be a member of any board or commission;
provided, that if the City Clerk-Treasurer is so designated, he or she shall
act as an ex-officio member, unless otherwise designated by the Council. Except
as otherwise provided, this section shall apply to all boards and commissions.
(Prior Code, § 2.40) (Ord. 27, second series, passed 12-21-1981)
§ 32.21 PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.
   (A)   Establishment and composition. A Planning and Zoning Commission
composed of seven members, and including a City Attorney as ex-officio member,
is hereby established, as provided by Charter. All appointments thereto shall
be made, or confirmed, by the Council as provided by Charter.
   (B)   Rules. Rules of general application to all boards and commissions are
applicable to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
   (C)   Duties. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall serve as an advisory
body to the Council in matters of directing the future physical development of
the city. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall, upon request of the
Council, make studies, investigations, and recommendations to the Council
regarding matters affecting zoning, platting, and public improvements. The
Planning and Zoning Commission shall adopt a plan and map for future
development and land use, and may, with the consent of the Council, prepare a
capital improvements program for the purpose of determining priorities, and
apportioning the costs of scheduled public improvements.
(Prior Code, § 2.41)
§ 32.22 AIRPORT COMMISSION AND AIRPORT ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   (A)   Airport Commission.
      (1)   Establishment and composition. An Airport Commission, composed of
five members, is hereby established. All appointments thereto shall be made by
the Council for a term of two years.
      (2)   Powers. The Airport Commission shall not expend any money on the
airport without prior consent of the Council, nor shall it rent, or lease, any
land on the airport without first obtaining the consent of the Council.
      (3)   Airport Manager. The Airport Commission may appoint an Airport
Manager, and other airport employees, subject to the approval of the Council,
and may recommend to the Council the compensation to be paid to the Airport
Manager, and other employees.
      (4)   Rules and regulations. The United States Civil Air Regulations, and
the laws of the state pertaining to aeronautics, are hereby adopted by
reference, which regulations shall govern the operation of the airport. The
Airport Commission may adopt additional regulations; provided, that such
regulations shall not conflict with applicable federal, or state, regulations.
(Prior Code § 2.42)
   (B)   Airport Zoning Board of Adjustment.
      (1)   Establishment and composition. An Airport Zoning Board of
Adjustment, composed of the members of the Airport Commission, is hereby
established.
      (2)   Powers. The Airport Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have the
following powers:
         (a)   To hear, and decide, appeals from any order, requirement,
decision, or determination made by the City Engineer in the enforcement of the
airport zoning regulations;
         (b)   To hear, and decide, any special exceptions as to airport zoning
regulations upon which the Airport Zoning Board of Adjustment may be required
to pass under such regulations; and
         (c)   To hear, and decide, specific variances of airport zoning
regulations.
      (3)   Decisions. The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the
Airport Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be sufficient to reverse any order,
requirement, decision, or determination of the City Engineer, or to decide in
favor of the applicant on any matters upon which it is required to pass under
the airport zoning regulations, or to effect any variation in the regulations.
      (4)   Rules. The Airport Zoning Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules in
accordance with the provisions of the city code. Meetings shall be held at the
call of the Chairperson, and at such other times as the Board may determine.
The Chairperson, or, in his or her absence, the Acting Chairperson, may
administer oaths, and compel the attendance of witnesses. All hearings of the
Board shall be public. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing
the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote,
indicating such fact, and shall keep record of its examination and other
official action, all of which shall immediately be filed in the office of the
City Clerk-Treasurer, and shall be a public record. The office of the City
Clerk-Treasurer shall be the office of the Board. Upon their appointment, the
members of the Airport Zoning Board of Adjustment shall select a Chairperson to
act at the pleasure of the Board.
(Prior Code, § 2.50) (Ord. 119, passed 4-20-1993)
CHAPTER 33: PUBLIC SAFETY AND LAW ENFORCEMENT
Section
   
33.01   Police Department
   
33.02   Fire Department
   
33.03   Ambulance Department
§ 33.01 POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   The Mayor shall have, without the approval of the Council, authority to
appoint additional members of the Police Department for temporary duty when, in
his or her judgment, an emergency exists for the preservation of life or
property. The Chief of Police, and all members of the Police Department, shall
have the powers, and authority, of police officers generally, and shall perform
such duties as are required of them by the Council, or by law. The Chief of
Police shall have general superintendence of the Police Department, and custody
of all property used, and maintained, for the purposes of the Department. It is
the duty of the Chief of Police, on, or before, the second business day in each
month, to file with the Council a report as to all arrests made by, and other
activities of, his or her Department during the previous month. The Chief of
Police shall also make, and file, such other reports as may be required by the
Council.
(Prior Code, § 2.21)
§ 33.02 FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   The size, and composition, of the Fire Department (including, but not
limited to, a determination as to permanent, and volunteer, members) shall be
established by resolution of the Council, which may be changed from time to
time by a subsequent resolution. The Council shall also establish, and from
time to time revise and amend, written rules and regulations of the Department
including, but not limited to, its internal structural organization and
compensation, a copy of which shall be distributed to each of its members
whenever established, revised, or amended. The Chief of the Fire Department
shall have general supervision of the Fire Department, and the custody of all
property used, and maintained, for the purposes of the Department. He or she
shall see that the same are kept in proper order, and that all rules and
regulations, and all provisions of the laws of the state and ordinances of the
city relative to a Fire Department, and to prevention, and extinguishment of,
fires are duly observed. He or she shall supervise the preservation of all
property endangered by fire, and shall control, and direct, all persons engaged
in preserving such property. In case of the absence, or disability, of the
Chief for any cause, the Assistant Chief shall exercise all powers, perform all
the duties, and be subject to all the responsibilities of the Chief. It is the
duty of the Chief of the Fire Department on, or before, the second regular
business day in each month, to file with the City Clerk-Treasurer a report as
to all fires occurring during the previous month, stating the probable cause
thereof and estimated damages; the reports shall also state the other
activities of the Department. The Chief of the Fire Department shall also make,
and file, such other reports as may be requested by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 2.22)
§ 33.03 AMBULANCE DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   Establishment. The Ambulance Department is hereby established, the
size and composition to be fixed by resolution of the Council.
   (B)   Administrative head. The head of the Ambulance Department shall be the
Ambulance Manager, who shall be designated by the City Manager, subject to
approval by the Council. Duties include assessment of fees, and documenting to
the Council unpaid fees for certification to the County Auditor for collection.
   (C)   Operations. The Ambulance Manager and City Manager shall prepare rules
of administration and operation for the Ambulance Department. A report of the
rules of administration and operation shall be submitted to the Council for
adoption by resolution.
   (D)   Finances. The City Clerk-Treasurer shall create a fund within the
city’s books and records for receipts, and disbursements of moneys, of the
Ambulance Department. All city funding, and receipts for services, shall be
recorded in the fund, and all disbursements recommended by the Ambulance
Manager will be recorded, and issued, by the City Clerk-Treasurer upon approval
by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 2.25) (Ord. 209, second series, passed 10-2-2007)
CHAPTER 34: EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
Section
Interim Emergency Succession
   
34.01   Purpose
   
34.02   Succession to local offices
   
34.03   Duties of the Interim Emergency Council
Emergency Management
   
34.15   Policy and purpose
   
34.16   Definitions
   
34.17   Establishment of emergency management organization
   
34.18   Powers and duties of Director
   
34.19   Local emergencies
   
34.20   Emergency regulations
   
34.21   Emergency management a government function
   
34.22   Participation in labor disputes or politics
 
   
34.99   Penalty
INTERIM EMERGENCY SUCCESSION
§ 34.01 PURPOSE.
   Due to the existing possibility of a nuclear attack, or a natural disaster
requiring a declaration of a state of emergency, it is found urgent, and
necessary, to ensure the continuity of duly elected, and lawful, leadership of
the city to provide for the continuity of the government, and the emergency
interim succession of key governmental officials by providing a method for
temporary emergency appointments to their offices.
(Prior Code, § 2.09)
§ 34.02 SUCCESSION TO LOCAL OFFICES.
   (A)   In the event of a nuclear attack upon the United States, or a natural
disaster affecting the vicinity of the city, the Mayor, Council, City Manager,
and City Clerk-Treasurer shall be forthwith notified by any one of the persons,
and by any means available to gather at the City Hall. In the event that
safety, or convenience, dictate, an alternative place of meeting may be
designated.
   (B)   Those gathered shall proceed as follows:
      (1)   By majority vote of those persons present, regardless of number,
shall elect a Chairperson and Secretary to preside, and keep minutes,
respectively;
      (2)   They shall review, and record, the specific facts relating to the
nuclear attack, or natural disaster, and injuries to persons, or damage to
property, already done, or the imminence thereof;
      (3)   They may, based on the facts, declare a state of emergency;
      (4)   By majority vote of those persons present, regardless of number,
they shall fill all positions on the Council (including the office of Mayor),
of those persons upon whom notice could not be served, or who are unable to be
present; and
      (5)   The interim successors shall serve until the time as the duly
elected official is again available, and returns to his or her position, or the
state of emergency has passed, and a successor is designated, and qualifies, as
required by law, whichever shall occur first.
(Prior Code, § 2.09) (Ord. 27, second series, passed 12-21-1981)
§ 34.03 DUTIES OF THE INTERIM EMERGENCY COUNCIL.
   The Interim Emergency Council shall exercise the powers, and duties, of
their offices, and appoint other key government officials to serve during the
emergency.
(Prior Code, § 2.09)
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
§ 34.15 POLICY AND PURPOSE.
   Because of the existing possibility of the occurrence of disasters of
unprecedented size and destruction resulting from fire, flood, tornado,
blizzard, destructive winds, or other natural causes, or from sabotage, hostile
action, or from hazardous material mishaps of catastrophic measure; and in
order to ensure that preparations of the city will be adequate to deal with
those disasters, and generally, to provide for the common defense, and to
protect the public peace, health, and safety, and to preserve the lives and
property of the people of the city, it is hereby found, and declared, to be
necessary:
   (A)   To establish a City Emergency Management Organization responsible for
city planning and preparation for emergency government operations in time of
disasters;
   (B)   To provide for the exercise of necessary powers during emergencies and
disasters;
   (C)   To provide for the rendering of mutual aid between the city and other
political subdivisions of the state, and of other states, with respect to the
carrying out of emergency-preparedness functions; and
   (D)   To comply with the provisions of M.S. § 12.25, as it may be amended
from time to time, which requires that each political subdivision of the state
shall establish a local organization for emergency management.
§ 34.16 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   DISASTER. A situation which creates an immediate, and serious, impairment to
the health, and safety, of any person, or a situation which has resulted in, or
is likely to result in, catastrophic loss to property, and for which
traditional sources of relief, and assistance, within the affected area are
unable to repair, or prevent, the injury or loss.
   EMERGENCY. An unforeseen combination of circumstances which calls for
immediate action to prevent from developing, or occurring.
   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT. The preparation for, and the carrying out of, all
emergency functions, other than functions for which military forces are
primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage
resulting from disasters caused by fire, flood, tornado, and other acts of
nature, or from sabotage, hostile action, or from industrial hazardous material
mishaps. These functions include, without limitation, firefighting services,
police services, emergency medical services, engineering, warning services,
communications, radiological and chemical, evacuation, congregate care,
emergency transportation, existing, or properly assigned, functions of plant
protection, temporary restoration of public utility services, and other
functions related to civil protection, together with all other activities
necessary, or incidental, for carrying out the foregoing functions. EMERGENCY
MANAGEMENT includes those activities sometimes referred to as CIVIL DEFENSE
FUNCTIONS.
   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT FORCES. The total personnel resources engaged in city-
level emergency management functions, in accordance with the provisions of this
subchapter, or any rule, or order, thereunder. This includes personnel from
city departments, authorized volunteers, and private organizations and
agencies.
   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION. The staff responsible for coordinating
city-level planning and preparation for disaster response. This organization
provides city liaison and coordination with federal, state, and local
jurisdictions relative to disaster preparedness activities, and assures
implementation of federal, and state, program requirements.
§ 34.17 ESTABLISHMENT OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION.
   There is hereby created, within the city government, an Emergency Management
Organization, which shall be under the supervision, and control, of the City
Emergency Management Director, called the Director. The Director shall be
appointed by the City Council for an indefinite term, and may be removed by the
Council at any time. The Director shall serve with a salary, as established by
the City Council, and shall be paid his or her necessary expenses. The Director
shall have direct responsibility for the organization, administration, and
operation of the Emergency Preparedness Organization, subject to the direction,
and control, of the Council. The Emergency Management Organization shall
conform to, and be consistent with, where applicable, all state, and federal,
requirements, including the National Incident Management System framework found
at 44 C.F.R. part 201, as it may be amended from time to time.
§ 34.18 POWERS AND DUTIES OF DIRECTOR.
   (A)   The Director shall represent the city on any regional, or state,
conference for emergency management. The Director shall develop proposed mutual
aid agreements with other political subdivisions of the state for reciprocal
emergency management aid, and assistance, in an emergency too great to be dealt
with unassisted, and shall present these agreements to the Council for its
action. These arrangements shall be consistent with the State Emergency Plan.
   (B)   The Director shall make studies, and surveys, of the human resources,
industries, resources, and facilities of the city, as deemed necessary, to
determine their adequacy for emergency management, and to plan for their most
efficient use in time of an emergency, or disaster. The Director shall
establish the economic stabilization systems and measures, service staffs,
boards, and sub-boards required, in accordance with state and federal plans,
and directions, subject to the approval of the Mayor.
   (C)   The Director shall prepare a comprehensive emergency plan for the
emergency preparedness of the city, and shall present the plan to the Council
for its approval. When the Council has approved the plan, it shall be the duty
of all city agencies, and all emergency preparedness forces of the city, to
perform the duties, and functions, assigned by the plan, as approved. The plan
may be modified in like manner from time to time. The Director shall coordinate
the emergency management activities of the city to the end that they shall be
consistent, and fully integrated, with the emergency plans of the federal
government and the state, and correlated with emergency plans of the county,
and other political subdivisions within the state.
   (D)   In accordance with the State and City Emergency Plan, the Director
shall institute training programs, public information programs, and conduct
practice warning alerts, and emergency exercises, as may be necessary, to
assure the prompt, and effective, operation of the City Emergency Plan when a
disaster occurs.
   (E)   The Director shall utilize the personnel, services, equipment,
supplies, and facilities of existing departments, and agencies, of the city to
the maximum extent practicable. The officers and personnel of all city
departments, and agencies, shall, to the maximum extent practicable, cooperate
with, and extend services and facilities to, the city’s Emergency Management
Organization, and to the Governor upon request. The head of each department, or
agency, in cooperation with the Director shall be responsible for the planning,
and programming, of those emergency activities as will involve the utilization
of the facilities of the department, or agency.
   (F)   The Director shall, in cooperation with those city departments and
agencies affected, assist in the organizing, recruiting, and training of
Emergency Management Personnel, which may be required on a volunteer basis to
carry out the emergency plans of the city and state. To the extent that
emergency personnel are recruited to augment a regular city department or
agency for emergencies, they shall be assigned to the departments or agencies,
and shall be under the administration, and control, of the department or
agency.
   (G)   Consistent with the State Emergency Services Law, the Director shall
coordinate the activity of municipal emergency management organizations within
the city, and assist in establishing, and conducting, training programs as
required to assure emergency operational capability in the several services, as
provided by M.S. § 12.25, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (H)   The Director shall carry out all orders, rules, and regulations issued
by the Governor with reference to emergency management.
   (I)   The Director shall prepare, and submit, reports on emergency
preparedness activities when requested by the Mayor.
§ 34.19 LOCAL EMERGENCIES.
   (A)   A local emergency may be declared only by the Mayor, or his or her
legal successor. It shall not be continued for a period in excess of three days
except by, or with, the consent of the Council. Any order, or proclamation,
declaring, continuing, or terminating a local emergency shall be given prompt,
and general, publicity, and shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk-
Treasurer.
   (B)   A declaration of a local emergency shall invoke necessary portions of
the response, and recovery, aspects of applicable local, or
interjurisdictional, disaster plans, and may authorize aid and assistance
thereunder.
   (C)   No jurisdictional agency, or official, may declare a local emergency
unless expressly authorized by the agreement under which the agency functions.
However, an interjurisdictional disaster agency shall provide aid, and
services, in accordance with the agreement under which it functions.
Penalty, see §
34.99
§ 34.20 EMERGENCY REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Whenever necessary, to meet a declared emergency, or to prepare for an
emergency for which adequate regulations have not been adopted by the Governor
or the Council, the Council may, by resolution, promulgate regulations
consistent with applicable federal, or state, law or regulation, respecting the
conduct of persons, and the use of property, during emergencies, the repair,
maintenance, and safeguarding of essential public services, emergency health,
fire, and safety regulations, drills or practice periods required for
preliminary training, and all other matters which are required to protect the
public safety, health, and welfare in declared emergencies.
   (B)   Every resolution of emergency regulations shall be in writing; shall
be dated; shall refer to the particular emergency to which it pertains, if so
limited; and shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk-Treasurer. A copy
shall be kept posted, and available, for public inspection during business
hours. Notice of the existence of these regulations, and their availability for
inspection at the City Clerk-Treasurer’s office, shall be conspicuously posted
at the front of the City Hall, or other headquarters of the city, or at other
places in the affected area as the Council shall designate in the resolution.
By resolution, the Council may modify, or rescind, a regulation.
   (C)   The Council may rescind any regulation by resolution at any time. If
not sooner rescinded, every regulation shall expire at the end of 30 days after
its effective date, or at the end of the emergency to which it relates,
whichever comes first. Any resolution, rule, or regulation inconsistent with an
emergency regulation promulgated by the Council shall be suspended during the
period of time, and to the extent conflict exists.
   (D)   During a declared emergency, the city is, under the provisions of M.S.
§ 12.37, as it may be amended from time to time, and notwithstanding any
statutory or Charter provision to the contrary, empowered, through its Council,
acting within, or without, the corporate limits of the city, to enter into
contracts, and incur obligations necessary, to combat the disaster by
protecting the health, and safety, of persons and property, and providing
emergency assistance to the victims of a disaster. The city may exercise these
powers in the light of the exigencies of the disaster without compliance with
the time-consuming procedures, and formalities, prescribed by law pertaining to
the performance of public work, entering rental equipment agreements, purchase
of supplies and materials, limitations upon tax levies, and the appropriation,
and expenditure, of public funds, including, but not limited to, publication of
resolutions, publication of calls for bids, provisions of personnel laws and
rules, provisions relating to low bids, and requirement for bids.
Penalty, see §
34.99
§ 34.21 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT A GOVERNMENT FUNCTION.
   All functions and activities relating to emergency management are hereby
declared to be governmental functions. The provisions of this subchapter shall
not affect the right of any person to receive benefits to which he or she would
otherwise be entitled under this subchapter, or under the Workers’ Compensation
Law, or under any pension law, nor the right of any person to receive any
benefits, or compensation, under any act of Congress.
§ 34.22 PARTICIPATION IN LABOR DISPUTES OR POLITICS.
   The Emergency Management Organization shall not participate in any form of
political activity, nor shall it be employed directly, or indirectly, for
political purposes, nor shall it be employed in a labor dispute.
§ 34.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provisions of this chapter, for which no
specific penalty is prescribed, shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of §§
34.15 through
34.22, or any regulation adopted thereunder relating to acts, omissions, or
conduct, other than official acts of city employees or officers, is guilty of a
misdemeanor.
CHAPTER 35: FINANCES AND TAXATION
Section
Lodging Tax and Franchise Tax
   
35.01   Definitions
   
35.02   Imposition of tax
   
35.03   Collections
   
35.04   Exceptions and exemptions
   
35.05   Advertising no tax
   
35.06   Payment and returns
   
35.07   Examination of return, adjustments, notices, and demands
   
35.08   Refunds
   
35.09   Failure to file a return
   
35.10   Administration of tax
   
35.11   Examine records
   
35.12   Use of proceeds
   
35.13   Appeals
   
35.14   Violations
 
   
35.99   Penalty
LODGING TAX AND FRANCHISE TAX
§ 35.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   CITY. The City of St. James, Minnesota.
   LODGER. The person obtaining lodging from an operator.
   LODGING. The furnishing for a consideration of lodging by a hotel, motel,
bed and breakfast, public/private campground, except where the LODGING shall be
for a continuous period of 30 days,
or more, to the same lodger(s). The furnishing of rooms owned by religious,
educational, or nonprofit organizations for self-sponsored activities shall not
constitute LODGING for purposes of this subchapter.
   OPERATOR. The person who is the proprietor of the lodging facility, whether
in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, licensee, or any other capacity.
   PERSON. Any individual, corporation, partnership, association, estate,
receiver, trustee, executor, administrator, assignee, syndicate, or any other
combination of individuals. Whenever the term PERSON is used in any provision
of this subchapter prescribing, and imposing, a penalty, the term as applied to
a corporation, association, or partnership shall mean the officers, or partners
thereof, as the case maybe.
   RENT. The total consideration valued in money charged for the lodging,
whether paid in money or otherwise, but shall not include any charges for
services rendered in connection with furnishing lodging, other than the room
charge itself.
(Prior Code, § 14.01)
§ 35.02 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   Pursuant to M.S. § 469.190, as it may be amended from time to time, there is
hereby a tax imposed on the rent charged by an operator for providing lodging
to any person. The lodging tax program shall commence on January 1, 2007. A tax
of 2% shall be imposed on the effective date of this subchapter. The tax
collected by the operator shall be extinguished only by payment to the city. In
no case shall the tax imposed by this subchapter upon an operator exceed the
amount of tax which the operator is authorized, and required by this program,
to collect from a lodger.
(Prior Code, § 14.02) (Ord. 016, fourth series, passed 12-19-2023)
§ 35.03 COLLECTIONS.
   Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this program at the time the
rent is paid. The tax collections shall be deemed to be held in trust by the
operator for the city. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the
rent charged for the lodging, and those persons paying the tax shall receive a
receipt of payment from the operator.
(Prior Code, § 14.02)
§ 35.04 EXCEPTIONS AND EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Exemptions. An exemption shall be granted to any person as to whom, or
whose, occupancy it is beyond the power of the city to tax. No exemption shall
be granted except upon a claim therefor made at the time the rent is collected,
and such a claim shall be made in writing, and under penalty of perjury on
forms provided by the city. All claims shall be forwarded to the city when the
returns, and collections, are submitted, as required by this subchapter.
   (B)   Exceptions. Excluded from this subchapter are current, and future,
agreements of local lodging establishments with Union Pacific Railroad and/or
Corporate Lodging Consultants, Inc., or any other corporate guests that lease
rooms for a continuous period of 30 days, or more.
(Prior Code, § 14.02)
§ 35.05 ADVERTISING NO TAX.
   It is unlawful for any operator to advertise, or hold out, or state to the
public, or any customer, directly, or indirectly, that the tax, or any part
thereof, will be assumed, or absorbed, by the operator, or that it will not be
added to the rent, or that, if added, it, or any part thereof, will be
refunded.
(Prior Code, § 14.02) Penalty, see §
35.99
§ 35.06 PAYMENT AND RETURNS.
   (A)   The taxes imposed by this program shall be paid monthly by the
operator to the city not later than 20 days after the end of the month in which
the taxes were collected. At the time of payment, the operator shall submit a
return upon such forms, and containing the information as the City Manager may
require.
   (B)   The operator may offset against the taxes payable with respect to any
reporting period, the amount of taxes imposed by this program previously paid
as a result of any transaction, the consideration for which became
uncollectible during the reporting period, but only in proportion to the
portion of the consideration which became uncollectible.
   (C)   The return shall contain the following minimum information:
      (1)   The total amount of rent collected for lodging during the period
covered by the return;
      (2)   The total amount of exceptions/exemptions;
      (3)   The amount of tax required to be collected, and due for the period;
      (4)   The signature of the person filing the return, or that of his or
her agent duly authorized agent, in writing;
      (5)   The period covered by the return; and
      (6)   The amount of uncollectible rental charges subject to the lodging
tax.
(Prior Code, § 14.02)
§ 35.07 EXAMINATION OF RETURN, ADJUSTMENTS, NOTICES, AND DEMANDS.
   The City Manager shall, after a return is filed, examine the same and make
any investigation, or examination, of the records and accounts of the person
making the return deemed necessary for determining its correctness. The tax
computed on the basis of the examination shall be the tax to be paid. If the
tax due is found to be greater than that paid, the excess shall be paid to the
city within ten days after receipt of a notice thereof given, either personally
or sent by registered mail to the address shown on the return. If the tax paid
is greater than the tax found to be due, the excess shall be refunded to the
person who paid the tax to the city within ten days after determination of the
refund.
(Prior Code, § 14.02)
§ 35.08 REFUNDS.
   Any person may apply to the City Manager for a refund of taxes paid in
excess of the amount legally due for that period; provided, that no application
for a refund shall be considered, unless filed within one year after the tax
was paid, or within one year from the filing of the return, whichever period is
the longer. The City Manager shall examine the claim, and make, and file,
written findings thereon denying, or allowing, the claim in whole, or in part,
and shall mail a notice thereof by registered mail to such person at the
address stated upon the return. If the claim is allowed in whole, or in part,
the City Manager shall credit the amount of the allowance against any taxes due
under this program from the claimant.
(Prior Code, § 14.02)
§ 35.09 FAILURE TO FILE A RETURN.
   (A)   If any operator required by this program to file a return shall fail
to do so within the time prescribed, or shall make, willfully or otherwise, an
incorrect, false, or fraudulent return, the operator shall, upon written notice
and demand, file the return, or corrected return, within five days of receipt
of the written notice, and shall, at the same time, pay any tax due on the
basis thereof. If such person shall fail to file the return, or corrected
return, the City Manager shall make a return, or corrected return, for such
person from the knowledge, and information, as the Economic Authority Director
can obtain, and assess a tax on the basis thereof, which tax (less any payments
theretofore made on account of the tax for the taxable period covered by such
return) shall be paid within five days of the receipt of written notice, and
demand for the payment.
   (B)   Any such return, or assessment, made by the City Manager shall be
prima facie correct and valid, and such person shall have the burden of
establishing its correctness, or invalidity, in any action, or proceeding, with
respect thereto.
   (C)   If any portion of a tax imposed by this program, including penalties
thereon, is not paid within 30 days after it is required to be paid, the city
may institute such legal action as may be necessary to recover the amount due,
plus interest, penalties, and the costs, and disbursements, of any action.
   (D)   Upon a showing of good cause, the City Manager may grant an operator
one 30-day extension of time within which to file a return, and make payment of
taxes as required by this subchapter; provided, that interest during the period
of extension shall be added to the taxes due at the rate of 10% per annum.
(Prior Code, § 14.02)
§ 35.10 ADMINISTRATION OF TAX.
   The City Manager shall administer, and enforce, the assessment, and
collection, of the taxes imposed by this subchapter. The Economic Authority
Director shall cause to be prepared blank forms for the returns, and other
documents, required by this subchapter, and shall distribute the same
throughout the city, and furnish them upon application; but failure to receive,
or secure, them shall not relieve any person from any obligation required under
this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 14.02)
§ 35.11 EXAMINE RECORDS.
   The City Manager may examine the books, papers, and records of any operator
in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return was made,
to ascertain the tax as provided in this program. Every such operator is
directed, and required, to give to the City Manager the means, facilities, and
opportunity for such examinations and investigations, as are hereby authorized.
(Prior Code, § 14.02)
§ 35.12 USE OF PROCEEDS.
   (A)   Ninety-eight percent of the proceeds obtained from the collection of
taxes pursuant to this program shall be used in accordance with M.S. § 469.190,
as it may be amended from time to time, to fund a local convention/tourism
bureau for the purpose of marketing, and promoting, the city as a tourist/
convention center. The city may retain a maximum of 2% for administrative
costs.
   (B)   The city by, and through, an agreement entitled “Agreement for the
Establishment of a Convention and Visitors Bureau Between the City of St. James
and the St. James Area Chamber of Commerce” (hereinafter the “agreement”) with
the City Area Chamber of Commerce (hereinafter “Chamber of Commerce”) hereby
permits the Chamber of Commerce to create the City Area Convention and Visitors
Bureau (hereinafter “CVB”). The CVB will be funded by the tax set forth herein,
and pursuant to M.S. § 469.190, as it may be amended from time to time. The
agreement sets forth the purpose, and duties, of CVB, and provides for its
internal structure. Pursuant to the terms of the agreement, and specifically
incorporated herein without limiting the effect of the agreement, are the
following terms that the CVB shall adhere to:
      (1)   Establish, and maintain, separate books and records;
      (2)   Establish separate bank accounts; and
      (3)   Not commingle its funds with the Chamber of Commerce, or any other
entity.
   (C)   Any, and all, employees of the Chamber of Commerce, or the CVB, or any
other persons, while engaged in the performance of any service required by the
Chamber of Commerce, shall not be considered employees of the city, and any,
and all, claims that may, or might, arise under the Workers’ Compensation Act
of the state on behalf of the employees, or other persons while so engaged, and
any, and all, claims made by the third party as a consequence of any act, or
omission, on the part of the Chamber, or its agents or employees, or other
persons while so engaged in any of the services provided to be rendered herein,
shall in no way be the obligation, or the responsibility, of the city. In
connection therewith, the Chamber of Commerce hereby agrees to indemnify, save,
and hold harmless, and defend the city and all its agents and employees
thereof, from any and all claims, demands, actions, or causes of action of
whatever nature, or character, arising out of, or by, reason of the execution,
or the performances, of the services provided in accordance with this
agreement, excepting therefrom City Manager duties, and city duties relating to
the collection of taxes.
   (D)   The annual budget submitted by CVB to the Council for its approval
shall be approved, or disapproved, in total.
(Prior Code, § 14.02)
§ 35.13 APPEALS.
   (A)   Any operator aggrieved by any notice, order, or determination made by
the City Manager under this subchapter may file a petition for review of the
notice, order, or determination detailing the operator’s reasons for contesting
the notice, order, or determination. The petition shall contain the name of the
petitioner, the petitioner’s address, and the location of the lodging subject
to the order, notice, or determination.
   (B)   The petition for review shall be filed with the Mayor within ten days
after the notice, order, or determination for which review is sought, has been
mailed, or served upon, the person requesting review.
   (C)   Upon receipt of the petition, the Mayor, or his or her designee, shall
set a date for a hearing, and give the petitioner at least five days’ prior
written notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing.
   (D)   At the hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to show
cause why the notice, order, or determination should be modified, or withdrawn.
The petitioner may be represented by counsel of the petitioner’s choosing, at
the petitioner’s own expense.
   (E)   Any disputes shall be conducted in accordance with principles, and
rules, of the American Arbitration Association.
   (F)   The hearing examiner conducting the hearing shall make written
findings of fact, and conclusions, based upon the applicable provisions of this
subchapter, and the evidence presented. The person conducting the hearing may
affirm, reverse, or modify the notice, order, or determination made by the City
Manager.
   (G)   Any decision rendered by the hearing examiner pursuant to this section
may be appealed to the Council. A petitioner seeking to appeal a decision must
file a written notice of appeal with the Mayor within ten days after the
decision has been mailed to the petitioner. The matter will thereupon be placed
on the Council agenda as soon as practicable. The Council shall then review the
findings of fact and conclusions to determine whether they were correct. Upon a
determination by the Council that findings, and conclusions, were incorrect,
the Council may modify, reverse, or affirm the decision of the hearing
examiner, or his or her designee, upon the same standards as set forth in
division (F) above.
(Prior Code, § 14.02)
§ 35.14 VIOLATIONS.
   Any person who shall willfully fail to make a return required by this
program, or shall fail to pay the tax after written demand for payment, or who
shall fail to remit the taxes collected, or any penalty or interest, imposed by
this subchapter after written demand for the payment, or who shall refuse to
permit the City Manager to examine the books, records, and papers under his or
her control, or who shall willfully make an incomplete, false, or fraudulent
return, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 14.02) (Ord. 198, second series, passed 8-2-2006) Penalty, see §
35.99
§ 35.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provisions of this chapter, for which no
specific penalty is prescribed, shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   If any tax imposed by §§
35.01 through
35.14 is not paid within the time herein specified for the payment, or any
extension thereof, there shall be added thereto a specific penalty equal to 10%
of the amount remaining unpaid.
      (2)   In case of any failure to make, and file, a return within the time
prescribed by §§
35.01 through
35.14, unless it is shown that the failure is not due to willful neglect, there
shall be added to the tax, in addition to the 10% specific penalty provided in
division (B)(1) above, 10% of the total tax if the failure is not for more than
30 days, with an additional 5% for each additional 30 days, or fraction
thereof, during which failure continues, not exceeding 25% in the aggregate. If
the penalty, as computed, does not exceed $10, a minimum penalty of $10 shall
be assessed. The amount so added to any tax shall be collected at the same
time, and in the same manner, and as a part of the tax, unless the tax has been
paid before the discovery of the negligence, in which case the amount so added
shall be collected in the same manner as the tax.
      (3)   If any person willfully fails to file any return, or make any
payment required by §§
35.01 through
35.14, or willfully files a false, or fraudulent, return, or willfully
attempts, in any manner, to evade, or defeat, any such tax, or payment thereof,
there shall also be imposed as a penalty an amount equal to 50% of any tax
(less amounts paid on the basis of such false, or fraudulent, return) found due
for the period to which the return related. The penalty imposed by this section
shall be collected as part of the tax, and shall be in addition to any other
penalties provided by §§
35.01 through
35.14.
      (4)   All payments received pursuant to §§
35.01 through
35.14 shall be credited first to penalties, next to interest, and then to the
tax due.
(Prior Code, § 14.02)
CHAPTER 36: GENERAL CITY POLICIES
Section
   
36.01   Right to administrative appeal
   
36.02   Rules of procedure for appeals and other hearings
   
36.03   Accounts, claims, or demands
   
36.04   Facsimile signatures
   
36.05   Workers’ Compensation
   
36.06   Disposal of excess property; surplus
   
36.07   Trust or escrow account for fire or explosion
§ 36.01 RIGHT TO ADMINISTRATIVE APPEAL.
   If any person shall be aggrieved by any administrative decision of the City
Manager, or any board or commission not having within its structure an
appellate procedure, the aggrieved person is entitled to a full hearing before
the Council, upon serving a written request therefor upon the Mayor and City
Manager at least five days prior to any regular Council meeting. The request
shall contain a general statement setting forth the administrative decision to
be challenged by the appellant. At the hearing, the appellant may present any
evidence he or she deems pertinent to the appeal, but the city shall not be
required to keep a verbatim record of the proceedings. The Mayor, or other
officer presiding at the hearing may, in the interest of justice, or to comply
with time requirements, and on his or her own motion, or the motion of the
appellant, the City Manager, or a member of the Council, adjourn the hearing to
a more convenient time or place, but such time or place shall be fixed, and
determined, before adjournment so as to avoid the necessity for formal notice
of reconvening.
(Prior Code, § 2.05) (Ord. 27, second series, passed 12-21-1981)
§ 36.02 RULES OF PROCEDURE FOR APPEALS AND OTHER HEARINGS.
   The Council may adopt, by resolution, certain written rules of procedure to
be followed in all administrative appeals, and other hearings, to be held
before the Council, or other bodies authorized to hold hearings, and determine
questions therein presented. The rules of procedure shall be effective 30 days
after adoption, and shall be for the purpose of establishing, and maintaining,
order and decorum in the proceedings.
(Prior Code, § 2.06)
§ 36.03 ACCOUNTS, CLAIMS, OR DEMANDS.
   (A)   Generally. Except as to an annual salary, fees of jurors, or
witnesses, fixed by law, or wages or salaries of employees which have been
fixed on an hourly, daily, weekly, or monthly basis by the Council, and which,
by law, are authorized to be paid on a payroll basis any account, claim, or
demand against the city, which can be itemized in the ordinary course of
business, the Council shall not audit, or allow, the claim until the person
claiming payment, or his or her agent, reduces it to writing, in items, and
signs a declaration to the effect that the account, claim, or demand is just
and correct, and that no part of it has been paid.
   (B)   Discretionary exception. The Council may, in its discretion, allow a
claim prepared by the City Clerk-Treasurer prior to the declaration by the
claimant if the declaration is made on the check by which the claim is paid.
   (C)   Form of declaration. The declaration provided for in division (A)
above is sufficient in the following form: “I declare under the penalties of
law that this account, claim or demand is just and correct and that no part of
it has been paid. Signature of Claimant”.
   (D)   Form and effect of declaration on check. The declaration provided for
in division (B) shall be printed on the reverse side of the check, above the
space for endorsement thereof by the payee, as follows: “The undersigned payee,
in endorsing this check declares that the same is received in payment of a just
and correct claim against the City, and that no part of it has heretofore been
paid”. When endorsed by the payee named in the check, the statement shall
operate, and shall be deemed sufficient as the required declaration of claim.
   (E)   Signing checks. All checks shall be signed by the Mayor and the City
Clerk-Treasurer.
(Prior Code, § 2.07) (Ord. 27, second series, passed 12-21-1981)
§ 36.04 FACSIMILE SIGNATURES.
   The Mayor and City Clerk-Treasurer are hereby authorized to request a
depository of city funds to honor an order for payment when the instrument
bears a facsimile of his or her signature, and to charge the same to the
account designated thereon, or upon which it is drawn, as effectively as though
it were his or her manually written signature. The authority is granted only
for the purpose of permitting the officers an economy of time and effort.
(Prior Code, § 2.08)
§ 36.05 WORKERS’ COMPENSATION.
   All officers of the city elected, or appointed, for a regular term of
office, or to complete the unexpired portion of any such regular term, shall be
included in the definition of EMPLOYEE, as defined in the state statutes
relating to coverage for purposes of workers’ compensation entitlement.
(Prior Code, § 2.12) (Ord. 27, second series, passed 12-21-1981)
§ 36.06 DISPOSAL OF EXCESS PROPERTY; SURPLUS.
   (A)   Disposal of unclaimed property.
      (1)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a
different meaning.
         ABANDONED PROPERTY. Tangible, or intangible, property that has
lawfully come into the possession of the city in the course of municipal
operations, remains unclaimed by the owner, and has been in the possession of
the city for at least 60 days, and has been declared by a resolution of the
Council.
      (2)   Preliminary notice. If the City Manager, or City Clerk-Treasurer,
knows the identity, and whereabouts, of the owner, he or she shall serve
written notice upon him or her at least 30 days prior to a declaration of
abandonment by the Council. If the city acquired possession from a prior
holder, the identity, and whereabouts, of whom are known by the City Manager,
or City Clerk-Treasurer, notice shall also be served upon him or her. The
notice shall describe the property, and state that unless it is claimed and
proof of ownership, or entitlement to possession established, the matter of
declaring it abandoned property will be brought to the attention of the Council
after the expiration of 30 days from the date of the notice.
      (3)   Notice and sale. Upon adoption of a resolution declaring certain
property to be abandoned property, the City Manager, or City Clerk-Treasurer,
shall publish a notice thereof describing the same, together with the names (if
known) and addresses (if known) of prior owners and holders thereof, and
including a brief description of the property. The text of the notice shall
also state the time, place, and manner of sale of all such property, except
cash and negotiables. The notice shall be published once in a legal newspaper
at least ten days prior to the sale. Sale shall be made to the highest bidder
at public auction or sale, or by a nonprofit organization with a significant
mission of community service in a private sale in the manner authorized by
statute.
      (4)   Funds and claims thereon. Expenses shall be paid from the proceeds
of the sale; the balance of the proceeds shall be paid into the General Fund of
the city if the property was disposed of by a public auction or sale; or, in
the case of a private sale, to the nonprofit organization authorized to conduct
the sale. The former owner, if he or she makes claim within six months from the
date of publication of the notice herein provided, and upon application, and
satisfactory proof, of ownership, may be paid the amount of cash or
negotiables, or, in the case of property sold, the amount received therefor,
less a pro rata share of the expenses of storage, publication of notice, and
sale expenses, but without interest.
   (B)   Disposal of excess property.
      (1)   Declaration of surplus, and authorizing sale of property. The City
Manager may, from time to time, recommend to the Council that certain personal
property (chattels) owned by the city is no longer needed for a municipal
purpose, and should be sold. By action of the Council, the property shall be
declared surplus, the value estimated and the City Manager authorized to
dispose of the property in the manner stated herein.
      (2)   Surplus property with a total estimated value of less than $100.
The City Manager may sell surplus property with a total value of less than $100
through negotiated sale.
      (3)   Surplus property with a total estimated value between $100 and
$500. The City Manager shall offer for public sale, to the highest bidder,
surplus property with a total estimated value of from $100 to $500. Notice of
the public sale shall be given, stating the time and place of sale, and
generally describing the property to be sold, at least ten days prior to the
date of sale, either by publication once in the official newspaper, or by
posting in a conspicuous place in the City Hall, at the City Manager’s option.
The sale shall be by auction.
      (4)   Surplus property with a total estimated value over $500. The City
Manager shall offer for public sale, to the highest bidder, surplus property
with a total estimated value over $500. Notice of the public sale shall be
given, stating the time and place of sale, and generally describing property to
be sold, at least ten days prior to the date of sale by publication once in the
official newspaper. The sale shall be to the person submitting the highest bid.
      (5)   Receipts from sales of surplus property. All receipts from sales of
surplus property under this section shall be placed in the General Fund.
   (C)   Persons who may not purchase; exception.
      (1)   City employees. No employee of the city who is a member of the
administrative staff, department head, a member of the Council, or an advisor
serving the city in a professional capacity, may be a purchaser of property
under this section. Other city employees may be purchasers if they are not
directly involved in the sale, if they are the highest responsible bidder, and
if at least one week’s published, or posted, notice of sale is given.
      (2)   Prohibited purchases. It is unlawful for any person to be a
purchaser of property under this section if the purchase is prohibited by the
terms of this section.
(Prior Code, § 2.60) (Ord. 27, second series, passed 12-21-1981; Ord. 154,
second series, passed 10-20-1998) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 36.07 TRUST OR ESCROW ACCOUNT FOR FIRE OR EXPLOSION.
   The city may establish a trust, or escrow, account to hold proceeds from
losses arising from fire or explosion of insured real property located within
the city. The city may utilize these funds to secure, repair, or demolish
damaged, or destroyed, structures, and clear the property in question, so that
the structure, and property, are in compliance with local code requirements,
and applicable city code provisions. Any unused portion of the retained
proceeds shall be returned to the insured. In addition, the regulatory, and
procedural, provisions of M.S. § 65A.50, “Trust or Escrow Accounts; Insured
Real Property Fire or Explosion Loss Proceeds”, as it may be amended from time
to time, are hereby incorporated herein, and adopted by reference, including
the penalty provision thereof.
(Prior Code, § 2.64)
CHAPTER 37: SCHEDULES AND FINES
Section
Administrative Schedules
   
37.01   Building permits
   
37.02   Utility billing rates
   
37.03   Liquor license
   
37.04   Parking violation fees
   
37.05   State citations and fees
   
37.06   Other licenses
   
37.07   Miscellaneous fees
   
37.08   Ordinance violation fees
Emergency Service Schedules
   
37.20   Ambulance fees
   
37.21   Fire fees
Recreational Schedules
   
37.35   Pool rates
   
37.36   Campground rates
   
37.37   Picnic shelter rates
ADMINISTRATIVE SCHEDULES
§ 37.01 BUILDING PERMITS.
   The Council may, by resolution, establish schedules, fees, and fines from
time to time, be amended.
§ 37.02 UTILITY BILLING RATES.
   The Council may, by resolution, establish schedules, fees, and fines from
time to time, be amended.
§ 37.03 LIQUOR LICENSE.
   The Council may, by resolution, establish schedules, fees, and fines from
time to time, be amended.
§ 37.04 PARKING VIOLATION FEES.
   The Council may, by resolution, establish schedules, fees, and fines from
time to time, be amended.
§ 37.05 STATE CITATIONS AND FEES.
   The Council may, by resolution, establish schedules, fees, and fines from
time to time, be amended.
§ 37.06 OTHER LICENSES.
   The Council may, by resolution, establish schedules, fees, and fines from
time to time, be amended.
§ 37.07 MISCELLANEOUS FEES.
   The Council may, by resolution, establish schedules, fees, and fines from
time to time, be amended.
§ 37.08 ORDINANCE VIOLATION FEES.
   The Council may, by resolution, establish schedules, fees, and fines from
time to time, be amended.
EMERGENCY SERVICE SCHEDULES
§ 37.20 AMBULANCE FEES.
   The Council may, by resolution, establish schedules, fees, and fines from
time to time, be amended.
§ 37.21 FIRE FEES.
   The Council may, by resolution, establish schedules, fees, and fines from
time to time, be amended.
RECREATIONAL SERVICES
§ 37.35 POOL RATES.
   The Council may, by resolution, establish schedules, fees, and fines from
time to time, be amended.
§ 37.36 CAMPGROUND RATES.
   The Council may, by resolution, establish schedules, fees, and fines from
time to time, be amended.
§ 37.37 PICNIC SHELTER RATES.
   The Council may, by resolution, establish schedules, fees, and fines from
time to time, be amended.
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   UTILITIES
      
51.   WATER
      
52.   SEWAGE
      
53.   GARBAGE, COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
CHAPTER 50: UTILITIES
Section
General Provisions
   
50.01   Definitions
   
50.02   Fixing rates and charges; public utilities
   
50.03   Fixing rates and charges; municipal utilities
   
50.04   Aggregation of retail customer demand response
   
50.05   Ancillary services provided by demand response resources
   
50.06   Contractual contents
Municipal Utility Service
   
50.20   Billing and payment
   
50.21   Application, connection, and sale of service
   
50.22   Discontinuance of service
   
50.23   Ownership of municipal utilities
   
50.24   Right of entry
   
50.25   Meter testing
   
50.26   Billing errors
   
50.27   Unlawful acts
   
50.28   Collection and lien for municipal utility service and charge
   
50.29   Municipal utility service outside the city
   
50.30   Connection or tapping prohibited; delinquent assessments or charges
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   COMPANY, GRANTEE, and FRANCHISEE. Any public utility system to which a
franchise has been granted by the city.
   CONSUMER and CUSTOMER. Any user of a utility.
   MUNICIPAL UTILITY. Any city-owned utility system, including, but not by way
of limitation, electric, water, and sewerage service.
   PUBLIC UTILITY. Any utility system furnishing service in the city, pursuant
to a franchise from the city, but not owned by the city.
   SERVICE. Providing a particular utility to a customer or consumer.
   UTILITY. All utility services, whether the same be public city-owned
facilities, or furnished by public utility companies.
(Prior Code, § 3.01)
§ 50.02 FIXING RATES AND CHARGES; PUBLIC UTILITIES.
   (A)   All rates and charges for public utility franchisees, not regulated by
an agency of the state, shall be fixed, and determined, by the Council, and
adopted by ordinance.
   (B)   Upon adoption, the rates, and charges, shall become provisions of this
subchapter.
   (C)   Public utility company rates, and charges, may be fixed, and
determined, by the respective franchisees in compliance with this section, as
follows:
      (1)   No rate, or charge involving an increase thereof, shall become
effective until approved by the Council. To request the increase, the
franchisee shall prepare its written petition setting forth the then current,
and proposed, rates and charges, the effective date of the proposed increases
(which may not be within 90 days of filing the petition), and the reason, or
reasons, necessitating the proposed increase, or increases. The petition shall
be filed with the Council by serving the same on the City Clerk-Treasurer in
person, or by certified mail, return receipt requested;
      (2)   Within 30 days of the filing, the Council shall adopt a resolution,
and serve the same upon the resident superintendent of the franchisee in like
manner as the petition may be served, either approving the proposed increases,
or ordering a hearing thereon, to be held within 60 days thereof. If no such
action is taken by the Council, the increase, or increases, shall take effect
on the date stated in the franchisee’s petition, as though approved by the
Council;
      (3)   Prior to the hearing date, the franchisee shall, without delay,
comply with the city’s reasonable requests for examination, and copying, of all
books, records, documents, and other information, relating to the subject
matter of the petition. Should the franchisee unreasonably delay, fail, or
refuse the requests, the same shall be grounds for a continuance of the hearing
date; and
      (4)   Notice of the hearing shall be in the form, and manner, stated in
the resolution. At the hearing, all persons wishing to be heard thereon shall
be afforded a reasonable opportunity. Findings, and a decision, shall be made
by the Council within 15 days after the hearing, and served upon the
franchisee.
(Prior Code, § 3.03)
§ 50.03 FIXING RATES AND CHARGES; MUNICIPAL UTILITIES.
   All rates and charges for municipal utilities, including, but not by way of
limitation, rates for service, deposits, connection, and meter reading fees,
disconnection fees, and reconnection fees, including penalties for non-payment,
if any, shall be fixed, determined, and amended by the Council, and adopted by
resolution. The resolution, containing the effective date thereof, shall be
kept on file, and open to inspection, in the office of the City Clerk-
Treasurer, and shall be uniformly enforced.
(Prior Code, § 3.02)
§ 50.04 AGGREGATION OF RETAIL CUSTOMER DEMAND RESPONSE.
   (A)   The city, or its authorized designee, is the sole entity permitted to
bid demand response on behalf of retail customers served by the city of
directly into any commission-approved independent system operator’s, or
regional transmission organization’s, organized electric markets.
   (B)   Retail customers served by the city wishing to bid their demand
response into a commission-approved independent system operator’s, or regional
transmission organization’s, organized electric markets may do so by
participating in the program established by the city, or its authorized
designee. Retail customers are not permitted to participate in the demand
response program of any other entity without the express prior authorization of
the city.
(Ord. 7, third series, passed 5-5-2009)
§ 50.05 ANCILLARY SERVICES PROVIDED BY DEMAND RESPONSE RESOURCES.
   (A) The city, or its authorized designee, is the sole entity permitted to
bid demand response on behalf of retail customers served by the city directly
into any commission-approved independent system operator’s, or regional
transmission organization’s, organized markets for energy imbalance, spinning
reserves, supplemental reserves, reactive power and voltage control, or
regulation, and frequency, response ancillary services (or its functional
equivalent in the commission-approved independent system operator’s, or
regional transmission organization’s, tariff).
   (B)   Retail customers served by the city wishing to bid their demand
response into a commission-approved independent system operator’s, or regional
transmission organization’s, organized markets for energy imbalance, spinning
reserves, supplemental reserves, reactive power, and voltage control, or
regulation and frequency response ancillary services (or its functional
equivalent in the commission-approved independent system operator’s, or
regional transmission organization’s, tariff) may do so by participating in the
program established by the city, or its authorized designee. Retail customers
are not permitted to participate in the demand response program of any other
entity without the express, prior authorization of the city.
(Ord. 7, third series, passed 5-5-2009)
§ 50.06 CONTRACTUAL CONTENTS.
   Provisions of this subchapter relating to municipal utilities shall
constitute portions of the contract between the city, and all consumers of
municipal utility services, and every such consumer shall be deemed to assent
to the same. All contracts between franchisees and consumers of utility
services, other than municipal, shall be in strict accord with the provisions
of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 3.04)
MUNICIPAL UTILITY SERVICE
§ 50.20 BILLING, AND PAYMENT.
   All municipal utilities shall be billed in monthly, or quarterly,
installments, as the case may be, but a utilities statement shall be sent to
each consumer on, or before, the first day of the month following reading of
any meter read during such month. All utilities charges shall be delinquent if
they are unpaid at the close of business on the tenth day of the month
following the billing; provided, that if the tenth day of the month shall fall
on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the time shall be extended to the
close of business on the next succeeding day on which business is normally
transacted. A penalty shall be added to, and become part of, all delinquent
utility bills. If any bill is not paid in full on, or before, the eleventh day
of the month following the date upon which it became delinquent, municipal
utilities may, at the option of the city, be suspended to the consumer whose
bill is so delinquent, upon ten days’ written notice served in person upon the
consumer. If service is suspended due to delinquency, it shall not be restored
at that location until a reconnection charge has been paid for each utility
reconnected, in addition to amounts owed for service and penalties.
(Prior Code, § 3.05) (Ord. 87, second series, passed 7-5-1988)
§ 50.21 APPLICATION, CONNECTION, AND SALE OF SERVICE.
   Application for municipal utility services shall be made upon forms supplied
by the city, and strictly in accordance therewith. No connection shall be made
until consent has been received from the city to make the same. All municipal
utilities shall be sold, and delivered, to consumers under the then applicable
rate applied to the amount of the utilities taken as metered, or ascertained in
connection with the rates.
(Prior Code, § 3.05)
§ 50.22 DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE.
   All municipal utilities may be shut off, or discontinued, whenever it is
found, that:
   (A)   The owner, or occupant, of the premises served, or any person working
on any connection with the municipal utility systems, has violated any
requirement of the city code relative thereto, or any connection therewith;
   (B)   Any charge for a municipal utility service, or any other financial
obligation imposed on the present owner, or occupant, of the premises served,
is unpaid after due notice thereof; or
   (C)   There is fraud, or misrepresentation, by the owner, or occupant, in
connection with any application for service, or delivery or charges therefor.
(Prior Code, § 3.05)
§ 50.23 OWNERSHIP OF MUNICIPAL UTILITIES.
   Ownership of all municipal utilities, plants, lines, mains, extensions, and
appurtenances thereto, shall be, and remain, in the city, and no person shall
own any part, or portion thereof; provided, however, that private facilities,
and appurtenances constructed on private property, are not intended to be
included in municipal ownership.
(Prior Code, § 3.05)
§ 50.24 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   The city has the right to enter in, and upon, private property, including
buildings and dwelling houses, in, or upon, which is installed a municipal
utility, or connection therewith, at all times reasonable under the
circumstances, for the purpose of reading utility meters, for the purpose of
inspection and repair of meters, or a utility system, or any part thereof, and
for the purpose of connecting, and disconnecting, service.
(Prior Code, § 3.05)
§ 50.25 METER TESTING.
   Whenever a consumer shall request the city to test any utility meter in use
by him or her, the request shall be accompanied by a cash deposit in the amount
set by resolution by the Council for each meter to be tested. If any meter is
found to be inaccurate, the same shall be replaced with an accurate meter, and
the deposit thereon refunded. If the meter shall be found to be accurate in its
recordings, or calculations, it shall be reinstalled, and the deposit shall be
retained by the city to defray the cost of the test.
(Prior Code, § 3.05)
§ 50.26 BILLING ERRORS.
   When a customer has been overcharged, or undercharged, as a result of
incorrect reading of the meter, incorrect application of the rate schedule,
incorrect connection of the meter, application of an incorrect multiplier, or
constant, or similar, reasons, the amount of the overcharge shall be refunded
to the customer, or the amount of the undercharge may be billed to the
customer. The refund, or charge, in no event shall exceed one year, unless the
date the error occurred can be fixed with reasonable certainty, in which case
the refund overcharge shall be computed from that date, but in no event for a
period longer than one year. The refund may be in either cash, or credit on the
utility bill.
(Prior Code, § 3.05) (Ord. 108, second series, passed 11-5-1991)
§ 50.27 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to willfully, or carelessly, break,
injure, mar, deface, disturb, or in any way interfere with any buildings,
attachments, machinery, apparatus, equipment, fixture, or appurtenance of any
municipal utility, or municipal utility system, or commit any act tending to
obstruct, or impair, the use of any municipal utility.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to make any connection with any
municipal utility system without first having applied for, and received written
permission, to do so from the city.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to turn on, or connect, a utility when
the same has been turned off, or disconnected, by the city for non-payment of a
bill, or for any other reason, without first having obtained a permit to do so
from the city.
   (D)   It is unlawful for any person to “jumper”, or by any means, or device,
fully, or partially, circumvent a municipal utility meter, or to knowingly use,
or consume, unmetered utilities, or use the services of any utility system, the
use of which the proper billing authorities have no knowledge.
(Prior Code, § 3.05) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.28 COLLECTION AND LIEN FOR MUNICIPAL UTILITY SERVICE AND CHARGE.
   (A)   Payment for all municipal utility (as that term is defined in city
code, §
50.01) service, and charges, shall be the primary responsibility of the fee
owner of the premises served, and shall be billed to the owner, unless
otherwise contracted for, and authorized in writing by, the fee owner, and any
other person (such as a tenant, contract purchaser, manager, and the like), as
agent for the fee owner, and consented to by the city. If the utility service,
and charges, are for a single metered multi-unit rental residential building,
the owner of the building shall be the customer of record, and this
responsibility shall not be waived by contract, or otherwise. The city may
collect the same in a civil action, or, in the alternative and at the option of
the city, as otherwise provided in this section.
   (B)   Pursuant to M.S. § 444.075, subd. 3e, as it may be amended from time
to time, referencing unpaid charges for utilities, the city may make charges
for unpaid utilities, a charge against the owner, lessee, occupant, or all of
them, and may provide, and covenant, for certifying unpaid charges to the
County Auditor with taxes against the property served for collection as other
taxes are collected.
(Prior Code, § 3.05) (Ord. 28, second series, passed 12-21-1981; Ord. 001,
third series, passed 4-15-2008)
§ 50.29 MUNICIPAL UTILITY SERVICE OUTSIDE THE CITY.
   Premises located outside the city shall not be connected to, or served by,
any municipal utility, except such premises as are publicly owned, or presently
served. Persons needing utility service, and not within one of the foregoing
exceptions, whose property is located outside the city must initiate annexation
proceedings prior to being provided with the service, or services.
(Prior Code, § 3.05) (Ord. 96, second series, passed 9-19-1989)
§ 50.30 CONNECTION OR TAPPING PROHIBITED; DELINQUENT ASSESSMENTS OR CHARGES.
   No permit shall be granted to tap, or connect with, a municipal utility when
any assessment, or connection, charge for the utility against the property to
be connected is in default, or delinquent. If the assessment, or connection,
charges are payable in installments, no permit shall be granted unless all
installments then due, and payable, have been paid.
(Prior Code, § 3.05)
CHAPTER 51: WATER
Section
   
51.01   Deficiency of water, and shutting off water
   
51.02   Repair of leaks
   
51.03   Abandoned services
   
51.04   Service pipes
   
51.05   Private water supplies
   
51.06   Private water supplies and well prohibited
   
51.07   Private fire hose connections
   
51.08   Opening hydrants
   
51.09   Restricted hours for sprinkling; non-essential water usage
§ 51.01 DEFICIENCY OF WATER, AND SHUTTING OFF WATER.
   The city is not liable for any deficiency, or failure, in the supply of
water to customers, whether occasioned by shutting the water off for the
purpose of making repairs or connections, or by any other cause whatever. In
case of fire, or alarm of fire, water may be shut off to ensure a supply for
fire fighting. In making repairs to maintain the service pipe, or construction
of new works, the water supply may be shut off at any time, and kept off so
long as may be necessary.
(Prior Code, § 3.30) (Ord. 192, second series, passed 1-3-2006)
§ 51.02 REPAIR OF LEAKS.
   It is the responsibility of the property owner to repair any leaks, or to
make any other repairs from the curb stop, including the curb stop into the
house, or other building. In case of failure upon the part of any consumer, or
owner, to repair any leak occurring in his or her service pipe within 24 hours
after oral, or written, notice has been given to the owner, or occupant, of the
premises, the water may be shut off, and will not be turned on until a
reconnection charge has been paid, and the water service has been repaired.
When the waste of water is great, or when damage is likely to result from the
leak, the water will be turned off if the repair is not proceeded with
immediately. The city will fix any service line rupture leak of a water service
line from the water main to the curb stop, not to include the curb stop.
(Prior Code, § 3.30) (Ord. 199, second series, passed 8-15-2006)
§ 51.03 ABANDONED SERVICES.
   All service installations connected to the water system that have been
abandoned, or, for any reason, have become useless for further service, shall
be disconnected at the main. The owner of the premises, served by this service,
shall pay the cost of excavation. The city shall perform the actual
disconnection, and all pipe, and appurtenances, removed from the street right-
of-way shall become the property of the city. When new buildings are erected on
the site of old ones, and it is desired to increase the old water service, a
new permit shall be taken out, and the regular tapping charge shall be made as
if this were a new service. It is unlawful for any person to cause, or allow,
any service pipe to be hammered, or squeezed together at the ends, to stop the
flow of water, or to save expense in proper removal of the pipe from the main.
Also, improper disposition thereof shall be corrected by the city, and the cost
incurred shall be borne by the person causing, or allowing, the work to be
performed. If unique circumstances arise, the Council may consider waiving the
requirements of this section.
(Prior Code, § 3.30) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.04 SERVICE PIPES.
   Every service pipe must be laid in a manner as to prevent rupture by
settlement. The service pipe shall be placed not less than seven feet below the
surface in all cases, so arranged as to prevent rupture, and stoppage by
freezing. Frozen service pipes between the main and the building shall be the
responsibility of the owner. Service pipes must extend from the curb stops to
the inside of the building. A valve, the same size as the service pipe, shall
be placed close to the inside wall of the building, ahead of the meter and
valve on the outlet side of meter, and also to be well protected from freezing.
Joints on copper tubing shall be flared or compressed, and kept to a minimum.
Not more than one joint shall be used for a service up to 70 feet in length.
All water main taps shall use an approved tapping sleeve when connecting to a
city water main. All water main taps, and service pipe joints, shall be left
uncovered until inspected. A notice requesting inspection shall be given far
enough ahead of time as to allow city staff to schedule a time to view. Minimum
size connection with the water mains shall be one inch in diameter on all new
water services. Type K copper or approved material shall be required from the
main tap to the curb stop. A tracer wire shall be installed along the same
installation route on all new water services that are not copper. The tracer
wire shall be installed to provide the ability to access a connection to the
tracer wire in the manner to allow connecting to a locator device.
(Prior Code, § 3.30)
§ 51.05 PRIVATE WATER SUPPLIES.
   No water pipe of the city water system shall be connected with any pump,
well, pipe, tank, or any device that is connected with any other source of
water supply, and when such are found, the city shall notify the owner, or
occupant, to disconnect the same and, if not immediately done, the city water
shall be turned off. Before any new connections to the city system are
permitted, the city shall ascertain that no cross-connections will exist when
the new connection is made. When a building is connected to city water, the
private water supply may be used only for such purposes as the city may allow.
(Prior Code, § 3.30)
§ 51.06 PRIVATE WATER SUPPLIES AND WELL PROHIBITED.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
       PERSON. Any natural person, or partnership, or association, or private
or public corporation.
       PRIVATE WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM. A system owned, and operated, by a person
for collection, and delivery, of piped water for human consumption into
commercial, industrial, or residential buildings, or structures.
      PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM. The city water supply system.
   (B)   No person shall build, establish, expand, or maintain a private water
supply within the city. Any private water supply system which is in place, and
operational, as of the date of this section, shall be subject to this section
only in the event that his or her current well system shall fail.
   (C)   Any violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 37, third series, passed 7-5-2016) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.07 PRIVATE FIRE HOSE CONNECTIONS.
   Owners of structures with self-contained fire protection systems may apply
for, and obtain, permission to connect the street mains with hydrants, large
pipes, and hose couplings, for use in case of fire only, at their own
installation expense, and at the rates as the Council may adopt by resolution
as herein provided.
(Prior Code, § 3.30)
§ 51.08 OPENING HYDRANTS.
   It is unlawful for any person, other than members of the Fire Department, or
other person duly authorized by the city, in pursuance of lawful purpose, to
open any fire hydrant, or attempt to draw water from the same, or in any manner
interfere therewith. It is also unlawful for any person so authorized to
deliver, or suffer to be delivered, to any other person any hydrant key or
wrench, except for the purposes strictly pertaining to their lawful use.
(Prior Code, § 3.30) (Ord. 192, second series, passed 1-3-2006) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.09 RESTRICTED HOURS FOR SPRINKLING; NON-ESSENTIAL WATER USAGE.
   (A)   Restricted hours for sprinkling. Whenever the city shall determine
that a shortage of water threatens the city, it may limit the times, and hours,
during which water may be used from the city water system for lawn and garden
sprinkling, irrigation, car washing, air conditioning, and other uses, or
either, or any, of them. It is unlawful for any water consumer to cause, or
permit, water to be used in violation of such determination after public
announcement thereof has been made through the news media specifically
indicating the restrictions thereof.
   (B)   Non-essential water usage.
      (1)   Purpose. This section establishes water conservation restrictions;
and the plan will be in effect at any time the Governor declares, by executive
order, a critical water deficiency, pursuant to M.S. § 103G.291, as it may be
amended from time to time.
      (2)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a
different meaning.
         CITY MANAGER. The individual in charge of the overall operation of the
city.
         DEPARTMENT. The City Water Department.
         EMERGENCY. The declaration of a critical water deficiency by the
Governor.
         IRRIGATION. The watering of shrubs, trees, sod, seeded areas, gardens,
lawns, or any other outdoor vegetation, except outdoor vegetation utilized for
agricultural purposes.
         NOTIFICATION TO PUBLIC. Notification through local media, including
interviews and issuance of news releases.
         PUBLIC WATER SUPPLIER. The city, or other entity, that owns, manages,
or operates a public water supply, as defined in M.S. § 144.382, subd. 4, as it
may be amended from time to time.
         RECLAIMED WATER. Water collected from rooftops, paved surfaces, or
other collection devices, and all water utilized more than once before re-
entering the natural water cycle.
         WATER RECIRCULATION SYSTEM. Any system which enables a user to reuse
water at least once prior to returning the water to the natural water cycle.
      (3)   Application.
         (a)   This section applies to all customers of public water suppliers
who own, or control, water use on any premises.
         (b)   No person shall make, cause, use, or permit the use of water
received from a public water supply for residential, commercial, industrial,
governmental, or any other purpose in any manner contrary to any provision in
this section.
         (c)   Mandatory emergency conservation measures shall be implemented
based upon the declaration of a critical water emergency by the Governor.
      (4)   Declaration of water deficiency. Upon the declaration of a critical
water deficiency by the Governor, the public water supplier shall immediately
post notice of the emergency declaration at the usual meeting place of the City
Council, or the official city bulletin board. The city shall provide
notification to the public as quickly as possible, or through established water
supply plans, emergency response plans, or procedures.
      (5)   Mandatory emergency water conservation measures. Upon declaration
of a water emergency and notification to the public, the following mandatory
restrictions upon non-essential water use shall be enforced:
         (a)   Outdoor irrigation of yards, gardens, golf courses, parklands,
and other non-agricultural land, except for those areas irrigated with
reclaimed water, is prohibited;
         (b)   Washing, or spraying, of sidewalks, driveways, parking areas,
tennis courts, patios, or other paved areas with water from any pressurized
source, including garden hoses, except to alleviate immediate health, or
safety, hazards, is prohibited;
         (c)   The outdoor use of any water-based play apparatus connected to a
pressurized source is prohibited;
         (d)   Restaurants, and other food service establishments, are
prohibited from serving water to their customers, unless water is specifically
requested by the customer;
         (e)   Operation of outdoor misting systems used to cool public areas
is prohibited;
         (f)   The filling of swimming pools, fountains, spas, or other
exterior water features is prohibited; and
         (g)   The washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, and other types of
mobile equipment is prohibited, except at facilities equipped with wash water
recirculation systems, and for vehicles requiring frequent washing to protect
public health, safety, and welfare.
      (6)   Variances. The City Manager, or his or her designee, is authorized
to grant variances to this section where strict application of its provisions
would result in serious hardship to a customer. A variance may be granted only
for reasons involving health or safety. An applicant may appeal the denial of a
variance within five days of the decision by submitting a written appeal to the
City Clerk-Treasurer. The City Council shall hear the appeal at the next City
Council meeting. The decision of the City Council is final.
      (7)   Violations.
         (a)   Violations shall be determined, and cited, by the City Manager,
or his or her designee. A violator may appeal the citation within five days of
its issuance by submitting a written appeal to the city. The City Council shall
hear the appeal at the next City Council meeting. The decision of the City
Council is final. Violators may be granted an administrative waiver if evidence
is provided that equipment failure was the cause of the violation. A letter
from a qualified vendor, or equipment invoice, will be required to show proof
of equipment failure.
         (b)   Upon discovery of a first violation, the violator shall be
issued, either personally or by mail, a warning letter that sets forth the
violation, and which shall describe the remedy, and fines, for future
violations.
         (c)   Upon subsequent violations at the same location, the violator
shall be issued, either personally or by mail, a citation that sets forth the
violation, and shall describe the remedy.
         (d)   Fines shall be added to the monthly water bill of the owner, or
current occupant, of the premises where the violation occurred. The imposition
of the fine shall, in no way, limit the right of the city to pursue other legal
remedies.
      (8)   Enforcement. The City Manager, or his or her designee, is
authorized to designate city employees, or law enforcement personnel, to
enforce the provisions of this section.
(Prior Code, § 3.30) (Ord. 38, third series, passed 7-5-2016) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 52: SEWAGE
Section
   
52.01   Definitions
   
52.02   Superintendent; powers and authority
   
52.03   Waste disposal
   
52.04   Private wastewater disposal
   
52.05   Building sewers and connections
   
52.06   Use of wastewater treatment works
   
52.07   Vandalism
   
52.08   Establishment of a sewer service charge system
   
52.09   Determination of sewer service charges
   
52.10   Sewer Service Fund
   
52.11   Administration
   
52.12   Violations
   
52.13   System to take precedence
   
52.14   Use of certain water/sewer drains
 
   
52.99   Penalty
§ 52.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also referred to as the Clean
Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.
   ADMINISTRATION COSTS. Fixed costs attributable to administration of the
wastewater treatment works (for example, billing and associated bookkeeping,
and accounting costs).
   ASTM. American Society for Testing and Materials.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in
five days at 20C, expressed in terms of milligrams per liter (mg/l).
   BUILDING DRAIN. The part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from waste, and other drainage pipes,
inside the walls of the building, and conveys it to the building sewer,
beginning three feet outside the building wall.
   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer,
or other place of disposal, also referred to as a house connection or service
connection.
   CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (COD). The quantity of oxygen, utilized in the
chemical oxidation of organic matter as determined by standard laboratory
procedures, expressed in terms of milligrams per liter (mg/l).
   COMMERCIAL USER. Users which are business enterprises discharging normal
domestic strength wastewater.
   COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH, and
fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the NPDES/SDS
permit if the treatment facilities are designed to treat such pollutants to a
degree which complies with effluent concentration limits imposed by the permit.
   CONTROL MANHOLE. A structure specifically constructed for the purpose of
measuring flow, and/or sampling of wastes.
   DEBT SERVICE CHARGE. A charge levied on users of the wastewater treatment
works for the cost of repaying money bonded to construct the facilities.
   EASEMENT. An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
   EXTRA STRENGTH WASTEWATER. Wastewater having a BOD, TSS, TKN, or phosphorus
concentration greater than normal domestic strength wastewater, as defined
herein, and not otherwise classified as an incompatible pollutant.
   FECAL CLORIFORM. Any number of organisms common to the intestinal tract of
humans and animals, whose presence in water is an indicator of pollution.
   FLOATABLE OIL (FOG). Oil, fat, or grease in a physical state, such that it
will separate by gravity from wastewater.
   GARBAGE. Animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking, and serving of food.
   GOVERNMENTAL USER. Users which are units, agencies or instrumentalities of
federal, state, or local government discharging normal domestic strength
wastewater.
   INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. Waste that either singly, or by interaction with
other wastes, interferes with the wastewater treatment works, constitutes a
hazard to humans or animals, creates a public nuisance, or creates any hazard
in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment works.
   INDUSTRIAL USER or INDUSTRY.
      (1)   Any user that discharges liquid wastes resulting from industrial,
or manufacturing, processes, or from the development of any natural resources,
into a publicly-owned wastewater treatment works. These are identified in the
Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, Office of Management and
Budget, as amended, and supplemented, under one of the following divisions:
         (a)   Division A: Agriculture, Forestry, and Fishing;
         (b)   Division B: Mining;
         (c)   Division D: Manufacturing;
         (d)   Division E: Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas, and
Sanitary Sewers; and
         (e)   Division I: Services.
      (2)   Any user of a publicly-owned treatment works which discharges
wastewater to the treatment works containing toxic pollutants, or poisonous
solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, to contaminate the sludge of any municipal
systems, or to injure, or to interfere with, any wastewater treatment process,
or which constitutes a hazard to humans or animals, creates a public nuisance,
or creates any hazard in, or has an adverse effect on, the waters receiving any
discharge from the treatment works.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. The gaseous, liquid, and solid wastes resulting from
industrial, or manufacturing, processes, trade of business, or from the
development, recovery, and processing of natural resources, including, but not
limited to, all Standard Industrial Classification Manual divisions A, B, D, E,
and I manufacturers, as distinct from normal domestic strength wastewater.
   INFILTRATION. Water entering the sewer system (including building drains and
pipes) from the ground through such means as defective pipes, pipe joints,
connections, and manhole walls.
   INFILTRATION/INFLOW (I/I). The total quantity of water from both
infiltration and inflow.
   INFLOW. Water, other than wastewater, that enters a sewer system (including
building drains) from sources such as, but not limited to, roof leaders, cellar
drains, yard and area drains, foundation drains, drains from springs and swampy
areas, manhole covers, cross-connections from storm sewers, catch basins,
surface runoff, street wash waters, or drainage.
   INSTITUTIONAL USER. Users other than commercial, governmental, industrial,
or residential users, discharging primarily normal domestic strength wastewater
(for example, nonprofit organizations).
   INTERFERENCE. The inhibition, or disruption, of the city’s wastewater
treatment works processes, or operations, which causes, or significantly
contributes to, a violation of any requirement of the city’s NPDES and/or SDS
permit. The term includes the inhibition, or disruption, of sewage sludge use,
or disposal, by the city in accordance with published regulations providing
guidelines under § 405 of the Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1345 or any regulations
developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et
seq.,, the Clean Air Act, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 7401 et seq., the Toxic Substances
Control Act, being 15 U.S.C. §§ 2601 et seq., or more stringent state criteria
applicable to the method of disposal, or use, employed by the city.
   MPCA. The State Pollution Control Agency.
   NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. Federal regulations
establishing pretreatment standards for introduction of pollutants in publicly-
owned wastewater treatment works, which are determined to be not susceptible to
treatment by such facilities, or would interfere with the operation of such
facilities, pursuant to § 307(b) of the Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1317.
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) PERMIT. A permit
issued by the MPCA, setting limits on pollutants that a permittee may legally
discharge into waters of the United States, pursuant to §§ 402 and 405 of the
Act, being 33 U.S.C. §§ 1342 et seq.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewers,
which overflow into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface
water, or groundwater.
   NITRIFICATION. The biochemical oxidation of unoxidized nitrogen (NH3-N and
organic nitrogen) to oxidized nitrogen (usually nitrate).
   NITROGEN OR N. A nutrient that is often present in wastewater as ammonia,
nitrate, nitrite, and organic nitrogen. The concentrations of each form, and
the sum total nitrogen, are expressed as milligrams per liter (mg/l) elemental
nitrogen.
      (1)   AMMONIA-NITROGEN or NH3-N. The quantity of elemental nitrogen
present in the form of ammonia (NH3); inorganic nitrogen.
      (2)   AVAILABLE NITROGEN. The nitrogen that is present in the inorganic
forms (NH3-N; nitrate) that are available for plant growth.
      (3)   ORGANIC NITROGEN. The nitrogen present in a sample that is combined
in organic matter, and is released by decay of the organics.
      (4)   TOTAL KJELDAHL NITROGEN OR TKN. A measure of the total nitrogen
present in a sample. Organic nitrogen plus ammonia-nitrogen equals TKN.
   NON-CONTACT COOLING WATER. The water discharged from any use, such as air
conditioning, cooling, refrigeration, or during which the only pollutant added
is heat.
   NORMAL DOMESTIC STRENGTH WASTEWATER (NDSW). Wastewater that is primarily
introduced by residential users with a BOD5 concentration not greater than 257
mg/l, a suspended solids (TSS) concentration not greater than 311 mg/l, a total
kjeldahl nitrogen (TKN) concentration not greater than 25 mg/l, and a
phosphorus concentration no greater than eight mg/l.
   OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE. Activities required to provide for the dependable
and economical functioning of the treatment works throughout the design, or
useful life, of the treatment works, whichever is longer, and at the level of
performance for which the treatment works were constructed. OPERATION AND
MAINTENANCE includes REPLACEMENT.
   OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COST. Expenditures for operation and maintenance,
including replacement.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation, or
group.
   pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions in
terms of grams per liter of solution.
   PHOSPHORUS or P. A nutrient that is often present in wastewater as organic
phosphorus compounds, polyphosphates, and orthophosphates. The concentrations
of each form, and the sum total phosphorus, are expressed as milligrams per
liter (mg/l) elemental phosphorus.
      (1)   ORGANIC PHOSPHORUS. The phosphorus present in a sample that is
combined in organic matter, and is released by decay of the organics.
      (2)   ORTHOPHOSPHATE. A salt that contains phosphorus as PO4. The product
of hydrolysis of polyphosphates. The product of the biochemical oxidation of
organic phosphorus.
      (3)   PHOSPHORUS REMOVAL. The precipitation of soluble, and insoluble,
phosphorus by chemical coagulation, and subsequent flocculation and
sedimentation.
   PRETREATMENT. The treatment of wastewater from industrial sources prior to
the introduction of the waste effluent into a publicly-owned treatment works.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking, and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 cm) in any dimension.
   PUBLIC WASTEWATER COLLECTION SYSTEM. A system of sanitary sewers owned,
maintained, operated, and controlled by the city.
   REPLACEMENT. Obtaining, and installing, of equipment, accessories, or
appurtenances which are necessary during the design, or useful life, of the
treatment works, whichever is longer, to maintain the capacity, and
performance, for which the works were designed and constructed.
   REPLACEMENT COSTS. Expenditures for replacement.
   RESIDENTIAL USER. A user of the wastewater treatment works whose premises,
or building, is used primarily as a residence for one, or more, persons,
including dwelling units such as detached, and semi-detached, housing,
apartments, and mobile homes; and which discharges primarily normal domestic
strength wastewater.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer intended to carry only liquid and water carried
wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and
institutions, together with minor quantities of ground, storm, and surface
waters, which are not admitted intentionally.
   SEWAGE. The spent water of a community. The preferred term is WASTEWATER.
   SEWER. A pipe, or conduit, that carries wastewater, or drainage water.
      (1)   COLLECTION SEWER. A sewer whose primary purpose is to collect
wastewaters from individual point source discharges and connections.
      (2)   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer intended to serve as a sanitary sewer, and
a storm sewer.
      (3)   FORCE MAIN. A pipe in which wastewater is carried under pressure.
      (4)   INTERCEPTOR SEWER. A sewer whose primary purpose is to transport
wastewater from collection sewers to a treatment facility.
      (5)   PRIVATE SEWER. A sewer which is not owned, and maintained, by a
public authority.
      (6)   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer owned, maintained, and controlled by a public
authority.
      (7)   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer intended to carry only liquid and water-
carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and
institutions, together with minor quantities of ground, storm, and surface
waters, which are not admitted intentionally.
      (8)   STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN. A drain or sewer intended to carry
stormwaters, surface runoff, groundwater, sub-surface water, street wash water,
drainage, and unpolluted water from any source.
   SEWER SERVICE. The use of, and benefit from, the wastewater treatment works.
   SEWER SERVICE CHARGE. The aggregate of all charges, including charges for
operation, maintenance, replacement, debt service, administrative costs, and
other sewer related charges that are billed periodically to users of the city’s
wastewater treatment works.
   SEWER SERVICE FUND. A fund into which income from sewer service charges is
deposited along with other income. Expenditures of the SEWER SERVICE FUND will
be for operation, maintenance, and replacement costs, and to retire debt
incurred through capital expenditure for the wastewater treatment works.
   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER. Any industrial user of the wastewater treatment
works which has a discharge flow in excess of 25,000 gallons per average work
day; has exceeded 5% of the total flow received at the treatment facility;
whose waste contains a pollutant in toxic amounts pursuant to § 307(a) of the
Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1317(a); or whose discharge has a significant effect,
either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on the
wastewater disposal system, the quality of sludge, the system’s effluent
quality, or emissions generated by the treatment system.
   SLUG. Any discharge of water, or wastewater, which, in concentration of any
given constituent, or in quantity of flow, exceeds, for any period of duration
longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the average 24-hour concentration,
or quantity of flow, during normal operation, and shall adversely affect the
performance of the wastewater treatment works.
   STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION MANUAL. Office of Management and Budget,
1972.
   STATE DISPOSAL SYSTEM (SDS) PERMIT. Any permit (including any terms,
conditions, and requirements thereof) issued by the MPCA, pursuant to M.S.
Chapter 115, as it may be amended from time to time, for the wastewater
treatment works.
   SUPERINTENDENT. The Superintendent of the Wastewater Treatment Facility, or
a deputy, agent, or representative thereof.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS) or TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS. The total suspended matter
that either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in, water,
wastewater, or other liquids, and is removable by laboratory filtering, as
prescribed in Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater,
latest edition, and referred to as non-filterable residue.
   TOXIC POLLUTANT. The concentration of any pollutant, or combination of
pollutants, which, upon exposure to, or assimilation into, any organism, will
cause adverse effects, as defined in standards issued pursuant to § 307(a) of
the Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1317(a).
   UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water of quality equal to, or better than, the effluent
criteria in effect, or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards, and would not be benefitted by discharge to the wastewater
treatment works. (See NON-CONTACT COOLING WATER.)
   USER. Any person who discharges, or causes, or permits, the discharge of,
wastewater into the city’s wastewater treatment works.
   USER CHARGE. A charge levied on users of the wastewater treatment works for
the user’s proportionate share of the cost of operation and maintenance,
including replacement.
   WASTEWATER. The spent water of the city, sometimes referred to as SEWAGE.
From the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-
carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and
institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that
may be present.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS or TREATMENT WORKS. An arrangement of any
devices, facilities, structures, equipment, or processes owned, or used, by the
city for the purpose of the transmission, storage, treatment, recycling, and
reclamation of municipal sewage, domestic sewage, or industrial wastewater, or
structures necessary to recycle, or reuse, water, including interceptor sewers,
outfall sewers, collection sewers, pumping, power, and other equipment, and
their appurtenances; extensions, improvements, remodeling, additions, and
alterations thereof; elements essential to provide a reliable recycled water
supply, such as standby treatment units and clear well facilities; and any
works including land which is an integral part of the treatment process, or is
used for ultimate disposal of residues resulting from the treatment.
   WATERCOURSE. A natural, or artificial, channel for the passage of water,
either continuously or intermittently.
   WATERS OF THE STATE. All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, aquifers,
irrigation systems, drainage systems, and all other bodies, or accumulations of
water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which
are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state, or any portion
thereof.
   WPCF. The Water Pollution Control Federation.
(Prior Code, § 3.40) (Ord. 105, second series, passed 5-15-1990; Ord. 177,
second series, passed 1-7-2003)
§ 52.02 SUPERINTENDENT; POWERS AND AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The Wastewater Superintendent shall have control, and general
supervision, of all public sewers and service connections in the city, and
shall be responsible for administering the provisions of this chapter to the
end that a proper, and efficient, public sewer is maintained.
   (B)   The Wastewater Superintendent, bearing proper credentials and
identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of
inspection, observations, measurement, sampling, and testing pertinent to the
discharges to the city’s sewer system in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. Where a user has security measures in force which would require proper
identification, and clearance, before entry into their premises, the user shall
make necessary arrangements with any security guards so that, upon presentation
of suitable identification, the city, MPCA, and EPA will be permitted to enter,
without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities.
   (C)   The Wastewater Superintendent is authorized to obtain information
concerning industrial processes which have a direct bearing on the type, and
source, of discharge to the wastewater collection system. An industry may
withhold information considered confidential; however, the industry must
establish that the revelation to the public of the information in question
might result in an advantage to competitors.
   (D)   While performing necessary work on private properties, the Wastewater
Superintendent shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises
established by the company, and the company shall be held harmless for injury,
or death, to the city employees, and the city shall indemnify the company
against loss, or damage, to its property by city employees, and against
liability claims and demands for personal injury, or property damage, asserted
against the company, and growing out of the gauging, and sampling, operation,
except as may be caused by negligence, or failure, of the company to maintain
safe conditions, as required in §
52.06 hereof.
   (E)   The Wastewater Superintendent, bearing proper credentials and
identification, shall be permitted to enter all private properties through
which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not
limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and
maintenance of any portion of the wastewater treatment works lying within the
easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on the easement shall be done
in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to
the private property involved.
(Prior Code, § 3.40)
§ 52.03 WASTE DISPOSAL.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be
deposited, in any unsanitary manner, on public, or private, property within the
city, or in any area under jurisdiction of the city, any human, or animal,
excrement, garbage, or objectionable waste.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to discharge to any natural outlet any
wastewater, or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been
provided in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and the city’s
NPDES/SDS permit.
   (C)   Except as provided hereinafter, it is unlawful for any person to
construct, or maintain, any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other
facility intended, or used, for the disposal of wastewater.
   (D)   The owner(s) of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes from which wastewater is
discharged, and which is situated within the city and adjacent to any street,
alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located, or may in the future be
located, a public sanitary sewer of the city, shall be required, at the owner’s
expense, to install a suitable service connection to the public sewer, in
accordance with provisions of this chapter, within ten days of the date the
public sewer is operational; provided, the public sewer is within 150 feet of
the structure generating the wastewater. All future buildings constructed on
property adjacent to the public sewer shall be required to immediately connect
to the public sewer. If sewer connections are not made pursuant to this
section, an official 30-day notice shall be served, instructing the affected
property owner to make the connection.
   (E)   In the event an owner shall fail to connect to a public sewer in
compliance with a notice given hereunder, the city must undertake to have the
connection made, and shall assess the cost thereof against the benefitted
property. The assessment, when levied, shall bear interest at the rate
determined by the Council, and shall be certified to the County Auditor, and
shall be collected, and remitted, to the city in the same manner as assessments
for local improvements. The rights of the city shall be in addition to any
remedial, or enforcement, provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 3.40) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.04 PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL.
   (A)   Where a public sewer is not available under the provisions of this
chapter, the building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal
system complying with the provisions of this section.
   (B)   Prior to commencement of construction of a private wastewater disposal
system, the owner(s) shall first obtain a written permit signed by the city.
The application for the permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city,
which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications, and other
information as are deemed necessary by the city.
   (C)   A permit for a private wastewater disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the city.
The city shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction,
and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the city when work
is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered.
The inspection shall be made within four hours of the receipt of notice.
   (D)   The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private wastewater
disposal system shall comply with all requirements of the state statutes. No
septic tank, or cesspool, shall be permitted to discharge to any natural
outlet.
   (E)   At the time as a public sewer becomes available to a property serviced
by a private wastewater disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to
the public sewer within ten days in compliance with this chapter, and, within
30 days, any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private wastewater disposal
systems shall be cleaned of sludge. The bottom shall be broken to permit
drainage, and the tank, or pit, filled with suitable material.
   (F)   The owner(s) shall operate, and maintain, the private wastewater
disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the
city.
   (G)   No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere
with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the MPCA, or the
Department of Health of the state.
(Prior Code, § 3.40)
§ 52.05 BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   Any new connection to the sanitary sewer system shall be prohibited,
unless sufficient capacity is available in all downstream facilities,
including, but not limited to, capacity for flow, BOD5, TSS, TKN, and
phosphorus, as determined by the Wastewater Superintendent.
   (B)   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with, or
opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer, or appurtenance thereof,
without first obtaining a written permit from the city.
   (C)   Applications for permits shall be made by the owner, or authorized
agent, and the party employed to do the work, and shall state the location,
name of owner, street number of the building to be connected, and how occupied.
No person shall extend any private building drain beyond the limits of the
building, or property, for which the service connection permit has been given.
   (D)   (1)   There shall be two classes of building sewer permits:
         (a)   For residential, and commercial, service; and
         (b)   For service to establishments producing industrial wastes.
      (2)   In either case, the application shall be supplemented by any plans,
specifications, or any other information considered pertinent in the judgment
of the city. The industry, as a condition of permit authorization, must provide
information describing its wastewater constituents, characteristics, and type
of activity.
   (E)   All costs, and expenses, incidental to the installation, and
connection, of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall
indemnify the city from any loss, or damage, that may be directly, or
indirectly, occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
   (F)   A separate, and independent, building sewer shall be provided for
every building, except where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot, and no private sewer is available, or can be constructed, to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway. The
building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building,
and the whole considered one building sewer. The city does not, and will not,
assume any obligation, or responsibility, for damage caused by, or resulting
from, any connection aforementioned.
   (G)   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and test by the Wastewater Superintendent,
or his or her representative, to meet all requirements of this chapter.
   (H)   The size, slopes, alignment, materials of construction of a building
sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing, and backfilling of the trench, shall all conform to the requirements
of the state building and plumbing codes, or other applicable rules and
regulations of the city. In the absence of code provisions, or in the
amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate
specifications of the ASTM and WPCF Manual of Practice, No. 9, shall apply.
   (I)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary
sewage carried by the building drain shall be lifted by an approved means, and
discharged to the building sewer.
   (J)   It is unlawful for any person to make connection of roof downspouts,
foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or
groundwater to a building sewer, or indirectly to the wastewater disposal
system.
   (K)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the state building and plumbing codes, or other
applicable rules and regulations of the city, or the procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of the ASTM and the WPCF Manual of Practice, No. 9.
All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight, and verified by
proper testing to prevent the inclusion of infiltration/inflow. Any deviation
from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the city prior
to installation.
   (L)   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the city when
the building sewer is ready for inspection, and connection, to the public
sewer. The connection, and inspection, shall be made under the supervision of
the Wastewater Superintendent.
   (M)   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard.
Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course
of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city.
   (N)   No person shall make a service connection with any public sewer unless
regularly licensed under the city code to perform the work, and no permit shall
be granted to any person except the regularly licensed person.
(Prior Code, § 3.40) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.06 USE OF WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to discharge, or cause to be discharged,
any unpolluted water such as stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff, surface
drainage, or non-contact cooling water to any sanitary sewer.
   (B)   Stormwater, and all other unpolluted drainage, shall be discharged to
the sewers as are specifically designed as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet
approved by the city, and other regulatory agencies. Industrial cooling water,
or unpolluted waters, may be discharged to a storm sewer, or natural outlet, on
approval of the city, and upon approval, and the issuance of a discharge permit
by the MPCA.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to discharge, or cause to be discharged,
any of the following described waters, or wastes, to any public sewers:
      (1)   Any liquids, solids, or gases which, by reason of their nature, or
quantity, are, or may be, sufficient either alone, or by interaction with other
substances, to cause fire or explosion, or be injurious in any other way to the
wastewater treatment works, or to the operation of the system. Prohibited
materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha,
benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides,
chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides, and sulfides;
      (2)   Solid or viscous substances which will cause obstruction to the
flow in a sewer, or other interference with the operation of the wastewater
treatment facilities, such as, but not limited to, grease, garbage with
particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension, animal guts or tissues,
paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, flushable wipes,
whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust,
metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops,
waste paper, wood, plastic, asphalt residues, residues from refining, or
processing, of fuel or lubricating oil, mud, or glass grinding, or polishing
wastes;
      (3)   Any wastewater having a pH of less than five, or greater than ten,
or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage, or hazard, to
structures, equipment, and personnel of the wastewater treatment works;
      (4)   Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity,
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to inhibit, or disrupt,
any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or
create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment
works. A toxic pollutant shall include, but not be limited to, any pollutant
identified pursuant to § 307(a) of the Act; and
      (5)   Sludges, floats, or skimmings generated by an industrial, or
commercial, pretreatment system. The sludges, floats, or skimmings shall be
contained, transported, and disposed of in accordance with all federal, state,
and local regulations.
   (D)   The following described substances, materials, water, or wastes shall
be limited in discharges to municipal systems to concentrations, or quantities,
which will not harm either sewers, the wastewater treatment works treatment
process, or equipment, will not have an adverse effect on the receiving stream
and/or soil, vegetation, and groundwater, or will not otherwise endanger lives,
limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. The Wastewater Superintendent
may set limitations lower than limitations established in the regulations below
if, in his or her opinion, the more severe limitation are necessary to meet the
above objectives. In forming his or her opinion as to the acceptability of
wastes, the Wastewater Superintendent will give consideration to the factors as
the quantity of subject waste in reaction to flows, and velocities, in the
sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the wastewater
treatment process, the city’s NPDES and/or SDS permit, capacity of the
treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The limitations, or restrictions,
on materials, or characteristics of waste, or wastewaters, discharged to the
sanitary sewer which shall not be violated without approval of the Wastewater
Superintendent are as follows:
      (1)   Any wastewater having a temperature greater than 150°F (65.6°C), or
causing, individually, or in combination with other wastewater, the influent at
the wastewater treatment plant to have a temperature exceeding 104°F (40°C), or
having heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity in the wastewater
treatment works, resulting in interference therein;
      (2)   Any wastewater containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l, or containing substances which may
solidify, or become viscous, at temperatures between 32°F and 150°F (0°C and
65.6°C), and any wastewater containing oil and grease concentrations of mineral
origin of greater than 100 mg/l, whether emulsified or not;
      (3)   Any quantities of flow, concentrations, or both which constitute a
slug, as defined herein;
      (4)   Any garbage not properly shredded, as herein defined. Garbage
grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions,
restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments, or similar places where
garbage originates from the preparation of food on the premises, or when served
by caterers;
      (5)   Any noxious, or malodorous, liquids, gases, or solids, which either
singly, or by interaction with other wastes, are capable of creating a public
nuisance, or hazard to life, or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers
for their maintenance and repair;
      (6)   Non-contact cooling water or unpolluted stormwater, storm drainage,
or groundwater;
      (7)   Wastewater containing inert suspended solids (such as, but not
limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved
solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride, and sodium sulfate) in
the quantities that would cause disruption of the wastewater treatment works;
      (8)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of the half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the Wastewater Superintendent
in compliance with applicable state, or federal, regulations;
      (9)   Any waters, or wastes, containing the following substances to the
degree that any such material received in the composite wastewater at the
wastewater treatment works will cause it to be in excess of limitations set by
the Wastewater Superintendent for such materials:
         (a)   Arsenic;
         (b)   Copper;
         (c)   Lead;
         (d)   Mercury;
         (e)   Silver;
         (f)   Zinc;
         (g)   Phenolic compounds which cannot be removed by city’s wastewater
treatment system; and
         (h)   Phosphorus.
      (10)   Any waters, or wastes, containing, at the point of discharge into
the wastewater treatment works, heavy metals in excess of limits as established
in the discharge permit issued to the industry by the city;
      (11)   Any wastewater which creates conditions at, or near, the
wastewater treatment works which violates any statute, city code provision,
rule, regulation, or ordinance of any regulatory agency, or state, or federal,
regulatory body; and
      (12)   Any waters, or wastes, containing BOD5, TSS, TKN, or phosphorus of
the character, and quantity, that unusual attention, or expense, is required to
handle the materials at the wastewater treatment works, except as may be
permitted by specific written agreement, subject to the provisions of this
section.
   (E)   The total allowable industrial loading allocation of the toxic
pollutants to the wastewater treatment system is shown in the following table.
The individual allocations are to be included in the user’s wastewater
discharge permit.
Toxic Pollutants Total LBS/Day*
Toxic Pollutants Total LBS/Day*
Cadmium          0.14
Chromium +6      1.58
Copper           1.69
Cyanide          0.72
Lead             0.12
Mercury          0.07
Nickel           1.38
Total chromium   3.85
Zinc             2.85
Notes to Table:
*   Monthly average
 
   (F)   (1)   If any waters, or wastes, are discharged, or are proposed to be
discharged, to the public sewers which contain substances, or possess the
characteristics enumerated herein, and/or which, in the judgment of the
Wastewater Superintendent, may have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater
treatment works, processes, or equipment; receiving waters and/or soil,
vegetation, and groundwater; or which otherwise create a hazard to life, or
constitute a public nuisance, the city may:
         (a)   Reject the wastes;
         (b)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers, pursuant to § 307(b) of the Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1317(b),
and all addendums thereof;
         (c)   Require control over the quantities, and rates, of discharge;
and/or
         (d)   Require payment to cover the added costs of handling, treating,
and disposing of wastes not covered by existing taxes, or sewer service
charges.
      (2)   If the city permits the pretreatment, or equalization, of waste
flows, the design, installation, and maintenance of the facilities, and
equipment, shall be made at the owners’ expense, and shall be subject to the
review, and approval, of the city pursuant to the requirements of the MPCA.
   (G)   It is unlawful for any user to increase the use of process water or,
in any manner, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial, or complete,
substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations
contained herein, or contained in the National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards, or any state requirements.
   (H)   Where pretreatment, or flow-equalizing, facilities are provided, or
required, for any waters, or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in
satisfactory, and effective, operation at the expense of the owner.
   (I)   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the Wastewater Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper
handling of liquid wastes containing floatable grease in excessive amounts, as
specified herein, any flammable wastes, as specified herein, sand, or other
harmful ingredients; except, that the interceptors shall not be required for
private living quarters, or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of the
type to be readily, and easily, accessible for cleaning and inspection. In the
maintaining of these interceptors, the owner shall be responsible for the
proper removal, and disposal, of the captured materials by appropriate means,
and shall maintain a record of dates, and means of disposal, which are subject
to review by the Wastewater Superintendent. Any removal, and hauling, of the
collected materials not performed by the owner’s personnel must be performed by
a currently licensed waste disposal firm.
   (J)   Where required by the city, the owner of any property serviced by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable structure,
or control manhole, with the necessary meters, and other appurtenances, in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of wastes.
The structure shall be accessible and safely located, and shall be constructed
in accordance with plans approved by the city. The structure shall be installed
by the owner at his or her expense, and shall be maintained by the owner to be
safe, and accessible, at all times.
   (K)   The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes may, at the discretion of the city, be required to provide
laboratory measurements, tests, or analyses of waters, or wastes, to illustrate
compliance with this subchapter, and any special condition for discharge
established by the city, or regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the
discharge. The number, type, and frequency of sampling, and laboratory analyses
to be performed by the owner, shall be as stipulated by the city. The industry
must supply a complete analysis of the constituents of the wastewater discharge
to assure that compliance with federal, state, and local standards are being
met. The owner shall report the results of measurements, and laboratory
analyses, to the city at such times, and in a manner, as prescribed by the
city. The owner shall bear the expense of all measurements, analyses, and
reporting, as required by the city. At such times as deemed necessary, the city
reserves the right to take measurements, and samples for analysis, by an
independent laboratory.
   (L)   All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of
waters, and wastes, to which reference is made in this chapter, shall be
determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health
Association. Sampling methods, location, times, duration, and frequencies are
to be determined on an individual basis, subject to approval by the Wastewater
Superintendent.
   (M)   Where required by the city, the owner of any property serviced by a
sanitary sewer shall provide protection from an accidental discharge of
prohibited materials, or other substances regulated by this chapter. Where
necessary, facilities to prevent accidental discharges of prohibited materials
shall be provided, and maintained, at the owner’s expense. Detailed plans
showing facilities, and operating procedures to provide this protection, shall
be submitted to the Wastewater Superintendent for review, and approval, prior
to construction of the facility. Review, and approval, of the plans and
operating procedures shall not relieve any user from the responsibility to
modify the user’s facility, as necessary, to meet the requirements of this
chapter. Users shall notify the Wastewater Superintendent immediately upon
having a slug, or accidental discharge, of substances of wastewater in
violation of this chapter to enable countermeasures to be taken by the
Wastewater Superintendent to minimize damage to the wastewater treatment works.
The notification will not relieve any user of any liability for any expense,
loss, or damage to the wastewater treatment system or treatment process, or for
any fines imposed on the city on account thereof under any state and federal
law. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause, or discover, a
discharge are advised of the emergency notification procedure.
   (N)   It is unlawful for any person having charge of any building, or other
premises, which drains into the public sewer, to permit any substance, or
matter which may form a deposit or obstruction, to flow, or pass, into the
public sewer. Within 30 days after receipt of written notice from the city, the
owner shall install a suitable, and sufficient, catch basin or waste trap, or
if one already exists, shall clean out, repair, or alter the same, and perform
the other work as the Wastewater Superintendent may deem necessary. Upon the
owner’s refusal, or neglect, to install a catch basin or waste trap, or to
clean out, repair, or alter the same after the period of 60 days, the
Wastewater Superintendent may cause the work to be completed at the expense of
the owner, or representative thereof.
   (O)   Whenever any service connection becomes clogged, obstructed, broken,
or out of order, or detrimental to the use of the public sewer, or unfit for
the purpose of drainage, the owner shall repair, or cause the work to be done,
as the Wastewater Superintendent may direct. Each day after three days that a
person neglects, or fails, to so act shall constitute a separate violation of
this chapter, and the Wastewater Superintendent may then cause the work to be
done, and recover from the owner, or agent, the expense thereof by an action in
the name of the city.
   (P)   The owner, or operator, of any motor vehicle washing, or servicing,
facility shall provide, and maintain, in serviceable condition, at all times, a
catch basin or waste trap in the building drain system to prevent grease, oil,
dirt, or any mineral deposit from entering the public sewer system.
   (Q)   In addition to any penalties that may be imposed for violation of any
provision of this chapter, the city may assess against any person the cost of
repairing, or restoring, sewers or associated facilities damaged as a result of
the discharge of prohibited wastes by the person, and may collect the
assessment as an additional charge for the use of the public sewer system, or
in any other manner deemed appropriate by the city.
   (R)   National Categorical Pretreatment Standards promulgated by the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), pursuant to the Act, shall be met by all
users which are subject to the standards in any instance where they are more
stringent than the limitations in this chapter, unless the city has applied
for, and obtained, from the state approval to modify the specific limits in the
National Categorical Pretreatment Standards. When requested, an application for
modification of the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards will be
considered for submittal by the city when the wastewater treatment system
achieves consistent removal of the pollutants. CONSISTENT REMOVAL shall be
defined as in 40 C.F.R. part 403 of the General Pretreatment Regulations for
Existing and New Sources of Pollution. Conditional revisions of the National
Categorical Pretreatment Standards may be made by the city in accordance with
40 C.F.R. part 403 of the General Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New
Sources of Pollution if requested by an industry, in accordance with the
requirements of 40 C.F.R. part 403.
   (S)   State requirements and limitations on discharges shall be met by all
users which are subject to the standards in any instance in which they are more
stringent than federal requirements and limitations, or those in this chapter,
or any other applicable city code provision.
   (T)   The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance, more stringent
limitations, or requirements, on discharges to the wastewater treatment system
if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in this chapter.
   (U)   No statement contained in this section shall be construed as
preventing any special agreement, or arrangement, between the city and
industrial concern, whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength, or
character, may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment
therefor by the industrial concern; provided, that National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards and the city’s NPDES, and/or state disposal system
permit limitations, are not violated.
(Prior Code, § 3.40) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.07 VANDALISM.
   It is unlawful for any person to intentionally, or negligently, break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance,
or equipment which is part of the wastewater facilities. Any person violating
this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest.
(Prior Code, § 3.40) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.08 ESTABLISHMENT OF A SEWER SERVICE CHARGE SYSTEM.
   (A)   The city hereby establishes a sewer service charge system (SSCS)
whereby all revenue collected from users of the wastewater treatment facilities
will be used to affect all expenditures incurred for annual operation,
maintenance, administration, and replacement, and for debt service on capital
expenditures incurred in constructing the wastewater treatment works.
   (B)   Each user shall pay his or her proportionate share of operation,
maintenance, and replacement costs of the treatment works, based on the user’s
proportionate contribution to the total wastewater loading from all users.
   (C)   Each user shall pay debt service charges to retire local capital
costs, as determined by the Council.
   (D)   Sewer service rates and charges to users of the wastewater treatment
works shall be determined, and fixed, in a sewer service charge system
developed according to the provisions of this chapter. The sewer service charge
system shall be adopted by resolution upon the effective date of this chapter,
shall be published in the local newspaper, and shall be effective upon
publication. Subsequent changes in sewer service rates, and charges, shall be
adopted by Council resolution, and shall be published in the local newspaper.
   (E)   Revenues collected for sewer service shall be deposited in a separate
fund known as the Sewer Service Fund. Income from revenues collected will be
expended to offset the cost of operation, maintenance, and equipment
replacement for the facility, and to retire the debt for capital expenditures.
   (F)   Sewer service charges, and the Sewer Service Fund, will be
administered in accordance with the provisions of §
52.11.
(Prior Code, § 3.40)
§ 52.09 DETERMINATION OF SEWER SERVICE CHARGES.
   (A)   (1)   Users of the city’s treatment works shall be identified as
belonging to one of the following user classes:
         (a)   Residential;
         (b)   Commercial;
         (c)   Industrial;
         (d)   Institutional; and
         (e)   Governmental.
      (2)   The allocation of users to these categories for the purpose of
assessing user charges, and debt service charges, shall be the responsibility
of the City Clerk-Treasurer. Allocation of users to user classes shall be based
on the substantive intent of the definitions of these classes contained herein.
   (B)   The user shall pay operation, maintenance, and replacement costs in
proportion to the user’s proportionate contribution of wastewater flows and
loadings to the treatment plant, with the minimum rate for loadings of BOD,
TSS, and phosphorus, being the rate established for concentration of 257 mg/
l BOD, and 311 mg/l TSS.
   (C)   Unit costs for fixed service and treatment of flow, BOD, TSS, and
phosphorus shall be determined, and fixed, annually in the sewer service charge
system according to the following procedure:
      (1)   Determine the annual OM&R budget;
      (2)   Allocate total annual OM&R costs to fixed service, flow, BOD, and
TSS proportionately, according to the costs of administration and collection,
and of the specific treatment processes required to affect, or reduce, flow,
BOD, and TSS;
      (3)   Divide the OM&R costs attributable to fixed service, flow, BOD, and
TSS, respectively, by the total annual billable connections, volume, and
loadings of flow, BOD, and TSS to arrive at unit costs; and
      (4)   Determine the wastewater volume charge in accordance with the
methodology developed in the current sewer charge system report.
         (a)   For purposes of determining user charges, the following
definitions of unit costs shall apply:
            1.   UFS: Unit cost for fixed service in dollars per billing
period;
            2.   VUC: Wastewater volume charge in dollars per l,000 gallons;
            3.   UF: Unit cost for treatment of flow in dollars per l,000
gallons;
            4.   UBOD: Unit cost for treatment of BOD in dollars per pound; and
            5.   UTSS: Unit cost for treatment of TSS in dollars per pound.
         (b)   Unit costs for 1988 are provided in tables 6 and 7 of the sewer
service charge system. Subsequent calculations of unit costs shall be according
to the substantive intent of this SSCS.
   (D)   The process for user charges for users contributing normal domestic
strength wastewater are as follows:
      (1)   For calculating billable flows and loadings:
         (a)   The billable amount of flow will be calculated from the value of
metered water usage;
         (b)   For users discharging NDSW but not connected to the city water
system, the billable amount of flow will be calculated from the volume of
metered water usage or, at the discretion of the city, from the measurement of
effluent flow at the user’s point of discharge. Measurements shall be according
to a regular program prescribed by the city; and
         (c)   For the determination of loadings from metered water usage, the
billable amounts of BOD, TSS, and phosphorus will be calculated from the volume
of metered water usage, as determined above, where the billable quantities will
be those attributable to a wastewater concentration of 257 mg/l BOD, and 311
mg/l TSS (for example, normal domestic strength wastewater).
      (2)   For calculating user charges, UC(NDS) = UFS + (VUC x F), where:
         (a)   “UC(NDS)” is the user charge for treatment of normal domestic
strength wastewater;
         (b)   “UFS” is the unit cost for fixed service in dollars per billing
period;
         (c)   “VUC” is the volume charge for treatment of 1,000 gallons of
normal domestic strength wastewater in dollars per l,000 gallons; and
         (d)   “F” is the billable flow in 1,000 gallons.
   (E)   The process for user charges for users contributing wastes greater
than normal domestic strength is as follows:
      (1)   For calculating billable flows and loadings:
         (a)   The billable amount of flow will be calculated from the volume
of metered water usage, or at the discretion of the city, from the measurement
of effluent flow at the user’s point of discharge. Measurements shall be
according to a regular program prescribed by the city; and
         (b)   The billable amounts of BOD and TSS will be calculated by the
measurement of these wastes according to a program prescribed by the city in
keeping with the latest edition of the Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater, and in accordance with other provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   (a)   For calculating user charges, UC(GNDS) = UFS + (VUC x F) +
(UBOD x QBOD) + (UTSS x QTSS), where:
            1.   “UC(GNDS)” is the user charge for treatment of wastewater that
is greater than normal domestic strength;
            2.   “UFS” is the unit cost for fixed service in dollars per
billing period;
            3.   “VUC” is the unit cost for treatment of flow in dollars per
1,000 gallons;
            4.   “F” is the billable flow in 1,000 gallons;
            5.   “UBOD” is the unit cost for treatment of BOD in dollars per
pound;
            6.   “QBOD” is the quantity of BOD in excess of 257 mg/l in pounds;
            7.   “UTSS” is the unit cost for treatment of TSS in dollars per
pound; and
            8.   “QTSS” is the quantity of TSS in excess of 311 mg/l, in
pounds.
         (b)   QBOD is calculated as follows: QBOD = F x 0.00834 x (CBOD -
257), where “CBOD” is the concentration of BOD in mg/l.
         (c)   QTSS is calculated as follows: QTSS = F x 0.00834 x (CTSS -
311), where “CTSS” is the concentration of TSS in mg/l.
   (F)   The city may, at its discretion, require non-residential users to
install wastewater flow meters, or the additional water meters, as may be
necessary to determine wastewater volume. The city may require residential
connections to install water meters for the purpose of determining wastewater
volume. When so required, the meters shall be of a type approved by the city,
equipped with remote registering recorders, and located at an accessible site
on the owner’s property.
   (G)   Local construction costs for the wastewater treatment works will be
recovered from users in proportion to their contributions of wastewater flow
and loadings, or the plant capacity allocated to each user, whichever is
greater, into the treatment works as follows:
      (1)   Unit costs for debt service of capital expenditures attributable to
fixed service, flow, BOD, and TSS shall be calculated according to the sewer
service charge system, as provided in tables 6 and 7 of the sewer service
charge system;
      (2)   For purposes of determining debt service charges, the following
definitions shall apply:
         DBOD. The unit cost for debt service of capital expenditures
attributable to BOD in dollars per pound.
         DF. The unit cost for debt service of capital expenditures
attributable to flow in dollars per 1,000 gallons.
         DFS. The unit cost for debt service of capital expenditures
attributable to fixed service in dollars per billing period.
         DTSS. Unit cost for debt service of capital expenditures attributable
to TSS, in dollars per pound.
         VDC. The wastewater volume charge for debt service in dollars per
1,000 gallons.
      (3)   The calculation of flows and loadings for the debt service charge
shall be the same as described in divisions (D) and (E) above.
      (4)   The process for calculating debt service charges is as follows:
         (a)   For normal domestic strength users, the formula shall be DC(NDS)
= DFS + (VDC x F), where “DC(NDS)” is the debt service charge to normal
domestic strength users;
         (b)   For users contributing wastes greater than normal domestic
strength, the formula shall be DC (GNDS) = DFS + (VDC x F) + (DBOD x QBOD) +
(DTSS x QTSS), where:
            1.   “DC(GNDS)” is the debt service charge to users contributing
wastewater that is greater than normal domestic strength;
            2.   “DFS” is the unit cost for fixed service in dollars per
billing period attributable to flow in dollars per 1,000 gallons;
            3.   “VDC” is the volume charge for treatment of 1,000 gallons of
normal domestic strength wastewater in dollars per 1,000 gallons;
            4.   “F” is the billable flow in 1,000 gallons;
            5.   “DBOD” is the unit cost for debt service of capital
expenditures attributable to BOD in dollars per pound;
            6.   “QBOD” is the quantity of BOD in excess of 257 mg/l, in
pounds;
            7.   “DTSS” is the unit cost for debt service of capital
expenditures attributable to TSS, in dollars per pound; and
            8.   “QTSS” is the quantity of TSS in excess of 311 mg/l, in
pounds.
         (c)   QBOD is calculated as follows: QBOD = F x 0.000834 x (CBOD -
257), where “CBOD” is the concentration of BOD in mg/l.
         (d)   QTSS is calculated as follows: QTSS = F x 0.00834 x (CTSS -
311), where “CTSS” is the concentration of TSS in mg/l.
   (H)   The total sewer service charge per billing period shall be calculated
as follows: SSC = UC + DC, where:
      (1)   “SSC” is the sewer service charge;
      (2)   “UC” is the user charge; and
      (3)   “DC” is the debt service charge.
   (I)   The Council shall adopt, by resolution, charges and fees which may
include:
      (1)   Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures;
      (2)   Fees for permit applications;
      (3)   Appeal fees; and
      (4)   Other fees as may be deemed necessary to carry out the requirements
contained herein.
(Prior Code, § 3.40)
§ 52.10 SEWER SERVICE FUND.
   (A)   (1)   The city hereby establishes a Sewer Service Fund as an income
fund to receive all revenues generated by the sewer service charge system, and
all other income dedicated to the operation, maintenance, replacement, and
construction of the wastewater treatment works, including taxes, special
charges, fees, and assessments intended to retire construction debt.
      (2)   The city also establishes the following accounts as income and
expenditure accounts within the Sewer Service Fund:
         (a)   Operation and Maintenance Account;
         (b)   Equipment Replacement Account; and
         (c)   Debt Retirement Account.
   (B)   All revenue generated by the sewer service charge system, and all
other income pertinent to the treatment of the system, including taxes and
special assessments dedicated to retire construction debt, shall be held by the
City Clerk-Treasurer separate, and apart, from all other funds of the city.
Funds received by the Sewer Service Fund shall be transferred to the “Operation
and Maintenance Account”, the “Equipment Replacement Account”, or the “Debt
Retirement Account”, in accordance with state and federal regulations, and the
provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Revenue generated by the sewer service charge system sufficient to
ensure adequate replacement throughout the design, or useful life, of the
wastewater facility, whichever is longer, shall be held separate, and apart, in
the “Equipment Replacement Account”, and dedicated to affecting replacement
costs. Interest income generated by the “Equipment Replacement Account” shall
remain in the “Equipment Replacement Account”.
   (D)   Revenue generated by the sewer service charge system sufficient for
operation, and maintenance, shall be held separate, and apart, in the
“Operation and Maintenance Account”.
   (E)   Revenue generated by the sewer service charge system sufficient for
payment of debt service stemming from the wastewater facility shall be held
separate, and apart, in the “Debt Service Account”.
(Prior Code, § 3.40)
§ 52.11 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   Annual assessment. The City Clerk-Treasurer shall maintain a proper
system of accounts suitable for determining the operation, and maintenance,
equipment replacement, and debt retirement costs of the treatment works, and
shall furnish the Council with a report of the costs annually in October. The
Council shall, annually, determine whether or not sufficient revenue is being
generated for the effective operation, maintenance, replacement, and management
of the treatment works, and whether sufficient revenue is being generated for
debt retirement. The Council will also determine whether the user charges are
distributed proportionately to each user in accordance with this chapter and §
204(b)(2)(A) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, being 33
U.S.C. § 1284(b)(2)(A). The city shall, thereafter, but not later than the end
of the year, reassess, and as necessary revise, the sewer service charge system
then in use to ensure the proportionality of the user charges, and to ensure
the sufficiency of funds to maintain the capacity and performance to which the
facilities were constructed, and to retire the construction debt.
   (B)   Notification. In accordance with federal and state requirements, each
user will be notified annually, in conjunction with a regular billing, of the
portion of the sewer service charge attributable to operation, maintenance, and
replacement.
   (C)   Records. In accordance with federal and state requirements, the City
Clerk-Treasurer shall be responsible for maintaining all records necessary to
document compliance with the sewer service charge system adopted.
   (D)   Payment of services. The owner of the premises shall be liable to pay
for the service to the premises, and the service is furnished to the premises
by the city only upon the condition that the owner of the premises is liable
therefor to the city.
   (E)   Additional costs. Any additional costs caused by discharges to the
treatment works of toxic, or other incompatible, pollutants, including the cost
of restoring wastewater treatment services, clean up and restoration of the
receiving waters and environs, and sludge disposal, shall be borne by the
discharger(s) of the wastes at no expense to the city.
   (F)   Discharge report. The city may require that any person discharging
wastewater to the wastewater treatment system file a periodic discharge report.
The discharge report may include, but not be limited to, the nature of the
process, rates of flow, mass discharge rate, raw material and production
quantities, hours of operation, number, and classification, of employees,
compliance status with any state, or federal, pretreatment standards, or other
information which relates to the generation of waste, including wastewater
constituents and concentrations in the wastewater discharge. The reports may
also include sludge disposal practices and the chemical constituents, and
quantity, of liquid, or gaseous, materials stored on site, even though they may
not normally be discharged. At a minimum, a summary of the data, indicating
each industrial user’s compliance with this chapter, shall be prepared
quarterly, and submitted to the Wastewater Superintendent. In addition to
discharge reports, the Wastewater Superintendent may require information in the
form of wastewater discharge permit applications, self-monitoring reports, and
compliance schedules.
   (G)   Wastewater discharge permits.
      (1)   Mandatory permits. All industries proposing to connect, or to
commence, a new discharge to the wastewater treatment system shall obtain a
wastewater discharge permit before connecting to, or discharging into, the
wastewater treatment system if the discharge would result in the industry being
classified as a significant industrial user. All existing significant
industrial users, or industrial users subject to national categorical
pretreatment standards under § 307(b) and (c) of the Act, being 33 U.S.C. §
1317(b) and (c), connected to, or discharging into, the wastewater treatment
system, shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit within 180 days after the
effective date of this chapter.
      (2)   Permit application.
         (a)   Users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall
complete, and file, with the Wastewater Superintendent an application in the
form prescribed by the city. Existing users shall apply for a wastewater
discharge permit within 30 days after the effective date of this chapter, and
proposed new users shall apply at least 90 days prior to connecting, or
discharging, to the wastewater treatment system. In support of the application,
the user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the
following information:
            1.   Name, address, and location (if different from the address);
            2.   SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification
Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended;
            3.   Wastewater constituents and characteristics including, but not
limited to, those governed by this chapter, as determined by a reliable
analytical laboratory; sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance
with procedures approved by the Wastewater Superintendent;
            4.   Time, and duration, of discharge;
            5.   Average daily and peak hour wastewater flow rates, including
daily, monthly, and seasonal variations, if any;
            6.   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and
details to show all sewers, sewer connections, and appurtenances by the size,
location, and elevation;
            7.   Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on
the premises, including all materials which are, or could be, discharged,
including sludges, floats, skimmings, and the like;
            8.   Where known, the nature, and concentration, of any pollutants
in the discharge which are limited by any city, state, or National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards;
            9.   Each product by type, amount, and rate of production;
            10.   Type, and amount, of raw materials processed (average and
maximum per day);
            11.   Number of full-time, and part-time, employees, and hours of
work; and
            12.   Any other information as may be deemed by the Wastewater
Superintendent to be necessary to evaluate the permit application.
         (b)   The Wastewater Superintendent will evaluate the data furnished
by the user, and may require additional information. After evaluation, and
acceptance, of the data furnished, the city may issue a wastewater discharge
permit subject to terms, and conditions, provided herein.
      (3)   Permit conditions.
         (a)   Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all
provisions of this chapter, and all other applicable regulations, user charges,
and fees established by the city.
         (b)   Permits may contain the following:
            1.   The unit charge, or schedule of user charges and fees, for the
wastewater to be discharged to the wastewater treatment system;
            2.   Limits on the average, and maximum, wastewater constituents
and characteristics;
            3.   Limits on average and maximum flow rate and time of discharge,
or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
            4.   Requirements for installation, and access to inspection and
sampling facilities;
            5.   Requirements for installation, operation, and maintenance of
pretreatment facilities;
            6.   Specifications for monitoring programs which may include
sampling locations, frequency, and method of sampling, number, types, and
standards for tests and reporting schedule;
            7.   Compliance schedules;
            8.   Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge
reports;
            9.   Requirements for maintaining, and retaining, plant records
relating to wastewater discharge, as specified by the city, but in no case less
than three years, and affording city access thereto;
            10.   Requirements for notification to, and acceptance by, the city
of any new introduction of wastewater constituents, or of any substantial
change in the volume, or character, of the wastewater constituents being
introduced into the wastewater treatment system;
            11.   Requirements for notification of slug, or accidental,
discharges, as provided herein, and reporting of permit violations;
            12.   Requirements for disposal of sludges, floats, skimmings, and
the like; and
            13.   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city to ensure
compliance with this chapter.
      (4)   Permit duration. Permits shall be issued for a specified time
period, not to exceed five years. The user shall apply for permit reissuance a
minimum of 90 days prior to the expiration of the user’s existing permit. The
terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the city
during the term of the permit as limitations or requirements, as identified
herein, are modified, or other just cause exists. The user shall be informed of
any proposed changes in his or her permit at least 30 days prior to the
effective date of change. Any changes, or new conditions, in the permit shall
include a reasonable time schedule for compliance.
      (5)   Permit modifications. Within nine months of the promulgation of the
National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, the wastewater discharge permit of
users subject to the standard shall be revised to require compliance with the
standard within the timeframe prescribed by the standard. Where a user, subject
to the National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, has not previously submitted
an application for a wastewater discharge permit, the user shall apply for a
wastewater discharge permit within 180 days after the promulgation of the
applicable National Categorical Pretreatment Standard. In addition, the user
with an existing wastewater discharge permit shall submit to the Wastewater
Superintendent, within 180 days after the promulgation of an applicable
National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, the information required by this
section. If the information previously submitted in an application is still
current and adequate, only a letter from the user certifying such is required.
      (6)   Permit transfer. Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a
specific user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not
be reassigned, or transferred or sold, to a new owner, new user, different
premises, or a new, or changed, operation without the approval of the city. Any
succeeding owner, or user, shall also comply with the terms, and conditions, of
the existing permit if the city approves the transfer of the existing permit.
   (H)   Pretreatment.
      (1)   Wastewater treatment. Users shall provide necessary wastewater
treatment, as required, to comply with this chapter, and shall achieve
compliance with all National Categorical Pretreatment Standards within the time
limitations as specified by the federal pretreatment regulations, or within
time limitations, as specified within the wastewater discharge permit,
whichever is sooner.
      (2)   Requirements of pretreatment. Any facilities required to pretreat
wastewater shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user’s expense.
Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities, and operating procedures,
shall be submitted to the Wastewater Superintendent for review, and shall be
acceptable to the Wastewater Superintendent before construction of the
facility. The review of the plans, and operating procedures, will, in no way,
relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary
to produce an effluent acceptable to the city under the provisions of this
chapter. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities, or method of
operation, shall be reported to, and be acceptable to, the city prior to the
user’s initiation of the changes.
      (3)   Records; pretreatment. All records relating to compliance with
pretreatment standards shall be made available by the city to officials of the
EPA or MPCA upon request.
      (4)   Submission of reports. Any user subject to a National Categorical
Pretreatment Standard, after the compliance date of the pretreatment standard,
or in the case of the commencement of a new discharge to the wastewater
treatment system, shall submit to the Wastewater Superintendent, during the
months of June and December, unless required more frequently in the
pretreatment standard, or by the city, a report indicating the nature, and
concentration, of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by the
pretreatment standards. In addition, this report shall include a record of all
daily flows which, during the reporting period, exceeded the average daily flow
report in this section. The Wastewater Superintendent may agree to alter the
months during which the above reports are to be submitted.
   (I)   Enforcement.
      (1) Slug or accidental discharges.
         (a)   The city may suspend the wastewater treatment service of a user,
and/or a wastewater discharge permit (after informal notice to the discharger),
when the suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the Wastewater
Superintendent, in order to stop an actual, or threatened, discharge which
presents, or may present, an imminent, or substantial, endangerment to the
health, or welfare, of persons, to the environment, or to the wastewater
treatment system, or would cause the city to violate any condition of its
NPDES, or state disposal system permit.
         (b)   Any user notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment
service, and/or the wastewater discharge permit, shall immediately stop the
discharge. In the event of a failure of the user to comply voluntarily with the
suspension order, the city shall take the steps as deemed necessary, including
immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent, or minimize, damage to
the wastewater treatment system, or endangerment to any individuals. The city
shall reinstate the wastewater discharge permit, and/or the wastewater
treatment service, upon proof of the elimination of the non-complying
discharge. A detailed written statement submitted by the user describing the
causes of the slug, or accidental, discharge, and the measures taken to prevent
any future occurrence, shall be submitted to the Wastewater Superintendent
within 15 days of the date of occurrence.
      (2)   Revocation of permit. In accordance with the procedures of this
section, the city may revoke the permit of any user which fails to factually
report the wastewater constituents, and characteristics, of its discharge;
which fails to report significant changes in wastewater constituents, or
characteristics; which refuses reasonable access to the user’s premises for the
purpose of inspection or monitoring, or for violation of conditions of its
permit, this chapter, or applicable state and federal regulations.
      (3)   Show cause hearing.
         (a)   If the violation is not corrected by timely compliance, the
Wastewater Superintendent may order any user which causes, or allows, an
unauthorized discharge to show cause before the Council why the proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. A notice shall be served on the user
specifying the time, and place, of a hearing to be held by the Council
regarding the violation, the reason why the action is to be taken, the proposed
enforcement action, and directing the user to show cause before the Council why
the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing
shall be served personally, or by registered or certified mail (return receipt
requested), at least ten days before the hearing. Service may be made on any
agent or officer of a corporation.
         (b)   The Council may itself conduct the hearing and take evidence, or
may designate any of its members, or any officer or employee, to:
            1.   Issue, in the name of the Council, notices of hearings
requesting the attendance, and testimony, of witnesses, and the protection of
evidence relevant to any matter involved in the hearings;
            2.   Take the evidence; and
            3.   Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including
transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the Council
for action thereon.
         (c)   At any hearing held pursuant to this chapter, testimony taken
must be under oath, and recorded stenographically. The transcript, so recorded,
will be made available to any member of the public, or any party to the
hearing, upon payment of the usual charges therefor.
         (d)   After the Council has reviewed the evidence, it may issue an
order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that, following a
specified time period, the sewer service be discontinued, unless adequate
treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances shall have been
installed, or existing treatment facilities, devices, or other related
appurtenances are properly operated. Further orders, and directives, as are
necessary, and appropriate, may be issued.
      (4)   Legal action. If any person discharges wastewater, industrial
wastes, or other wastes into the wastewater treatment system contrary to the
provisions of this chapter, federal, or state pretreatment requirements, or any
order of the city, the City Attorney may, following the authorization of the
action by the Council, commence an action for appropriate legal, and/or
equitable, relief.
      (5)   Annual publication. A list of the users which were significantly
violating applicable pretreatment requirements, or National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards, during the 12 previous months may be annually published
by the city in the official newspaper of the city. The notification shall also
summarize any enforcement actions taken against the user during the same 12
months. For the purpose of this provision, significant violations would be
those violations which remain uncorrected 45 days after notification of non-
compliance, which are part of a pattern of non-compliance over a 12-month
period, or which involve a failure to accurately report non-compliance.
      (6)   Appeal to the Council.
         (a)   Any interested party shall have the right to request, in
writing, an interpretation, or ruling, on any matter covered by this chapter,
and shall be entitled to a written reply from the city.
         (b)   Any decision of the city in the enforcement of this chapter may
be appealed to the Council by filing a written petition with the City Clerk-
Treasurer within 30 days of the City’s ruling. The petition shall specify, in
detail, the matter, or matters, involved, and every ground, or basis, on which
objections are made. The petition shall show the names, addresses, and
telephone numbers of all objectors and their attorney at law, or spokesperson.
The filing of a petition, in accordance with the requirements herein, shall
stay all proceedings, unless the city shall file, within 72 hours after the
filing of a petition, a certificate stating that a stay would cause peril to
life or property, or specifying other good reason. The Council shall fix a
reasonable time for hearing of the petition or appeal, and give due notice of
the time and place of the hearing to parties named in the petition as attorney
or spokesperson. The hearing shall be open to the public. Petitioners shall be
given full opportunity to present evidence in support of their petition, after
which the city may present evidence in support of its decision.
         (c)   The Council shall decide the appeal within a reasonable time,
and notify the attorney or spokesperson. The minutes of the Council shall
constitute the official record of the petition, hearing, and decision. Any
party desiring a transcript of the proceedings shall furnish a qualified court
reporter at their own expense.
(Prior Code, § 3.40) (Ord. 105, second series, passed 5-15-1990)
§ 52.12 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Notice. Upon discovery of a suspected violation and/or non-compliance,
the alleged violator shall be issued, either personally or by telephone, a
notice of the violation. A written citation shall follow by mail within 48
hours that sets forth the alleged violation, and which shall inform the alleged
violator of his or her right to be heard on the accusation of violation and/or
non-compliance. Each license/permit holder shall designate a person to receive
service of the citation.
   (B)   Scheduled maintenance. Industries shall inform the Wastewater
Superintendent at least 48 hours in advance of any scheduled maintenance that
may result in any technical violation of this chapter. The industries shall
work cooperatively with the Wastewater Superintendent so as to alleviate any
problems, or violations, associated with the maintenance. Notice, and
cooperation, in the scheduled maintenance by the industries shall be taken as
proof that no violation was intended, and they shall not be cited as violating
this chapter.
   (C)   Superintendent and City Manager. The Wastewater Superintendent, the
City Manager, and a representative of the alleged violator, shall meet within
48 hours of issuance of the written citation and discuss appropriate actions,
including whether or not the written citation shall be issued, settled,
dismissed, or should proceed to a full hearing in front of the Council.
   (D)   Hearings. If the person, or permit holder, accused of violating this
chapter so requests, within ten days of service of the citation, a hearing
shall be scheduled, the time and place of which shall be published and provided
to the accused violator. The hearing shall be held before the Council.
   (E)   Decision. If the Council determines that a violation of this chapter
did occur, that decision, along with the reasons for the decisions, shall be
recorded, in writing, a copy of which to be provided to the accused violator.
Likewise, if the Council determines that no violation occurred, or finds
grounds for not imposing the penalty, the findings shall be recorded, and a
copy provided to the acquitted accused violator.
   (F)   Appeals. Appeals of any decision made by the Council regarding
violations of this chapter shall be filed with the County District Court.
   (G)   Continued violations. Each violation, and every day/24-hour period in
which a violation occurs, or continues, shall constitute a separate offense.
Any violator who is found to have violated this chapter seven times, or more,
within a 12-month period may be referred to the City Attorney’s office for
possible criminal prosecution.
(Prior Code, § 3.40) (Ord. 177, second series, passed 1-7-2003) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.13 SYSTEM TO TAKE PRECEDENCE.
   The sewer service charge system shall take precedence over any terms, or
conditions, of agreements or contracts which are inconsistent with the
requirements of § 204(b)(1)(A) of the Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1284(b)(1) and
federal regulation 40 C.F.R. § 35.2140 of the Environmental Protection Agency’s
grant regulations.
(Prior Code, § 3.40) (Ord. 105, second series, passed 5-15-1990)
§ 52.14 USE OF CERTAIN WATER/SEWER DRAINS.
   (A)   Purpose. The discharge of water from roof, surface, groundwater sump
pump, footing tile, swimming pool, or other natural precipitation into the city
sewerage system results in flooding and overloading of the sewerage system.
When this water is discharged into the sanitary sewer system it is treated at
the sewage treatment plant. This results in very large and needless
expenditures. The City Council, therefore, finds it in the best interest of the
city to prohibit such discharges.
   (B)   Discharge prohibited. Except as otherwise expressly authorized in this
section, no water from any roof, surface, groundwater sump pump, footing tile,
or other natural precipitation shall be discharged into the sanitary sewer
system. Dwellings and other buildings and structures which require, because of
infiltration of water into basements, crawl spaces, and the like, a sump pump
discharge system shall have a discharge line which shall not at any time
discharge water into the sanitary sewer system, except as provided herein. A
permanent installation shall be one which provides for year-round discharge
capability to either the outside of the dwelling, building, or structure, or is
connected to city storm sewer or discharge through the curb and gutter to the
street. It shall consist of a rigid discharge line, without valving or quick
connections for altering the path of discharge, and if connections for altering
the path of discharge, and if connected to the city storm sewer line, include a
check valve and an air gap located in a small diameter structure as shown in
the city’s standard plates.
   (C)   Disconnection. Before October 1, 2010, any person, firm, or
corporation having a roof surface, groundwater sump pump, footing tile, or
swimming pool now connected and/or discharging into the sanitary sewer system
shall disconnect or remove same. Any disconnects or openings in the sanitary
sewer system shall be closed or repaired in an effective, workmanlike manner.
   (D)   Inspection. Every person owning improved real estate that discharges
into the city’s sanitary sewer system shall allow an employee of the city or a
designated representative of the city to inspect the buildings to confirm that
there is no sump pump or other prohibited discharge into the sanitary sewer
system. In lieu of having the city inspect their property, any person may
furnish a certificate from a licensed plumber certifying that their property is
in compliance with this section.
   (E)   Future inspections. Each sump pump connection identified will be
reinspected periodically.
   (F)   New construction. All new dwellings with sumps for which a building
permit is issued after June 1, 2010, shall have a pump and shall be piped to
the outside of the dwelling before a certificate of occupancy is issued.
   (G)   Winter discharge.
      (1)   The City Manager is authorized to issue a permit to allow a
property owner to discharge surface water into the sanitary sewer system. The
permit shall authorize such discharge only from November 1 to April 1 and must
be reinspected or the surcharge fee remains in effect. A property owner is
required to meet at least one of the following criteria in order to obtain the
permit:
         (a)   The freezing of the surface water discharge from the sump pump
or footing drain is causing a dangerous condition, such as ice buildup or
flooding, on either public or private property;
         (b)   The property owner has demonstrated that there is a danger that
the sump pump or footing drain pipes will freeze up and result in either
failure or damage to the sump pump unit or the footing drain and cause basement
flooding; or
         (c)   The water being discharged from the sump pump or footing drain
cannot be readily discharged into a storm drain or other acceptable drainage
system.
      (2)   Following ten days’ written notice and an opportunity to be heard,
the City Clerk-Treasurer may require a property to discharge their sump pump
into the sanitary sewer from November 1 to March 1 if surface water discharge
is causing an icy condition on streets.
   (H)   Exceptions. Specifically excepted from this section are all commercial
buildings in business districts within the city in existence as of the date of
this section. All new construction in business district zones shall be required
to direct all spring, summer and fall flow into a storm drain.
(Res. 06-10-03, passed 6-1-2010) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   General. Any person, or permit holder, who is found to be violating
any provision of this chapter, or any provision of a permit issued by the city
under §
52.11 herein, shall be served by the city with written notice stating the
nature of the violation. The offender shall pay a non-compliance surcharge, as
set forth in §
52.12. Violations include:
      (1)   Loadings discharged from any facility in excess of the user permit,
such as metals, pH, BOD, TSS, FOG, and/or phosphorus, as the terms are defined
herein;
      (2)   Failure to send in monthly reports and flows;
      (3)   Lack of operational monitoring equipment, and/or failure to
complete required repairs and notify the city;
      (4)   Failure to immediately notify the city of anticipated violations
due to a sudden change of circumstances within the plan, or in any event,
within three hours of the discovery of the violation;
      (5)   In the event of a bypass, the city shall be notified as soon as
possible, and in advance if possible; and
      (6)   Slug loads.
   (B)   Prima facie evidence. Violations of divisions (A)(1), (A)(3), and (A)
(4) above will require a sample as prima facie evidence of an alleged violation
before the city may consider any occurrence as a violation of this chapter.
   (C)   First, second, and third time offenders within a 12-month period. Any
person, or permit holder, found to be in violation of this chapter, and who has
not violated this chapter, or another city code provision in conformity with
it, more than three times within the 12 months prior to the violation/non-
compliance, shall be assessed $100 per occurrence per 24-hour period for
violations of divisions (A)(1) through (A)(5) above, and shall be assessed
$300, plus expenses, per occurrence per 24-hour period for a violation of
division (A)(6) above.
   (D)   Fourth, fifth, and sixth offenses within a 12-month period. Any
person, or permit holder, found to be in violation of this chapter, and who has
not violated this chapter more than three times, but less than seven times,
within the 12 months prior to the violation/non-compliance shall be assessed
$200 per occurrence per 24-hour period for violations of divisions (A)(1)
through (A)(4) above, and shall be assessed $600, plus expenses, per occurrence
per 24-hour period for a violation of division (A)(5) above.
   (E)   Seventh, and subsequent, violations within a 12-month period. Any
person, or permit holder, found to be in violation of this chapter, and who has
not violated this chapter or another city code provision in conformity with it
more than six times within the 12 months prior to the violation/non-compliance,
shall be assessed $1,000 per occurrence per 24-hour period.
   (F)   Expenses. Expenses, as set forth in this section, shall include:
         (1)   Expenses for scheduled/planned maintenance billed to each
industry member/permit holder at the actual costs to the city for the
maintenance;
         (2)   Expenses for repair, and replacement, of city property damaged
due to the violation; and
         (3)   Expenses for costs incurred for labor as reasonably incurred as
a cost of cleaning up, or correcting, the violation. Expenses are not to exceed
the rates set forth on the city’s current rate schedule for labor, or other
actual costs associated with the violation.
   (G)   Enhancements. The enhancement provisions of divisions (C), (D), and
(E) above, are in effect for all violations committed after 12:01 a.m.,
February 15, 2003.
(Prior Code, § 3.40)
CHAPTER 53: GARBAGE, COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
Section
   
53.01   Purpose
   
53.02   Garbage and refuse defined
   
53.03   Collection services
   
53.04   Collections by the city
   
53.05   Collection practices
   
53.06   Garbage and rubbish containers
   
53.07   Storage of containers
   
53.08   Storage of garbage and rubbish
   
53.09   Residential dumpster use
   
53.10   Fees
   
53.11   Hauling of garbage and rubbish prohibited
   
53.12   Collection of charges
   
53.13   Grievances
§ 53.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to maintain, and protect, the public health
and sanitation of the residents of the city by the removal of garbage and
rubbish from the residences and business places in the city, and to prevent the
unregulated, and unrestricted, hauling of garbage and rubbish by other means
than through the garbage and rubbish collection system, established by this
chapter, so as to eliminate the dispersal of garbage and rubbish along the
streets, roads, and other properties in, and near, the city.
(Prior Code, § 3.20)
§ 53.02 GARBAGE AND REFUSE DEFINED.
   The term GARBAGE AND REFUSE means, and includes, refuse of all kinds, both
organic and inorganic, which accumulate in the ordinary operation of a
household, including all putrescible wastes, animal offal, the carcasses of
dead animals, and other refuse small enough to go into a 30 gallon container,
but specifically excluding grass trimmings, ashes, tree branches, leaves, human
excreta, sewage, and other water-carried wastes. Also excluded are all non-
putrescible wastes such as rocks, earth, sand, gravel, brick, stone, plaster,
wood, and other similar substances which may accumulate as a result of
construction, or demolition, operations.
(Prior Code, § 3.20)
§ 53.03 COLLECTION SERVICES.
   The collection service shall be furnished to the residents of the city,
either by direct city involvement, or by contract, and in the event of non-
payment of charges, which have been properly billed, and are more than 30 days
delinquent, the city may certify the charge to the County Auditor for
collection with other real estate taxes. The owners of rental property and
apartments shall be responsible for charges made for the collection service to
each rental unit served, and charges which become delinquent shall be certified
by the City Clerk-Treasurer to the County Auditor for collection with other
real estate taxes.
(Prior Code, § 3.20)
§ 53.04 COLLECTIONS BY THE CITY.
   All garbage and rubbish accumulated by residences in the city shall be
collected, conveyed, and disposed of by the city, or by its duly authorized
contractor. It is a petty misdemeanor for any person to collect, or dispose, of
any garbage, or rubbish, accumulated from any residential premises in the city,
excluding commonly recyclable materials. The use of the collection system
provided by the city, as herein provided, is mandatory for all residences.
(Prior Code, § 3.20) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.05 COLLECTION PRACTICES.
   (A)   Frequency of collection. Garbage and rubbish shall be collected at
least once each week according to a schedule to be determined, and notice shall
be given, by the contractor from time to time.
   (B)   Limits on quantity. There shall be no limits as to the quantity, so
long as all garbage and rubbish is placed in authorized containers.
(Prior Code, § 3.20)
§ 53.06 GARBAGE AND RUBBISH CONTAINERS.
   Every household, occupant, or owner of any residence, business, industrial,
or commercial establishment shall provide on the premises one, or more,
containers to receive, and contain, all refuse which may accumulate between
collections or disposal. Each container shall be water-tight, shall be
impervious to insects and rodents, and shall be fire-proof. Containers shall be
maintained in good and sanitary condition.
(Prior Code, § 3.20)
§ 53.07 STORAGE OF CONTAINERS.
   Except on days scheduled for collection, garbage and rubbish containers
shall be stored out of view of the public street, and on the day of collection
shall be made readily accessible to the collector, within ten feet of the curb
line on the public street.
(Prior Code, § 3.20)
§ 53.08 STORAGE OF GARBAGE AND RUBBISH.
   It is a petty misdemeanor for any person to:
   (A)   Place any garbage, or rubbish, in any street, alley, or other public
place, or upon any private property whether owned by such person or not, within
the limits of the city unless it is in the proper container for collection;
   (B)   Throw, or deposit, any garbage, or rubbish, in any stream or body of
water. Any unauthorized accumulation of garbage, or rubbish, on any premises is
hereby declared to be a nuisance, and is prohibited;
   (C)   Cast, place, or deposit anywhere within the city any garbage, or
rubbish, in such a manner that it may be carried, or deposited, by the elements
upon any street, sidewalk, alley, sewer, parkway, or other public place, or
into the occupied premises, or onto the premises of another person; and/or
   (D)   Put their household or commercial refuse, garbage, or rubbish in
another container not of their own.
(Prior Code, § 3.20) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.09 RESIDENTIAL DUMPSTER USE.
   (A)   General. It is not lawful for a single-family residential dwelling
unit within the city to use dumpsters for household waste and refuse, except as
follows:
      (1)   Businesses. By virtue of a dumpster permit issued by the Building
Inspector to businesses operating out of a residential unit who have complied
with the applicable zoning ordinances of the city code, and all other
applicable city code provisions, rules, and regulations. Any dumpster approved
by a dumpster permit shall not be stored within the front yard setback. A
dumpster cannot be stored on a grass surface and, in all cases, the dumpster
location shall be determined by mutual agreement between the appropriate city
building official, property owner, and representative of the contract garbage
carrier. If no agreement can be reached, the Building Official’s decision shall
be final. Failure to keep the dumpster lid secured, the area around the
dumpster clean, the dumpster emptied on schedule, and failure to maintain odor
control, will be considered a violation of this section, which may include
revocation of the dumpster permit;
      (2)   Residential uses when moving or relocating, removing material for
siding, shingling, and/or remodeling. In such circumstances, the owner, or
resident, of the premises shall be required to obtain a one-month temporary
dumpster permit from the city for the dumpster. Once the one-month period has
expired, the dumpster must be removed, or the resident must obtain further
permission from the City Building Official. Failure on the part of the owner to
have the dumpster emptied on schedule, the lid secured, the area around the
dumpster kept clean, and maintain odor control, will be considered a violation
of this section, and subject the property owner to the penalties described
herein.
   (B)   Dumpster permit. Dumpsters approved by a dumpster permit must be
located on private property. Under no circumstances can dumpsters be located on
streets, rights-of-way, or alleys.
   (C)   Violation. A person who violates a division herein shall be guilty of
a petty misdemeanor.
(Ord. 4, third series, passed 8-5-2008) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.10 FEES.
   (A)   Fees on residential property. The city, or its designated contractor,
shall serve all residential properties within the city on as frequent basis as
the city shall deem necessary for the preservation of the health, and safety,
of the general public. The fees charged for residential properties service
shall be based on the volume of garbage, and rubbish, and the complexity of
collection involved. Fees and charges for collection shall be fixed by
resolution of the Council, and may be amended from time to time only after the
contractor provides proper financial data showing a need for a fee increase.
   (B)   Fees on commercial property. The city, or its designated contractor,
shall serve all commercial, or industrial, properties within the city on as
frequent basis as the city shall deem necessary for the preservation of the
health, and safety, of the general public. The fees charged for commercial, and
industrial, properties service shall be based on the volume of garbage, and
rubbish, and the complexity of collection involved.
(Prior Code, § 3.20)
§ 53.11 HAULING OF GARBAGE AND RUBBISH PROHIBITED.
   It is a petty misdemeanor for any person to collect garbage, and rubbish,
without first procuring a license therefor as a garbage collector, and paying
the license fee. The city shall not issue more than one residential haulers
license at a given time. There shall be no limit on the number of commercial
haulers licensed.
(Prior Code, § 3.20) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.12 COLLECTION OF CHARGES.
   The city shall not be involved with the collection of fees, and charges, for
the collection of garbage, or refuse, except as herein provided, or under
separate, negotiated contract.
(Prior Code, § 3.20)
§ 53.13 GRIEVANCES.
   Any resident having a grievance relating to the collection service, and
wishing to be heard, shall state his or her grievance, in writing, and submit a
copy to the City Clerk-Treasurer addressed to the Council, who shall pass upon
it at its earliest meeting date.
(Prior Code, § 3.20) (Ord. 130, second series, passed 12-7-1993)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   PARKING REGULATIONS
      
72.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
      
73.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
70.01   Adopted by reference
   
70.02   Truck route
   
70.03   U-turns prohibited
   
70.04   One-way streets
   
70.05   Exhibition driving
   
70.06   Motorized vehicle operation, backing
 
   
70.99   Penalty
§ 70.01 ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, or in Chapters 71 and 152 of
this code, the regulatory, and procedural, provisions of M.S. Chapter 168,
Chapter 169 (commonly referred to as the “Highway Traffic Regulation Act”), and
Chapter 171, as amended through Laws 2007, as they may be amended from time to
time, are hereby incorporated herein, and adopted by reference, including the
penalty provisions thereof.
(Prior Code, § 8.01) (Ord. 210, second series, passed 10-2-2007)
§ 70.02 TRUCK ROUTE.
   It is unlawful for any person to drive a tractor, agricultural implement,
truck (other than pickup trucks, panel trucks, local service trucks, county
highway trucks, and city trucks, of three-quarter ton, or less) truck-trailer,
tractor-trailer or truck tractors, automobile trailer, or automobile to which a
trailer is attached, in through traffic, upon any street, except those which
have been designated, and sign-posted, as truck routes. For the purpose of this
chapter, THROUGH TRAFFIC means originating without the city and with a
destination without the city, as distinguished from LOCAL TRAFFIC, which means
traffic either originating, or having a destination, within the city.
(Prior Code, § 8.02) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.03 U-TURNS PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle by turning so as to
proceed in the opposite direction upon any street, except at a street
intersection, and then only if the street intersection is not sign-posted
prohibiting a U-turn, or marked as a stop or yield intersection for traffic
from any direction; provided, that any person making a permitted U-turn shall
yield the right-of-way to all other vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 8.10) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.04 ONE-WAY STREETS.
   (A)   The Council may, by resolution, designate streets as one-way streets.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to travel upon any one-way street in a
direction opposite that designated when the same has been duly sign-posted.
(Prior Code, § 8.11) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.05 EXHIBITION DRIVING.
   (A)   Prohibited. No person shall stop, start, turn, accelerate, decelerate,
or otherwise operate any motor vehicle within the city in any manner which
creates, or causes, unnecessary engine noise or backfire, tires squealing,
gears to grind, skidding, sliding, swaying, fishtailing, throwing of sand, snow
or gravel, or engine racing noises.
   (B)   Prima facie evidence. Squealing or screeching sounds emitted by tires,
or the throwing of sand, snow, or gravel by tires, or as to two, and three,
wheel vehicles causing the front wheel to lose contact with the ground or
roadway surface, shall constitute prima facie evidence of a violation of this
section.
   (C)   Violations. It is a violation of this section for any person to do any
exhibition driving on any street, parking lot, or other public, or private,
property, including the ice on public, or private, waters, except when an
emergency creates necessity for the operation to prevent injury to persons, or
damage to property.
(Prior Code, § 8.12) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.06 MOTORIZED VEHICLE OPERATION, BACKING.
   Unless otherwise allowable by state or local law, including emergency
vehicles, publicly-owned service vehicles, and other lawful purposes, it is
unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle in reverse for a distance in excess
of 50 feet upon any street. A violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 8.21) (Ord. 206, second series, passed 8-7-2007) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Every person violates a section, division, subchapter, or provision of
this chapter when he or she performs an act thereby prohibited, or declared
unlawful, or fails to act when the failure is thereby prohibited, or declared
unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows:
      (1)   Where the specific section, division, subchapter, or provision
specifically makes a violation a misdemeanor, he or she shall be punished as
for a misdemeanor; where a violation is committed in a manner, or under
circumstances, so as to endanger, or be likely to endanger, any person or
property, he or she shall be punished as for a misdemeanor; where he or she
stands convicted of violation of any provision of this chapter, exclusive of
violations relating to the standing, or parking, of an unattended vehicle,
within the immediate preceding 12-month period for the third, or subsequent,
time, he or she shall be punished as for a misdemeanor;
      (2)   As to any violations not constituting a misdemeanor under the
provisions of division (A)(1) above, he or she shall be punished as for a petty
misdemeanor; and
      (3)   As to any violation of a provision adopted by reference, he or she
shall be punished as specified in the provision, so adopted.
(Prior Code, § 8.99)
   (B)   A person who violates §
70.05 shall be sentenced as follows:
      (1)   For first time offenders: Any person who violates §
70.05, and has not violated this chapter, or another city code provision in
conformity with it, within five years prior to the violation is guilty of a
petty misdemeanor, and punishable by a fine of not more than $200, except as
set forth in division (B)(2) below; and
      (2)   For misdemeanor offenses:
         (a)   Any person who violates §
70.05 within five years of previously violating this chapter, or another city
code provision in conformity with it, is guilty of a misdemeanor; and/or
         (b)   Any person who violates §
70.05, and the violation is committed in a manner, or under circumstances, so
as to endanger, or be likely to endanger, any person or property, is guilty of
a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 8.12) (Ord. 162, second series, passed 8-17-1999)
CHAPTER 71: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
   
71.01   Presumption
   
71.02   General parking prohibitions
   
71.03   Unauthorized removal
   
71.04   House trailer, mobile home, trailer, and bus parking
   
71.05   Direction to proceed
   
71.06   Parallel parking
   
71.07   Angle parking
   
71.08   Streets without curb
   
71.09   Parking hours
   
71.10   Parking rules in municipal parking lots and ramps
   
71.11   Impounding and removing vehicles
   
71.12   Loading zones
   
71.13   Unattended vehicle
   
71.14   Vehicle repair on street
   
71.15   Parking for the purpose of advertising and selling
   
71.16   Courtesy parking
   
71.17   Physically handicapped parking
   
71.18   Truck parking
   
71.19   Parking regulations
   
71.20   Off-street parking
   
71.21   Electric vehicle charging standards
 
   
71.99   Penalty
§ 71.01 PRESUMPTION.
   As to any vehicle parking in violation of Chapters
70,
71,
72,
73, and
152 when the driver thereof is not present, it shall be presumed that the owner
parked the same, or that the driver was acting as the agent of the owner.
(Prior Code, § 9.01)
§ 71.02 GENERAL PARKING PROHIBITIONS.
   It is unlawful for any person to stop, stand, or park a vehicle except when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with the
specific directions of a police officer, or traffic control device, in any of
the following places:
   (A)   On a sidewalk;
   (B)   In front of a public, or private, driveway;
   (C)   Within an intersection;
   (D)   Within ten feet of a fire hydrant;
   (E)   On a crosswalk;
   (F)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at any intersection;
   (G)   In a signposted fire lane;
   (H)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign, or
traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway;
   (I)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
   (J)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station, and on
the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet
of the entrance when properly sign-posted;
   (K)   Alongside, or opposite, any street excavation, or obstruction, when
stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic;
   (L)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped, or parked, at the edge, or
curb, of a street;
   (M)   Upon any bridge, or other elevated structure, upon a street;
   (N)   At any place where official signs prohibit, or restrict, stopping,
parking, or both;
   (O)   In any alley, except for loading and unloading, and then only so long
as reasonably necessary for loading, and unloading, to or from adjacent
premises; or
   (P)   On any boulevard which has been curbed.
(Prior Code, § 9.02) (Ord. 34, second series, passed 12-21-1981) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.03 UNAUTHORIZED REMOVAL.
   It is unlawful for any person to move a vehicle not owned by the person into
any prohibited area, or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful.
(Prior Code, § 9.03) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.04 HOUSE TRAILER, MOBILE HOME, TRAILER, AND BUS PARKING.
   It is unlawful for any person to leave, or park, a house trailer, mobile
home, camping trailer, utility trailer, bus, or other similar recreational
vehicle on, or within, the limits of any street or right-of-way, except where
signs are erected designating the place as a campsite, for more than 24
consecutive hours.
(Prior Code, § 9.04) (Ord. 104, second series, passed 4-17-1990) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.05 DIRECTION TO PROCEED.
   It is unlawful for any person to stop, or park, a vehicle on a street when
directed, or ordered, to proceed by any police officer invested by law with
authority to direct, control, or regulate traffic.
(Prior Code, § 9.05) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.06 PARALLEL PARKING.
   Except where angle parking is specifically allowed, and indicated, by curb
marking or sign-posting, or both, each vehicle stopped, or parked, upon a two-
way road where there is an adjacent curb shall be stopped, or parked, with the
right-hand wheels of the vehicle parallel with, and within, 12 inches of, the
right-hand curb, and, where painted markings appear on the curb, or the street,
the vehicle shall be within the markings, front and rear; provided, that upon a
one-way roadway all vehicles shall be so parked, except that the left-hand
wheels of the vehicle may be parallel with, and within, 12 inches from the
left-hand curb, but the front of the vehicle in any event, and with respect to
the remainder of the vehicle, shall be in the direction of the flow of traffic
upon the one-way street; and it is unlawful to park in violation of this
section.
(Prior Code, § 9.06) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.07 ANGLE PARKING.
   Where angle parking has been established by Council resolution, and is
allowed, as shown by curb marking or sign-posting, or both, each vehicle
stopped, or parked, shall be at an angle of approximately 45 to 60 degrees,
with the front wheel touching the curb, and within any parking lines painted on
the curb or street; provided, that the front wheel not touching the curb shall
be the portion of the vehicle furthest in the direction of one-way traffic; and
it is unlawful to park in violation of this section.
(Prior Code, § 9.07) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.08 STREETS WITHOUT CURB.
   Upon streets not having a curb, each vehicle shall be stopped, or parked,
parallel, and to the right, of the paving, improved, or main traveled part of
the street; and it is unlawful to park in violation of this section.
(Prior Code, § 9.08) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.09 PARKING HOURS.
   Parking on streets shall be limited as follows:
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to stop, park, or leave standing any
vehicle upon any street, or municipal parking lot, for a continuous period in
excess of 24 hours; and
   (B)   The Chief of Police may, when authorized by resolution of the Council,
designate certain streets, blocks, or portions of streets or blocks, as five-
minute, ten-minute, 15-minute, 30-minute, one-hour, two-hour, four-hour, six-
hour, or eight-hour limited parking zones, and shall mark, by appropriate
signs, any zones so established. The zones shall be established whenever
necessary for the convenience of the public, or to minimize traffic hazards and
preserve a free flow of traffic.
(Prior Code, § 9.09) (Ord. 45, third series, passed 3-18-2020) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.10 PARKING RULES IN MUNICIPAL PARKING LOTS AND RAMPS.
   In parking lots and ramps owned by the city, or any other governmental
subdivision, the Council may limit the sizes, and types, of motor vehicles to
be parked thereon, hours of parking, and prescribed method of parking;
provided, that the limitations, and restrictions, are sign-posted thereon.
Where painted marking appears, vehicles shall be parked within the markings,
front and rear, where parallel parking is permitted, and side to side, where
angle parking is permitted. It is unlawful to park, or leave standing, any
vehicle backed into a parking place, to drive in a direction opposite the flow
of traffic marked by one-way signs or arrows, or to park any vehicle in parking
lots, or ramps, contrary to the restrictions, or limitations, sign-posted
therein, or the marking painted thereon.
(Prior Code, § 9.11) (Ord. 91, second series, passed 7-5-1988) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.11 IMPOUNDING AND REMOVING VEHICLES.
   When any police officer finds a vehicle standing upon a street, or
municipally-owned parking lot, in violation of any parking regulation, the
officer is hereby authorized to require the driver, or other person in charge
of the vehicle, to remove the same to a position in compliance with this
chapter. When any police officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any street, or
municipally-owned parking lot, in violation of any parking regulation, the
officer is hereby authorized to impound the unlawfully parked vehicle, and to
provide for the removal thereof, and to remove the same to a convenient garage,
or other facility or place of safety; provided, that if any charge shall be
placed against the vehicle for cost of removal or storage, or both, by anyone
called upon to assist therewith, the same shall be paid to the city prior to
removal from the place of storage, or safekeeping.
(Prior Code, § 9.12) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.12 LOADING ZONES.
   The Council may, by resolution, establish loading zones to be used for the
specific purpose of loading, or unloading, merchandise from a commercial
vehicle, or vehicle temporarily being utilized in the transport of merchandise.
The loading zones shall be installed by order of the City Manager where, in the
judgment of the Council, a commercial loading zone is justified, and duly sign-
posted.
(Prior Code, § 9.13) (Ord. 34, second series, passed 12-21-1981)
§ 71.13 UNATTENDED VEHICLE.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to leave a motor vehicle unattended
while the engine is running.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to leave a motor vehicle unattended with
the key in the ignition.
(Prior Code, § 9.14) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.14 VEHICLE REPAIR ON STREET.
   It is unlawful for any person to service, repair, assemble, or dismantle any
vehicle parked upon a street, or attempt to do so, except to service the
vehicle with gasoline or oil, or to provide emergency repairs thereon.
(Prior Code, § 9.15) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.15 PARKING FOR THE PURPOSE OF ADVERTISING AND SELLING.
   It is unlawful for any person to park a vehicle on any street, municipally-
owned parking lot, or other city-owned property for the purpose of selling
merchandise thereon, or therein, or advertising any merchandise for sale, or a
forthcoming event, for a period longer than 15 minutes.
(Prior Code, § 9.16) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.16 COURTESY PARKING.
   The Council is hereby authorized, by motion, to waive meter charges, and
hours of parking limitations herein stated, upon an application duly filed on
any day, and to any particular group; provided, that members of the group shall
have displayed in their motor vehicles a courtesy parking sticker, card, or
other similar designation.
(Prior Code, § 9.17) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.17 PHYSICALLY HANDICAPPED PARKING.
   (A)   Statutory parking privileges for the physically handicapped shall be
strictly observed and enforced. Police officers are authorized to tag vehicles
on either private, or public, property in violation of the statutory
privileges.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person, whether or not physically handicapped,
to stop, park, or leave standing, a motor vehicle in a sign-posted fire lane at
any time, or in lanes where, and during such hours as, parking is prohibited to
accommodate heavy traffic during morning, and afternoon, rush hours.
(Prior Code, § 9.18) (Ord. 59, second series, passed 11-20-1984) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.18 TRUCK PARKING.
   It is unlawful to park a semitrailer, truck-tractor, or combination thereof,
or any other vehicle with more than 9,000 pounds gross vehicle weight, or any
vehicle designed, used, or maintained for towing other motor vehicles or
equipment, upon any street, alley, private road, parking lot, driveway or upon
any public, or private, property which is within an area zoned as a residential
district, except for the purpose of loading, or unloading, and then only for a
period no longer than one hour.
(Prior Code, § 9.19) (Ord. 73, second series, passed 3-18-1986) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.19 PARKING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   There shall be no street parking during snow removal in order to
expedite efficient snow removal from the city streets.
   (B)   Vehicles shall not be parked, or left standing, on any street after an
accumulation of two inches, or more, of snowfall until snow removal operations
have been completed on a street for the entire block from curb to curb, or the
entire width of streets without curbing.
(Prior Code, § 9.20) (Ord. 95, second series, passed 12-6-1988; Ord. passed 1-
3-2023) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.20 OFF-STREET PARKING.
   (A)   Surfacing and drainage. Off-street parking areas, except for single-
family residences, shall be constructed of hard surfaced materials, such as
bituminous or concrete, or a combination of the two materials. Parking lots
shall be maintained as a dust free surface. All accessory off-street parking
facilities required herein shall be located as follows:
      (1)   Spaces accessory to one- and two-family dwellings on the same lot
as the principal use served;
      (2)   Spaces accessory to the multiple-family dwellings on the same lot
as the principal use served, or within 300 feet of the main entrance to the
principal building served;
      (3)   There shall be no off-street parking space within five feet of any
street right-of-way; and
      (4)   No off-street open space parking area containing more than four
parking spaces shall be located closer than five feet from an adjacent lot
zoned, or used, for residential purposes.
   (B)   General provisions.
      (1)   The Council recognizes that the inflexible application of parking
standards set forth in division (D) below may result in a development’s having
an inadequate number of parking spaces, or parking spaces far in excess, of a
development’s needs. Therefore, the city may permit deviations from the
presumptive requirements of the standards table in division (D) below, and may
require more parking spaces, or allow fewer parking spaces, whenever it finds
that such deviations are more likely to satisfy the development’s needs.
      (2)   Access drives shall be located no closer than five feet to any
adjacent lot’s side or rear lot line.
      (3)   When required, accessory off-street parking facilities are provided
elsewhere than on the lot in which the principal use served is located, they
shall be in the same ownership, or control, either by deed or long-term lease,
as the property occupied by the principal use, and the owner of the principal
use shall file a recordable document with the Council requiring the owner, and
his or her heirs and assigns, to maintain the required number of off-street
spaces during the existence of the principal use.
      (4)   Required off-street parking space in any district shall not be
utilized for open storage of goods, or for the storage of vehicles which are
inoperable, for sale, or rent.
      (5)   Parking shall not be allowed in areas not designated for off-street
parking.
   (C)   Design and maintenance of off-street parking areas.
      (1)   Parking areas shall be designed so as to provide adequate means of
access to a public alley or street. The driveway access shall not exceed 30
feet in width, and shall be so located as to cause the least interference with
traffic movement.
      (2)   Each parking space shall not be less than nine feet wide, and 20
feet in length.
      (3)   When required, off-street parking spaces for six cars, or more, is
located adjacent to a residential district, screening is required, and it shall
be at least five feet in height. If plant materials are used, they shall be no
less than three and one-half feet in height if it is of a species, or variety,
that will attain the required height within three years of planting. Height
shall be measured from the finished grade. If fencing is used, an opaque fence
may be constructed, as approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission, or its
official representative.
      (4)   It shall be the responsibility of the operator and owner of the
principal use, uses, and/or building to maintain, in a neat and adequate
manner, the parking space accessways, landscaping, required screening, and/or
fences.
      (5)   Any lighting proposed to illuminate off-street parking areas shall
be located, and arranged, so that all direct rays of light are directed upon
the parking area only, and not on any adjoining properties.
      (6)   When a building, or structure, accommodates more than one type of
use, the parking space requirement for the whole building shall be the sum of
the requirements for the separate parts of the building occupied by the
separate types of use, unless otherwise specified herein.
      (7)   When a number of parking spaces are specified for off-street
parking, a design standard of 300 square feet of space will be required per
parking space to meet the needs for vehicle standing space and maneuvering
area. For example, if the off-street parking standards for a use are for ten
spaces, the off-street parking area would need to meet a minimum area of 3,000
square feet (ten spaces times 300 square feet).
   (D)   Off-street space required (one space equals 300 square feet).
Business or Dwelling Amount of Parking Spaces
Business or         Amount of Parking Spaces
Dwelling
Automobile service  At least four off-street parking spaces, plus two off-street parking
station             spaces for each service stall.
Bowling alley       Five spaces for each alley, plus additional spaces as may be required
                    herein for related uses, such as a restaurant.
Business and        Four spaces, plus one additional space for each 500 square feet of floor
professional        area over, and above, 1,000 square feet.
offices
Churches            One parking space for each four seats, based upon design capacity of the
                    main seating area.
Drive-in food       One space for 15 square feet of gross floor space in the building
establishment       allocated to drive-in operation.
Hotel or motel      One space per rental unit, plus one space per full time employee.
Industrial,         At least one space for each employee on maximum shift, or one space for
warehouse, storage, each 2,000 square feet of gross floor area, whichever is large, plus one
or handling of bulk space for each company vehicle when customarily kept on the premises.
goods
                    One space for each employee on the major shift, or one space for each 350
Manufacturing or    square feet of gross floor area within the building, whichever is
processing plant    greater, plus one space for each company vehicle when customarily kept on
                    the premises.
Medical and dental  Four spaces, plus one additional space for each 500 square feet of floor
clinics             area over, and above, 1,000 square feet.
Multiple dwellings  Two and one-half parking spaces per dwelling unit.
Nursing/            One parking space for each four beds in the facility.
convalescent home
One- and two-family Two parking spaces.
homes
Outdoor             Ten spaces, plus any additional spaces, as determined by the Planning and
recreational uses   Zoning Commission.
Restaurant, cafs,   At least one space for each 100 square feet of floor area.
bars
Retail store        At least one off-street parking for each 500 square feet of gross floor
                    area, plus one space for each employee on the major shift.
Sales lot
businesses, garden  Six parking spaces, plus one space for each 500 square feet of floor area
centers, building   over, and above, 1,000 square feet.
materials, and auto
repair services
Schools             1.    Two parking spaces for each classroom.
1.   Elementary  2.    At least one parking space for each ten students based on design
2.   High school capacity, plus one additional space for each classroom.
Theaters,
auditoriums,        One parking space for each four seats, based upon design capacity.
stadiums, other
places of assembly
Undertaking         Eight spaces for each chapel or parlor, plus one space for each funeral
establishments      vehicle maintained on the premises.
Uses not            As determined by the Council following review by the Planning and Zoning
specifically noted  Commission.
 
(Prior Code, § 11.70)
§ 71.21 ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STANDARDS.
   (A)   Statement of purpose. To accommodate and promote electric vehicle
charging throughout the city, promoting the health, safety and general welfare
of the community and preventing adverse impacts in the installation and use of
electric vehicle chargers.
   (B)   Permitted locations.
      (1)   Electric vehicle chargers are permitted in every zoning district,
when accessory to the primary use and intended solely to charge vehicles that
would otherwise be on site.
      (2)   If the primary use of the electric vehicle chargers is the retail
charging of electric vehicles that would not otherwise be on site, then:
         (a)   The use is considered a convenience store with fuel sales for
zoning purposes and allowed only in zoning districts that permit convenience
stores with fuel sales uses; and
         (b)   The electric vehicle chargers must comply with the American with
Disabilities Act (ADA) guidelines.
   (C)   Electric vehicle charger standards. Electric vehicle chargers must
meet the following standards:
      (1)   Design. Parking must meet standards set in this chapter.
      (2)   Minimum off-street required parking. Parking spaces with electric
vehicle chargers count toward satisfying the minimum off-street parking
requirements of §
71.20 provided:
         (a)   The spaces are open for use by non-electric vehicles if over 5%
of the parking spaces on site; and
         (b)   The electric vehicle chargers are non-proprietary if over 5% of
the parking spaces on site.
      (3)   Private single-family home electric charger standards. Electric
vehicle chargers located on properties used for single family or two-family
homes must meet the following standards:
         (a)   Must be solely for private use of the property owner, resident,
or their non-paying guests;
         (b)   Must be located in a garage, on the exterior wall of the home or
garage, or freestanding pole with footing, adjacent to a parking space subject
to principal building setbacks; and
         (c)   When located outside of garage, must be rated for outdoor use.
      (4)   Municipal parking lots and ramps. In parking lots and ramps owned
by the city, or any other governmental subdivision, parking spaces with
electric vehicle chargers are not open for use by non-electric vehicles.
(Ord. 014, fourth series, passed 11-7-2023)
§ 71.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Every person who violates a section, division, subchapter, or
provision of this chapter when he or she performs an act thereby prohibited, or
declared unlawful, or fails to act when the failure is thereby prohibited, or
declared unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows:
      (1)   Where the specific section, division, subchapter, or provision
specifically makes the violation a misdemeanor, he or she shall be punished as
for a misdemeanor; where a violation is committed in a manner, or under
circumstances, so as to endanger, or be likely to endanger, any person or
property, he or she shall be punished as for a misdemeanor; where he or she
stands convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter, exclusive of
violations relating to the standing, or parking, of an unattended vehicle,
within the immediate preceding 12-month period for the third, or subsequent,
time, he or she shall be punished as for a misdemeanor; and
      (2)   As to any violation not constituting a misdemeanor under the
provisions of division (A)(1) above, he or she shall be punished as for a petty
misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 9.99)
   (B)    Pursuant to § 71.19, the Council may, by resolution, establish
schedules, fees, and fines from time to time, as may be amended.
(Prior Code, § 9.20) (Ord. 004, fourth series, passed 3-15-2022)
CHAPTER 72: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
Bicycles
   
72.01   Traffic laws apply
   
72.02   Manner, number riding
   
72.03   Hitching rides
   
72.04   Where to ride
   
72.05   Right-of-way; sidewalks
   
72.06   Carrying articles
   
72.07   Lighting and brake equipment
   
72.08   Sale with reflectors
Skateboards and Roller Skates
   
72.20   Definitions
   
72.21   Regulations
   
72.22   Where to skate
Golf Carts
   
72.35   Operation authorized
   
72.36   Permits
   
72.37   Unlawful acts
Snowmobiles
   
72.50   Scope
   
72.51   Statutes adopted
   
72.52   Private property
   
72.53   Sidewalks and boulevards
   
72.54   Operation on roadways, public lands, and waters
   
72.55   Direct crossings
   
72.56   Hours of operation
   
72.57   Prohibited acts
   
72.58   Unattended snowmobile
   
72.59   Minimum age of operator
BICYCLES
§ 72.01 TRAFFIC LAWS APPLY.
   Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway, or upon any path set aside for
the exclusive use of bicycles, shall be granted all of the rights, and shall be
subject to all of the duties, applicable to the driver of a vehicle by
Chapter 70, except as to special regulations in
Chapter 70, and except as to those provisions of
Chapter 70 which, by their nature, can have no application.
(Prior Code, § 8.03)
§ 72.02 MANNER, NUMBER RIDING.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person propelling a bicycle to ride, other than
upon, or astride, a permanent, and regular, seat attached thereto.
   (B)   No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the
number for which it is designed and equipped, except on a baby seat attached to
the bicycle; provided, that the seat is equipped with a harness to hold the
child securely in the seat, and that protection is provided against the child’s
feet hitting the spokes of the wheel, or in a seat attached to the bicycle
operator.
(Prior Code, § 8.03) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.03 HITCHING RIDES.
   It is unlawful for any person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller
skates, toboggan, sled, or toy vehicle to attach the same, or himself or
herself, to any vehicle upon a roadway.
(Prior Code, § 8.03) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.04 WHERE TO RIDE.
   (A)   Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to
the right side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when passing
a standing vehicle, or one proceeding in the same direction.
   (B)   Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two
abreast, except on paths, or parts of roadways, set aside for the exclusive use
of bicycles.
   (C)   Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a
roadway, bicycle riders shall use the paths and shall not use the roadway.
(Prior Code, § 8.03) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.05 RIGHT-OF-WAY; SIDEWALKS.
   Whenever a person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, the person shall
yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian, and shall give audible signal before
overtaking, and passing, the pedestrian; provided, that it is unlawful for any
person to ride a bicycle on a sidewalk in a business district.
(Prior Code, § 8.03) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.06 CARRYING ARTICLES.
   It is unlawful for any person operating a bicycle to carry any package,
bundle, or article which prevents the driver from keeping at least one hand
upon the handlebars.
(Prior Code, § 8.03) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.07 LIGHTING AND BRAKE EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Every bicycle, when in use at nighttime, shall be equipped with, or
its operator shall carry, a lamp on the front, which shall emit a white light
visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the front, and with a red
reflector on the rear of a type approved by the Department of Public Safety,
which is visible from all distances from 100 feet to 600 feet to the rear when
directly in front of lawful lower beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp
emitting a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear may be
used in addition to the red reflector. No person may, after January 1, 1976, at
any other time when there is not sufficient light to render clearly discernible
persons and vehicles on the highway at a distance of 500 feet ahead, operate a
bicycle, unless the bicycle, or its operator, is equipped with reflective
surfaces that shall be visible during the hours of darkness from 600 feet when
viewed in front of lawful lower beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. The
reflective surfaces shall include reflective materials on each side of each
pedal to indicate their presence from the front, or the rear, and with a
minimum of 20 square inches on each side of the bicycle, or its operator, of
white reflective material. All reflective materials used in compliance with
this section shall meet the requirements as prescribed by the Commissioner of
Public Safety.
   (B)   Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the
operator to make the braked wheels skid on dry, level, clean pavement.
(Prior Code, § 8.03)
§ 72.08 SALE WITH REFLECTORS.
   It is unlawful for any person to sell, or offer for sale, any new bicycle,
unless it is equipped with the reflectors as prescribed in §
72.07.
(Prior Code, § 8.03) Penalty, see §
10.99
SKATEBOARDS AND ROLLER SKATES
§ 72.20 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   BUSINESS DISTRICT. First Avenue South, starting at the intersection of
Seventh Street and First Avenue South, to the intersection of Second Street and
First Avenue South; Armstrong Boulevard on the southerly most tract of the
Union Pacific Railroad tracks south to Second Avenue South; Fifth Street South
from First Avenue South to Second Avenue South.
   ROLLER SKATES. A shoe with wheels attached, or a device with wheels which is
designed to be attached to a shoe. This definition also includes ROLLER BLADES.
   SKATEBOARD. A wheeled device propelled by human means, and transporting a
rider in a standing position, which device is not otherwise secured to a
rider’s foot or shoes.
(Prior Code, § 8.04)
§ 72.21 REGULATIONS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to operate, propel, or ride a
skateboard, or roller skates, upon any public sidewalk and/or parking lots in
the Business District.
   (B)   Whenever a person is riding a skateboard, or roller skates, upon a
sidewalk where not prohibited, the person shall yield the right-of-way to any
pedestrian, and shall give audible signal before overtaking, and passing, the
pedestrian.
(Prior Code, § 8.04) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.22 WHERE TO SKATE.
   (A)   Every person operating a skateboard, or roller skates, upon a roadway
shall travel as near to the right side of the roadway as practicable,
exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle, or one proceeding in the
same direction.
   (B)   Persons traveling on skateboards, or roller skates, shall not ride
more than two abreast, except on paths, or parts of roadways, set aside for the
exclusive use of bicycles, skateboards, and roller skates.
   (C)   Whenever a usable path for bicycles, skateboards, and roller skates
has been provided adjacent to a roadway, operators of the equipment shall use
the paths, and shall not use the roadway.
(Prior Code, § 8.04) (Ord. 197, second series, passed 7-5-2006)
GOLF CARTS
§ 72.35 OPERATION AUTHORIZED.
   Operation of motorized golf carts is hereby authorized on the roadways of
all streets, except such as are prohibited by resolution of the Council, and
only in strict compliance with this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 8.13)
§ 72.36 PERMITS.
   Permits shall be issued only to handicapped persons, as defined by statute.
Application for a permit to operate a motorized golf cart on the roadways of
streets shall include the name, and address, of the applicant, and other
information as may, from time to time, be required by the Council. Applications
for initial, or renewal, permits shall be accompanied by a certificate signed
by a physician stating that the applicant is capable of safely operating a
motorized golf cart on the roadway of streets. All permits shall expire on
December 31, unless renewed. The fee for a permit shall be fixed by resolution
of the Council.
(Prior Code, § 8.13) (Ord. 84, second series, passed 4-7-1987)
§ 72.37 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   It is unlawful for any person to operate a motorized golf cart on the
roadway of a street unless:
   (A)   The operator has, in possession, a valid, current, and unrevoked
permit from the city;
   (B)   The operation is on a roadway which has not been designated as
prohibited for the operation, except crossing at an intersection;
   (C)   The operation is during daylight hours between sunrise and sunset;
   (D)   The operation is not during inclement weather, or when visibility is
impaired by weather, smoke, fog, or other conditions, or when there is
insufficient light to clearly see persons, or vehicles, thereon at a distance
of 500 feet;
   (E)   The motorized golf cart displays a slow moving vehicle emblem, as
described by statute, on the rear thereof;
   (F)   The operator has insurance coverage, as provided by statute (presently
M.S. § 65B.48, subd. 5, as it may be amended from time to time) for
motorcycles; and
   (G)   The operator observes all traffic laws, except such as cannot
reasonably be applied to motorized golf carts.
(Prior Code, § 8.13) (Ord. 90, second series, passed 7-5-1988) Penalty, see §
10.99
SNOWMOBILES
§ 72.50 SCOPE.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of
Chapter 70 to the contrary, this subchapter shall apply to control of traffic
and regulation of that certain class of vehicles falling within the definition
of snowmobiles as to matters set forth herein. All provisions of this
subchapter, not relating to matters herein stated, apply as equally to
snowmobiles as other vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 8.20)
§ 72.51 STATUTES ADOPTED.
   M.S. §§ 84.81 through 84.90, as they may be amended from time to time,
together with rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, are hereby adopted
by reference, incorporated herein, and made a part hereof, except as otherwise
provided herein.
(Prior Code, § 8.20)
§ 72.52 PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   It is a misdemeanor to operate a snowmobile on private property without the
permission, or consent, of the owner, or occupant.
(Prior Code, § 8.20) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.53 SIDEWALKS AND BOULEVARDS.
   It is a misdemeanor to operate a snowmobile on a sidewalk or boulevard,
except that a direct crossing may be made in the same manner as provided for
direct crossing of a city street.
(Prior Code, § 8.20) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.54 OPERATION ON ROADWAYS, PUBLIC LANDS, AND WATERS.
   (A)   Snowmobiles may be operated on roadways, public lands, or waters only
as herein specified.
   (B)   It is a misdemeanor to operate a snowmobile upon Armstrong Boulevard
or First Avenue, except to make a direct crossing, or upon other roadways, or
public lands or waters, as follows:
      (1)   Upon the roadway, shoulder, or inside bank or slope of any trunk,
county state-aid, or county highway, and in the case of a divided trunk, or
county highway, on the right-of-way between the opposing lanes of traffic,
except to make a direct crossing in the manner herein described;
      (2)   Within the right-of-way of any trunk, county state-aid, or county
highway between the hours of one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before
sunrise, except on the right-hand side of the right-of-way, and in the same
direction as highway traffic on the nearest lane of the roadway adjacent
thereto, except to make a direct crossing in the manner herein described;
      (3)   Other than on the right-hand side of any roadway not otherwise
prohibited herein;
      (4)   Other than single file on a roadway;
      (5)   On publicly-owned land, except roadways, but including school land,
park property, playgrounds, and recreational lands; and
      (6)   Any city street, avenue, or alley, except as is necessary to reach
the perimeter areas outside of the city limits, and operators of snowmobiles
shall use the shortest possible routes on streets, avenues, and alleys to reach
the perimeter boundary of the city limits. In the event a snow emergency
condition makes the city streets impassable to normal vehicular traffic, then
the restrictions herein shall be suspended, and snowmobiles may be operated on
city streets without restriction. The Chief of Police shall be the authority to
determine when the restrictions are suspended, and when the restrictions are
activated.
(Prior Code, § 8.20) (Ord. 139, second series, passed 11-21-1995) Penalty, see
§
10.99
§ 72.55 DIRECT CROSSINGS.
   It is a misdemeanor to cross a roadway, except at a controlled intersection,
in any manner other than as follows:
   (A)   The crossing shall be made at an angle of approximately 90 degrees to
the direction of the highway, and at a place where no obstruction prevents a
quick, and safe, crossing;
   (B)   The snowmobile shall be brought to a complete stop before crossing the
shoulder or main-traveled way of the highway;
   (C)   The driver yields the right-of-way to all oncoming traffic which
constitutes an immediate hazard;
   (D)   In crossing a divided highway, the crossing shall be made only at an
intersection of the highway with another public street; or
   (E)   If the crossing is made between the hours of one-half hour after
sunset to one-half hour before sunrise, or under conditions of reduced
visibility, the front and rear lights shall be illuminated.
(Prior Code, § 8.20) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.56 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   It is a misdemeanor to operate a snowmobile within the city limits from 11:
00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m., Sunday through Thursday, and from 1:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m.,
Friday and Saturday.
(Prior Code, § 8.20) (Ord. 200, second series, passed 1-2-2007)
§ 72.57 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   It is a misdemeanor for any person to operate a snowmobile in the following
ways:
   (A)   At a rate of speed greater than reasonable, or proper, under all
surrounding circumstances, but in no event in excess of ten mph within the city
limits;
   (B)   In a careless, reckless, or negligent manner so as to endanger the
person, or property of another, or to cause injury or damage thereto;
   (C)   While under the influence of intoxicating liquor or narcotics, or
habit-forming drugs;
   (D)   To tow any person, or object, except through use of a rigid tow-bar
attached to the rear of the snowmobile;
   (E)   To intentionally drive, chase, run over, or kill any animal with a
snowmobile; or
   (F)   In any tree nursery, or planting, in a manner which damages, or
destroys, growing stock.
(Prior Code, § 8.20) (Ord. 139, second series, passed 11-21-1995) Penalty, see
§
10.99
§ 72.58 UNATTENDED SNOWMOBILE.
   Every person leaving a snowmobile unattended shall lock the ignition, and
remove the key from the ignition and from the snowmobile.
(Prior Code, § 8.20)
§ 72.59 MINIMUM AGE OF OPERATOR.
   No person under the age of 14 years shall operate a snowmobile on any public
land, or water, in the city. A person 14 years of age or older, but less than
18 years of age, may operate a snowmobile on streets and highways as permitted
under this subchapter, and make a direct crossing of the streets, and highways,
only if he or she has, in his or her immediate possession, a valid snowmobile
certificate issued by the Commissioner, and then only for purposes of travel
between his or her home (or home location of the snowmobile), and a point
outside the city, or to an area within the city, or to an area within the city
designated as a snowmobile area. The travel must be accomplished by the
shortest distance, taking the most direct route while complying with applicable
laws.
(Prior Code, § 8.20)
CHAPTER 73: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
I.   Speed limits
SCHEDULE I. SPEED LIMITS.
   Pursuant to M.S. § 169.14, as it may be amended from time to time, the speed
limit on Levee Boulevard, within the corporate limits of the city, shall be 15
mph, and shall be so posted.
(Prior Code, § 8.09) (Ord. 147, second series, passed 11-4-1997)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   NUISANCES; HEALTH AND SAFETY
      
91.   ANIMALS
      
92.   HOUSING, RENTAL PROPERTY
      
93.   GARAGE SALES
      
94.   RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT
      
95.   ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES; UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
      
96.   NOISE CONTROL
      
97.   PARK REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 90: NUISANCES; HEALTH AND SAFETY
Section
Nuisances; Abatement
   
90.001   Definitions
   
90.002   Nuisances
   
90.003   Violations
   
90.004   Public nuisance inspections
   
90.005   Notice and order
   
90.006   Authority to abate and remediate
   
90.007   Additional requirements for clandestine drug labs and operations
   
90.008   Appeal procedure
   
90.009   Emergency abatement procedure
   
90.010   Hazardous or substandard buildings
Grass, Weeds, and Trees
   
90.020   Definition
   
90.021   City to control tree planting standards
   
90.022   Permit required
   
90.023   Duty of property owners to cut grass and weeds; maintain trees and
shrubs
   
90.024   City may order work done
   
90.025   City may trim all boulevard trees
Shade Tree Disease
   
90.035   Policy and purpose
   
90.036   Scope and adoption by reference
   
90.037   Definitions
   
90.038   Unlawful act
   
90.039   Inspection and diagnosis
   
90.040   Abatement of tree nuisance
   
90.041   Procedure for removal of infected trees and wood
   
90.042   Spraying trees
   
90.043   Transporting wood prohibited
   
90.044   Interference prohibited
   
90.045   Additional duties of Tree Inspector
   
90.046   Diseased trees in streets
   
90.047   Subsidies
Open Burning; Air Pollution Control
   
90.060   Unlawful burning
   
90.061   Exceptions
   
90.062   Reporting of fires
Open Area Storage
   
90.070   Purpose
   
90.071   Definitions
   
90.072   Vehicle storage
   
90.073   Building material storage
   
90.074   Other storage
   
90.075   Anhydrous ammonia storage
Littering
   
90.085   Definitions
   
90.086   Litter in public places
   
90.087   Litter on public sidewalk and gutters prohibited
   
90.088   Litter from vehicles
   
90.089   Litter in parks, lakes, and streams
   
90.090   Litter on private property
   
90.091   Exceptions in proper zones
 
   
90.999   Penalty
NUISANCES; ABATEMENT
§ 90.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED BUILDING. Any building or portion of a building which has stood
with an incomplete exterior shell for longer than one year or any building or
portion thereof which has stood unoccupied for longer than one year which meets
one or more of the following criteria:
      (1)   Unsecured;
      (2)   Boarded;
      (3)   Having multiple exterior Housing Code or Building Code violations;
and/or
      (4)   Placarded as "Unfit for Human Habitation".
   ABATEMENT. The proper removal, containment, cleanup, and/or remediation of a
nuisance. ABATEMENT may include, but shall not be limited to, removal,
cleaning, extermination, cutting, mowing, grading, sewer repairs, draining,
securing, boarding unoccupied structures, barricading or fencing, removing
dangerous portions of structures, and demolition of dangerous structures or
abandoned buildings.
   ABATEMENT DEADLINE. The date on which the nuisance must be abated by as
specified in a written order.
   CHEMICAL INVESTIGATION SITE. A drug lab site (such as a clandestine drug lab
site as defined in M.S. § 152.0275) that is under notice and order for cleanup
and/or remediation as a public health nuisance, as authorized by M.S. Chapter
145A and/or this chapter.
   CHILD. Any person under the age of 18.
   CLANDESTINE DRUG LAB OR OPERATION. The unlawful manufacture or attempt to
manufacture a controlled substance within any area of a structure such as a
dwelling, building, motor vehicle, trailer, boat, or other structure or
appliance, as determined by a licensed law enforcement officer.
   CLEANUP. The proper removal and/or containment of substances or materials
hazardous to humans and/or the environment. CLEANUP can also be referred to as
abatement and is part of remediation.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES. A drug, substance or immediate precursor in Schedules
I through V of M.S. § 152.02. The term shall not include distilled spirits,
wine, malt beverages, intoxicating liquors, or tobacco.
   DANGEROUS STRUCTURE. Any structure which is potentially dangerous to persons
or property including but not limited to:
      (1)   A structure which is in danger of partial or complete collapse;
      (2)   A structure which has any exterior parts such as chimneys, eaves,
porches, siding, railings, or trim which are loose or in danger of falling; or
      (3)   A structure which has any parts such as porches, stairs, ramps,
rails, balconies, or roofs which are accessible and which are either collapsed,
in danger of collapsing, or unable to support a person.
   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. The Code Enforcement Officer, Street Superintendent,
Building Official, Fire Chief, Chief of Police, or their duly authorized
representative designated by the City Manager to determine if a nuisance exists
and administer this chapter. The city further authorizes the Brown-Nicollet
Environmental Health to undertake the responsibilities of enforcing the public
nuisance provisions of this code when investigating a public health nuisance
located in the city.
   EXTERMINATION. The eradication of rodents or other vermin by any or all
approved methods such as poisoning, fumigation, or trapping.
   FIREWOOD. Firewood, split wood or unsplit wood logs cut into lengths not
exceeding three feet for the purpose of burning for a fireplace or a
recreational fire on the real property. FIREWOOD shall not include milled or
prepared lumber.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE. Any waste material so defined by M.S. § 116.06, or
described or listed as hazardous waste in Minn. Rules Chapter 7045.
   INTERESTED PARTY. Any owner of record, occupying tenant, or lien holder of
record.
   JUNK. Included, but not limited to, machinery or auto parts, appliances,
household furniture and furnishing, scrap lumber, decayed or broken building
materials, used tires, barrels and scrap metal, and old or unused bicycles or
parts.
   LAST KNOWN ADDRESS. The address shown on the records of the Watonwan County
Department of Property Taxation or a more recent address known to the
enforcement officer. In the case of parties not listed in these records, the
LAST KNOWN ADDRESS shall be that address obtained by the enforcement officer
after a reasonable search.
   MAIL. Depositing the item with the United States Postal Service addressed to
the intended recipient at his or her last known address with first class
postage prepaid thereon.
   NOXIOUS SUBSTANCES. Substances, solid or fluid, which are offensive,
detrimental to health, hurtful, or dangerous. NOXIOUS SUBSTANCES shall include
but not be limited to any dead animal, or portion thereof, putrid carcass,
decayed animal matter, green hides, or any putrid, spoiled, foul, or stinking
meat, poultry, fish, offal, hides, skins, fat, grease, liquors, human or animal
excrement, or manure.
   OCCUPANT. A natural or legal person who occupies real property, whether with
or without any right, title or interest in the property, or who is in
possession or charge of such property, in the event the property owner resides
or is located elsewhere.
   OWNER. Any person, firm, partnership or corporation who owns, in whole or in
part, real property, a structure and/or fixtures, or is the purchaser of the
property under a contract for deed or owns personal property such as a motor
vehicle, trailer, boat or other appliance.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. All property other than real property or structures
located on real property.
   PERSONAL SERVICE. Service by personally handing a copy to the intended
recipient or by leaving a copy at the intended recipient's residence or place
of business with a person of suitable age and discretion.
   PRIVY. Any type of no-flush fixture for the receipt and storage of human
waste including fixed units with vaults as well as portable units.
   PROPERTY. Publicly or privately owned real or personal property, including
buildings and other structures, and motor vehicles as defined in M.S. §
609.487, subd. 2a, as may be amended.
   PROPERTY AGENT OR AGENT. A legal or natural person authorized by an owner to
act in transacting business matters or in managing the property.
   PUBLIC HEALTH HAZARD OR PUBLIC HEALTH NUISANCE. Any activity or failure to
act that adversely affects the public health, and shall include, but not be
limited to, any condition that poses an immediate and direct hazard to human
health if left unremediated due to the existence of the condition itself, or
due to the immediate threat of transmission of disease through insects, animals
or other means for the transmission of infection.
   REAL PROPERTY. Any parcel of land, whether vacant or not, whether any
structure thereon is occupied or not, or whether submerged or not.
   REFUSE. Putrescible or non-putrescible and combustible or non-combustible
waste, including paper, cardboard, glass, plastic, aluminum, garbage, junk,
material resulting from the handling, processing, preparation, cooking,
storage, serving and consumption of food, vegetable or animal matter, offal,
rubbish, plant wastes such as tree trimmings or grass cuttings, ashes,
incinerator residue, street cleanings, construction debris, detached vehicle
parts, and solid industrial and market wastes.
   REMEDIATION. Methods employed in dealing with public health nuisances and
include, but are not limited to, assessment, evaluation, testing, venting,
detergent scrubbing, enclosure, encapsulation, demolition, and/or removal of
materials.
   RESPONSIBLE PARTY. Any one or more of the following:
      (1)   An owner;
      (2)   Agent;
      (3)   Assignee or collector of rents;
      (4)   Holder of a contract for deed;
      (5)   A mortgagee or vendee in possession;
      (6)   Receiver or executor or trustee;
      (7)   Lessee;
      (8)   Those listed as owners on a vacant building registration form
submitted to the Building Inspector under the City Code; and
      (9)   Other person, firm, or corporation exercising apparent control over
a property, including occupants.
   RUBBISH. Any material rejected or thrown away, which is regarded as
worthless.
   STRUCTURE. A dwelling, building, motor vehicle, trailer, boat, or any other
area or location, fixed or temporary, indoors or outdoors.
   UNOCCUPIED BUILDING. A building which is not being used for a legal
occupancy or a building which has been ordered vacated by the city.
   UNSECURED BUILDING. A building or a portion of a building that is open to
entry by unauthorized persons without the use of tools.
   VULNERABLE ADULT. Shall have the meaning set out in M.S. § 626.5572, subd.
1, as may be amended.
(Ord. 020, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 90.002 NUISANCES.
   (A)   The creation or maintenance of a public nuisance is prohibited. A
public nuisance shall mean:
      (1)   Any act or failure to perform a legal duty that results in the
maintaining or permitting of a condition which unreasonably annoys, injures, or
endangers the safety, morals, comfort or repose of any considerable number of
members of the public;
      (2)   Any public health hazard/public health nuisance;
      (3)   Any thing or condition which creates a dangerous condition;
      (4)   Any thing or condition that threatens the public peace, safety, or
sanitary condition of the city;
      (5)   Any act or failure to perform a legal duty that interferes with,
obstructs, or renders dangerous for passage, any public highway or right-of-
way, or waters used by the public;
      (6)   Any thing or condition that is offensive or has a blighting
influence on the community and which is found upon, in, being discharged or
flowing from any street, alley, highway, railroad right-of-way, vehicle,
railroad car, water, excavation, building, erection, lot, grounds, or other
real or personal property located within the city; and
      (7)   Any act or omission declared by law to be a public nuisance and for
which no sentence is specifically provided.
   (B)   Public nuisances shall include, but not be limited to, those set forth
in this section.
      (1)   Refuse, noxious substances, and hazardous wastes. Refuse, noxious
substances, or hazardous waste that is not properly contained in a closed,
insect- and rodent-proof container designed or reasonably adapted for such
purposes, or is laying, pooled, accumulated, piled, left, deposited, buried, or
discharged upon, in, being discharged or flowing from any real or personal
property; except for:
         (a)   Refuse deposited at places designated and provided for that
purpose by the city code; or
         (b)   Refuse stored in accordance with provisions of the city code or
vehicle parts stored in an enclosed structure.
      (2)   Firewood. Stacks of firewood in excess of six cords, stacks of
firewood higher than six feet from ground level to the highest point of
elevation, or stacks of firewood stored within the required setback.
      (3)   Stagnant water. Water standing on real property and/or allowed to
accumulate in or on any personal property, which ceases to flow away from the
property. STAGNANT WATER does not include holding areas and ponds and
detention/retention ponds or basins permitted or required by the city code.
      (4)   Sanitary defects. Any structure or real property that has become
dangerous for further occupancy in the opinion of the enforcement officer,
which may include, but is not limited to: accumulation of human or animal
feces, evidence of garbage and rotting food, infestation or harborage or
breeding of vermin, rodents or insects, environmental conditions that affect
children and vulnerable adults, and lack of approved potable water supply or
sewage disposal.
      (5)   Vermin infestations and harborage. Infestations and/or harborage of
vermin such as rats, mice, skunks, snakes, bats, grackles, starlings, pigeons,
bees, wasps, cockroaches, lice, ticks, fleas, flies, fly larvae and hookworm
larvae, except for bees or pigeons kept with written permission from, and in
accordance with, the city code and the regulations of the Division of Public
Health.
      (6)   Carcasses. Accumulation of carcasses of animals, birds or fish by
failing to bury or otherwise dispose of a carcass in a sanitary manner within
72 hours after death. This provision shall not apply if the animals, birds, or
fish are intended for human consumption.
      (7)   Decaying matter. Accumulation of decayed animal or vegetable
matter, animal or human feces, trash, rubbish, garbage, tires or any other
substances in which flies, mosquitoes, other disease-carrying insects, rodents
or other vermin can harbor; this definition does not include compost bins or
compost sites that are being managed in accordance with acceptable standards.
      (8)   Mosquito breeding grounds. Unnatural breeding grounds that support
mosquito larvae and mosquitoes carrying West Nile Virus, La Crosse
encephalitis, or any other disease-causing microorganisms.
      (9)   Sanitary structures. Structures for sanitation, such as privies,
vaults, sewers, private drains, septic tanks, cesspools, and drain fields,
which have failed or do not function properly, or which are overflowing,
leaking, or emanating odors. Septic tanks, cesspools, and cisterns which are
abandoned or no longer in use unless they are empty and filled with clean fill.
Any vault, cesspool, or septic tank which does not meet the following criteria:
         (a)   The bottom and sides are cemented to make impervious to water;
         (b)   The bottom is at least six feet below grade;
         (c)   Proper ventilating pipes and covers are provided;
         (d)   It is located at least 20 feet from any house, residence,
building, or public street;
         (e)   It is cleaned at least once a year; and
         (f)   The real property served is located such that connection to the
public sewer is impractical.
      (10)   Manure vaults. Manure vaults which have become offensive. Manure
vaults for stables where more than two animals are kept which are not cleaned
twice in each week.
      (11)   Dangerous structures. Dangerous structures, whether or not
registered pursuant to the city code.
      (12)   Abandoned buildings. Abandoned buildings, whether or not
registered pursuant to the city code.
      (13)   Hazards.
         (a)   Any thing or condition on property which, in the opinion of the
enforcement officer, may contribute to injury of any person present on or near
the property.
         (b)   Hazards shall include, but not be limited to, open holes, open
foundations, open wells, improperly abandoned cisterns, unused or non-
maintained private swimming pools, mine shafts or tunnels, dangerous trees or
limbs, abandoned refrigerators, or dangerous animal trapping devices.
            1.   Animal trapping devices such as live traps may be utilized,
but shall be designed to be non-lethal, humane, and safe to the general public.
            2.   Under no circumstances may conibear-type, body-gripping or
steel-jaw leg-hold traps be used anywhere in the city, except when deemed
necessary for public safety by the Chief of Police in coordination with the
Impound Officer.
      (14)   Fire hazards. Any thing or condition on property which, in the
opinion of the enforcement officer, creates a fire hazard or which is a
violation of the Fire Code.
      (15)   Health hazards. Any thing or condition on or in property which, in
the opinion of the enforcement officer, creates a health hazard or which is a
violation of any health or sanitation law, including but not limited to, a
chemical investigation site and/or clandestine drug lab or operation.
      (16)   Vehicle parking.
         (a)   Outside parking and storage of large numbers of vehicles and
vehicles, materials, supplies or equipment which:
            1.   Obstruct views on streets and private property;
            2.   Create cluttered and otherwise unsightly areas;
            3.   Prevent the full use of residential streets for residential
parking;
            4.   Introduce commercial advertising signs into an area where
commercial advertising signs are otherwise prohibited;
            5.   Decrease adjoining landowner's and occupant's enjoyment of
their property and neighborhood; and
            6.   Otherwise adversely affect property values and neighborhood
patterns.
         (b)   A person must not cause, undertake, permit or allow the outside
parking and storage of vehicles on residential property unless it complies with
the city's zoning ordinances and the following requirements:
            1.   No more than six vehicles per lawful dwelling unit may be
parked or stored anywhere outside on residential property, except as otherwise
permitted or required by the city because of nonresidential characteristics of
the property. This maximum number does not include vehicles of occasional
guests who do not reside on the property.
            2.   Vehicles that are parked or stored outside in all yard areas
must be on a paved or graveled parking or driveway area.
            3.   Vehicles, watercrafts, and other recreational vehicles stored
outside on residential property must be owned by a person who resides on that
property. Students who are away at school for periods of time but still claim
the property as their legal residence will be considered residents on the
property.
            4.   Temporary parking of more than six vehicles per lawful
dwelling may occur anywhere outside on residential property, including in front
and rear yards during special designated events approved by the City Council.
            5.   Camping is not allowed on city streets, public property, or
public right-of-way unless approved by City Council.
      (17)   Statute and common law nuisances. Any thing or condition on or in
real or personal property which is known at common law, Minnesota Statutes, or
the city code as a nuisance.
(Ord. 020, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 90.003 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to create or maintain a public nuisance
as defined in §
90.002 herein, by his or her act or failure to perform a legal duty.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to permit property under his or her
control to be used to create or maintain a public nuisance as defined in §
90.002 herein, or let the same to another knowing it is to be so used.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any owner of any truck, trailer, railroad car or
flat, or other vehicle to leave the vehicle standing on or along any street,
highway, freeway, or railroad track, or other real property within the city
carrying or containing any refuse, noxious substance, or hazardous waste,
except as otherwise permitted in the city code.
(Ord. 020, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 90.004 PUBLIC NUISANCE INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   The owner, occupant or property agent may, upon the request of the
enforcement officer and after proper identification, permit access to all parts
of the property as often as necessary and at any reasonable time for the
purpose of inspection, and may exhibit and allow copying of any and all records
necessary to ascertain compliance with this chapter. If the owner, occupant or
property agent refuses consent to an enforcement officer's entry or access to
property for purposes of enforcement of this chapter, the enforcement officer
is authorized to take the necessary steps to obtain a warrant or other order
from the court authorizing entry and/or access.
   (B)   If the city is notified of a public nuisance concern or complaint, it
shall be authorized to investigate to determine if a public nuisance exists.
Notifications and complaints may be received from law enforcement, city staff,
state or county government agency staff, the public, or any other party deemed
to have sufficient information regarding the situation. The enforcement officer
shall have discretion to determine if a complaint provides a sufficient basis
to investigate a situation as a public nuisance.
   (C)   Upon the request of the enforcement officer, a responsible party or
owner shall disclose the name of any other responsible party or owner known to
him or her. This shall include but not be limited to the persons for whom he or
she is acting, from whom he or she is leasing the property, to whom he or she
is leasing the property, with whom he or she shares joint ownership, or with
whom he or she has any conveyancing contract.
(Ord. 020, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 90.005 NOTICE AND ORDER.
   (A)   In the event that an enforcement officer observes a person creating,
maintaining or permitting a public nuisance, the officer may, after presenting
proper identification, verbally order that the person cease creating,
maintaining and/or permitting a nuisance. If, after receiving a concern or
complaint and completing an investigation, the enforcement officer determines a
public nuisance exists, a notice and order shall be issued requiring the owner,
occupant and/or property agent (individually or jointly) to abate and/or
remediate the public nuisance.
   (B)   Contents of notice and order. The city shall include the following as
part of notice and order:
      (1)   Property location by street address, property identification
number, or other property description;
      (2)   Information identifying the nature of the public nuisance on or in
the property;
      (3)   A summary of the owner's and occupant's responsibilities under
state law and/or this chapter;
      (4)   Specific orders of abatement and/or remediation of the public
nuisance;
      (5)   Completion dates for abatement and remediation, as prescribed by §
90.006(A) herein;
      (6)   Notice that unless the public nuisance is abated and/or remediated
in accordance with the terms of the order or appealed by the completion date
designated in the order, the city will have the nuisance abated and remediated
at the expense of the owner under the provisions of M.S. § 145A.08, M.S.
Chapter 463, this chapter, or other applicable state or local law and assess
the costs against the real property where applicable as a special assessment to
be collected in the same manner as property taxes;
      (7)   Notice of a right to appeal the order by submitting a written
request with the City Manager before the abatement/remediation completion date
set forth in the order;
      (8)   An order that the property may not be occupied or used until the
public health nuisance is assessed and remediated by an approved contractor
when a public health nuisance exists and where the public health nuisance
includes a chemical investigation site or a clandestine drug lab or operation
contaminated by substances, chemicals, or items used in the manufacture of
methamphetamine or any part of the manufacturing of methamphetamine or any part
of the manufacturing process, the by-products or degradants of manufacturing or
other public nuisances including hazardous waste, solid waste, rodents, vermin,
disease-carrying insects or other unsanitary conditions; and
      (9)   When applicable, a copy of the chemical investigation site public
health nuisance warning sign that is posted at the site's entrance(s).
   (C)   Service.
      (1)   The notice and order for abatement and/or remediation shall be
served on the owner, occupant, or property agent, if applicable, in one of the
following ways:
         (a)   By mail;
         (b)   By an officer authorized to serve a warrant; or
      (2)   If the owner of real property is unknown or absent and has no known
representative upon whom notice can be served, an enforcement officer shall
post a written or printed notice on the real property, stating that, unless the
nuisance is abated or appealed within ten days, the city will have the public
nuisance abated at the expense of the owner under M.S. § 145A.08, M.S. Chapter
463, this chapter, or other applicable state or local law.
      (3)   Where it is determined that a child neglect, child endangerment or
vulnerable adult situation may exist as a result of a public health nuisance,
the enforcement officer shall notify the Watonwan County divisions responsible
for responding to potential child neglect, child endangerment or vulnerable
adult situations. The notice should include the following:
         (a)   Real property location by street address;
         (b)   Owner's and occupant's identities known to be associated with
the real property;
         (c)   Conditions found that make this home or residence a public
health nuisance; and
         (d)   Any other conditions that may be associated with the real
property that could present harmful conditions as determined by state law.
   (D)   The enforcement officer may leave a posted warning sign at a public
health nuisance site. It shall be unlawful for any person, except for
authorized city personnel, to remove this sign once posted. Any person, other
than an enforcement officer, who willfully removes a warning sign may be
charged with a misdemeanor interference with performance of duties pursuant to
M.S. § 145A.04, subd. 10.
   (E)   Notice to public. When an order requires, exclusively or as an option,
the demolition of a building, the public shall be put on notice as follows:
      (1)   A copy of the order shall be placed on file in the office of the
City Manager.
      (2)   The enforcement officer shall notify the Council of each parcel of
real property subject to a demolition order as follows: each month the
enforcement officer shall send to the Council a list of the real properties
that have become subject to a demolition order. The list shall be in the form
of a resolution declaring that an enforcement action has been commenced and
that as a result of the public nuisance status of a building on the real
property an order has been issued detailing the violations and requiring,
exclusively or as an option, that the building be demolished and that a copy of
this order is on file in the office of the City Manager.
   (F)   Recording. Where a public health nuisance includes a chemical
investigation site or a clandestine drug lab or operation contaminated by
substances, chemicals, or items used in the manufacture of methamphetamine or
any part of the manufacturing of methamphetamine or any part of the
manufacturing process, the by-products or degradants of manufacturing or other
public nuisances including hazardous waste, solid waste, rodents, vermin,
disease-carrying insects or other unsanitary conditions, the city shall:
      (1)   Record an affidavit with the County Recorder Office for Watonwan
County, Minnesota as required by M.S. § 152.0275, subd. 2(h) if the affected
property is real property.
      (2)   Notify the registrar of motor vehicles as required by M.S. §
152.0275, subd. 2(g) if the affected property is a motor vehicle, boat, or
trailer.
   (G)   Chemical investigation site; property owner's and occupant's
additional responsibilities.
      (1)   Property owner(s) and occupant(s) provided with notice, which also
includes the posted warning sign informing them of the chemical investigation
site public health nuisance, shall promptly act to vacate occupants and animals
from those parts of a structure that are a chemical investigation site or other
public health nuisance. This includes dwellings, buildings, motor vehicles,
trailers, boat, appliances or any other affected area or location.
      (2)   Property owner(s) and occupant(s) shall contract with one or more
approved remediation, environmental hazard testing and cleaning firms on the
Minnesota Department of Health's list that will verify work is completed
according to the Minnesota Department of Health's Clandestine Drug Labs General
Cleanup Guidelines (in coordination with the Minnesota Pollution Control
Agency) and best practices, to accomplish ordered work which may include, but
is not limited to, the following:
         (a)   A detailed on-site assessment of the extent of contamination at
the site and the contamination of the personal property therein. This includes
dwellings, buildings, motor vehicles, trailers, boats, appliances or any other
affected area or location;
         (b)   Soil testing of the site and testing of all property and soil in
proximity to the site that the environmental hazard testing and cleaning firm
determines may have been affected by the conditions found at the site,
including testing the well and septic system;
         (c)   A complete cleanup of the site (including, but not limited to,
the cleanup or removal of contaminated plumbing, ventilation systems, fixtures
and soil, well and septic system), or a demolition of the site and a complete
cleanup of the demolished site including abandonment of the well and septic
system if necessary;
         (d)   A complete cleanup, or disposal at an approved dumpsite, of all
personal property in the site;
         (e)   A complete cleanup of all property and soil in proximity to the
site that is found to have been affected by the conditions found at the site;
and
         (f)   Remediation testing and follow-up testing to determine that all
health risks are sufficiently reduced, according to Minnesota Department of
Health and Minnesota Pollution Control Agency guidelines, to allow safe human
occupancy and use of the site, and use of the personal property therein.
      (3)   Property owner(s) and occupant(s) shall provide both local law
enforcement and the Brown-Nicollet Environmental Health with the identity of
the professional remediation firm the owner, occupant or property agent has
contracted with for remediation of the structure(s) as described above.
      (4)   Property owner(s) and occupant(s) shall provide both local law
enforcement and the Brown-Nicollet Environmental Health with the selected
contractor's plan and schedule for remediation that will satisfy the abatement
and remediation order(s).
      (5)   The property owner(s) and occupant(s) may request an extension of
time for the abatement and remediation completion date(s) set forth in the
order to consider options for arranging cleanup or removal of the affected
parts of the property. The owner(s) or occupant(s) must show good cause for any
such extension. Any such extension shall be dependent on the assurances of the
owner(s) that the affected parts of the property will not be occupied pending
appropriate cleanup or demolition.
   (H)   Modification and removal.
      (1)   The city may modify conditions of an abatement and remediation
order, including timelines, and may order removal of a declaration of a public
health nuisance.
      (2)   Such modification or removal shall be only after the city has
determined the public nuisance is sufficiently reduced or abated through
remediation to warrant modification or removal of the declaration in the notice
and order. The city may rely on information from competent sources, including
those supplied by the property owner(s) and others, including but not limited
to state and local health, safety, law enforcement and pollution control
authorities, to reach such decisions.
      (3)   If notice of a public health nuisance was filed with the County
Recorder Office for Watonwan County, Minnesota, notice that the declaration in
the order or the order itself has been removed shall be forwarded to the County
Recorder Office for Watonwan County, Minnesota for addition to the property
record.
      (4)   If notice of a public health nuisance was filed with the State
Registrar, notice that the declaration in the order or the order itself has
been removed shall be provided to the motor vehicle or other license records
agencies and lien holders.
(Ord. 020, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 90.006 AUTHORITY TO ABATE AND REMEDIATE.
   (A)   Owner abatement and remediation. It shall be the primary
responsibility of a property owner or occupant to abate any public nuisance
that exists on or in the owner's or occupant's property. Unless an emergency
abatement or remediation occurs at the direction of the city, the owner,
occupant, and/or property agent shall abate and remediate the public nuisance
by the completion date(s) set forth in the notice and order. Completion dates
for abatement and remediation shall be set as follows unless a shorter time is
required due to the enforcement officer's determination that a quicker
abatement is necessary to protect public health and safety (in such cases, the
reasons for a shortened abatement period shall be specified):
      (1)   A date no more than 30 days from service of the notice and order
upon the owner(s), occupant(s), or agent of the property where a public
nuisance exists; or
      (2)   Such other date agreed upon between the city and property owner or
occupant.
   (B)   Public health nuisance handling. Waste generated through cleanup or
remediation of a site that is considered a public health nuisance shall be
treated, stored, transported and disposed in accordance with applicable
Minnesota Department of Health, Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, Watonwan
County and City of St. James guidelines, rules and regulations for remediation
of a chemical investigation site and/or clandestine drug lab or operation, for
solid waste, and for hazardous household/other hazardous wastes.
   (C)   City abatement and remediation. The city is authorized to abate and/or
remediate public nuisances in accordance with the procedures set forth in this
section upon expiration of the time provided in the notice and order.
      (1)   The city shall be authorized to contract services of a third party
to abate any public nuisance on a property when the property owner, occupant or
property agent has provided written consent.
      (2)   If written consent is not provided, the city may proceed with any
legal remedies available, including a court order to enter the property, to
complete the abatement of the declared public nuisance.
      (3)   The City Manager, or his/her designee, shall be fully authorized to
direct funds to assure prompt abatement and remediation of public nuisances.
      (4)   In addition, the city may impose an administrative penalty in an
amount set by Council for each day that the nuisance remains unabated.
   (D)   Cost of abatement and remediation to be assessed. Abatement and
remediation costs shall include the cost of the abatement and/or remediation,
including but not limited to personnel costs and equipment costs and
depreciation; the cost of investigation and verification, such as title
searches, inspection, assessment, evaluation, and testing; the cost of
contractors, venting, detergent scrubbing, enclosure, encapsulation,
demolition, and/or removal of materials; the cost of notifications, postings,
and vacating and securing the site; filing costs; legal costs, including
attorney fees; and administrative costs, including administrative penalties and
fees for Council meetings and expenses related to the recovery of costs,
including the assessment process. All costs incurred shall be charged against
the real property as a special assessment to be collected in the manner
provided for in M.S. Chapter 429.
   (E)   Nothing in this chapter is intended to limit the rights of the
property owner(s), agent(s), occupant(s), or the enforcing government agency,
including the city, to recover costs or damages from persons contributing to
the damage or condition created by the public nuisance, such as operators of a
clandestine drug lab site.
(Ord. 020, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024; Ord. 026, fourth series, passed 3-
4-2025)
§ 90.007 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR CLANDESTINE DRUG LABS AND OPERATIONS.
   (A)   Notifications. Law enforcement officers who identify and confirm a
clandestine drug lab or operation shall notify the Brown-Nicollet Environmental
Health and the Watonwan County department responsible for child protection and
vulnerable adults within one business day of identifying and confirming the lab
or operation location.
   (B)   Disposal. Upon identification of a clandestine drug lab or operation,
law enforcement agencies may treat, store, transport or dispose of all
hazardous material or hazardous waste found at the site in a manner consistent
with Minnesota Department of Health, Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, and
Watonwan County rules and regulations.
   (C)   Securing affected areas. The law enforcement agency responding to the
clandestine drug lab or operation shall install locks on all entry doors of the
affected area of a structure(s) after all occupants and animals have vacated
the site.
   (D)   Warning sign. When the responding law enforcement agency completes its
work and is prepared to leave such sites, the agency shall affix a warning sign
to all entrances of the affected part of the structure or in a conspicuous
place(s) on bare land.
      (1)   The warning sign shall be consistent with those deemed appropriate
by local law enforcement and the Watonwan County Sheriff's Office. The warning
sign shall alert visitors or returning occupants that the site is a chemical
investigation site public health nuisance, may be dangerous to enter, and must
not be entered.
      (2)   It is unlawful for any person, except authorized Watonwan County
personnel, to remove a chemical investigation site public health nuisance
warning sign from the posted property. Any person other than a representative
of the Brown-Nicollet Environmental Health who willfully removes a warning sign
may be charged with misdemeanor interference with performance and duties
pursuant to M.S. § 145A.04, subd. 10.
(Ord. 020, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 90.008 APPEAL PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Appeal. Anyone who receives a notice and order shall have the ability
to appeal the order to the City Council by filing a written request to the City
Manager on or before the abatement/remediation completion date identified in
the order.
   (B)   Hearing date. In the event that an appeal is filed with the City
Manager, the Council shall within three weeks fix a date for a public hearing;
said hearing shall take place at the next City Council meeting.
   (C)   Notice. The City Manager, or his/her designee, shall mail a notice of
the date, time, place, and subject of the hearing to the owner and known
responsible parties. The City Manager shall also notify the enforcement officer
issuing the order.
   (D)   Hearing. At the time of the public hearing, the Council shall hear
from the enforcement officer, and any other parties who wish to be heard. After
the hearing, the Council may confirm or modify the order of the enforcement
officer. In either case, if the Council's determination requires abatement, the
Council shall, in the resolution, fix a time within which the public nuisance
must be abated and shall provide that if corrective action is not taken within
the time specified, the city may abate the public nuisance. The City Manager or
his/her designee shall mail a copy of this resolution to same parties required
to be notified in division (C) above.
(Ord. 020, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 90.009 EMERGENCY ABATEMENT PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Authority. When the enforcement officer determines that a public
nuisance exists on a parcel of real property, the public nuisance constitutes
an immediate danger or hazard which if not immediately abated will endanger the
health or safety of the public, and there does not exist sufficient time to
follow the procedures described herein, the city may abate the public nuisance.
   (B)   Order by City Manager or designee. The city shall order emergency
abatement by an administrative order to be signed by the City Manager or their
designee. A good faith effort shall be made to inform the owner that the action
is being taken.
   (C)   Notice of the abatement. Following an emergency abatement, as soon as
the costs incurred are known to the City Manager, the City Manager shall serve
written notice upon the property owner. The notice shall contain:
      (1)   A description of the property sufficient for identification;
      (2)   The location and description of the public nuisance;
      (3)   The remedial action taken by the city;
      (4)   The reasons for immediate action;
      (5)   The costs incurred in abating the public nuisance; and
      (6)   A statement that the property owner may request, by writing to the
City Manager within 20 calendar days of the date of the notice, a hearing at
which the Council shall review the actions taken by the city.
   (D)   Setting hearing date. In the event that a property owner files a
request for a review of the action with the City Manager, the Council shall
within three weeks fix a date for a public hearing; said hearing shall take
place at the next City Council meeting.
   (E)   Notice. The City Manager shall notify the enforcement officer and the
property owner of the date, time, place, and subject of the public hearing.
   (F)   Hearing. At the time of the public hearing, the Council shall hear
from the enforcement officer and any other parties who wish to be heard. After
the hearing, the Council may adopt a resolution levying an assessment for all
or a portion of the costs incurred by the city in abating the nuisance. The
City Manager shall give a copy of the resolution to the enforcement officer and
shall mail a copy to the property owner.
(Ord. 020, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 90.010 HAZARDOUS OR SUBSTANDARD BUILDINGS.
   If the city determines that removal and disposal of a structure or part
thereof located on real property is appropriate, the City Manager, or his or
her designee, shall notify the property owner(s), occupying tenants, and all
lienholders of record of the city's intent, and with their consent, may
proceed. If consent is not received, the city shall obtain a judgment in
accordance with M.S. Chapter 463 authorizing it to carry out the removal and
disposal of the property. The Council may adopt a resolution levying an
assessment for all or a portion of the costs incurred by the city in abating
the public nuisance. The City Manager shall give a copy of the resolution to
the enforcement officer and shall mail a copy to the property owner(s),
occupying tenants, and all lienholders of record. Nothing in this section shall
limit the city's right to enforce a judgment obtained in accordance with M.S.
Chapter 463 in the manner prescribed by M.S. Chapter 463.
(Ord. 020, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
GRASS, WEEDS AND TREES
§ 90.020 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   WEEDS. Useless and troublesome plants commonly known as WEEDS including but
not limited to noxious WEEDS, such as cockleburr, burdock, tumble mustard, wild
mustard, wild oats, Canadian thistle, oxeye daisy, quack grass, Frenchweed, and
Russian thistle.
(Ord. 020, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 90.021 CITY TO CONTROL TREE PLANTING STANDARDS.
   The city shall have control and supervision of planting shrubs and trees
upon, or overhanging, all the streets or other public property. The city may
establish and enforce uniform standards relating to the kinds and types of
trees to be planted and the placement thereof. Such standards shall be kept on
file in the office of the Street/Park Superintendent and may be revised from
time to time by action of the Council upon the recommendation of the Street/
Park Superintendent.
(Ord. 020, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 90.022 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person to plant, spray, trim or remove trees or other
plants which are upon city property, including rights-of-way, without first
procuring a written permit to do so from the Street/Park Superintendent.
(Ord. 020, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 90.023 DUTY OF PROPERTY OWNERS TO CUT GRASS AND WEEDS; MAINTAIN TREES AND
SHRUBS.
   (A)   All residential and commercial lots and the adjacent boulevards shall
be mowed on a regular basis so that the height of grass and/or weeds does not
exceed eight inches. Property owners in violation shall be given a seven-day
written enforcement intent notice from the date of mailing to complete the
work. In addition, property owners shall be responsible for maintaining and
trimming trees and shrubs located in the boulevards.
   (B)   All vacant lots within the city must also be maintained and are
subject to the eight-inch rule. An exemption from enforcement must be obtained
in areas where vacant lot(s) are unsafe to mow due to terrain or water erosion
control. However, the boulevards and portions of the lot (if any) that can
safely be accessed must still be maintained.
   (C)   For purposes of enforcement of this section, when any property is in
the right of recovery period of an act of foreclosure, the individual or
corporate owner against whom the foreclosure is taking place continues to be
responsible for maintenance of the property for as long as they occupy the
premises. Once vacated, maintenance responsibility is transferred to the
secured party having title to the property.
   (D)   For purposes of enforcement, city personnel need only issue an
enforcement intent notice once per calendar year, normally during the spring of
the year to all individual residential and commercial lots. After issuance of
the annual notice, city enforcement personnel are authorized to conduct
inspections on a weekly basis to ensure compliance.
   (E)   For all lots within the city, noxious weeds must be treated,
eradicated, or maintained before the weed is allowed to seed out, per Minnesota
state statute (M.S. Ch. 18.00).
   (F)   Failure to comply with provisions of this section constitutes a petty
misdemeanor enforceable by written citation or summons. In addition to or in
lieu of citation, the city may elect to complete the abatement procedure as
listed in §
90.006.
(Ord. 020, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 90.024 CITY MAY ORDER WORK DONE.
   The city may, in cases of failure to comply with §
90.023, perform the work with employees of the city or under contract, keeping
an accurate account of the cost thereof for each lot. After the maintenance
work is completed, the City Code Enforcement Officer shall forthwith determine
the cost of the work, and the city shall send the owner of the benefitted
property a bill for the costs plus an administrative fee in an amount set by
City Council. If the property owner fails to pay the city's invoice within 30
days of receipt, the costs may be specially assessed against the benefitted
property pursuant to M.S. § 429.101.
(Ord. 020, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 90.025 CITY MAY TRIM ALL BOULEVARD TREES.
   The city may trim all trees located within the city's boulevard or right-of-
way or any trees located between the line of the private property nearest to
the street and the street as necessary in order to facilitate street and
sidewalk maintenance.
(Ord. 020, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
SHADE TREE DISEASE
§ 90.035 POLICY AND PURPOSE.
   The city has determined that the health of oak, elm, and ash trees are
threatened by fatal diseases, such as oak wilt, dutch elm, and emerald ash
borer disease. It has further determined that the loss of shade trees, i.e.
oak, elm, and ash located on public and private property would substantially
depreciate the value of property and impair the safety, general welfare and
convenience of the public. It is declared to be the intention of the Council to
control and prevent the spread of these diseases and provide for the removal of
dead or diseased trees as nuisances as permitted by M.S. § 18G.13.
(Ord. 020, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 90.036 SCOPE AND ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.
   M.S. Chapter 18G is hereby adopted by reference, together with the rules and
regulations of the Minnesota Commissioner of Agriculture relating to shade tree
diseases; provided, that this section shall govern where this code is more
restrictive.
(Ord. 020, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 90.037 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   INFECTED. A plant that is:
      (1)   Contaminated with pathogenic microorganisms;
      (2)   Being parasitized;
      (3)   A host or carrier of an infectious, transmissible, or contagious
pest; or
      (4)   So exposed to a plant listed in divisions (1), (2), or (3) that one
of those conditions can reasonably be expected to exist and the plant may also
pose a risk of contamination to other plants or the environment.
   OWNER. Includes, but is not limited to, the person with the legal right of
possession, proprietorship of, or responsibility for the property or place
where any of the articles regulated in this chapter are found, or the person
who is in possession of, has proprietorship of, or has responsibility for the
regulated articles.
   PERSON. An individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association, trust,
joint stock company, or unincorporated organization; the state; a state agency;
or a political subdivision.
   PUBLIC TREE NUISANCE.
      (1)   Any living or standing tree infected to any degree with a shade
tree disease; or
      (2)   Any logs, branches, stumps or other parts of any dead or dying tree
so infected, unless such parts have been fully burned or treated under the
direction of the Tree Inspector.
   SHADE TREE. A woody perennial grown primarily for aesthetic or environmental
purposes.
   SHADE TREE DISEASE. Dutch elm disease or oak wilt disease.
   SHADE TREE PEST. Pests or pathogens affecting the growth and life of shade
trees.
   TREE INSPECTOR. The Public Works Director shall inspect the trees of the
city on an annual basis. The timetable of inspection shall be at the discretion
of the Director.
(Ord. 020, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 90.038 UNLAWFUL ACT.
   It is unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or permit any public tree
nuisance as defined in §
90.037 upon premises the person owns or upon public property where the person
has the duty of tree maintenance.
(Ord. 020, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 90.039 INSPECTION AND DIAGNOSIS.
   It is the power and duty of the Tree Inspector to enter upon public or
private property, at any reasonable time, for the purpose of inspecting for,
and diagnosing, shade tree disease. In cases of suspected shade tree disease,
and in performance of his or her duties, the Tree Inspector may remove
specimens or samples as may be necessary or desirable for diagnosis.
(Ord. 020, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 90.040 ABATEMENT OF TREE NUISANCE.
   A public tree nuisance shall be abated by spraying, removing, burning, or
otherwise effectively treating the infected tree or wood to prevent spread of
shade tree disease. The abatement procedures shall be carried out in accordance
with current technical and expert methods and plans as may be designed by the
Commissioner of Agriculture of the State of Minnesota.
(Ord. 020, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 90.041 PROCEDURE FOR REMOVAL OF INFECTED TREES AND WOOD.
   (A)   Whenever the Tree Inspector finds with reasonable certainty that the
infection, or danger of infection, exists in any tree or wood on any public or
private property, the Tree Inspector shall proceed as follows:
      (1)   The Tree Inspector or City Code Enforcement Officer shall provide a
20-day written notice from the date of mailing to the owner of the property
upon which the infected tree is located informing the owner that the tree must
be through specified removal methods.
      (2)   If the owner does not remove the tree within the time period listed
in the written notice, the Tree Inspector or City Code Enforcement Officer
shall order the work performed by city staff or day labor.
      (3)   After the city removes the tree, the city shall send an invoice to
the property owner requiring payment of all city costs related to removal of
the tree, including contractor, consultant and city staff costs. The owner must
pay the city's bill within 30 days of receipt.
      (4)   If the owner fails to pay the city's invoice, the city may levy the
costs of tree removal against the property as a special assessment under M.S. §
429.101 and other pertinent statutes for certification to the County Auditor
and collection the following year along with current taxes.
   (B)   No damage shall be awarded the owner for destruction of any tree, wood
or part thereof pursuant to this section.
(Ord. 020, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 90.042 SPRAYING TREES.
   (A)   Whenever the Tree Inspector determines that any tree or wood is
infected or threatened with infection, the Tree Inspector may spray or treat
all nearby high value trees with an effective concentrate or fungicide or both.
Activities authorized by this section shall be conducted in accordance with
technical and expert opinions and plans of the Commissioner of Agriculture and
under the supervision of the Commissioner and his or her agents whenever
possible.
   (B)   The notice and assessment provisions of §
90.041 apply to spraying and treatment operations conducted under this section.
(Ord. 020, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 90.043 TRANSPORTING WOOD PROHIBITED.
   It is a petty misdemeanor for any person to transport any elm or ash wood
into or through the city; or to transport any oak wood in the months of April,
May or June, without first obtaining a permit from the City Manager.
(Ord. 020, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 90.044 INTERFERENCE PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the Tree
Inspector while he or she is engaged in the performance of duties imposed by
this subchapter.
(Ord. 020, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 90.045 ADDITIONAL DUTIES OF TREE INSPECTOR.
   It is the additional duty of the Tree Inspector to coordinate, under the
direction and control of the Council, all activities of the city relating to
the control and prevention of shade tree disease. He or she shall recommend to
the Council the details of a program for the control of the diseases, and
perform the duties incident to such a program adopted by the Council.
(Ord. 020, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 90.046 DISEASED TREES IN STREETS.
   The rights, duties and responsibilities of property owners set forth in this
subchapter shall be equally applicable to, and binding upon, abutting property
owners with tree maintenance responsibilities under this subchapter.
(Ord. 020, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 90.047 SUBSIDIES.
   The duty of any property owner to bear the cost of removing or maintaining
trees, whether by private contract or assessment, may be offset by a subsidy
policy, if any, established by the city for the treatment or removal of trees
infected with shade tree disease.
(Ord. 020, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
OPEN BURNING; AIR POLLUTION CONTROL
§ 90.060 UNLAWFUL BURNING.
   Any burning of rubbish, trash, or other materials is prohibited.
(Ord. 020, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 90.061 EXCEPTIONS.
   The following open burning shall be excepted from the regulations of this
subchapter.
   (A)   Fires in barbecue grills or other authorized containers used solely
for the preparation of food. In any structure containing three or more dwelling
units, it is a petty misdemeanor for any person to kindle, maintain or cause to
be kindled or maintained any fire or open flame on any balcony above ground
level, or on any ground floor patio within 15 feet of said structure, or to
store or use any fuel, barbecue, torch or other similar heating or lighting
chemicals or devices in the locations designated above. These prohibitions do
not apply to electric or gas-fired barbecue grills which are permanently
mounted, wired or plumbed to the building's gas or electrical system and
maintain a minimum clearance of 18 inches on all sides (unless listed for
lesser clearances by the manufacturer) when approved by the Fire Chief.
   (B)   Fires set for the instruction and training of public and industrial
firefighting personnel when: weather conditions are such that resultant smoke
will be carried away from the neighboring residences or other affected property
owners or public roadways; the burning will not constitute a fire, health or
traffic hazard; and a special permit has been issued by the Fire Chief.
   (C)   Fires set for the elimination of hazards which cannot be abated by any
other practical means and have been issued a special permit by the Fire Chief.
   (D)   RECREATIONAL FIRES are defined as the burning of materials other than
rubbish where the fuel being burned is placed in a container or at a location
other than in an incinerator, outdoor fireplace or barbecue pit, and with a
total fuel area of three feet or less in diameter and two feet in height.
RECREATIONAL FIRES are permitted under the following conditions: buckets,
shovels, or garden hoses are readily available, and a special permit is issued
by the Fire Chief or duly authorized agent. It is a petty misdemeanor to allow
campfires except in pits conforming to the specifics above located in
designated camp grounds.
   (E)   Fires for the purpose of burning leaves shall be permitted on private
property under the following conditions:
      (1)   The burning of leaves will only be permitted from May 1 through May
31, and from October 15 through December 1;
      (2)   A responsible person shall be in constant attendance until the fire
allowed in division (E)(1) above is completely extinguished;
      (3)   Burning will only be allowed between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:
00 p.m. All fires are to be extinguished by 8:00 p.m.;
      (4)   Fires shall not be less than 25 feet from any structure, wood
fence, hedge, or bush, and no less than five feet from any property line;
      (5)   The burning of leaves is prohibited on city streets, boulevards,
lake shores, or any public property by private citizens;
      (6)   No open burning of leaves shall take place during an air pollution
alert warning, or emergency, declared by the State Environmental Protection
Agency; and
      (7)   The City Manager may temporarily discontinue burning between
October 15 and December 1 due to unsafe conditions (for example, excessive
dryness, and the like).
(Ord. 020, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 90.062 REPORTING OF FIRES.
   It is a petty misdemeanor for the occupant of any property upon which any
unauthorized fire is burning, whether the fire was started by the occupant or
otherwise, to fail to promptly report the fire to the nearest forestry office,
fire department, or other proper authority. The occupant of the premises shall
be deemed prima facie guilty of negligence if the unreported fire spreads from
the property or causes damage, loss, or injury to another person, that person's
property, or the state.
(Ord. 020, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
OPEN AREA STORAGE
§ 90.070 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this section is to regulate the storage of property in areas
of the city visible to the general public, in a manner designed to protect and
promote the health, safety and welfare of the public and to maintain property
values. No person, firm, or corporation of any kind shall maintain or permit to
be maintained, any causes of blight or blighting factors upon any public or
private property within city limits owned, leased, rented or occupied by such
person, firm or corporation.
(Ord. 020, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 90.071 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   INOPERABLE VEHICLE. A vehicle lacking working components needed for
operation.
   UNLICENSED VEHICLE. A vehicle with registration that has expired, is
untitled, or in the case of any motor vehicle, recreational vehicle, boat, or
snowmobile that requires current registration be displayed on the unit and that
registration has expired.
(Ord. 020, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 90.072 VEHICLE STORAGE.
   (A)   No motor vehicles which are inoperable or unlicensed or both, shall be
stored on private property for a period of more than 30 days, unless stored in
a building or surrounded by a fence or other enclosure as approved by the City
Council constructed to keep said vehicle from public view.
   (B)   Any motor vehicles described in this section constitute a hazard to
health and welfare of the residents of the community in that such vehicles can
harbor noxious diseases, furnish a shelter and breeding place for vermin, and
present physical danger to the safety and well-being of children and citizens;
and vehicles containing fluids which, if released into the environment, can and
do cause significant health risks to the community. The city may elect to
complete the abatement procedure as listed in §
90.006.
(Ord. 020, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 90.073 BUILDING MATERIAL STORAGE.
   A person must not place, store, or allow the placement or storage of pipe,
lumber, forms, steel, machinery, or similar materials, including all materials
used in connection with a business, or outside on residential property, except
in any agriculture district or during construction or repair of real property.
All building materials shall be stacked and stored in a neat and orderly
fashion, and in a manner so as to avoid presenting any danger to the general
public. Refuse building materials shall be stored in a garbage disposal
container. All building materials and refuse shall be cleared from the property
no later than 30 days after the completion of the construction repair or ten
days after the building permit has expired, whichever comes first. If there is
failure to comply with the provisions of this section, the city may elect to
complete the abatement procedure as listed in §
90.006.
(Ord. 020, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 90.074 OTHER STORAGE.
   A person must not place, store, or allow the placement or storage of ice
fish houses, skateboard ramps, playhouses, trampolines, or other similar non-
permanent structures outside continuously for longer than 24 hours in the
front-yard area of residential property unless these are more than 100 feet
back from the front property line.
(Ord. 020, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 90.075 ANHYDROUS AMMONIA STORAGE.
   Unlawful acts.
   (A)   Establish any new, or different, location for the storage of anhydrous
ammonia;
   (B)   Enlarge, or extend, any existing location, or facility, for the
storage of anhydrous ammonia; or
   (C)   Increase the average quantity of anhydrous ammonia stored at any
existing location, or facility.
(Ord. 020, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
LITTERING
§ 90.085 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GARBAGE. All putrescible wastes, including animal offal and carcasses of
dead animals, but excluding human excreta, sewage, and other water-carried
wastes.
   LITTER. Garbage, refuse, and rubbish, as defined herein, and all other waste
material which, if thrown, deposited, maintained, or stored, as herein
prohibited, tends to create a danger to public health, safety, and welfare.
   PARK. A park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center, or any
other public area in the city owned, or used, by the city, and devoted to
active, or passive, recreation.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any and all streets or other public ways, and any and all
public parks, ravines, spaces, grounds, and buildings.
   REFUSE. All putrescible and non-putrescible solid wastes (except body
wastes), including garbage; rubbish; ashes; street cleanings; dead animals;
abandoned, unlicensed, or inoperative vehicles; and solid commercial and
industrial wastes.
   RUBBISH. Non-putrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and
non-combustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin
cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, scrap metal,
scrap lumber, used vehicle parts, and similar materials.
   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may
be transported, or drawn upon on a highway, including, but not limited to,
devices such as automobiles, trucks, bicycles, motorcycles, snowmobiles,
trailers of any kind, and similar forms of conveyance.
(Ord. 020, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 90.086 LITTER IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit litter in or upon any
street or other public place, except in public receptacles, private
receptacles, or in the official county land-fill. Persons placing litter in
private receptacles shall do so in a manner as to prevent it from being carried
or deposited by the elements upon any street or other public place, or upon
private property.
(Ord. 020, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 90.087 LITTER ON PUBLIC SIDEWALK AND GUTTERS PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to sweep into or deposit in any gutter,
street, or other public place within the city any litter from any building or
lot, or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or
occupying property, including commercial or industrial property, shall keep the
sidewalk or boulevard in front of their premises free of litter at all times.
This section shall not prohibit the deposit of leaves on boulevards each fall
for authorized pick up by the city facilities.
(Ord. 020, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 90.088 LITTER FROM VEHICLES.
   It is unlawful for any person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, to
throw or deposit litter upon any street or other public place within the city,
or upon private property. No person shall drive or move any truck or other
vehicle within the city unless the vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to
prevent any load, contents, or litter from being blown or deposited upon any
street or other public place, or upon private property. Nor shall any person
drive or move any vehicle or truck within the city, the wheels or tires of
which carry onto or deposit in any street or other public place mud, dirt,
sticky substances, litter, or foreign matter of any kind.
(Ord. 020, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 90.089 LITTER IN PARKS, LAKES, AND STREAMS.
   It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit litter in any park, lake,
or stream within the city, except in public receptacles, and in a manner that
the litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements
upon any part of park, lake, or stream, or upon any street, or other public
place. Where public receptacles are not provided, all the litter shall be
carried away from the park, lake, or stream by the person responsible for its
presence and properly disposed of elsewhere.
(Ord. 020, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 90.090 LITTER ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   It is unlawful for any person to throw, deposit, maintain, or store outside
any litter on any private property within the city, whether owned by the person
or not, and the owner, and the person in control, of any such private property
shall, at all times, maintain the premises free of litter; provided, however,
that this section shall not prohibit the storage of litter in private
receptacles for collection.
(Ord. 020, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 90.091 EXCEPTIONS IN PROPER ZONES.
   This section shall not prohibit the lawful keeping of vehicles defined as
refuse herein on private property under the following circumstances:
   (A)   When stored inside a building; provided, the building and land usage
complies with all applicable codes and provisions of the city code regulating
the special hazards and usage thereof; or
   (B)   Temporary outside storage, not exceeding 60-days, in appropriate
business or industrial zones, under
Chapter 156, while awaiting repair work thereon.
(Ord. 020, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 90.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of §
90.002 or fails to comply with a lawful order issued pursuant to that section
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
upon each day that a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 020, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
§CHAPTER 91: ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
   
91.01   Limitation on number of dogs and cats; kennel license
   
91.02   Cat regulations
   
91.03   Animals and fowl; keeping, transporting, treatment, housing
   
91.04   Chickens
Dogs
   
91.15   Running at large prohibited
   
91.16   License required
   
91.17   Application
   
91.18   Period and fee
   
91.19   Tag required
   
91.20   Dog pound
   
91.21   Notice of impounding; exception
   
91.22   Right to hearing and release from dog pound
   
91.23   Barking/crying/whining dogs
   
91.24   Immobilization of dogs
Dangerous Dogs
   
91.35   Adopted by reference
   
91.36   Definitions
   
91.37   Declaration of dangerous, or potentially dangerous, dogs
   
91.38   License required
   
91.39   Properly restrained in proper enclosure, or outside proper enclosure
   
91.40   Notification requirements to city
   
91.41   Seizure; subsequent offenses
   
91.42   Reclamation
   
91.43   Notice, hearings
   
91.44   Destruction of certain dogs
   
91.45   Concealing of dogs
   
91.46   Dog ownership prohibited; review
 
   
91.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.01 LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF DOGS AND CATS; KENNEL LICENSE.
   (A)   Limitation on number of dogs and cats; kennel license. No person shall
keep in any one household unit, lot, or premises, or portion thereof, more than
three service animals or three dogs or cats, or a total combination of three
said animals, over six months of age unless a person has a valid kennel license
from the city.
   (B)   Definition of kennel. The keeping of four, or more, service animals,
or four, or more, dogs, or four, or more, cats, or a combination of four, or
more, dogs, cats, and service animals on the same premises, whether owned by
the same person or not, and for whatever purpose kept, shall constitute a
KENNEL; except that a fresh litter of pups or kittens may be kept for a period
of three months before that keeping shall be deemed to be a KENNEL.
   (C)   Definition of service animal. Dogs or cats that are individually
trained to do work or perform tasks for people with disabilities that are
directly related to the person’s disability. Examples of such work or tasks
include guiding people who are blind, alerting people who are deaf, pulling a
wheelchair, alerting or protecting a person who is having a seizure, reminding
a person with mental illness to take prescribed medications, calming a person
with Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) during an anxiety attack, or
performing other duties. A dog or cat whose sole function is to provide comfort
or emotional support does not qualify as a SERVICE ANIMAL and does qualify as a
pet.
   (D)   Kennel as a nuisance. Because the keeping of four, or more, service
animals, or four, or more, dogs, or four, or more, cats, or a combination of
four, or more, cats, dogs, and service animals on the same premises is subject
to great abuse, causing discomfort to persons in the area by way of smell,
noise, hazard, and general aesthetic depreciation, the keeping of four, or
more, service animals, or four, or more, dogs, or four, or more, cats on the
premises is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and no person shall keep, or
maintain, a kennel within the city, except as allowed hereafter. A kennel is
not permitted in the “R-1”, One- and Two-Family Residential District. A kennel
may only be maintained in a special commercial district through a special use
permit.
   (E)   Kennel permit. An annual kennel permit is required before four, or
more, dogs, cats, service animals, or combination thereof, may be kept on the
same premises. The permit shall be obtained from the City Manager. The annual
fee for a kennel permit shall be established by resolution of the City Council.
Persons operating, or maintaining, a kennel as defined by M.S. § 347.31, subd.
2, as it may be amended from time to time, shall obtain a kennel license from
the State Board of Animal Health before being issued a kennel permit by the
city.
   (F)   Maintenance of kennels. Kennels shall be kept in a clean, and
sanitary, manner, all animals shall be treated humanely, and the owners, or
operators, of all kennels shall follow all provisions of Minn. R. Chapter 1721,
part 1721.050, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (G)   Revocation of kennel permit. A kennel permit may be revoked by the
City Council if a kennel is not kept in a clean, and sanitary, manner, if the
animals are not treated humanely, if the kennel does not comply with the above
cited rules, or if any other provision of this section is violated.
   (H)   Professional breeder defined. A PROFESSIONAL BREEDER is any person, or
entity, breeding animals for profit, or who produces more than one litter
regardless of species, in any 12-month period.
   (I)   Nonprofessional breeder defined. A NONPROFESSIONAL BREEDER is any
person breeding animals as a hobby, and produces not more than one litter in
any 12-month period.
   (J)   Professional breeder permit. A professional breeder must acquire a
kennel permit in order to continue business as a professional breeder
regardless of the number of adult dogs, and/or cats, on the premises. A kennel
is not permitted in the “R-1”, One- and Two-Family Residential District. A
kennel may only be maintained in a special commercial district through a
special use permit.
(Ord. 19, third series, passed 6-21-2011; Ord. 008, fourth series, passed 12-
22-2022)
§ 91.02 CAT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person who is the owner, or other person in
possession, of a cat, to permit the cat to run at large on public property, or
on private property of another, unless the owner of the property actually
consents thereto. There is no requirement of mens rea, or intent. Either the
owner, whether or not present, or a person in charge, must keep the cat under
control, and either may be charged with the violation.
   (B)   For the purposes of this section, every cat at large shall be deemed
at large with the permission, and at the sufferance, of its owner, and in the
event of a violation of the provisions of this section, it shall be no defense
that the offending cat escaped, or is otherwise at large without permission, or
sufferance, of its owner.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to feed a feral cat.
   (D)   The apprehended cats shall be dealt with in keeping with the
provisions of §§
91.20 through
91.22.
(Prior Code, § 10.27) (Ord. 22, third series, passed 7-5-2011) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.03 ANIMALS AND FOWL; KEEPING, TRANSPORTING, TREATMENT, HOUSING.
   (A)   Animals defined. The term ANIMALS means cattle, horses, mules, sheep,
goats, swine, ponies, ducks, geese, turkeys, chickens, guinea hens, rabbits,
honey bees, reptiles, and feathered birds, or fowl, except dogs, cats, gerbils,
hamsters, and caged household birds.
   (B)   Keeping. It is unlawful for any person to keep, or harbor, any animal
not in transit, except:
      (1)   Animals kept as part of a show;
      (2)   Animals used in a parade;
      (3)   Animals kept in a laboratory for scientific, or experimental,
purposes;
      (4)   Animals kept in an animal hospital, or clinic, for treatment by a
licensed veterinarian; or
      (5)   The keeping of animals for recreational purposes only, on parcels
of not less than five acres, and at a density of not more than one horse for
each one and one-half acres, but not for boarding, or commercial, purposes
subject to obtaining a special use permit, as provided for in
Chapter 156.
   (C)   Animals in transit. It is unlawful for any person to transport animals
unless they are:
      (1)   Confined within a vehicle, cage, or other means of conveyance;
      (2)   Farm animals being transported in a portion of the city zoned to
permit agricultural purposes; or
      (3)   Restrained by means of bridles, halters, ropes, or other means of
individual restraint.
   (D)   Treatment. It is unlawful for any person to treat an animal in a
cruel, or inhumane, manner.
   (E)   Housing. It is unlawful for any person to keep any animal in any
structure infested by rodents, vermin, flies, or insects.
   (F)   Trespasses. It is unlawful for any person to herd, drive, or ride any
animal over, and upon, any grass, turf, boulevard, city park, cemetery, garden,
or lot without specific permission therefor from the owner.
(Prior Code, § 10.22) (Ord. 35, second series, passed 12-21-1981; Ord. 60,
second series, passed 11-20-1984; Ord. 72, second series, passed 3-18-1986;
Ord. 133, second series, passed 12-21-1993) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.04 CHICKENS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      BROODING. The period of chicken growth when supplemental heat must be
provided due to the bird’s inability to generate enough body heat.
      CHICKEN. A domesticated bird that is kept as a pet or serves as a source
of eggs or meat.
      COOP. The structure used for the keeping or housing of chickens permitted
by this section.
      FREE RANGE. Allowing the chickens to leave their designated coop and run
with or without supervision.
      HEN. A female chicken.
      ROOSTER. A male chicken.
      RUN. A fully-enclosed and covered area attached to a coop where the
chickens can roam unsupervised.
   (B)   Requirements for the keeping of chickens. The following shall be
required of for persons keeping chickens:
      (1)   The keeping and maintaining of chickens shall be allowed in R-
l residential districts by issuance of a chicken keeping license in accordance
with this section, and subject to compliance with the following standards:
         (a)   The keeping and maintaining of chickens shall be allowed on
properties that are legal conforming lots of record in their respective zoning
district.
         (b)   The keeping of chickens shall only be allowed in the following
zoning districts: R-1, One- and Two-Family Residential District.
         (c)   Only a property owner shall be eligible to obtain a chicken
keeping license for their property. In the case of properties where the owner
does not reside on the property, written permission from the property owner
must be obtained for the property to receive a license. In no case shall a
property contain more than one license for keeping of chickens.
         (d)   A maximum of four hen chickens shall be allowed per property.
         (e)   The keeping of asil or buckeye chickens, roosters, peacocks and
waterfowl shall be prohibited.
         (f)   The chickens shall be housed within an enclosed accessory
building (coop and run) subject to the requirements of division (B)(4) below.
         (g)   Fencing used to contain chickens shall comply with division (B)
(4) below.
         (h)   The license holder of the chickens shall control animal manure
and dispose of it properly. No household waste (i.e., kitchen scraps) shall be
used as chicken feed. The license applicant shall submit a narrative for
management plan that includes the following:
            1.   How the coop and run will be cleaned.
            2.   How the manure will be collected, stored and disposed of.
         (i)   The feeding of chickens shall only take place inside the chicken
coop and run.
         (j)   Grains and food stored on the premises shall be kept in rodent-
proof containers and kept inside the principal building or an accessory
building on the property.
         (k)   Food shall not be allowed to accumulate around feeders, run or
coops and must be removed to avoid rodent and vermin.
         (l)   The chickens must always remain inside the coop and run.
Allowing chickens to “free range” is strictly prohibited.
         (m)   If eggs are harvested, they shall not be offered for sale from
the premises.
         (n)   All premises on which chickens are kept or maintained shall be
kept in a clean, sanitary and healthy manner from filth, garbage, and any
substances and all droppings and body excretions collected weekly. All waste
must be properly disposed of or composted.
         (o)   No chicken may be kept or raised in a manner as to cause injury
or annoyance to persons or other animals on other property in the vicinity by
reason of noise, odor, or filth.
         (p)   Slaughtering of chickens and “cockfighting” are prohibited.
         (q)   All grass and weeds shall be maintained in accordance with §
152.05.
         (r)   Any diseased or sick chickens shall be disposed of immediately.
         (s)   Any chickens that are deceased must be either buried immediately
or removed from the property immediately in accordance with the Minnesota Board
of Animal Health Livestock Carcass Disposal Guide; the Minnesota Pollution
Control Agency; and any other applicable laws and guidelines.
         (t)   The fee for the chicken keeping license shall be as set forth by
the City Council in the city’s fee schedule.
      (2)   A chicken keeping license application shall include the following:
         (a)   A description of the real property upon which is desired to keep
the chickens.
         (b)   The number and breed of chickens to be maintained on the
premises.
         (c)   A site plan of the property showing the location and size of the
proposed chicken coop and run, setbacks from the chicken coop to property lines
and surrounding building (including houses and buildings on adjacent lots), and
the location, style, and height of fencing proposed to contain the chickens in
a run or exercise area. Portable coops and cages are not allowed.
         (d)   Statements that the applicant will at all times keep the
chickens in accordance with all of the conditions prescribed by the city, or
modification thereof, and that failure to obey such conditions will constitute
a violation of the provisions of this section and grounds for cancellation of
the permit.
         (e)   Agreement that property may be inspected by the city at all
reasonable times.
         (f)   Approval of adjacent property owners.
         (g)   Such other and further information as may be required by the
officer.
         (h)   If a license application should be denied, the applicant must
wait at least one year to reapply for the chicken keeping license application.
      (3)   A chicken keeping license includes the following conditions:
         (a)   No person shall anywhere in the city keep, harbor, or maintain
care, custody, or control over any chicken without obtaining a chicken keeping
license issued by the city.
         (b)   Approval of chicken keeping license application is subject to
conditions prescribed by the city. Failure to adhere to conditions is cause for
cancellation of the permit and/or may result in an administrative fine.
         (c)   If granted, the permit shall be issued by city staff and shall
state the conditions, if any, imposed upon the permitted for the keeping of
chickens under this license. The license shall specify the restrictions,
limitations, conditions and prohibitions which the city deems reasonably
necessary to protect any person or neighboring use from unsanitary conditions,
unreasonable noise or odors, or annoyance, or to protect the public health and
safety.
         (d)   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the city staff may
appeal that decision to the City Council by filing an agenda request to appeal
with the City Manager within ten calendar days after the city’s decision. The
City Manager shall cause the appeal request to be placed on the agenda of the
next regular City Council meeting that is held not less than ten calendar days
following receipt of the appeal request. The City Council may affirm or reject
the decision of the city staff. The Council may add reasonable conditions to
any decision granting a license or permit or may delete any conditions
previously imposed by city staff.
      (4)   A chicken coop and run shall adhere to the following requirements:
         (a)   The coop and run shall comply with applicable accessory building
area requirements of the district where it is located and the applicant must
obtain a permit for an accessory building.
         (b)   Total area for coop and covered run is limited to no more than
60 square feet.
         (c)   Coop and run must be located entirely in the rear yard. Lots
with shoreline on the St. James Lake are permitted to maintain a coop and run
in the front yard except within the first 100 feet of lot depth.
         (d)   Coop and run shall be located at least ten feet from side or
rear lot lines.
         (e)   Coop and run shall be at least 30 feet from an adjacent
property’s primary residence.
         (f)   Coop and run must be located at least 50 feet from any well.
         (g)   Coop and run must be located more than six feet from the primary
structure or any accessory structures on the property.
         (h)   Coop and run must be removed and site restored if keeping of
chickens is discontinued for more than 12 months.
         (i)   The coop and run shall be constructed in a workmanship fashion
and shall match the principal structure on the property in color. The coop and
run must be fully enclosed on all sides and top with one of the following
materials:
            1.   Pressure-treated lumber.
            2.   Metal fencing intended for an animal enclosure.
            3.   Lumber intended for outdoor use such as cedar, teak, or
redwood provided that it is painted to match the existing principal structure
or other accessory structures on the property.
            4.   Materials commonly found on the exterior of a principal
structure such as asphalt shingles, vinyl siding, stucco, cement fiber, painted
wood or brick.
         (j)   In no case shall the following materials be used for the
construction of a chicken coop or run:
            1.   Corrugated metal.
            2.   Rusted metal of any kind.
            3.   Cinder block.
            4.   Lumber not intended for exterior use.
            5.   Plywood, particle board or similar material.
            6.   Plastics of any kind.
            7.   Tarp or poly material of any kind.
            8.   Gypsum board.
         (k)   The coop shall provide a minimum of four square feet per animal
in the coop and the run shall contain a minimum of four square feet per animal.
In no case shall the footprint of the coop and run be larger than 200 square
feet. If the coop is elevated two feet above the ground, so the chickens can
access the space beneath, that area may be counted as a portion of the minimum
run footprint.
         (l)   The height of the coop and run shall not exceed eight feet in
height.
         (m)   The coop and run shall count against the property’s number of
accessory structures, and shall count against the property’s accessory building
square footage allowance.
         (n)   In no case shall an existing accessory structure on the property
that does not conform to these requirements be used as a chicken coop and run.
         (o)   The chicken coop and run must be anchored to the ground.
         (p)   Before a chicken coop and run can be used, it must be inspected
by an agent of the city for compliance with this section.
         (q)   The coop and run shall not cause drainage to leave the property.
         (r)   If the license holder is no longer keeping chickens, the coop
and run shall be removed from the property within one year of the chickens
being removed from the property.
   (C)   Enforcement.
      (1)   A chicken keeping license shall expire for any of the following
reasons:
         (a)   If chickens are removed from the property for a period of one
year.
         (b)   The license is revoked.
         (c)   A violation occurs as outlined below.
      (2)   If a property receives three or more valid complaints regarding the
keeping of chickens, the chicken keeping license shall be revoked and the
chickens must be removed from the property within 30 days of the date of
revocation. A violation will be sited if the chicken is running-at-large. The
license holder may appeal to the City Council for reinstatement of their
license by filing an agenda request to appeal with the City Manager within ten
calendar days after the city’s decision to revoke the license. The City Manager
shall cause the appeal request to be placed on the agenda of the next regular
City Council meeting that is held not less than ten calendar days following
receipt of the appeal request. The City Council may affirm or reject the
decision of the city staff.
      (3)   Any violation of this section shall be considered a nuisance per §
90.003, and is subject to an administrative fine in accordance with the city’s
fee schedule.
      (4)   If a property has a chicken keeping license revoked, the property
is not eligible for a new license unless a conveyance of the property has
occurred, and the previous license holder no longer resides on the property.
      (5)   The chicken keeping license shall apply only to the named
applicant, shall not run with the land, and may not be transferred. It shall
automatically terminate upon the vacation of the property by the applicant.
(Ord. 010, fourth series, passed 2-21-2023; Ord. 030, fourth series, passed 7-
15-2025)
DOGS
§ 91.15 RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Running at large prohibited. It shall be unlawful for the dog or cat
of any person who owns, harbors, or keeps a dog or cat, to run at large. A
person, who owns, harbors, or keeps a dog or cat which runs at large shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor. Dogs or cats on a leash and accompanied by a
responsible person or accompanied by and under the control and direction of a
responsible person, so as to be effectively restrained by command as by leash,
shall be permitted in streets or on public land unless the city has posted an
area with signs reading “dogs or cats prohibited.”
   (B)   License required.
      (1)   All dogs over the age of six months kept, harbored, or maintained
by their owners in the city, shall be licensed and registered with the city.
Dog licenses shall be issued by the City Clerk-Treasurer upon payment of the
license fee. The owner shall state, at the time application is made for the
license and upon forms provided, his or her name and address and the name,
breed, color, and sex of each dog owned or kept by him or her. No license shall
be granted for a dog that has not been vaccinated against distemper and rabies,
as evidenced by a certificate by a veterinarian qualified to practice in the
state in which the dog is vaccinated.
      (2)   It shall be the duty of each owner of a dog subject to this section
to pay to the City Clerk-Treasurer the license fee.
      (3)   Upon payment of the license fee, the City Clerk-Treasurer shall
issue to the owner a license certificate and metallic tag for each dog
licensed. The tag shall have stamped on it the year for which it is issued and
the number corresponding with the number on the certificate. Every owner shall
be required to provide each dog with a collar to which the license tag must be
affixed, and shall see that the collar and tag are constantly worn. In case a
dog tag is lost or destroyed, a duplicate shall be issued by the City Clerk-
Treasurer. A charge shall be made for each duplicate tag in an amount as set by
resolution by City Council. Dog tags shall not be transferable from one dog to
another and no refunds shall be made on any dog license fee or tag because of
death of a dog or the owner's leaving the city before the expiration of the
license period.
      (4)   The licensing provisions of this division (B) shall not apply to
dogs whose owners are nonresidents temporarily within the city, nor to dogs
brought into the city for the purpose of participating in any dog show. Service
animals do not require a license.
      (5)   The funds received by the City Clerk-Treasurer from all dog
licenses and metallic tags fees shall first be used to defray any costs
incidental to the enforcement of this chapter; including, but not restricted
to, the costs of licenses, metallic tags, and impounding and maintenance of the
dogs.
   (C)   Cats. Cats shall be included as controlled by this division (C)
insofar as running-at-large, pickup, impounding, boarding, licensing and proof
of anti-rabies vaccine is concerned. All other provisions of this section shall
also apply to cats unless otherwise provided.
   (D)   Vaccination.
      (1)   All dogs and cats kept harbored, maintained, or transported within
the city shall be vaccinated at least once every three years by a licensed
veterinarian for:
         (a)   Rabies - with a live modified vaccine; and
         (b)   Distemper.
      (2)   A certificate of vaccination must be kept on which is stated the
date of vaccination, owner’s name and address, the animal’s name (if
applicable), sex, description and weight, the type of vaccine, and the
veterinarian's signature. Upon demand made by the City Clerk-Treasurer, the
Animal Control Officer or a police officer, the owner shall present for
examination the required certificate(s) of vaccination for the animal(s). In
cases where certificates are not presented, the owner or keeper of the animal
(s) shall have seven days in which to present the certificate(s) to the City
Clerk-Treasurer or officer. Failure to do so shall be deemed a violation of
this section.
Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.16 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person, or other possessor, of a dog over three
months of age, to fail to obtain a proper city license therefor.
(Prior Code, § 10.21) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.17 APPLICATION.
   Application for a dog license shall be upon a form supplied by the city
containing a certificate by a veterinarian, duly licensed to practice
veterinary medicine within the state, which certificate shall state that the
dog, for which application for a license is made, has been inoculated against
rabies for at least the period for which a license is applied.
(Prior Code, § 10.21)
§ 91.18 PERIOD AND FEE.
   All dog licenses shall be considered lifetime licenses. The fee for a dog
license shall be established, and may, from time to time, be amended by
resolution of the Council.
(Prior Code, § 10.21) (Ord. 35, second series, passed 12-21-1981)
§ 91.19 TAG REQUIRED.
   All licensed animals shall wear a collar, and have a tag firmly affixed
thereto, evidencing the license for the current year. A duplicate for a lost
tag may be issued by the City Clerk-Treasurer upon presentation of the receipt
showing the payment of the license fee, and upon payment of the fee for
issuance of the duplicate. The fee for a duplicate tag shall be established,
and may from time to time, be amended by resolution of the Council. Dog tags
shall not be transferable, and no refunds shall be made on any dog license fee
because of leaving the city, or death of the dog.
(Prior Code, § 10.21)
§ 91.20 DOG POUND.
   (A)   Any dog found in the city without a license tag, or running at large,
shall be placed in the dog pound, and an accurate record of the time of the
placement shall be kept on each dog. Every dog so placed in the dog pound shall
be held for redemption by the owner for a period of not less than five regular
business days. A REGULAR BUSINESS DAY is one during which the pound is open for
business to the public for at least four hours, between 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
   (B)   Impoundment records shall be preserved for a minimum of six months,
and shall show:
      (1)   The description of the animal by species, breed, sex, approximate
age, and other distinguishing traits;
      (2)   The location at which the animal was seized;
      (3)   The date of seizure;
      (4)   The name, and address, of the person from whom any animal three
months of age, or over, was received; and
      (5)   The name, and address, of the person to whom any animal three
months of age, or over, was transferred.
   (C)   If unclaimed, the dog may be humanely destroyed, and the carcass
disposed of, unless it is requested by a licensed educational, or scientific,
institution under authority of state law; provided, however, that if a tag
affixed to the dog, or a statement by the dog’s owner after seizure, specifies
that the dog should not be used for research, the dog shall not be made
available to any such institution, but may be destroyed after the expiration of
the five-day period.
(Prior Code, § 10.21) (Ord. 35, second series, passed 12-21-1981)
§ 91.21 NOTICE OF IMPOUNDING; EXCEPTION.
   (A)   Notice of impounding. Upon the impounding of any dog, the owner shall
be notified, or if the owner of the dog is unknown, written notice shall be
posted for five days at the City Hall describing the dog, and the place, and
time, of taking.
   (B)   Exception. Any dog seized under M.S. §§ 343.22 or 343.29, as they may
be amended from time to time, shall be held for ten regular business days. For
the purposes of this section, the term REGULAR BUSINESS DAY means any day
during which the establishment having custody of the animal is open to the
public for not less than four consecutive hours, between 8:00 a.m. and 7:00
p.m. A person claiming an interest in a dog in custody under this section may
prevent disposition of the dog by posting security in an amount sufficient to
provide for the dog’s actual costs of care, and keeping. The security must be
posted within ten days of the seizure, inclusive of the date of the seizure.
   (C)   Notice of impounding; exception. Upon impounding a dog under division
(B) above, notice shall be given the owner, or person claiming interest in the
dog, by delivering, or mailing, it to a person claiming an interest in the dog,
or by posting a copy of it at the place where the dog is taken into custody, or
by delivering it to a person residing on the property, and telephoning, if
possible. The notice shall include:
      (1)   A description of the dog seized; the authority, and purpose, for
the seizure; the time, place, and circumstances under which the dog was seized;
and the location, address, telephone number, and contact person where the dog
is kept;
      (2)   A statement that a person claiming an interest in the dog may post
security to prevent the disposition of the dog, and may request a hearing
concerning the seizure, or impoundment, and that failure to do so within five
days of the date of the notice will result in the disposition of the dog;
      (3)   A statement that all actual costs of the care, keeping, and
disposal of the dog are the responsibility of the person claiming an interest
in the dog, except to the extent that a court, or hearing officer, finds that
the seizure, or impoundment, was not substantially justified by law; and
      (4)   A form that can be used by a person claiming an interest in the dog
for requesting a hearing under this section.
(Prior Code, § 10.21)
§ 91.22 RIGHT TO HEARING AND RELEASE FROM DOG POUND.
   (A)   Right to hearing and release from dog pound. Upon request of a person
claiming interest in the dog, which request must be made within ten days of the
date of seizure, a hearing shall be held within five business days of the
request to determine the validity of the seizure and impoundment. If the
seizure was done pursuant to a warrant under M.S. § 343.22, as it may be
amended from time to time, the hearing must be conducted by the judge who
issued the warrant. If the seizure was done under M.S. § 343.29, as it may be
amended from time to time, the city may either authorize a licensed
veterinarian with no financial interest in the matter, or professional
association with either party, or use the services of a hearing officer to
conduct the hearing. A person claiming interest in the dog who is aggrieved by
a decision of a hearing officer under this section may seek a court order
governing the seizure, or impoundment, within five days of the notice of the
order.
      (1)   The judge, or hearing officer, may authorize the return of the dog,
if the judge, or hearing officer, finds that:
         (a)   The dog is physically fit; and
         (b)   The person claiming an interest in the dog can, and will,
provide the care required by law for the dog.
      (2)   The person claiming an interest in the dog is liable for all actual
costs of the care, keeping, and disposal of the dog, except if a court, or
hearing officer, finds that the seizure, or impoundment, was not substantially
justified by law. The costs shall be paid in full, or a mutually satisfactory
arrangement for payment must be made between the city and the person claiming
an interest in the dog before the return of the dog to the person.
         (a)   If the dog is owned by a resident of the city, the cost shall
include the purchase of a license; if unlicensed, payment for the dog’s
maintenance while in custody, and may include an immunization fee of any such
dog for rabies.
         (b)   If the dog is owned by a person not a resident of the city, the
cost shall include payment for the dog’s maintenance while in custody, and may
include an immunization fee of any dog for rabies.
   (B)   Release from dog pound. Dogs shall be released to their owners, or
persons previously in possession of them, upon a sworn statement of ownership,
proof that a license has been duly issued for an impounded animal, and payment
of impounding fees, as established by the Council by resolution.
(Prior Code, § 10.21) (Ord. 159, second series, passed 10-20-1988)
§ 91.23 BARKING/CRYING/WHINING DOGS.
   (A)   Habitual barking. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or
harbor a dog which habitually barks or cries. Habitual barking shall be defined
as barking for repeated intervals of at least five minutes with less than one
minute of interruption. The barking must also be audible off of the owner’s or
caretaker’s premises.
   (B)   Damage to property. It shall be unlawful for any person’s dog or other
animal to damage any lawn, garden, or other property, whether or not the owner
has knowledge of the damage.
   (C)   Cleaning up litter. The owner of any animal or person having the
custody or control of any animal shall be responsible for cleaning up any feces
of the animal and disposing of the feces in a sanitary manner whether on their
own property, on the property of others or on public property.
   (D)   Warrant required. The Animal Control Officer or police officer shall
not enter the property of the owner of an animal described in this section
unless the officer has first obtained the permission of the owner to do so or
has obtained a warrant issued by a court of competent jurisdiction, as provided
for in §
10.20, to search for and seize the animal.
Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.24 IMMOBILIZATION OF DOGS.
   For the purpose of enforcement of this subchapter, any peace officer, dog
catcher, or other person assisting a peace officer, or dog catcher, may use a
so-called tranquilizer gun, or other instrument, for the purpose of
immobilizing, and catching, a dog.
(Prior Code, § 10.21)
DANGEROUS DOGS
§ 91.35 ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, the regulatory, and
procedural, provisions of M.S. §§ 347.50 through 347.565, as they may be
amended from time to time, commonly referred to as the “Dangerous Dog
Regulations”, are adopted by reference.
(Ord. 19, third series, passed 6-21-2011)
§ 91.36 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   DANGEROUS DOG. Any dog, except a dog assisting a peace officer engaged in
law enforcement duties, and/or dogs trained by a recognized program within an
established curriculum for training dogs for services, such as rescue and
recovery, that demonstrates any of the following behavior:
      (1)   Any dog that, when unprovoked, inflicts substantial bodily harm on
a human being who is conducting himself or herself peacefully and lawfully.
SUBSTANTIAL BODILY HARM means bodily injury which involves a temporary, but
substantial, disfigurement, or which causes a temporary, but substantial, loss,
or impairment, of the function of any bodily member, or organ, or which causes
a fraction of any bodily member;
      (2)   Any dog previously designated as a potentially dangerous dog that,
after the owner, or custodian, has been notified of the designation, exhibits
any of the behaviors described in this subchapter;
      (3)   Any dog previously designated as a potentially dangerous dog after
the owner, or custodian, has been notified of the designation, if the owner, or
custodian, subsequently violates any requirement of this subchapter;
      (4)   Any dog that kills another domestic animal without provocation
while off the property of the owner, or custodian, of the attacking dog;
      (5)   Any dog, when unprovoked, that repeatedly attacks, or attempts to
attack, a person, or domestic animal, on private, or public, property. For
purposes of this provision, REPEATEDLY shall mean more than one unprovoked
attack, or attempted attack, occurring during the course of either a single
encounter, or separate encounters; and
      (6)   The dog’s owner, or custodian, is in possession of training
apparatus, paraphernalia, or drugs intended to be used to prepare, or train,
dogs to be fought, and the dog displays evidence that it has been, or will be,
fought established by the fact that the dog has fresh wounds, scarring, or is
observed in a fight, or has other indications which, to a reasonable person,
evidence that the animal has been, or will be used, trained, or encouraged, to
fight with another animal.
   DOG. Both male and female of the canine species, commonly accepted as
domesticated household pets.
   GREAT BODILY HARM. Bodily harm which creates a high probability of death, or
which causes serious permanent disfigurement, or which causes a permanent, or
protracted, loss, or impairment, of the function of any bodily member or organ,
or other serious bodily harm.
   MAINTENANCE COSTS. Any costs incurred as a result of seizing an animal for
impoundment, including, but not limited to, the capturing, impounding, keeping,
treating, examining, securing, confining, feeding, destroying, boarding, or
maintaining seized animals, whether these services are provided by the city or
the pound.
   OWNER. Any person, or persons, firm, corporation, organization, department,
or association owning, possessing, harboring, keeping, having an interest in,
or having care, custody, or control of a dog.
   POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG. Any dog, except a dog assisting a peace officer
engaged in law enforcement duties, and/or dogs trained by a recognized program
within an established curriculum for training dogs for services, such as rescue
and recovery, that demonstrates any of the following behavior:
      (1)   Any dog that engages in any unprovoked behavior that requires a
defensive action by any person to prevent bodily harm when the person, and the
dog, are off the property of the owner, or custodian, of the dog. BODILY HARM
means physical pain or injury, illness, or any impairment of physical
condition;
      (2)   Any dog that, when unprovoked, bites a person on public, or
private, property, causing a minor injury not resulting in muscle tears or
disfiguring lacerations, or requiring multiple sutures or corrective, or
cosmetic, surgery;
      (3)   Any dog that, when unprovoked, bites, inflicts injury, or otherwise
causes injury to a domestic animal off the property of the owner, or custodian,
of the attacking dog;
      (4)   Any dog that, when unprovoked, engages in any behavior that
constitutes a physical threat of bodily harm to a person or domestic animal, or
poses an immediate threat to public safety off the property of the owner, or
custodian, of the dog; and
      (5)   Any dog that has a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to
attack unprovoked, causing injury, or otherwise threatening the safety of
humans, or domestic animals, as documented by law enforcement or the city.
   PROPER ENCLOSURE. Securely confined indoors, or in a securely enclosed, and
locked, pen or structure suitable to prevent the dog from escaping, and to
provide protection for the dog from the elements. A PROPER ENCLOSURE does not
include a porch, patio, or any part of a house, garage, or other structure that
would allow the dog to exit of its own volition, or any house or structure in
which windows are open, and in which door, or window, screens are the only
barriers which prevent the dog from exiting. The enclosure shall not allow the
egress of the dog in any manner without human assistance. A pen or kennel shall
meet the following minimum specifications:
      (1)   A minimum overall floor size of 32 square feet;
      (2)   Sidewalls shall have a minimum height of five feet, and be
constructed of 11 gauge, or heavier, wire. Openings in the wire shall not
exceed two inches, support posts shall be one and one-fourth inch, or larger,
and steel pipe buried in the ground 18 inches, or more. When a concrete floor
is not provided, the sidewalls shall be buried a minimum of 18 inches in the
ground;
      (3)   A cover over the entire pen, or kennel, shall be provided. The
cover shall be constructed of the same gauge wire, or heavier, as the
sidewalls, and openings in the wire shall not exceed two inches; and
      (4)   An entrance/exit gate shall be provided, and be constructed, of the
same material as the sidewalls, and openings in the wire shall not exceed two
inches. The gate shall be self-closing, and self-locking. The gate shall be
locked at all times when the dog is in the pen, or kennel.
   SUBSTANTIAL BODILY HARM. Bodily harm that involves a temporary, but
substantial, disfigurement, or that causes a temporary, but substantial, loss
or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ, or that causes a
fracture of any bodily member.
   UNPROVOKED. The condition in which the dog is not purposely excited,
stimulated, agitated, or disturbed.
(Ord. 19, third series, passed 6-21-2011)
§ 91.37 DECLARATION OF DANGEROUS, OR POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS, DOGS.
   (A)   A police officer, community service officer, or animal control officer
may declare a dog to be dangerous, or potentially dangerous, when the officer
has probable cause to believe that a dog is dangerous, or potentially
dangerous. The following factors will be considered in determining a dangerous,
or potentially dangerous, dog:
      (1)   Whether any injury, or damage, to a person by the dog was caused
while the dog was protecting, or defending, a person, or the dog’s offspring,
within the immediate vicinity of the dog from an unjustified attack, or
assault;
      (2)   The size, and strength, of the dog, including jaw strength, and the
animal’s propensity to bite humans, or other domestic animals. This factor may
only be considered along with the additional listed factors in determining a
dangerous, or potentially dangerous, dog, and may not be used by itself in
making the determination. This information may be available from veterinarians
or publications; and
      (3)   Whether the dog has wounds, scarring, is observed in a fight, or
has other indications that the dog has been, or will be, used, trained, or
encouraged to fight with another animal, or whose owner is in possession of any
training apparatus, paraphernalia, or drugs used to prepare the dog to fight
with other animals.
   (B)   Beginning six months after a dog is declared dangerous, or potentially
dangerous, an owner may request annually that the city review the designation.
The owner must provide evidence that the dog’s behavior has changed due to the
dog’s age, neutering, environment, completion of obedience training, or other
factors. If enough evidence is provided, the city may rescind the designation.
   (C)   The provisions of this subchapter do not apply to dogs used by law
enforcement.
   (D)   Dogs may not be declared dangerous, or potentially dangerous, if the
threat, injury, or danger was sustained by a person who was:
      (1)   Committing a willful trespass, or other tort, upon the premises
occupied by the owner of the dog;
      (2)   Provoking, tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog, or who can
be shown to have a history of repeatedly provoking, tormenting, abusing, or
assaulting the dog; or
      (3)   Committing, or attempting to commit, a crime.
(Ord. 19, third series, passed 6-21-2011)
§ 91.38 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   General. The owner must annually license dangerous, or potentially
dangerous, dogs with the city, and must license a newly declared dangerous, or
potentially dangerous, dog within 14 days after notice that a dog has been
declared dangerous, or potentially dangerous. Regardless of any appeal that may
be requested, the owner must comply with the requirements of M.S. § 347.52(a)
and (c), as it may be amended from time to time, regarding proper enclosures
and notification to the city upon transfer, or death, of the dog, until, and
unless, a hearing officer, or court of law, reverses the declaration.
   (B)   Process for dangerous dogs. 
      (1)   The city will issue a license to the owner of a dangerous dog if
the owner presents sufficient evidence that:
         (a)   There is a proper enclosure;
         (b)   Written proof that there is a surety bond by a surety company
authorized to conduct business in the state in the sum of at least $300,000,
payable to any person injured by a dangerous dog, or receipt of a copy of a
policy of liability insurance issued by an insurance company authorized to do
business in the state in the amount of at least $300,000, insuring the owner
for any personal injuries inflicted by the dangerous dog. The city may notify
the insurance company, or surety company, of the dangerous dog declaration. The
surety bond, or insurance policy, shall provide that no cancellation of the
bond, or policy, will be made unless the city is notified, in writing, by the
surety company, or the insurance company, at least ten days prior to the
cancellation;
         (c)   The owner has paid the annual license fee;
         (d)   The owner has had a microchip identification implanted in the
dangerous dog. The name of the microchip manufacturer, and identification
number, of the microchip must be provided to the city. If the microchip is not
implanted by the owner, it may be implanted by the city at the owner’s expense;
and
         (e)   The owner provides proof that the dog has been sterilized. If
the owner does not sterilize the dog within 30 days, the city shall seize the
dog, and sterilize it at the owner’s expense.
      (2)   The dog may not be possessed, or maintained, at any other location
other than the owner’s property.
      (3)   The owner, or custodian, of the animal may not be a minor under the
age of 18 years.
      (4)   The owner of the dangerous dog may be required to complete an
approved obedience class at the direction of the city, or hearing officer.
   (C)   Process for potentially dangerous dogs. The city will issue a license
to the owner of a potentially dangerous dog if the owner presents sufficient
evidence that:
      (1)   There is a proper enclosure;
      (2)   The owner has paid the annual license fee; and
      (3)   The owner has had a microchip identification implanted in the
potentially dangerous dog. The name of the microchip manufacturer, and
identification number, of the microchip must be provided to the city. If the
microchip is not implanted by the owner, it may be implanted by the city at the
owner’s expense.
   (D)   Inspection. A pre-license inspection of the premises to ensure
compliance with the city code is required. If the city issues a license to the
owner of a dangerous, or potentially dangerous, dog, the city shall be allowed,
at any reasonable time, to inspect the dog, the proper enclosure, and all
places where the dog is kept.
   (E)   Warning symbol. The owner of a dangerous dog licensed under this
section must post a sign with the uniform dangerous dog warning symbol on the
property in order to inform children that there is a dangerous dog on the
property. The sign will be provided by the city upon issuance of the license.
   (F)   Tags. A dangerous dog licensed under this section must wear a
standardized, easily identifiable, tag at all times that contains the uniform
dangerous dog symbol, identifying the dog as dangerous. The tag shall be
provided by the city upon issuance of the license.
   (G)   License fee. The city will charge the owner an annual license fee for
a dangerous, or potentially dangerous, dog.
(Ord. 19, third series, passed 6-21-2011)
§ 91.39 PROPERLY RESTRAINED IN PROPER ENCLOSURE, OR OUTSIDE PROPER ENCLOSURE.
   While on the owner’s property, an owner of a dangerous, or potentially
dangerous, dog must keep it in a proper enclosure. Inside a residential home,
there must be a secured area maintained where the dog will stay when persons,
other than family members, are present. If the dog is outside the proper
enclosure, the dog must be muzzled, and restrained by a substantial chain, or
leash, no longer than four feet, and under the physical restraint of an adult.
The muzzle must be made in a manner that will prevent the dog from biting any
person, or animal, but that will not cause injury to the dog, or interfere with
its vision or respiration.
(Ord. 19, third series, passed 6-21-2011)
§ 91.40 NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS TO CITY.
   (A)   Relocation or death. The owner of a dog that has been declared
dangerous, or potentially dangerous, must notify the City Manager, in writing,
if the dog is to be relocated from its current address, or if the dog has died.
The notification must be given, in writing, within 30 days of the relocation,
or death. The notification must include the current owner’s name and address,
and the new owner’s name and the relocation address. If the relocation address
is outside the city, the city may notify the local law enforcement agency of
the transfer of the dog into its jurisdiction.
   (B)   Renter’s obligations. A person who owns, or possesses, a dangerous, or
potentially dangerous, dog, and will rent property from another where the dog
will reside must disclose to the property owner prior to entering into the
lease agreement, and at the time of any lease renewal periods, that the person
who owns, or possesses, a dangerous, or potentially dangerous, dog that will
reside at the property. A dog owner who is currently renting property must
notify the property owner within 14 days of city notification if the owned dog
is newly declared as dangerous, or potentially dangerous, and the owner keeps
the dog on the property.
   (C)   Transfer of ownership into the city. No dog that has been previously
determined to be dangerous, or potentially dangerous, by another jurisdiction
shall be kept, owned, or harbored in the city, unless the dog’s owner complies
with the requirements of this section prior to bringing the dog into the city.
Dogs in violation of this section are subject to impoundment and destruction.
(Ord. 19, third series, passed 6-21-2011)
§ 91.41 SEIZURE; SUBSEQUENT OFFENSES.
   (A)   Seizure. Animal control may immediately seize any dangerous, or
potentially dangerous, dog if:
      (1)   Fourteen days after the owner has notice that the dog is declared
dangerous, or potentially dangerous, the dog is not validly licensed, and no
appeal has been filed;
      (2)   Fourteen days after the owner has notice that the dog is dangerous,
the owner does not secure the proper liability insurance, or surety coverage,
as required, or the required insurance is cancelled;
      (3)   The dog is not maintained in a proper enclosure;
      (4)   The dog is outside the proper enclosure, and not under proper
restraint, as required by this subchapter;
      (5)   Thirty days after the owner has notice that the dog is dangerous,
the dog is not sterilized, as required by this subchapter;
      (6)   The dog’s microchip has been removed; and/or
      (7)   The dog’s owner, or custodian, is in possession of training
apparatus, paraphernalia, or drugs intended to be used to prepare, or train,
dogs to be fought, and the dog displays evidence that it has been, or will be,
fought established by the fact that the dog has fresh wounds, scarring, or is
observed in a fight, or has other indications which, to a reasonable person,
evidence that the animal has been, or will be, used, trained, or encouraged to
fight with another animal.
   (B)   Subsequent offenses; seizure. If a person has been convicted of
violating a provision of this subchapter, and the person is charged with a
subsequent violation relating to the same dog, the dog must be seized. If the
owner is convicted of the crime for which the dog was seized, the court may
order that the dog be destroyed in a proper, and humane, manner, and the owner
pay the maintenance costs. If the owner is not convicted, and the dog is not
reclaimed by the owner within seven days after the owner has been notified that
the dog may be reclaimed, the dog may be disposed of, used for research, or
destroyed.
(Ord. 19, third series, passed 6-21-2011)
§ 91.42 RECLAMATION.
   A dog seized under this subchapter may be reclaimed by the owner of the dog
upon payment of maintenance costs, and presenting proof to animal control that
the requirements of this subdchapter have been met. A dog not reclaimed under
this subdchapter within seven days may be disposed of, and the owner may be
liable to the city for maintenance costs. A person claiming an interest in a
seized dog may prevent disposition of the dog by posting a security in an
amount sufficient to provide for the dog’s maintenance costs. The security must
be posted with the city within seven days of the seizure, inclusive of the date
seized.
(Ord. 19, third series, passed 6-21-2011)
§ 91.43 NOTICE, HEARINGS.
   (A)   Notice. After a dog has been declared dangerous, or potentially
dangerous, or has been seized for destruction, the city shall give notice by
delivering, or mailing, it to the owner of the dog, or by posting a copy of it
at the place where the dog is kept, or by delivering it to a person residing on
the property, and telephoning, if possible. The notice shall include:
      (1)   A description of the seized dog; the authority for, and purpose of,
the declaration, and seizure; the time, place, and circumstances under which
the dog was declared; and the telephone number, and contact person, where the
dog is kept;
      (2)   A statement that the owner of the dog may request a hearing
concerning the declaration, and that failure to do so within 14 days of the
date of the notice will terminate the owner’s right to a hearing;
      (3)   A statement that if an appeal request is made within 14 days of the
notice, the owner must immediately comply with the requirements of M.S. §
347.52, paragraphs (a) and (c), as it may be amended from time to time,
regarding proper enclosures, and notification to the city upon transfer, or
death, of the dog, until such time as the hearing officer issues an opinion;
      (4)   A statement that, if the hearing officer affirms the dangerous dog
declaration, the owner will have 14 days from receipt of that decision to
comply with all other requirements of M.S. §§ 347.51, 347.515, and 347.52, as
they may be amended from time to time;
      (5)   A form to request a hearing; and
      (6)   A statement that if the dog has been seized, all maintenance costs
of the care, keeping, and disposition of the dog, pending the outcome of the
hearing, are the responsibility of the owner, unless a court, or hearing
officer, finds that the seizure, or impoundment, was not substantially
justified by law.
   (B)   Right to hearing.
      (1)   After a dog has been declared dangerous, potentially dangerous, or
has been seized for destruction, the owner may appeal, in writing, to the city
within 14 days after notice of the declaration, or seizure. Failure to do so
within 14 days of the date of the notice will terminate the owner’s right to a
hearing. The owner must pay a nonrefundable $100 fee for an appeal hearing.
      (2)   The appeal hearing will be held within 14 days of the request. The
hearing officer must be an impartial employee of the city, or an impartial
person retained by the city, to conduct the hearing.
      (3)   If the declaration, or destruction, is upheld by the hearing
officer, actual expenses of the hearing, up to a maximum of $1,000, as well as
all maintenance costs, will be the responsibility of the dog’s owner. The
hearing officer shall issue a decision on the matter within ten days after the
hearing. The decision shall be delivered to the dog’s owner by hand delivery,
or registered mail, as soon as practical, and a copy shall be provided to the
city. The decision of the hearing officer is final.
(Ord. 19, third series, passed 6-21-2011)
§ 91.44 DESTRUCTION OF CERTAIN DOGS.
   (A)   The Police Chief, and/or hearing officer, are authorized to order the
destruction, or other disposition, of any dog, after proper notice is given
pursuant to this subchapter, and upon a finding that:
      (1)   The dog has been declared dangerous, the owner’s right to appeal
hereunder has been exhausted or expired, and the owner has failed to comply
with the provisions of this subchapter;
      (2)   It is determined that the dog is infected with rabies;
      (3)   The dog inflicted substantial, or great, bodily harm on a human on
public, or private, property without provocation;
      (4)   The dog inflicted multiple bites on a human on public, or private,
property without provocation;
      (5)   The dog bit multiple human victims on public, or private, property
in the same attack without provocation;
      (6)   The dog bit a human on public, or private, property without
provocation in an attack where more than one dog participated in the attack; or
      (7)   The dog has engaged in an attack on, or exhibited unusually
aggressive behavior towards, any person, or domestic animal, under
circumstances that would indicate danger to the safety of the person, or
animal.
   (B)   In determining the disposition of the dog, the city will determine the
potential of the dog to pose a danger to the public’s health, safety, or
welfare based upon the following factors:
      (1)   The dog weighs more than 20 pounds;
      (2)   The strength of the dog, including jaw strength;
      (3)   The dog’s tolerance for pain;
      (4)   The dog’s tendency to refuse to terminate an attack;
      (5)   The dog’s propensity to bite humans, or other domestic animals;
      (6)   The dog’s potential for unpredictable behavior;
      (7)   The dog’s aggressiveness; and
      (8)   The likelihood that a bite by the dog will result in serious
injury.
(Ord. 19, third series, passed 6-21-2011)
§ 91.45 CONCEALING OF DOGS.
   No person may harbor, hide, or conceal a dog that the city has the authority
to seize, or that has been ordered into custody for destruction, or other
proper disposition.
(Ord. 19, third series, passed 6-21-2011)
§ 91.46 DOG OWNERSHIP PROHIBITED; REVIEW.
   (A)   Dog ownership prohibited.
      (1)   Except as provided below, a person shall not own a dog if the
person has been:
         (a)   Convicted of a third, or subsequent, violation of §§
91.38,
91.39, or
91.40;
         (b)   Convicted of second degree manslaughter due to negligent, or
intentional use, of a dog under M.S. § 609.205(4), as it may be amended from
time to time; or
         (c)   Convicted of a gross misdemeanor harm caused by a dog under M.S.
§ 609.226, subd. 1, as it may be amended from time to time.
      (2)   Any person who owns a dangerous, or potentially dangerous, dog, and
is found to be in violation of any of the provisions of this section, or had
owned a dangerous, or potentially dangerous, dog, but never achieved compliance
with this section may be prohibited from ownership, or custody of, another dog
for a period of five years after the original declaration. Any dog found to be
in violation shall be impounded until due process is completed.
      (3)   If any member of a household is prohibited from owning a dog in
divisions (A)(1) and (A)(2) above, unless specifically approved with, or
without, restrictions by the city, no person in the household is permitted to
own a dog.
   (B)   Dog ownership prohibition review. Beginning three years after a
conviction under division (A)(1) above that prohibits a person from owning a
dog, and annually thereafter, the person may request, in writing, to the Chief
of Police that the city review the prohibition. The city may consider such
facts as the seriousness of the violation, or violations, that led to the
prohibition, any criminal convictions, or other facts that the city deems
appropriate. The city may rescind the prohibition entirely, or rescind it with
limitations. The city may also establish conditions a person must meet before
the prohibition is rescinded, including, but not limited to, successfully
completing dog training, or dog handling, courses. If the city rescinds a
person’s prohibition, and the person subsequently fails to comply with any
limitations imposed by the city, or the person is convicted of any animal
violation involving unprovoked bites or dog attacks, the city may permanently
prohibit the person from owning a dog in the city.
(Ord. 19, third series, passed 6-21-2011)
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provisions of this chapter, for which no
specific penalty is prescribed, shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   A person who violates §
91.15 shall be sentenced as follows:
      (1)   First time offenders. Any person who violates §
91.15, and has not violated §
91.15 within the five years prior to the violation, is guilty of a petty
misdemeanor, and punishable by a fine of not less than $50, nor more than $200.
      (2)   Second time offenders. Any person who violates §
91.15 for the second time, within five years prior to the violation, is guilty
of a petty misdemeanor, and punishable by a fine of not less than $100, nor
more than $200.
      (3)   Misdemeanor offenses.
         (a)   Any person who violates §
91.15 more than two times within five years of previously violating §
91.15, or another city code provision in conformity with it, is guilty of a
misdemeanor.
         (b)   Any person who violates §
91.15, and the violation is committed in a manner, or under circumstances, so
as to endanger, or be likely to endanger, any person or property, is guilty of
a misdemeanor.
   (C)   A person who violates §
91.23 shall be sentenced as follows:
      (1)   First time offenders. Any person who violates §
91.23, and has not violated §
91.23 within the five years prior to the violation, is guilty of a petty
misdemeanor, and punishable by a fine of not less than $50, nor more than $200.
      (2)   Second time offenders. Any person who violates §
91.23 for the second time, within five years prior to the violation, is guilty
of a petty misdemeanor, and punishable by a fine of not less than $100, nor
more than $200.
      (3)   Misdemeanor offenses.
         (a)   Any person who violates §
91.23 more than two times within five years of previously violating §
91.23, or another city code provision in conformity with it, is guilty of a
misdemeanor.
         (b)   Any person who violates §
91.23, and the violation is committed in a manner, or under circumstances, so
as to endanger, or be likely to endanger, any person or property, is guilty of
a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 10.21)
   (D)   A person who violates §§
91.35 through
91.46 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 19, third series, passed 6-21-2011)
CHAPTER 92: HOUSING, RENTAL PROPERTY
Section
Rental Housing
   
92.01   Definitions
   
92.02   License required; fees; expiration; transfer
   
92.03   Inspection
   
92.04   Register of occupancy
   
92.05   Agent required
   
92.06   Exception
   
92.07   Refuse removal
   
92.08   Conduct on licensed premises; violations
Crime Free Rental Housing Program
   
92.20   Background
   
92.21   Findings
   
92.22   Definitions
   
92.23   Certification
   
92.24   Program specifications
   
92.25   Decertification
   
92.26   Fees
RENTAL HOUSING
§ 92.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   DWELLING UNIT. Any building, structure, or enclosure, including any mobile
home, rented, or offered for rent, by any person, or persons, for use for rent
by any person to any other person, or persons, for use for residential purposes
by the other person, or persons.
   LONG-TERM HOTEL DWELLING UNIT. A dwelling unit in any hotel, as defined in
M.S. Chapter 327, as it may be amended from time to time, which dwelling unit
is held out, or available, to the public for use for sleeping, or residential
purposes, for a period of one week, or more.
   ROOMING HOUSE DWELLING UNIT. Any dwelling unit in any building, or
structure, which building, or structure, is used, or held out, to be a place
where sleeping accommodations are furnished to the public as regular roomers
for periods of one week, or more.
(Prior Code, § 6.32)
§ 92.02 LICENSED REQUIRED; FEES; EXPIRATION; TRANSFER.
   (A)   License required.
      (1)   It is unlawful for any person, as the owner, manager, or other
person having control of any dwelling unit, to lease, rent, offer for rent or
lease, or permit to be leased, rented, or offered for rent or lease, or permit
the occupancy of any dwelling unit, as defined in this subchapter, with the
city without first having obtained a rental license for the dwelling unit, as
hereafter provided.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy a dwelling unit
within the city that is found to be in violation of this subchapter.
      (3)   (a)   A rental license shall be required in the following
situations:
            1.   A dwelling unit is rented, or leased, as defined by this
subchapter; or
            2.   A dwelling unit is not occupied by the owner, but is occupied
by one, or more, persons.
         (b)   Residential occupancies shall conform to all of the requirements
of the city code, including, but not limited to, §§
156.070 through
156.076, and
156.090 through
156.095.
      (4)   For the purposes of determining occupancy for rental purposes, the
following standards shall apply:
         (a)   An OCCUPANT is a person that occupies a dwelling unit for
living, and/or sleeping, purposes for more than seven days in a consecutive 30-
day period;
      (b)   A guest may occupy a licensed, or unlicensed, dwelling unit;
provided, the guest does not reside in the dwelling unit for more than seven
days within a consecutive 30-day period, and the guest has a documented
permanent residence other than the dwelling unit in which they are considered a
guest; and
      (c)   The occupancy of a dwelling unit shall comply with the occupancy
restrictions of the residential districts, as stated in §§
156.070 through
156.076, and
156.090 through
156.095, of the city code.
   (B)   License and fees.
      (1)   The application for a license shall be made, and filed, on a form
furnished by the City Clerk-Treasurer for the purpose herein, and shall set
forth the name, residence address, and phone number of the owner of the
dwelling unit, or the agent authorized by the owner, to receive, and give,
receipt for notices in cases where the owner of the dwelling unit does not
reside within the city.
      (2)   The annual dwelling rental license fee for each long-term hotel, or
rooming house dwelling unit shall be as set by resolution of the Council and
may be amended from time to time.
      (3)   The annual dwelling rental license fee for a complete dwelling or
project, not per unit, other than a long-term hotel, or a rooming house, shall
be shall be as set by resolution of the Council and may be amended from time to
time.
      (4)   The annual dwelling unit rental license fee for each mobile
licensed park, or project, shall be shall be as set by resolution of the
Council and may be amended from time to time.
      (5)   The fee for reinspection for non-compliance shall be shall be as
set by resolution of the Council and may be amended from time to time.
      (6)   Fees established in this division (B) may be amended from time to
time by resolution of the City Council.
   (C)   License expiration. Each license issued pursuant to this section shall
expire on December 31 of the year in which the license is issued.
   (D)   Transfer of license. Each license issued pursuant to this section may
be transferred to another party; provided, that any licensee shall give written
notice of the transfer to the city at least 48 hours prior to the transfer of
the licensed premises, which notice shall include the name, and address, of the
transferee.
(Prior Code, § 6.32) (Ord. 146, second series, passed 8-19-1987; Ord. 183,
second series, passed 6-15-2004; Ord. 11, third series, passed 1-19-2010; Ord.
17, third series, passed 12-21-2010) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.03 INSPECTION.
   Upon receipt of an application for any dwelling unit rental license, the
City Clerk-Treasurer shall forward a copy of the application to the Building
Official/Code Enforcement person, whereupon the Building Official shall, within
ten days after receiving the application, inspect the dwelling unit to be
licensed to determine whether the unit complies with provisions of applicable
codes (the Uniform Fire Code, most recent edition, and the Uniform Housing
Code, most recent edition). No dwelling unit rental license shall be issued by
the city unless the dwelling complies with provisions of the city code which
pertain to the dwelling unit.
(Prior Code, § 6.32)
§ 92.04 REGISTER OF OCCUPANCY.
   Each owner of a dwelling unit within the city rented, or offered for rent,
for residential purposes, shall maintain a register of occupancy for each
dwelling unit, which register shall be available for examination by city
officials, and shall include the following information:
   (A)   The address of the dwelling unit;
   (B)   The number of bedrooms per unit;
   (C)   The names of the current occupants per unit; and
   (D)   Maximum number of people permitted per dwelling unit.
(Prior Code, § 6.32)
§ 92.05 AGENT REQUIRED.
   Each owner of a dwelling unit within the city rented, or offered for rent,
for residential purposes, which owner does not reside within the city, shall,
by written document executed, and acknowledged, by the owner, appoint an agent
residing within the city, upon which agent the city may serve notices
pertaining to the administration of this subchapter, or of any provisions
effective as if made upon the owner.
(Prior Code, § 6.32)
§ 92.06 EXCEPTION.
   This subchapter shall not apply to any hotel, motel room, or related
facility licensed by the state.
(Prior Code, § 6.32)
§ 92.07 REFUSE REMOVAL.
   (A)   Duty to provide removal. The occupant of each dwelling unit within the
city rented for residential purposes shall provide for the dwelling unit refuse
and garbage removal service, whereby refuse and garbage shall be removed from
the premises upon which the dwelling unit is located at least once every seven
days for a dwelling unit rental license issued pursuant to this subchapter.
Failure of the occupant to comply with the provisions of this section shall
constitute a violation.
   (B)   Duty of landlord to provide dumpsters. In instances where a dwelling
unit consists of five, or more, apartments, the landlord shall provide, at no
cost to the occupants, a dumpster of suitable size to meet the needs of the
dwelling unit.
   (C)   Violation. Failure to comply with the requirements of this section may
result in a suspension, or revocation, of the dwelling unit rental license, or
considered a violation of this section, which shall be punishable as a
misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 6.32)
§ 92.08 CONDUCT ON LICENSED PREMISES; VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   The renter/occupant shall be responsible to conduct themselves in a
manner as to not cause the premises to be in non-compliance with Chapters
71,
111,
150,
151, and
152.
   (B)   The Building Official shall be charged with the responsibility of
enforcing this subchapter.
   (C)   Upon determination by the Building Official that the licensed premises
were out of compliance, the Building Official shall notify the license holder
by regular mail of the violations.
   (D)   If another violation occurs within 12 months of an incident for which
notice was given, as stated herein, the license holder shall be notified of the
instance of violation, and shall also be required to meet with the City Manager
and Building Official.
   (E)   If another instance of disorderly use of the premises occurs within 12
months after receipt of notices pursuant to this section, the dwelling unit
rental license may be revoked, or suspended, for the unit by action of the
Council. The suspension, or revocation, may be for all units in a given
building address. Upon suspension, or revocation, a license holder shall pay to
the city a reinstatement fee equal to $100. A suspension may be stayed subject
to payment of the applicable reinstatement fees, and no further violations for
a period of time.
   (F)   No suspension, or revocation, shall be imposed where the instance of
violation occurred during the pendency of eviction proceedings (unlawful
detainer), or within 30 days of notice given by the license holder to a tenant
to vacate the premises where the violation was related to, and occurring in,
the unit for which eviction proceedings were undertaken, or notice to vacate
was given. Eviction proceedings shall not be a bar to sanctions, however,
unless they are diligently pursued by the license holder.
   (G)   All written leases for property subject to the provisions of this
section, after its effective date, shall contain a clause; provided, that
tenants violating provisions of this section shall constitute a material breach
of the lease, and are grounds for termination of the lease.
(Prior Code, § 6.32) (Ord. 146, second series, passed 8-19-1997)
CRIME FREE RENTAL HOUSING PROGRAM
§ 92.20 BACKGROUND.
   The Crime Free Rental Housing Program (or “program”) is a certification
program for rental properties of all sizes, including single-family rental
homes, and multi-housing buildings. The program is based on the program
developed by the International Crime Free Association (ICFA), and is
administered by the City Police Department.
(Ord. 10, third series, passed 10-6-2009)
§ 92.21 FINDINGS.
   The City Council finds that preventing crime in rental properties requires
additional training, inspections, and enforcement that is unique to rental
properties, and different than crime prevention in commercial, and industrial,
properties. The City Council further finds that crime free housing has been
demonstrated to have been successful in preventing criminal activity in rental
housing.
(Ord. 10, third series, passed 10-6-2009)
§ 92.22 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   BUILDING. Any structure used, or intended, for supporting, or sheltering,
any use or occupancy.
   DWELLING UNIT. Consists of one, or more, rooms that are arranged, designed,
or used as living quarters. Each room, or group of rooms, shall be a separate
dwelling unit. A rooming house shall be considered a single DWELLING UNIT, but
may charge a fee based on the number of sleeping rooms. A structure that is
self-enclosed and arranged, designed, and used, as living quarters to a single
family, or group of persons under a single lease, or agreement, shall be
considered a single DWELLING UNIT.
   FAMILIAL RELATION. A legally recognized son, daughter, father, mother,
grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, sister, or brother.
   HOUSING INSPECTOR. A designee appointed by the City Council authorized to
administer, and enforce, this subchapter.
   LICENSE. A provisional license, which is issued after receipt of fees, and
may be revoked if the rental property is found not to be in compliance with
ordinances, codes, or statutes.
   LOT. An area within a manufactured home park, or otherwise, maintained, and
made available, for occupancy by a manufactured home.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. As provided in §
156.002.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. Any site, lot, field, or tract of land upon which
two, or more, occupied manufactured homes are located, either free of charge,
or for compensation, and includes any building, structure, tent, vehicle, or
enclosure used, or intended for use, as part of the equipment of the
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK.
   MAXIMUM OCCUPANCY. For each occupant in a dwelling unit, 100 square feet of
space must be provided.
   OCCUPANT. Any person (including the owner, or operator) living, sleeping,
cooking, and eating in a dwelling unit.
   OPERATOR. The owner, or agent, who has charge, care, control, or management
of a building, or manufactured home park, or part hereof, in which dwelling
units, manufactured homes, lots, or rooming units are let.
   OWNER. Any person who, alone or jointly, or severally with others, shall be
in actual possession of, or have charge, care, or control of, any dwelling
unit, manufactured home, lot, rooming house, or sleeping unit within the city.
   PERSON. Any natural person, his or her heirs, executors, administrators, or
assigns, and also includes a firm, partnership, and limited liability company,
cooperative or corporation, its, or their, successors, or assigns, or the agent
of any of the aforementioned.
   RENTAL PROPERTY. A dwelling unit offered for rent, or occupied by a person,
or persons, in the status of tenant, but does not include motels. This term
shall not include property in which the dwelling unit, or manufactured home, is
owned by the occupant, but the land, or lot, is rented, or leased.
   ROOMING HOUSE. A building, or structure, providing a room, or rooms,
intended for living, and sleeping, for persons in the status of tenant, in
which the toilet and kitchen facilities are shared, and the common, or shared,
areas of the structure are actively maintained by the operator. This term shall
include boarding houses, day cares, lodging houses, bed and breakfasts,
fraternity and sorority houses, but does not include hotels, motels, or
hospitals.
   SLEEPING ROOMS. A room, or enclosed floor space in a rooming house, or
dwelling unit, as defined herein, used, or intended to be used, primarily for
sleeping purposes.
   TENANT. One who has, as his or her place of abode, a dwelling unit,
manufactured home, lot, rooming house, or sleeping room furnished to him or her
for payment of a rental charge to another, in cash or kind.
(Ord. 10, third series, passed 10-6-2009)
§ 92.23 CERTIFICATION.
   At least one operator of each rental property shall obtain program
certification by participating in a program administered by the City Police
Department, or by participating in a program administered by any other state
law enforcement agency certified by the ICFA, and approved by the City Council.
(Ord. 10, third series, passed 10-6-2009)
§ 92.24 PROGRAM SPECIFICATIONS.
   Any program, whether administered by the City Police Department, or another
law enforcement agency, shall include the following:
   (A)   Training. Attendance at, and successful completion of, a management
training component, which shall require demonstration of an understanding of
each of the following subject matter:
      (1)   The program and this subchapter;
      (2)   Rental applications, and housing discrimination;
      (3)   Screening, and background checks;
      (4)   Lease, and lease addendums;
      (5)   Unlawful detainer, and eviction;
      (6)   Manager/owner policies, and roles;
      (7)   Data privacy;
      (8)   Narcotics, and gangs;
      (9)   Section 8 housing; and
      (10)   Rental licensing.
   (B)   Compliance with environmental crime prevention requirements for all
rental properties operated by the owner or property manager. Compliance shall
be indicated by completion of the following requirements:
      (1)   Single cylinder deadbolt locks installed in each entry door for
each dwelling unit;
      (2)   High security strike plate with three-inch screws installed on each
entry door for each dwelling unit;
      (3)   Door viewer; 180-degree peephole installed in primary entry door of
each dwelling unit;
      (4)   Anti-lift/slide device installed on all windows and sliding glass
doors;
      (5)   Security lighting adequate to illuminate exterior grounds;
      (6)   Landscaping in a manner that provides for visual sight lines;
      (7)   Visible address numbering installed; and
      (8)   Compliance with all Fire Code and Building Code requirements.
   (C)   Training for tenants. At least once every 12 months, the operator
shall make available, in cooperation with the City Police Department, training
for tenants in respect to the following subject areas:
      (1)   The program, together with the concept of partnerships, and sharing
responsibilities;
      (2)   Crime concerns, and prevention awareness techniques; and
      (3)   Application of Neighborhood Watch program/principles.
   (D)   Leases; crime-free and drug-free housing. Include, implement, and
enforce, as part of all written leases, the lease addendum for crime-free/drug-
free housing, provided by the city;
   (E)   Retraining; maintaining compliance. Attend annual retraining sessions,
and maintain compliance with all program components; and
   (F)   Non-owner operators; additional properties. Non-owner operators who
add additional properties, for which they are responsible, following the
successful completion of the program must bring those properties into
compliance within one year from the date of acquisition, or assumption, of
management responsibilities.
(Ord. 10, third series, passed 10-6-2009)
§ 92.25 DECERTIFICATION.
   (A)   Operators who do not maintain compliance with the certification
requirements will lose their certification.
   (B)   Prior to decertification, an operator shall appear before the City
Council to review compliance with the program requirements. If the City Council
finds the operator has not maintained compliance with the certification
requirements, the City Council may either decertify the owner or property
manager, or order full compliance within no more than 90 days.
   (C)   An operator who is decertified shall not be eligible to reapply for
program certification for a period of two years following the date of
decertification. This prohibition may be waived by the City Council after
finding extenuating circumstances related to the decertification, and a
likelihood that the operator will remain certified, as required by this
subchapter.
(Ord. 10, third series, passed 10-6-2009)
§ 92.26 FEES.
   Fees for participation in this program shall be determined by the City
Council by resolution, as amended from time to time.
(Ord. 10, third series, passed 10-6-2009)
CHAPTER 93: GARAGE SALES
Section
   
93.01   Generally
 
   
93.99   Penalty
§ 93.01 GENERALLY.
   (A)   Garage sales as defined herein must be limited to property belonging
to the homeowner or friends of the homeowner with the homeowner’s permission,
and shall not consist of sales of items purchased for resale or received on
consignment for resale.
   (B)   Garage sales, including garage sales by non-profit organizations, will
be limited to six garage sales per year. Each sale shall be limited to five
consecutive days and may be any five-day period. Three off-site signs and one
on-site sign is allowed during the sale, but must be removed immediately upon
the completion of the sale. Signs may be up to six square feet and four feet
high. The signs must be five feet from the curb or shoulder of the road and
will not be allowed on utility poles or street signs.
   (C)   Prior to conducting any sale, a permit fee, the amount to be
established by the City Council, must be paid. The fee set shall be a part of
the city fee schedule. The city-wide garage sale shall not be required to pay a
permit fee.
(Ord. 50, third series, passed 4-20-2021) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   A violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor or, in the alternative,
subject to an administrative fine as to be established by the City Council.
(Ord. 50, third series, passed 4-20-2021)
CHAPTER 94: RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT
Section
   
94.01   Findings, purpose, and intent
   
94.02   Election to manage the public rights-of-way
   
94.03   Definitions
   
94.04   Administration
   
94.05   Utility coordination committee
   
94.06   Registration and right-of-way occupancy
   
94.07   Registration information
   
94.08   Reporting obligations
   
94.09   Permit requirement
   
94.10   Permit applications
   
94.11   Issuance of permit; conditions
   
94.12   Permit fees
   
94.13   Right-of-way patching and restoration
   
94.14   Joint applications
   
94.15   Supplementary applications
   
94.16   Other obligations
   
94.17   Denial of permit
   
94.18   Installation requirements
   
94.19   Inspection
   
94.20   Work done without a permit
   
94.21   Supplementary notification
   
94.22   Revocation of permits
   
94.23   Mapping data
   
94.24   Location and relocation of facilities
   
94.25   Pre-excavation facilities location
   
94.26   Damage to other facilities
   
94.27   Right-of-way vacation
   
94.28   Indemnification and liability
   
94.29   Abandoned and unused facilities
   
94.30   Appeal
   
94.31   Severability
§ 94.01 FINDINGS, PURPOSE, AND INTENT.
   (A)   To provide for the health, safety, and welfare of its citizens, and to
ensure the integrity of its streets and the appropriate use of the rights-of-
way, the city strives to keep its rights-of-way in a state of good repair and
free from unnecessary encumbrances.
   (B)   Accordingly, the city hereby enacts this new chapter of this code
relating to right-of-way permits and administration. This chapter imposes
reasonable regulation on the placement and maintenance of facilities and
equipment currently within its rights-of-way or to be placed therein at some
future time. It is intended to complement the regulatory roles of state and
federal agencies. Under this chapter, persons excavating and obstructing the
rights-of-way will bear financial responsibility for their work. Finally, this
chapter provides for recovery of out-of-pocket and projected costs from persons
using the public rights-of-way.
   (C)   This chapter shall be interpreted consistently with 1997 Session Laws,
Chapter 123, substantially codified in M.S. §§ 237.16, 237.162, 237.163,
237.79, 237.81, and 238.086, as they may be amended from time to time, and the
other laws governing applicable rights of the city and users of the right-of-
way. This chapter shall also be interpreted consistent with Minn. R. 7819.0050
through 7819.9950, as they may be amended from time to time, where possible. To
the extent any provision of this chapter cannot be interpreted consistently
with the Minnesota Rules, that interpretation most consistent with this chapter
and other applicable statutory and case law is intended. This chapter shall not
be interpreted to limit the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt
and enforce general ordinances necessary to protect the health, safety and
welfare of the public.
§ 94.02 ELECTION TO MANAGE THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   Pursuant to the authority granted to the city under state and federal
statutory, administrative and common law, the city hereby elects, pursuant M.S.
§ 237.163, subd. 2(b), to manage rights-of-way within its jurisdiction.
§ 94.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   ABANDONED FACILITY. A facility no longer in service or physically
disconnected from a portion of the operating facility, or from any other
facility, that is in use or still carries service. A facility is not abandoned
unless declared so by the right-of-way user.
   APPLICANT. Any person requesting permission to excavate or obstruct a right-
of-way.
   CITY. The City of St. James, Minnesota. For purposes of §
94.28, CITY means its elected officials, officers, employees, and agents.
   COMMISSION. The State Public Utilities Commission.
   CONGESTED RIGHT-OF-WAY. A crowded condition in the subsurface of the public
right-of-way that occurs when the maximum lateral spacing between existing
underground facilities does not allow for construction of new underground
facilities without using hand digging to expose the existing lateral facilities
in conformance with M.S. § 216D.04, subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to
time, over a continuous length in excess of 500 feet.
   CONSTRUCTION PERFORMANCE BOND. Any of the following forms of security
provided at permittee’s option:
      (1)   Individual project bond;
      (2)   Cash deposit;
      (3)   Security of a form listed or approved under M.S. § 15.73, subd. 3,
as it may be amended from time to time;
      (4)   Letter of credit, in a form acceptable to the city;
      (5)   Self-insurance, in a form acceptable to the city; or
      (6)   A blanket bond for projects within the city, or other form of
construction bond, for a time specified and in a form acceptable to the city.
   DEGRADATION. A decrease in the useful life of the right-of-way caused by
excavation in or disturbance of the right-of-way, resulting in the need to
reconstruct such right-of-way earlier than would be required if the excavation
or disturbance did not occur.
   DEGRADATION COST. Subject to Minn. R. 7819.1100, as it may be amended from
time to time, the cost to achieve a level of restoration, as determined by the
city at the time the permit is issued, not to exceed the maximum restoration
shown in plates 1 to 13, set forth in Minn. R. parts 7819.9900 to 7819.9950, as
they may be amended from time to time.
   DEGRADATION FEE. The estimated fee established at the time of permitting by
the city to recover costs associated with the decrease in the useful life of
the right-of-way caused by the excavation, and which equals the degradation
cost.
   DEPARTMENT. The Department of Public Works of the city.
   DEPARTMENT INSPECTOR. Any person authorized by the city to carry out
inspections related to the provisions of this chapter.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of the Department of Public Works of the city, or his
or her designee.
   DELAY PENALTY. The penalty imposed as a result of unreasonable delays in
right-of-way excavation, obstruction, patching, or restoration as established
by permit.
   EMERGENCY. A condition that poses a danger to life or health, or of a
significant loss of property; or requires immediate repair or replacement of
facilities in order to restore service to a customer.
   EQUIPMENT. Any tangible asset used to install, repair, or maintain
facilities in any right-of-way.
   EXCAVATE. To dig into or in any way remove or physically disturb or
penetrate any part of a right-of-way.
   EXCAVATION PERMIT. The permit which, pursuant to this chapter, must be
obtained before a person may excavate in a right-of-way. An EXCAVATION PERMIT
allows the holder to excavate that part of the right-of-way described in such
permit.
   EXCAVATION PERMIT FEE. Money paid to the city by an applicant to cover the
costs as provided in §
94.12 of this chapter.
   FACILITY or FACILITIES. Any tangible asset in the right-of-way required to
provide utility service.
   FIVE-YEAR PROJECT PLAN. Shows projects adopted by the city for construction
within the next five years.
   HIGH DENSITY CORRIDOR. A designated portion of the public right-of-way
within which telecommunications right-of-way users having multiple and
competing facilities may be required to build and install facilities in a
common conduit system or other common structure.
   HOLE. An excavation in the pavement, with the excavation having a length
less than the width of the pavement.
   LOCAL REPRESENTATIVE. A local person or persons, or designee of such person
or persons, authorized by a registrant to accept service and to make decisions
for that registrant regarding all matters within the scope of this chapter.
   MANAGEMENT COSTS. The actual costs the city incurs in managing its rights-
of-way, including such costs, if incurred, as those associated with registering
applicants; issuing, processing, and verifying right-of-way permit
applications; inspecting job sites and restoration projects; maintaining,
supporting, protecting, or moving user facilities during right-of-way work;
determining the adequacy of right-of-way restoration; restoring work
inadequately performed after providing notice and the opportunity to correct
the work; and revoking right-of-way permits. MANAGEMENT COSTS do not include
payment by a telecommunications right-of-way user for the use of the right-of-
way, the fees and cost of litigation relating to the interpretation of
Minnesota Session Laws 1997, M.S. Chapter 123, as it may be amended from time
to time; M.S. §§
94.30 of this chapter.
   OBSTRUCT. To place any tangible object in a right-of-way so as to hinder
free and open passage over that or any part of the right-of-way.
   OBSTRUCTION PERMIT. The permit which, pursuant to this chapter, must be
obtained before a person may obstruct a right-of-way, allowing the holder to
hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of that right-of-way,
for the duration specified therein.
   OBSTRUCTION PERMIT FEE. Money paid to the city by a permittee to cover the
costs as provided in §
94.12 of this chapter.
   PATCH or PATCHING. A method of pavement replacement that is temporary in
nature. A PATCH consists of the compaction of the subbase and aggregate base,
and the replacement, in kind, of the existing pavement for a minimum of two
feet beyond the edges of the excavation in all directions. A PATCH is
considered full restoration only when the pavement is included in the city’s
five-year project plan.
   PAVEMENT. Any type of improved surface that is within the public right-of-
way and that is paved or otherwise constructed with bituminous, concrete,
aggregate, or gravel.
   PERMIT. The meaning given “right-of-way permit” in M.S. § 237.162, as it may
be amended from time to time.
   PERMITTEE. Any person to whom a permit to excavate or obstruct a right-of-
way has been granted by the city under this chapter.
   PERSON. An individual or entity subject to the laws and rules of this state,
however organized, whether public or private, whether domestic or foreign,
whether for profit or non-profit, and whether natural, corporate, or political.
   PROBATION. The status of a person that has not complied with the conditions
of this chapter.
   PROBATIONARY PERIOD. One year from the date that a person has been notified
in writing that they have been put on probation.
   REGISTRANT. Any person who has or seeks to have its equipment or facilities
located in any right-of-way, or in any way occupies or uses, or seeks to occupy
or use, the right-of-way or place its facilities or equipment in the right-of-
way.
   RESTORE or RESTORATION. The process by which an excavated right-of-way and
surrounding area, including pavement and foundation, is returned to the same
condition and life expectancy that existed before excavation.
   RESTORATION COST. The amount of money paid to the city by a permittee to
achieve the level of restoration according to plates 1 to 13 of Minnesota
Public Utilities Commission rules.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway,
street, cartway, bicycle lane, or public sidewalk in which the city has an
interest, including other dedicated rights-of-way for travel purposes and
utility easements of the city. A right-of-way does not include the airwaves
above a right-of-way with regard to cellular or other non-wire
telecommunications or broadcast service.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT. Either the excavation permit or the obstruction permit,
or both, depending on the context, required by this chapter.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY USER. A telecommunications RIGHT-OF-WAY USER as defined by M.S.
§ 237.162, subd. 4, as it may be amended from time to time; or a person owning
or controlling a facility in the right-of-way that is used or intended to be
used for providing utility service, and who has a right under law, franchise,
or ordinance to use the public right-of-way.
   SERVICE or UTILITY SERVICE. Those services provided by a public utility as
defined in M.S. § 216B.02, subds. 4 and 6, as they may be amended from time to
time; services of a telecommunications right-of-way user, including
transporting of voice or data information; services of a cable communications
systems as defined in M.S. Chapter 238, as it may be amended from time to time;
natural gas or electric energy or telecommunications services provided by the
city; services provided by a cooperative electric association organized under
M.S. Chapter 308A, as it may be amended from time to time; and water, and
sewer, including service laterals, steam, cooling, or heating services.
   SERVICE LATERAL. An underground facility that is used to transmit,
distribute, or furnish gas, electricity, communications, or water from a common
source to an end-use customer. A SERVICE LATERAL is also an underground
facility that is used in the removal of wastewater from a customer’s premises.
   SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATION. An application made to excavate or obstruct more
of the right-of-way than allowed in, or to extend, a permit that had already
been issued.
   TEMPORARY SURFACE. The compaction of subbase and aggregate base and
replacement, in kind, of the existing pavement only to the edges of the
excavation. It is temporary in nature except when the replacement is of
pavement included in the city’s two-year plan, in which case it is considered
full restoration.
   TRENCH. An excavation in the pavement, with the excavation having a length
equal to or greater than the width of the pavement.
   TELECOMMUNICATION RIGHT-OF-WAY USER. A person owning or controlling a
facility in the right-of-way, or seeking to own or control a facility in the
right-of-way, that is used or is intended to be used for transporting
telecommunication or other voice or data information. For purposes of this
chapter, a cable communication system defined and regulated under M.S. Chapter
238, as it may be amended from time to time, and telecommunication activities
related to providing natural gas or electric energy services whether provided
by a public utility as defined in M.S. § 216B.02, as it may be amended from
time to time, a municipality, a municipal gas or power agency organized under
M.S. Chapters 453 and 453A, as they may be amended from time to time, or a
cooperative electric association organized under M.S. Chapter 308A, as it may
be amended from time to time, are not TELECOMMUNICATIONS RIGHT-OF-WAY USERS for
purposes of this chapter.
   TWO-YEAR PROJECT PLAN. Projects adopted by the city for construction within
the next two years.
§ 94.04 ADMINISTRATION.
   The director is the principal city official responsible for the
administration of the rights-of-way, right-of-way permits, and the ordinances
related thereto. The director may delegate any or all of the duties hereunder.
§ 94.05 UTILITY COORDINATION COMMITTEE.
   The city may create an advisory utility coordination committee.
Participation on the committee is voluntary. It will be composed of any
registrants that wish to assist the city in obtaining information and, by
making recommendations regarding use of the right-of-way, and to improve the
process of performing construction work therein. The city may determine the
size of such committee and shall appoint members from a list of registrants
that have expressed a desire to assist the city.
§ 94.06 REGISTRATION AND RIGHT-OF-WAY OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   Registration. Each person who occupies or uses, or seeks to occupy or
use, the right-of-way or place any equipment or facilities in or on the right-
of-way, including persons with installation and maintenance responsibilities by
lease, sublease, or assignment, must register with the city. Registration will
consist of providing application information
   (B)   Registration prior to work. No person may construct, install, repair,
remove, relocate, or perform any other work on, or use any facilities or any
part thereof, in any right-of-way without first being registered with the city.
   (C)   Exceptions. Nothing herein shall be construed to repeal or amend the
provisions of a city ordinance permitting persons to plant or maintain
boulevard plantings or gardens in the area of the right-of-way between their
property and the street curb. Persons planting or maintaining boulevard
plantings or gardens shall not be deemed to use or occupy the right-of-way, and
shall not be required to obtain any permits or satisfy any other requirements
for planting or maintaining such boulevard plantings or gardens under this
chapter. However, nothing herein relieves a person from complying with the
provisions of the M.S. Chapter 216D, as it may be amended from time to time,
being the Gopher One Call Law.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.07 REGISTRATION INFORMATION.
   (A)   Information required. The information provided to the city at the time
of registration shall include, but not be limited to:
      (1)   Each registrant’s name, Gopher One-Call registration certificate
number, address, and e-mail address, if applicable, and telephone and facsimile
numbers;
      (2)   The name, address, and e-mail address, if applicable, and telephone
and facsimile numbers of a local representative. The local representative or
designee shall be available at all times. Current information regarding how to
contact the local representative in an emergency shall be provided at the time
of registration;
      (3)   A certificate of insurance or self-insurance:
         (a)   Verifying that an insurance policy has been issued to the
registrant by an insurance company licensed to do business in the state, or a
form of self-insurance acceptable to the city;
         (b)   Verifying that the registrant is insured against claims for
personal injury, including death, as well as claims for property damage arising
out of the use and occupancy of the right-of-way by the registrant, its
officers, agents, employees, and permittees, and placement and use of
facilities and equipment in the right-of-way by the registrant, its officers,
agents, employees, and permittees, including, but not limited to, protection
against liability arising from completed operations, damage of underground
facilities, and collapse of property;
         (c)   Naming the city as an additional insured as to whom the
coverages required herein are in force and applicable and for whom defense will
be provided as to all such coverages;
         (d)   Requiring that the city be notified 30 days in advance of
cancellation of the policy or material modification of a coverage term; and
         (e)   Indicating comprehensive liability coverage, automobile
liability coverage, workers compensation, and umbrella coverage established by
the city in amounts sufficient to protect the city and the public and to carry
out the purposes and policies of this chapter.
      (4)   The city may require a copy of the actual insurance policies;
      (5)   If the person is a corporation, a copy of the certificate is
required to be filed under M.S. § 300.06, as it may be amended from time to
time, as recorded and certified to by the Secretary of State; and
      (6)   A copy of the person’s order granting a certificate of authority
from the Minnesota Public Utilities Commission or other applicable state or
federal agency, where the person is lawfully required to have such certificate
from said commission or other state or federal agency.
   (B)   Notice of changes. The registrant shall keep all of the information
listed above current at all times by providing to the city information as to
changes within 15 days following the date on which the registrant has knowledge
of any change.
§ 94.08 REPORTING OBLIGATIONS.
   (A)   Operations.
      (1)   Each registrant shall, at the time of registration and by December
1 of each year, file a construction and major maintenance plan for underground
facilities with the city. Such plan shall be submitted using a format
designated by the city and shall contain the information determined by the city
to be necessary to facilitate the coordination and reduction in the frequency
of excavations and obstructions of rights-of-way.
      (2)   The plan shall include, but not be limited to, the following
information:
         (a) The locations and the estimated beginning and ending dates of all
projects to be commenced during the next calendar year (in this section, a
“next-year project”);
         (b)   To the extent known, the tentative locations and estimated
beginning and ending dates for all projects contemplated for the five years
following the next calendar year (in this section, a “five-year project”); and
         (c)   The term “project” in this section shall include both next-year
projects and five-year projects.
      (3)   By January 1 of each year, the city will have available for
inspection in the city’s office a composite list of all projects of which the
city has been informed of the annual plans.
      (4)   All registrants are responsible for keeping themselves informed of
the current status of this list.
      (5)   Thereafter, by February 1, each registrant may change any project
in its list of next-year projects, and must notify the city and all other
registrants of all such changes in said list. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a
registrant may at any time join in a next-year project of another registrant
listed by the other registrant.
   (B)   Additional next-year projects. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city
will not deny an application for a right-of-way permit for failure to include a
project in a plan submitted to the city if the registrant has used commercially
reasonable efforts to anticipate and plan for the project.
§ 94.09 PERMIT REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in this code, no person
may obstruct or excavate any right-of-way without first having obtained the
appropriate right-of-way permit from the city to do so.
      (1)   Excavation permit. An excavation permit is required by a registrant
to excavate that part of the right-of-way described in such permit and to
hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of the right-of-way by
placing facilities described therein, to the extent and for the duration
specified therein.
      (2)   Obstruction permit. An obstruction permit is required by a
registrant to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of right-
of-way by placing equipment described therein on the right-of-way, to the
extent and for the duration specified therein. An obstruction permit is not
required if a person already possesses a valid excavation permit for the same
project.
   (B)   Permit extensions. No person may excavate or obstruct the right-of-way
beyond the date or dates specified in the permit unless such person makes a
supplementary application for another right-of-way permit before the expiration
of the initial permit, and a new permit or permit extension is granted.
   (C)   Delay penalty. In accordance with Minn. R. 7819.1000, subp. 3, as it
may be amended from time to time and notwithstanding division (B) above, the
city shall establish and impose a delay penalty for unreasonable delays in
right-of-way excavation, obstruction, patching, or restoration. The delay
penalty shall be established from time to time by City Council resolution.
   (D)   Permit display. Permits issued under this chapter shall be
conspicuously displayed or otherwise available at all times at the indicated
work site and shall be available for inspection by the city.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.10 PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   Application for a permit is made to the city. Right-of-way permit
applications shall contain, and will be considered complete only upon
compliance with, the requirements of the following provisions:
   (A)   Registration with the city pursuant to this chapter;
   (B)   Submission of a completed permit application form, including all
required attachments, and scaled drawings showing the location and area of the
proposed project and the location of all known existing and proposed
facilities;
   (C)   Payment of money due the city for:
      (1)   Permit fees, estimated restoration costs, and other management
costs;
      (2)   Prior obstructions or excavations;
      (3)   Any undisputed loss, damage, or expense suffered by the city
because of applicant’s prior excavations or obstructions of the rights-of-way
or any emergency actions taken by the city; and
      (4)   Franchise fees or other charges, if applicable.
   (D)   Payment of disputed amounts due the city by posting security or
depositing in an escrow account an amount equal to at least 110% of the amount
owing; and
   (E)   Posting an additional or larger construction performance bond for
additional facilities when applicant requests an excavation permit to install
additional facilities and the city deems the existing construction performance
bond inadequate under applicable standards.
§ 94.11 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Permit issuance. If the applicant has satisfied the requirements of
this chapter, the city shall issue a permit.
   (B)   Conditions. The city may impose reasonable conditions upon the
issuance of the permit and the performance of the applicant thereunder to
protect the health, safety, and welfare or when necessary to protect the right-
of-way and its current use.
§ 94.12 PERMIT FEES.
   (A)   Excavation permit fee. The city shall establish an excavation permit
fee in an amount sufficient to recover the following costs:
      (1)   The city management costs; and
      (2)   Degradation costs, if applicable.
   (B)   Obstruction permit fee. The city shall establish the obstruction
permit fee and shall be in an amount sufficient to recover the city management
costs.
   (C)   Payment of permit fees. No excavation permit or obstruction permit
shall be issued without payment of excavation or obstruction permit fees. The
city may allow applicant to pay such fees within 30 days of billing.
   (D)   Non-refundable. Permit fees that were paid for a permit that the city
has revoked for a breach as stated in §
94.22 of this chapter are not refundable.
   (E)   Application to franchises. Unless otherwise agreed to in a franchise,
management costs may be charged separately from and in addition to the
franchise fees imposed on a right-of-way user in the franchise.
§ 94.13 RIGHT-OF-WAY PATCHING AND RESTORATION.
   (A)   Timing. The work to be done under the excavation permit, and the
patching and restoration of the right-of-way as required herein, must be
completed within the dates specified in the permit, increased by as many days
as work could not be done because of circumstances beyond the control of the
permittee or when work was prohibited as unseasonal or unreasonable under §
94.16 of this chapter.
   (B)   Patch and restoration. Permittee shall patch its own work. The city
may choose either to have the permittee restore the right-of-way or to restore
the right-of-way itself.
      (1)   City restoration. If the city restores the right-of-way, permittee
shall pay the costs thereof within 30 days of billing. If, following such
restoration, the pavement settles due to permittee’s improper backfilling, the
permittee shall pay to the city, within 30 days of billing, all costs
associated with correcting the defective work.
      (2)   Permittee restoration. If the permittee restores the right-of-way
itself, it shall at the time of application for an excavation permit post a
construction performance bond in accordance with the provisions of Minn. R.
7819.3000, as it may be amended from time to time.
      (3)   Degradation fee in lieu of restoration. In lieu of right-of-way
restoration, a right-of-way user may elect to pay a degradation fee. However,
the right-of-way user shall remain responsible for patching and the degradation
fee shall not include the cost to accomplish these responsibilities.
   (C)   Standards. The permittee shall perform excavation, backfilling,
patching, and restoration according to the standards and with the materials
specified by the city and shall comply with Minn. R. 7819.1100, as it may be
amended from time to time.
   (D)   Duty to correct defects. The permittee shall correct defects in
patching or restoration performed by permittee or its agents. The permittee
upon notification from the city, shall correct all restoration work to the
extent necessary, using the method required by the city. Said work shall be
completed within five calendar days of the receipt of the notice from the city,
not including days during which work cannot be done because of circumstances
constituting force majeure or days when work is prohibited as unseasonable or
unreasonable under §
94.16 of this chapter.
   (E)   Failure to restore. If the permittee fails to restore the right-of-way
in the manner and to the condition required by the city, or fails to
satisfactorily and timely complete all restoration required by the city, the
city at its option may do such work. In that event the permittee shall pay to
the city, within 30 days of billing, the cost of restoring the right-of-way. If
permittee fails to pay as required, the city may exercise its rights under the
construction performance bond.
§ 94.14 JOINT APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Joint application. Registrants may jointly apply for permits to
excavate or obstruct the right-of-way at the same place and time.
   (B)   Shared fees. Registrants who apply for permits for the same
obstruction or excavation, which the city does not perform, may share in the
payment of the obstruction or excavation permit fee. In order to obtain a joint
permit, registrants must agree among themselves as to the portion each will pay
and indicate the same on their applications.
   (C)   With city projects. Registrants who join in a scheduled obstruction or
excavation performed by the city, whether or not it is a joint application by
two or more registrants or a single application, are not required to pay the
excavation or obstruction and degradation portions of the permit fee, but a
permit would still be required.
§ 94.15 SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Limitation on area. A right-of-way permit is valid only for the area
of the right-of-way specified in the permit. No permittee may do any work
outside the area specified in the permit, except as provided herein. Any
permittee which determines that an area greater than that specified in the
permit must be obstructed or excavated must before working in that greater area
make application for a permit extension and pay any additional fees required
thereby, and be granted a new permit or permit extension.
   (B)   Limitation on dates. A right-of-way permit is valid only for the dates
specified in the permit. No permittee may begin its work before the permit
start date or, except as provided herein, continue working after the end date.
If a permittee does not finish the work by the permit end date, it must apply
for a new permit for the additional time it needs, and receive the new permit
or an extension of the old permit before working after the end date of the
previous permit. This supplementary application must be submitted before the
permit end date.
§ 94.16 OTHER OBLIGATIONS.
   (A)   Compliance with other laws. Obtaining a right-of-way permit does not
relieve permittee of its duty to obtain all other necessary permits, licenses,
and authority and to pay all fees required by the city or other applicable
rule, law, or regulation. A permittee shall comply with all requirements of
local, state, and federal laws, including but not limited to M.S. §§ 216D.01 -
216D.09, as they may be amended from time to time (Gopher One Call Excavation
Notice System) and Minn. R. Chapter 7560, as it may be amended from time to
time. A permittee shall perform all work in conformance with all applicable
codes and established rules and regulations, and is responsible for all work
done in the right-of-way pursuant to its permit, regardless of who does the
work.
   (B)   Prohibited work. Except in an emergency, and with the approval of the
city, no right-of-way obstruction or excavation may be done when seasonally
prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for such work.
   (C)   Interference with right-of-way. A permittee shall not so obstruct a
right-of-way that the natural free and clear passage of water through the
gutters or other waterways shall be interfered with. Private vehicles of those
doing work in the right-of-way may not be parked within or next to a permit
area, unless parked in conformance with city parking regulations. The loading
or unloading of trucks must be done solely within the defined permit area
unless specifically authorized by the permit.
   (D)   Trenchless excavation. As a condition of all applicable permits,
permittees employing trenchless excavation methods, including but not limited
to horizontal directional drilling, shall follow all requirements set forth in
M.S. Chapter 216D and Minn. R. Chapter 7560, as they may be amended from time
to time, and shall require potholing or open cutting over existing underground
utilities before excavating, as determined by the director.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.17 DENIAL OF PERMIT.
   The city may deny a permit for failure to meet the requirements and
conditions of this chapter or if the city determines that the denial is
necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare or when necessary to
protect the right-of-way and its current use.
§ 94.18 INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS.
   The excavation, backfilling, patching, and restoration, and all other work
performed in the right-of-way shall be done in conformance with Minn. R.
7819.1100 and 7819.5000, as they may be amended from time to time and other
applicable local requirements, in so far as they are not inconsistent with the
M.S. §§ 237.162 and 237.163, as they may be amended from time to time.
Installation of service laterals shall be performed in accordance with Minn. R.
Chapter 7560, as it may be amended from time to time and these ordinances.
Service lateral installation is further subject to those requirements and
conditions set forth by the city in the applicable permits and/or agreements
referenced in §
94.23(B) of this chapter.
§ 94.19 INSPECTION.
   (A)   Notice of completion. When the work under any permit hereunder is
completed, the permittee shall furnish a completion certificate in accordance
Minn. R. 7819.1300, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (B)   Site inspection. Permittee shall make the work-site available to the
city and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all reasonable
times during the execution of and upon completion of the work.
   (C)   Authority of director.
      (1)   At the time of inspection, the director may order the immediate
cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the life, health, safety,
or well-being of the public.
      (2)   The director may issue an order to the permittee for any work that
does not conform to the terms of the permit or other applicable standards,
conditions, or codes. The order shall state that failure to correct the
violation will be cause for revocation of the permit. Within ten days after
issuance of the order, the permittee shall present proof to the director that
the violation has been corrected. If such proof has not been presented within
the required time, the director may revoke the permit pursuant to §
94.22 of this chapter.
§ 94.20 WORK DONE WITHOUT A PERMIT.
   (A)   Emergency situations.
      (1)   Each registrant shall immediately notify the director of any event
regarding its facilities that it considers to be an emergency. The registrant
may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary to respond to the emergency.
Excavators’ notification to Gopher State One Call regarding an emergency
situation does not fulfill this requirement. Within two business days after the
occurrence of the emergency, the registrant shall apply for the necessary
permits, pay the fees associated therewith, and fulfill the rest of the
requirements necessary to bring itself into compliance with this chapter for
the actions it took in response to the emergency.
      (2)   If the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding a registrant’s
facilities, the city will attempt to contact the local representative of each
registrant affected, or potentially affected, by the emergency. In any event,
the city may take whatever action it deems necessary to respond to the
emergency, the cost of which shall be borne by the registrant whose facilities
occasioned the emergency.
   (B)   Non-emergency situations. Except in an emergency, any person who,
without first having obtained the necessary permit, obstructs or excavates a
right-of-way must subsequently obtain a permit and, as a penalty, pay double
the normal fee for said permit, pay double all the other fees required by the
city code, deposit with the city the fees necessary to correct any damage to
the right-of-way, and comply with all of the requirements of this chapter.
§ 94.21 SUPPLEMENTARY NOTIFICATION.
   If the obstruction or excavation of the right-of-way begins later or ends
sooner than the date given on the permit, permittee shall notify the city of
the accurate information as soon as this information is known.
§ 94.22 REVOCATION OF PERMITS.
   (A)   Substantial breach. The city reserves its right, as provided herein,
to revoke any right-of-way permit without a fee refund, if there is a
substantial breach of the terms and conditions of any statute, ordinance, rule,
or regulation, or any material condition of the permit. A substantial breach by
permittee shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
      (1)   The violation of any material provision of the right-of-way permit;
      (2)   An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of the right-
of-way permit, or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any fraud or deceit
upon the city or its citizens;
      (3)   Any material misrepresentation of fact in the application for a
right-of-way permit;
      (4)   The failure to complete the work in a timely manner, unless a
permit extension is obtained or unless the failure to complete work is due to
reasons beyond the permittee’s control; or
      (5)   The failure to correct, in a timely manner, work that does not
conform to a condition indicated on an order issued pursuant to §
94.19 of this chapter.
   (B)   Written notice of breach. If the city determines that the permittee
has committed a substantial breach of a term or condition of any statute,
ordinance, rule, regulation, or any condition of the permit, the city shall
make a written demand upon the permittee to remedy such violation. The demand
shall state that continued violations may be cause for revocation of the
permit. A substantial breach, as stated above, will allow the city, at its
discretion, to place additional or revised conditions on the permit to mitigate
and remedy the breach.
   (C)   Response to notice of breach. Within 24 hours of receiving
notification of the breach, permittee shall provide the city with a plan,
acceptable to the city, that will cure the breach. Permittee’s failure to so
contact the city, or permittee’s failure to timely submit an acceptable plan,
or permittee’s failure to reasonably implement the approved plan, shall be
cause for immediate revocation of the permit. Further, permittee’s failure to
so contact the city, or permittee’s failure to submit an acceptable plan, or
permittee’s failure to reasonably implement the approved plan, shall
automatically place the permittee on probation for one full year.
   (D)   Cause for probation. From time to time, the city may establish a list
of conditions of the permit, which if breached will automatically place the
permittee on probation for one full year, such as, but not limited to, working
out of the allotted time period or working on right-of-way grossly outside of
the permit authorization.
   (E)   Automatic revocation. If a permittee, while on probation, commits a
breach as outlined above, permittee’s permit will automatically be revoked and
permittee will not be allowed further permits for one full year, except for
emergency repairs.
   (F)   Reimbursement of city costs. If a permit is revoked, the permittee
shall also reimburse the city for the city’s reasonable costs, including
restoration costs and the costs of collection and reasonable attorneys’ fees
incurred in connection with such revocation.
§ 94.23 MAPPING DATA.
   (A)   Information required. Each registrant and permittee shall provide
mapping information required by the city in accordance with Minn. R. 7819.4000
and 7819.4100, as they may be amended from time to time. Within 90 days
following completion of any work pursuant to a permit, the permittee shall
provide the director accurate maps and drawings certifying the “as-built”
location of all equipment installed, owed and maintained by the permittee. Such
maps and drawings shall include the horizontal and vertical location of all
facilities and equipment and shall be provided consistent with the city’s
electronic mapping system, when practical or as a condition imposed by the
director. Failure to provide maps and drawings pursuant to this division (A)
shall be grounds for revoking the permit holder’s registration.
   (B)   Service laterals. All permits issued for the installation or repair of
service laterals, other than minor repairs as defined in Minn. R. 7560.0150,
subpart 2, as it may be amended from time to time, shall require the
permittee’s use of appropriate means of establishing the horizontal locations
of installed service laterals, and the service lateral vertical locations in
those cases where the director reasonably requires it. Permittees or their
subcontractors shall submit to the director evidence satisfactory to the
director of the installed service lateral locations. Compliance with this
division (B) and with applicable Gopher State One Call law and Minnesota Rules
governing service laterals installed after December 31, 2005, shall be a
condition of any city approval necessary for payments to contractors working on
a public improvement project including those under M.S. Chapter 429, as it may
be amended from time to time, and city approval of performance under
development agreements, or other subdivision or site plan approval under M.S.
Chapter 462, as it may be amended from time to time. The director shall
reasonably determine the appropriate method of providing such information to
the city. Failure to provide prompt and accurate information on the service
laterals installed may result in the revocation of the permit issued for the
work or for future permits to the offending permittee or its subcontractors.
§ 94.24 LOCATION AND RELOCATION OF FACILITIES.
   (A)   Generally. Placement, location, and relocation of facilities must
comply with this chapter, with other applicable law, and with Minn. R.
7819.3100, 7819.5000, and 7819.5100, as they may be amended from time to time,
to the extent the rules do not limit authority otherwise available to cities.
   (B)   Corridors.
      (1)   The city may assign a specific area within the right-of-way, or any
particular segment thereof as may be necessary, for each type of facilities
that is or, pursuant to current technology, the city expects will someday be
located within the right-of-way. All excavation, obstruction, or other permits
issued by the city involving the installation or replacement of facilities
shall designate the proper corridor for the facilities at issue.
      (2)   Any registrant who has facilities in the right-of-way in a position
at variance with the corridors established by the city shall, no later than at
the time of the next reconstruction or excavation of the area where the
facilities are located, move the facilities to the assigned position within the
right-of-way, unless this requirement is waived by the city for good cause
shown, upon consideration of such factors as the remaining economic life of the
facilities, public safety, customer service needs, and hardship to the
registrant.
   (C)   Nuisance. One year after the passage of this chapter, any facilities
found in a right-of-way that have not been registered shall be deemed to be a
nuisance. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in
equity, including, but not limited to, abating the nuisance or talcing
possession of the facilities and restoring the right-of-way to a useable
condition.
   (D)   Limitation of space. To protect health, safety, and welfare, or when
necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use, the city shall have
the power to prohibit or limit the placement of new or additional facilities
within the right-of-way. In making such decisions, the city shall strive to the
extent possible to accommodate all existing and potential users of the right-
of-way, but shall be guided primarily by considerations of the public interest,
the public’s needs for the particular utility service, the condition of the
right-of-way, the time of year with respect to essential utilities, the
protection of existing facilities in the right-of-way, and future city plans
for public improvements and development projects which have been determined to
be in the public interest.
§ 94.25 PRE-EXCAVATION FACILITIES LOCATION.
   In addition to complying with the requirements of M.S. §§ 216D.01 through
216D.09 (“One Call Excavation Notice System”) before the start date of any
right-of-way excavation, each registrant who has facilities or equipment in the
area to be excavated shall mark the horizontal and vertical placement of all
said facilities. Any registrant whose facilities are less than 20 inches below
a concrete or asphalt surface shall notify and work closely with the excavation
contractor to establish the exact location of its facilities and the best
procedure for excavation.
§ 94.26 DAMAGE TO OTHER FACILITIES.
   When the city does work in the right-of-way and finds it necessary to
maintain, support, or move a registrant’s facilities to protect it, the city
shall notify the local representative as early as is reasonably possible. The
costs associated therewith will be billed to that registrant and must be paid
within 30 days from the date of billing. Each registrant shall be responsible
for the cost of repairing any facilities in the right-of-way which it or its
facilities damage. Each registrant shall be responsible for the cost of
repairing any damage to the facilities of another registrant caused during the
city's response to an emergency occasioned by that registrant’s facilities.
§ 94.27 RIGHT-OF-WAY VACATION.
   If the city vacates a right-of-way that contains the facilities of a
registrant, the registrant’s rights in the vacated right-of-way are governed by
Minn. R. 7819.3200, as it may be amended from time to time.
§ 94.28 INDEMNIFICATION AND LIABILITY.
   By registering with the city, or by accepting a permit under this chapter, a
registrant or permittee agrees to defend and indemnify the city in accordance
with the provisions of Minn. R. 7819.1250, as it may be amended from time to
time.
§ 94.29 ABANDONED AND UNUSABLE FACILITIES.
   (A)   Discontinued operations. A registrant who has determined to
discontinue all or a portion of its operations in the city must provide
information satisfactory to the city that the registrant’s obligations for its
facilities in the right-of-way under this chapter have been lawfully assumed by
another registrant.
   (B)   Removal. Any registrant who has abandoned facilities in any right-of-
way shall remove it from that right-of-way if required in conjunction with
other right-of-way repair, excavation, or construction, unless this requirement
is waived by the city.
§ 94.30 APPEAL.
   A right-of-way user that: has been denied registration; has been denied a
permit; has had a permit revoked; believes that the fees imposed are not in
conformity with M.S. § 237.163, subd. 6, as it may be amended from time to
time; or disputes a determination of the director regarding §
94.23(B) of this chapter may have the denial, revocation, fee imposition, or
decision reviewed, upon written request, by the City Council. The City Council
shall act on a timely written request at its next regularly scheduled meeting,
provided the right-of-way user has submitted its appeal with sufficient time to
include the appeal as a regular agenda item. A decision by the City Council
affirming the denial, revocation, or fee imposition will be in writing and
supported by written findings establishing the reasonableness of the decision.
§ 94.31 SEVERABILITY.
   If any portion of this chapter is for any reason held invalid by any court
of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct,
and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions thereof. Nothing in this chapter precludes the city from
requiring a franchise agreement with the applicant, as allowed by law, in
addition to requirements set forth herein.
CHAPTER 95: ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES; UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
Section
Abandoned Motor Vehicles; Disposal
   
95.01   Definitions
   
95.02   Custody
   
95.03   Sale; waiting periods
   
95.04   Notice
   
95.05   Right to reclaim
   
95.06   Auction or sale
   
95.07   Disposal of vehicles
   
95.08   Contracts and disposal
Unclaimed Property; Disposal
   
95.15   Definition
   
95.16   Preliminary notice
   
95.17   Notice and sale
   
95.18   Funds and claims thereon
ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES; DISPOSAL
§ 95.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE. A motor vehicle as defined in M.S. Chapter 169,
that has remained for a period of more than 48 hours on public property
illegally or lacking vital component parts, or in an inoperable condition such
that it has no substantial potential further use consistent with its usual
function unless it is kept in an enclosed garage or storage building. It shall
also mean a motor vehicle voluntarily surrendered by its owner to and accepted
by the city. A classic car or pioneer car, as defined in M.S. Chapter 168,
shall not be considered an ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE within the meaning of this
section. Vehicles on the premises of junk yards or automobile graveyards, which
are licensed and maintained in accordance with the City Code, shall not be
considered abandoned motor vehicles within the meaning of this section.
   JUNK VEHICLE. A vehicle that is three years old or older; is extensively
damaged, with the damage including such things as broken or missing wheels,
motor, drive train, or transmission; is apparently inoperable; does not have a
valid, current registration plate; and has an approximate fair market value
equal only to the approximate value of the scrap in it.
   UNAUTHORIZED VEHICLE. A vehicle that is subject to removal and impoundment
pursuant to Minnesota Statutes but is not a junk vehicle or abandoned vehicle.
   VITAL COMPONENT PARTS. Those parts of a motor vehicle that are essential to
the mechanical functioning of the vehicle, including, but not limited to, the
motor, drive train and wheels.
(Ord. 021, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 95.02 CUSTODY.
   The city may take into custody and impound any abandoned or junk motor
vehicle, or any unauthorized vehicle as provided by statute. Nothing in this
chapter shall prohibit the owner of any private property upon which an
unauthorized vehicle is parked to have the vehicle towed at the owner's
expense.
(Ord. 021, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 95.03 SALE; WAITING PERIODS.
   (A)   An impounded vehicle is eligible for disposal or sale 15 days after
notice to the owner if the vehicle is determined to be a junk vehicle, except
that it may have a valid, current registration plate and still be eligible for
disposal or sale, or an abandoned motor vehicle.
   (B)   An impounded vehicle is eligible for disposal or sale 45 days after
notice to the owner if the vehicle is determined to be an unauthorized vehicle.
   (C)   When vehicles, real estate, or other real property has been seized by
the Police Department in conjunction with the commission of a state statute
designated crime, the Police Department may sell the vehicles, real estate, or
other real property by auction, bid, or to a dealer, that have been awarded to
the city through the vehicle forfeiture process as outlined in state statutes.
Proceeds from these sales will be deposited into the Police Forfeiture Fund and
distributed in accordance with state law governing same.
(Ord. 021, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 95.04 NOTICE.
   (A)   When an impounded vehicle is taken into custody, the city or impound
lot operator shall give notice of the taking within ten days. The notice shall
set forth the date and place of the taking, the year, make, model and serial
number of the abandoned motor vehicle, if such information can be reasonably
obtained, and the place where the vehicle is being held; shall inform the owner
and any lien holders of their right to reclaim the vehicle under §
95.05; and shall state that failure of the owner or lien holder to exercise
their right to reclaim the vehicle and contents within the appropriate time
allowed under statute shall be deemed a waiver by them of all rights, title and
interest in the vehicle and a consent to the transfer of title to and disposal
or sale of the vehicle and contents pursuant to §
95.06.
   (B)   The notice shall be sent by mail to the registered owner, if any, of
the impounded motor vehicle and to all readily identifiable lien holders of
record. This information shall be made available to impound lot operators for
notification purposes. If it is impossible to determine with reasonable
certainty the identity and address of the registered owner and all lien
holders, the notice shall be published once in the official newspaper.
Published notices may be grouped together for convenience and economy. If an
unauthorized vehicle remains unclaimed after 30 days from the date the notice
was sent, a second notice shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the registered owner, if any, of the unauthorized vehicle and to
all readily identifiable lien holders of record.
(Ord. 021, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 95.05 RIGHT TO RECLAIM.
   (A)   The owner or any lien holder of an impounded motor vehicle shall have
the right to reclaim the vehicle from the city or impound lot upon payment of
all towing and storage charges resulting from taking the vehicle into custody
within 15 or 45 days as applicable under this chapter after the date of the
notice required by this chapter.
   (B)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to impair any lien of a
garage keeper under the laws of this state, or the right of the lien holder to
foreclose. For the purposes of this section, GARAGE KEEPER is an operator of a
parking place or establishment, an operator of a motor vehicle storage
facility, or an operator of an establishment for the servicing, repair or
maintenance of motor vehicles.
(Ord. 021, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 95.06 AUCTION OR SALE.
   (A)   An abandoned or unauthorized motor vehicle and contents taken into
custody by the city or any impound lot and not reclaimed under §
95.05 may be disposed of or sold at auction or sale when eligible pursuant to §
95.05. The purchaser shall be given a receipt in a form prescribed by the
Registrar of Motor Vehicles, which shall be sufficient title to dispose of the
vehicle. The receipt shall also entitle the purchaser to register the vehicle
and receive a certificate of title, free and clear of all liens and claims of
ownership. Before such a vehicle is issued a new certificate of title, it must
receive a motor vehicle safety check.
   (B)   From the proceeds of the sale of an abandoned or unauthorized motor
vehicle by the city or public impound lot, the city shall reimburse itself for
the cost of towing, preserving and storing the vehicle, and all administrative,
notice and publication costs incurred pursuant to this subchapter. Any
remainder from the proceeds of a sale shall be held for the owner of the
vehicle or entitled lien holder for 90 days and then shall be deposited in the
General Fund of the city.
   (C)   The operator of a nonpublic impound lot may retain any proceeds from a
sale derived from a sale conducted under the authority of this chapter. The
operator may retain all proceeds from the sale of any personal belongings and
contents in the vehicle that were not claimed by the owner or the owner's agent
before the sale; except that any suspected contraband or other items that
likely would be subject to forfeiture in a criminal trial must be turned over
to the appropriate law enforcement agency.
(Ord. 021, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 95.07 DISPOSAL OF VEHICLES.
   Where no bid has been received for an abandoned or junk motor vehicle, the
city may dispose of it in accordance with this subchapter.
(Ord. 021, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 95.08 CONTRACTS AND DISPOSAL.
   (A)   The city may contract with any qualified person for collection,
storage, incineration, volume reduction, transportation or other services
necessary to prepare abandoned motor vehicles and other scrap metal for
recycling or other methods of disposal.
   (B)   Where the city enters into a contract with a person duly licensed by
the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, the Agency shall review the contract to
determine whether it conforms to the Agency's plan for solid waste disposal. A
contract that does so conform may be approved by the Agency. Where a contract
has been approved, the Agency may reimburse the city for the costs incurred
under the contract which have not been reimbursed.
   (C)   If the city utilizes its own equipment and personnel for disposal of
the abandoned motor vehicle, it shall be entitled to reimbursement for the cost
thereof along with its other costs as herein provided.
(Ord. 021, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
UNCLAIMED PROPERTY; DISPOSAL
§ 95.15 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED PROPERTY. Tangible or intangible property that has lawfully come
into the possession of the city in the course of municipal operations, remains
unclaimed by the owner, and has been in the possession of the city for at least
60 days and has been declared such by a resolution of the Council.
(Ord. 021, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 95.16 PRELIMINARY NOTICE.
   The city shall send written notice to the owner of the abandoned property at
least 30 days prior to a declaration of abandonment by the Council. If the city
acquired possession from a prior owner, the city shall also send written notice
to the prior owner. The notice shall describe the property and state that
unless it is claimed and proof of ownership, or entitlement to possession is
established, the City Council may declare the property abandoned 30 days from
the date of the notice. Property seized by the Police Department in accordance
with state forfeiture law is exempt from this section.
(Ord. 021, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 95.17 NOTICE AND SALE.
   Upon adoption of a resolution declaring certain property to be abandoned
property, the City Manager shall publish a notice thereof describing the same,
together with the known names of prior owners and holders thereof, and
including a brief description of the property. The text of the notice shall
also state the time, place and manner of sale of all such property, except cash
and negotiables. The notice shall be published once in a legal newspaper at
least ten days prior to the sale. The city shall sell the abandoned property to
the highest bidder at public auction or sale or by a nonprofit organization
with a significant mission of community service in a private sale in the manner
authorized by statute.
(Ord. 021, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 95.18 FUNDS AND CLAIMS THEREON.
   If the abandoned property was sold at public auction or sale, proceeds from
the sale shall first pay expenses of the sale, then be placed into the General
Fund of the city; or, in the case of a private sale, to the nonprofit
organization authorized to conduct the sale. If the former owner claims the
abandoned property within six months from the date of publication of the notice
herein provided, and provides application and satisfactory proof of ownership,
the former owner may be paid the amount at sale, less the cost of storage,
publication of notice, and sale expenses, but without interest. Property seized
by the Police Department in accordance with state forfeiture law is exempt from
this section.
(Ord. 021, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
CHAPTER 96: NOISE CONTROL
Section
   
96.01   Unlawful to make loud or unnecessary noise
   
96.02   Unlawful acts
§ 96.01 UNLAWFUL TO MAKE LOUD OR UNNECESSARY NOISE.
   It is unlawful for any person to make, or cause to be made, any loud,
unnecessary, or unusual noise which either annoys, disturbs, or affects the
comfort, repose, health, or peace of others.
(Ord. 022, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 96.02 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   The following acts set forth in divisions (A) through (O) are declared to be
loud, disturbing, and unnecessary noises in violation of this section, but the
enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive:
   (A)   Horns, signaling devices, and the like. The sounding of any horn, or
signaling device, on any automobile, motorcycle, or other vehicle, except as a
danger warning.
   (B)   Radios, tape and disc players, and the like. The using, operating, or
permitting to be played any radio receiving set, tape, or disc player, musical
instrument, phonograph, or other machine or device for the producing, or
reproducing, of sound in a manner, considering the time and place, and the
purpose for which the sound is produced, as to disturb the peace, quiet, or
repose of a person, or persons, of ordinary sensibilities;
      (1)   The play, use, or operation of any radio, tape, or disc player,
musical instrument, phonograph, or other machine or device for the production
or reproduction of sound in a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of
50 feet from the machine or device shall be prima facie evidence of a violation
of this section.
      (2)   When sound violating this section is produced or reproduced by a
machine or device that is located in or on a vehicle, the vehicle's owner is
guilty of the violation; provided, however, that if the vehicle's owner is not
present at the time of the violation, the person in charge or control of the
vehicle at the time of the violation is guilty of the violation;
      (3)   This section shall apply to all radios, tape and disc players,
musical instruments, phonographs, and machines and devices for the production
or reproduction of sound, whether on public, or private property.
   (C)   Loudspeakers; amplifiers for advertising. The using, operating, or
permitting to be played any radio receiving set, musical instrument,
phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier, or other machine or device for the
producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public streets for the
purpose of commercial advertising, or attracting the attention of the public to
any building or structure.
   (D)   Yelling, shouting, and the like. Yelling, shouting, hooting,
whistling, or singing at any time or place to annoy or disturb the quiet,
comfort, or repose of persons in any office, or in any dwelling, hotel, motel,
or other place of residence, or of any person in the vicinity.
   (E)   Animals, birds, and the like. The keeping of any animal or bird which,
by causing frequent, or long, continued noise, shall disturb the comfort or
repose of any persons in the vicinity.
   (F)   Whistles or sirens. The blowing of a locomotive whistle or steam
whistle attached to any stationary boiler, or any siren whatsoever, except to
give notice of the time to begin or stop work, as a warning of fire or danger,
or by public emergency vehicles.
   (G)   Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any
vehicle, except through a muffler or other device, which will effectively
prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom.
   (H)   Defect in vehicle or load. The use of any automobile, motorcycle, or
vehicle so out of repair, so loaded, or in a manner as to create loud and
unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling, or other noise which shall disturb the
comfort or repose of any person in the vicinity.
   (I)   Sound truck for advertising purposes. The use of sound trucks, or any
other vehicle equipped with sound amplifying devices, for the purposes of
advertising any program, project, or meeting of any public agency, private
business, religious organization, civic group, political party, or charitable
organization.
   (J)   Loading, unloading, opening boxes. The creation of a loud and
excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle, or the
opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates, and containers.
   (K)   Construction or repairing of buildings. The erection (including
excavation), demolition, alteration, or repair of any building between the
hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on weekdays, except where single individuals
or families work on single-family residences for their own occupancy owned by
them; except that the Building Official may, in cases of emergency, grant
permission to repair, at any time, when he or she finds that the repair work
will not affect the health and safety of the persons in the vicinity.
   (L)   Schools, courts, churches, hospitals. The creation of any excessive
noise on any street or private property adjacent to any school, institution of
higher learning, church, court, clinic, or hospital, while the same are in use,
which unreasonably interferes with the use thereof; provided, conspicuous signs
are displayed in the streets indicating that the same is a school, hospital, or
court street.
   (M)   Pile drivers, hammers, and the like. The operation between the hours
of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of any pile driver, power shovel, pneumatic hammer,
derrick, power or electric hoist, or other appliance, the use of which is
attended by loud or unusual noise.
   (N)   Blowers. The operation of any noise creating power or power fan or any
internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise due to the
explosion of generating gases or fluids; unless the noise from the blower or
fan is muffled and the engine is equipped with a muffler designed sufficient to
deaden the noise.
   (O)   Noisy parties and gatherings.
      (1)   It is unlawful for any person to, between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m., congregate at or participate in any party or gathering of two or
more people from which noise emanates of a sufficient volume so as to disturb
the peace, quiet, or repose of another person. It is also unlawful for any
person to knowingly remain at such a noisy party or gathering.
      (2)   Noise of such volume as to be clearly audible at a distance of 50
feet from the structure or building in which the party or gathering is
occurring, or in the case of an apartment building, in the adjacent hallway or
apartment, shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section.
      (3)   When a peace officer determines that a party or gathering is in
violation of this section, the officer may order all persons present at the
premises where the violation is occurring, other than the owner or tenants of
the premises, to disperse immediately. It is unlawful for any person to
knowingly remain at such a party or gathering.
      (4)   The following are exempt from violation of this division (O):
         (a)   Activities which are duly authorized, sponsored, or licensed by
the city, so long as the activity is conducted pursuant to the conditions of
the license, permit, or contract authorizing the activity; and
         (b)   Persons who have gone to the party for the sole purpose of
abating the violation.
      (5)   Every owner or tenant of the premises where a party or gathering in
violation of this division this division (O) occurs who is present at the party
or gathering is guilty of a violation of this division (O). Any person who
refuses to disperse from a party or gathering in violation of this division (O)
after being ordered by a law enforcement officer to do so is guilty of a
misdemeanor.
   (P)   Exemptions. The following are exempt from violation of this chapter:
      (1)   City personnel or contractors performing public works operations;
      (2)   Activities which are duly authorized, sponsored or licensed by the
city, so long as the activity is conducted pursuant to the conditions of the
license, permit, or contract authorizing such activity;
      (3)   Church bells, school bells, chimes, or carillons;
      (4)   Antitheft devices; and
      (5)   Machines or devices for the production of sound on or in authorized
emergency vehicles or for authorized emergency purposes.
(Ord. 022, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
CHAPTER 97: PARK REGULATIONS
Section
   
97.01   Traffic prohibited
   
97.02   General rules
   
97.03   Hours and conduct
   
97.04   Animals in the park
   
97.05   Weapons
   
97.06   Rules and regulations
   
97.07   City employees
   
97.08   A veteran’s park
§ 97.01 TRAFFIC PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to drive a self-propelled or motorized
vehicle, except an electrically propelled wheelchair, in any park, playground,
recreational area or athletic field owned or maintained by the city except upon
a street or other public thoroughfare therein; provided, that this section
shall not apply to construction or maintenance equipment operated by, or under
a contract with, the city and within the scope of such operation or contract.
(Ord. 023, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 97.02 GENERAL RULES.
   It is unlawful for any person, in any park or recreation area, to:
   (A)   Deface, destroy, tamper with, injure, or remove any city property,
including, but not limited to, furniture, structures, vegetation, signs or
soils;
   (B)   Scatter or litter the grounds or any lake, pond, or watercourse within
or draining into a park with any form of trash, but shall place such material
in the proper receptacles where these are provided; where receptacles are not
provided, all such trash shall be carried away from the area by the person
responsible for its presence;
   (C)   Start a fire, except a small fire for cooking purposes in a designated
area, and then only in a fire ring, grill or portable stove; or fail to fully
extinguish such a fire;
   (D)   Powered model aircraft may only be flown in areas which will not
interfere with sport games or any other park activities;
   (E)   Sell, solicit or conduct any commercial enterprise unless authorized
by written permit from the City Council;
   (F)   Paste, affix or inscribe any handbill, poster or sign or distribute
handbills, circulars or announcements of any kind for a commercial purpose;
and/or
   (G)   Possess liquids in containers made of glass.
(Ord. 023, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 97.03 HOURS AND CONDUCT.
   It is unlawful for any person, in any park or recreation area, to:
   (A)   Remain between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. without a written permit from
the City Council. No privately-owned vehicle shall remain during these same
hours without a written permit. Any vehicle remaining after 11:00 p.m. without
authorization shall be towed at the owner's expense; provided, however, that
residents living adjacent to Memorial Park on 7th Avenue South, and their
guests, will be permitted to park their vehicles at any time;
   (B)   Behave in an unruly manner, disrupting others' enjoyment of the park
or recreation area;
   (C)   Possess or consume beer, wine, or liquor as defined in §
111.001 of the city code, in the city parks unless otherwise permitted by a
special permit from the city;
   (D)   Use, possess or sell any controlled substance;
   (E)   Appear nude, seminude, commit any nuisance; use threatening, abusing,
insulting, obscene or indecent language; act in an indecent, lascivious, or
improper manner; or do any act which constitutes a breach of the public peace;
   (F)   Harass any visitor or behave in a reckless manner which would endanger
any visitor or visitor's property;
   (G)   Park a bike in such a manner as to create a hazard or interfere with
other visitors or activities;
   (H)   Engage in any form of gambling; or
   (I)   Disobey any reasonable order or direction of any city employee, law
enforcement officer, or other person designated by the City Council to give
such orders or directions.
(Ord. 023, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 97.04 ANIMALS IN THE PARK.
   It is unlawful for any person, in any park or recreation area, to:
   (A)   Kill, trap, hunt, pursue or in any manner disturb or cause to be
disturbed any wildlife, except that fishing is permitted. City staff are
permitted to remove wildlife as necessary to promote the health and safety of
park users;
   (B)   Bring any dog, cat or other creature unless caged or kept on a rope or
leash that is shortened to bring the animal within six feet of the handler when
a dog or a person is within 20 feet of the animal except the unleashed dog
park;
   (C)   Permit a creature to disturb, harass, or interfere with or endanger
any visitor or visitor's property, or tether any creature to a tree, plant,
building or park equipment;
   (D)   Permit a creature to enter unauthorized areas. Unauthorized areas are
active play areas, picnic areas and park buildings;
   (E)   Release any insect, fish, animal or other wildlife or introduce any
plant, chemical or other agent potentially harmful to the vegetation, water
supply or wildlife of the area; and/or
   (F)   Fail to clean up feces deposited on park grounds by any animal brought
into the park.
(Ord. 023, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 97.05 WEAPONS.
   It is unlawful for any person, in any park or recreation area, to: possess,
carry, fire or discharge any firearm within or into any park or recreation area
from beyond its boundaries, except that authorized bows and arrows may be
permitted in designated archery areas.
(Ord. 023, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 97.06 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The City Council or City Manager shall have the right to issue additional
administrative rules and regulations relative to but not conflicting with this
chapter. No person shall violate such rules or regulations, and any such
violation may be subject to penalties of this chapter.
(Ord. 023, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 97.08 CITY EMPLOYEES.
   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent city employees including law
enforcement officers from performing their assigned duties.
(Ord. 023, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 97.09 A VETERANS PARK.
   The city hereby provides for the erection, equipment, and maintenance of a
park in recognition of the services provided by members of the military as
allowed by Minnesota Statutes. The real property constituting the park and any
equipment placed within the park shall remain the sole property of the city.
However, pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, the city may enter into a joint powers
agreement with incorporated veterans groups allocating maintenance
responsibilities, avenues of funding, and record-keeping responsibilities. The
park use regulations described above in this chapter shall apply to the
veterans park.
(Ord. 023, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   LICENSING
      
111.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
      
112.   AMUSEMENT AND LEISURE
      
113.   TOBACCO SALE, CONSUMPTION
      
114.   TRANSIENT MERCHANTS, PEDDLERS, MOBILE FOOD VENDORS
      
115.   TAXICABS
      
116.   LAWFUL GAMBLING
      
117.   BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENTS
      
118.   PAWNBROKERS, SECONDHAND GOODS DEALERS
      
119.   SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES
      
120.   UTILITY SERVICES
      
121.   FRANCHISE PROCEDURES
      
122.   TETRAHYDROCANNABINOL (THC) PRODUCTS
      
123.   SPECIAL EVENTS
      
124.   CANNABIS
CHAPTER 110: LICENSING
Section
   
110.01   Definitions
   
110.02   Applications
   
110.03   Action on application for license
   
110.04   Carrying or posting
   
110.05   Property owners
   
110.06   Responsibility of licensee
   
110.07   Conviction of crime; denial of license
   
110.08   Conditional licenses
   
110.09   Insurance requirements
   
110.10   Fixing license fees
§ 110.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   APPLICANT. Any person making an application for a license under this title.
   APPLICATION. A form with blanks or spaces thereon, to be filled in, and
completed by, the applicant as his or her request for a license, furnished by
the city and uniformly required as a prerequisite to the consideration of the
issuance of a license for a business.
   BOND. A corporate surety document in the form, and with the provisions,
acceptable and specifically approved by the City Attorney.
   BUSINESS. Any activity, occupation, sale of goods or services, or
transaction that is either licensed, or regulated, or both licensed and
regulated, by the terms and conditions of this title.
   LICENSE. A document issued by the city to an applicant permitting him or her
to carry on, and transact, a business.
   LICENSEE. An applicant who, pursuant to his or her application, holds a
valid, current, unexpired, and unrevoked license from the city for carrying on
a business.
   LICENSE FEE. The money paid to the city pursuant to an application, and
prior to issuance of a license to transact, and carry on, a business.
   SALE, SELL, AND SOLD. All forms of barter, and all manner, or means, of
furnishing merchandise to persons.
(Prior Code, § 6.01)
§ 110.02 APPLICATIONS.
   All applications shall be made as follows:
   (A)   All applications shall be made at the office of the City Clerk-
Treasurer upon forms that have been formulated by the city for such purposes;
   (B)   All applications must be subscribed, sworn to, and include, but not be
limited to, the following:
      (1)   The applicant’s name and citizenship;
      (2)   The applicant’s present address, and length of time he or she has
lived at that address;
      (3)   The applicant’s occupation, and length of time so engaged;
      (4)   Whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony,
gross misdemeanor, or misdemeanor, including violation of a municipal
ordinance, but excluding traffic violations, and if so, the date and place of
conviction, and the nature of the offense;
      (5)   Type of license, and location of the premises for which the
application is made;
      (6)   At least two character references if the applicant has not resided
in the city for two years next preceding the date of the application; and
      (7)   Other information as the Council shall deem necessary considering
the nature of the business for which the license application is made.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any applicant to intentionally make a false
statement, or omission, upon any application form. Any false statement in the
application, or any willful omission to state any information called for on the
application form, shall, upon discovery of the falsehood work an automatic
refusal of the license, or if already issued, shall render any license, or
permit, issued pursuant thereto void, and of no effect to protect the applicant
from prosecution for violation of this title, or any part hereof;
   (D)   The City Clerk-Treasurer shall, upon receipt of each application
completed in accordance herewith, forthwith investigate the truth of statements
made therein, and the moral character, and business reputation, of each
applicant for a license to the extent as he or she deems necessary. For the
investigation, the City Clerk-Treasurer may enlist the aid of the Chief of
Police. The Council shall not consider an application before the investigation
has been completed; and
   (E)   Applications for renewal licenses may be made in the abbreviated form
as the Council may, by resolution, adopt.
(Prior Code, § 6.02) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.03 ACTION ON APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   Granting. The Council may grant any application for the period of the
remainder of the then current calendar year, or for the entire ensuing license
year. All applications, including proposed license periods, must be consistent
with this title.
   (B)   Issuing. If an application is granted, the City Clerk-Treasurer shall
forthwith issue a license pursuant thereto in the form prescribed by the
Council upon proof of ownership, payment of the appropriate license fee, and
approval of the bond or insurance as to form, and surety, or carrier, if
required. All licenses shall be on a calendar-year basis beginning January 1
and ending December 31. Unless otherwise herein specified, license fees shall
be pro-rated on the basis of one and one-half for each calendar month, or part
thereof, remaining in the then current license year. Licenses shall be valid
only at one location, and on the premises therein described.
   (C)   Transfer. A license shall be transferable between persons upon consent
of the Council, and payment of the investigation fee. No license shall be
transferable to a different location without prior consent of the Council, and
upon payment of the fee for a duplicate license. It is unlawful to make any
transfer in violation of this section.
   (D)   Termination. Licenses shall terminate only by expiration or
revocation.
   (E)   Refusal, suspension, and revocation. The Council may, for any
reasonable cause, refuse to grant any application, or revoke any license. No
license shall be granted to a person of questionable moral character, or
business reputation. Before revocation, or suspension, of any license, the
Council shall give notice to the licensee, and grant the licensee opportunity
to be heard. Notice to be given, and the exact time of the hearing, shall be
stated in the resolution calling for the hearing.
   (F)   Duplicate license. Duplicates of all original licenses may be issued
by the City Clerk-Treasurer, without action by the Council, upon the licensee’s
affidavit that the original has been lost, and upon payment of a fee of $2 for
issuance of the duplicate. All duplicate licenses shall be clearly marked
“DUPLICATE”.
(Prior Code, § 6.03) (Ord. 31, second series, passed 12-21-1981) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.04 CARRYING OR POSTING.
   All transient merchants, peddlers, and solicitors shall, at all times when
so engaged, carry their license on their person. All other licensees shall post
their licenses in their place of business near the licensed activity; provided,
however, that in the case of machine or other device licensing, the city may
provide a sticker for the current license year, which shall be affixed to each
machine, or device, requiring the sticker. All licensees shall display their
licenses upon demand by any officer or citizen.
(Prior Code, § 6.04)
§ 110.05 PROPERTY OWNERS.
   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly permit any real property owned,
or controlled, by him or her to be used, without a license, for any business
for which a license is required by this title.
(Prior Code, § 6.05) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.06 RESPONSIBILITY OF LICENSEE.
   The conduct of agents and employees of a person to whom a license, or
permit, is issued shall be deemed the conduct of the licensee himself or
herself.
(Prior Code, § 6.06)
§ 110.07 CONVICTION OF CRIME; DENIAL OF LICENSE.
   (A)   A license may be denied to an applicant by the Council solely, or in
part, due to a prior conviction of a crime by an applicant only upon a finding
that the conviction directly relates to the occupation for which the license is
sought, and then only after considering evidence of rehabilitation, and the
other evidence, as may be presented, all in accordance with M.S. §§ 364.01
through 364.10, as they may be amended from time to time.
   (B)   An applicant must show his or her present fitness to perform the
occupation for which the license is sought.
(Prior Code, § 6.07)
§ 110.08 CONDITIONAL LICENSES.
   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, the Council may, upon
a finding of the necessity therefor, place the conditions, and restrictions,
upon a license as it, in its discretion, may deem reasonable and justified.
(Prior Code, § 6.08)
§ 110.09 INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   Whenever insurance is required by a section of this title, after approval by
the Council, but before the license shall issue, the applicant shall file with
the City Clerk-Treasurer a policy, or certificate, of public liability
insurance showing:
   (A)   The limits are at least as high as required;
   (B)   The coverage is effective for at least the license term approved; and
   (C)   The insurance will not be cancelled, or terminated, without 30 days’
written notice served upon the City Clerk-Treasurer. Cancellation, or
termination, of the coverage shall be grounds for license revocation.
(Prior Code, § 6.09)
§ 110.10 FIXING LICENSE FEES.
   Except as otherwise herein provided, all fees for licenses under this title
shall be fixed, and determined, by the Council, adopted by resolution, and
uniformly enforced. The license fees may, from time to time, be amended by the
Council by resolution. A copy of the resolution setting forth currently-
effective license fees shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk-
Treasurer, and open to inspection during regular business hours. For the
purpose of fixing the fees, the Council may subdivide, and categorize, licenses
under a specific license requirement; provided, that any such subdivision, or
categorization, shall be included in the resolution authorized by this section.
(Prior Code, § 6.10) (Ord. 31, second series, passed 12-21-1981)
CHAPTER 111: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
General Provisions
   
111.001   Consumption, possession of alcohol; public streets, property, private
parking lots
   
111.002   Alcoholic beverages in certain buildings and grounds
   
111.003   Bottle clubs
   
111.004   Hours, days of liquor sales
Municipal Liquor Dispensary
   
111.015   Establishment
   
111.016   Location and operation
   
111.017   Liquor Dispensary Fund
Licensing and Regulations
   
111.030   Definitions
   
111.031   Applications
   
111.032   False statements
   
111.033   Investigation fee
   
111.034   Action
   
111.035   Duplicate licenses
   
111.036   Posting
   
111.037   Conditional licenses
   
111.038   Intoxicating malt liquor sale without license
   
111.039   Resident manager or agent
   
111.040   Premises licensed
   
111.041   Sale by employee
   
111.042   Delinquent taxes and charges
   
111.043   License condition and unlawful act
   
111.044   Unlawful acts
   
111.045   Insurance certificate required
   
111.046   Financial responsibility of licensees
   
111.047   Minors; unlawful acts
   
111.048   Fixing license fee
   
111.049   Workers’ compensation
   
111.050   Non-enclosed premises
   
111.051   Nonprofit; one-day license
Beer Licensing
   
111.065   Beer license required
   
111.066   Restrictions and regulations
   
111.067   Unlawful acts
   
111.068   Beer sale restrictions
   
111.069   Temporary beer license
Liquor Licensing
   
111.080   Liquor license required
   
111.081   Liquor license fees
   
111.082   Application
   
111.083   Persons eligible
   
111.084   License restrictions
   
111.085   Unlawful acts
   
111.086   Clubs; liquor licenses
Wine Licensing
   
111.100   License required
   
111.101   License restrictions
Brewer Taprooms, Small Brewer, Brew Pub Licensing
   
111.115   Provisions of state law adopted
   
111.116   License required
   
111.117   Application
   
111.118   Granting of license
   
111.119   Brewer taproom, on-sale
   
111.120   Small brewer, off-sale
   
111.121   Brew pub, off-sale
   
111.122   Fees
   
111.123   Suspension of license; revocation
 
   
111.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 111.001 CONSUMPTION, POSSESSION OF ALCOHOL; PUBLIC STREETS, PROPERTY, PRIVATE
PARKING LOTS.
   It is unlawful for any person to consume, or possess in an unsealed
container, any alcoholic beverage on any city park, street, public property, or
private parking lot to which the public has access, except on the premises
when, and where, permission has been specifically granted, or licensed, by the
Council; provided, that this section shall not apply to the possession of an
unsealed container in a motor vehicle when the container is kept in the trunk
of the vehicle, if it is equipped with a trunk, or kept in some other area of
the vehicle not normally occupied by the driver or passengers, if the motor
vehicle is not equipped with a trunk. For the purpose of this section, a
utility or glove compartment shall be deemed to be within the area occupied by
the driver or passengers.
(Prior Code, § 5.16) (Ord. 89, second series, passed 7-5-1988) Penalty, see §
111.999
§ 111.002 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN CERTAIN BUILDINGS AND GROUNDS.
   It is unlawful for any person to introduce upon, or have in his or her
possession upon, or in, any public elementary or secondary school ground, or
any public elementary or secondary school building, any alcoholic beverage,
except for experiments in laboratories, and except for those organizations who
have been issued temporary licenses to sell alcoholic beverages, and for any
person to possess alcoholic beverages as a result of a purchase from those
organizations holding temporary licenses.
(Prior Code, § 5.17) (Ord. 119, second series, passed 4-20-1993) Penalty, see §
111.999
§ 111.003 BOTTLE CLUBS.
   (A)   Definition. For purposes of this section, the term BOTTLE CLUB is a
club, as defined in this chapter, or an unincorporated society which, except
for its lack of incorporation, otherwise meets the requirements of a club, and
which is not otherwise licensed for the sale of liquor, either on-sale or off-
sale, or both.
   (B)   Consumption and display license required. It is unlawful for any
bottle club, or for any business establishment, to allow the consumption, or
display, of liquor, or the serving of any liquid for the purpose of mixing
liquor, without a license therefor from the city, but a bottle club, as herein
defined and licensed, may permit its members to bring, and keep, a personal
supply of liquor in lockers assigned to the members.
   (C)   Consumption and display restrictions and regulations.
      (1)   Every bottle, container, or other receptacle containing liquor
stored by a member of a bottle club shall have attached to it a label signed by
the member of the club, shall be kept in a locker designated to the use of the
member, and no other liquor shall be on bottle club premises.
      (2)   It is unlawful for any minor to be assigned a locker for the
storage of liquor, or to consume, or display, liquor on any premises under
control by the club.
      (3)   It is unlawful to consume, or allow consumption, or display, of
liquor in any bottle club, or business establishment, between the hours of 1:00
a.m. and 8:00 a.m., nor on any Sunday between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 12:00
p.m.
      (4)   Any bottle club, or business establishment, allowing the
consumption, or display, of liquor shall be open for inspection at all times by
authorized peace officers to inspect the premises.
      (5)   No license shall be issued to any bottle club when a member of the
board, management, executive committee, or other similar body chosen by its
members, or when a business establishment, or the owner thereof, holds a
federal retail liquor dealer’s special tax stamp for the sale of liquor.
      (6)   Liquor sold, served, or displayed in violation of this section
shall be subject to seizure for purposes of evidence.
(Prior Code, § 5.75) (Ord. 70, second series, passed 3-18-1986; Ord. 83, second
series, passed 4-7-1987) Penalty, see §
111.999
§ 111.004 HOURS, DAYS OF LIQUOR SALES.
   (A)   Liquor, consumption; on-sale. No sale of liquor for consumption on the
licensed premises may be made:
      (1)   Between 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on the days of Monday through
Saturday; or
      (2)   After 1:00 a.m. on Sundays, except as provided by division (B)
below.
   (B)   Liquor, Sunday sales; on-sale. On-sale licenses for the sale of liquor
on Sunday may be issued to restaurants, clubs, and hotels with a seating
capacity for at least 30 persons, and which holds an on-sale intoxicating
liquor license. The establishments may sell liquor for consumption on the
premises, in conjunction with the sale of food between the hours of 10:00 a.m.
on Sundays and 1:00 a.m. on Mondays; provided, that the licensee is in
conformance with the Federal Clean Air Act, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 7401 et seq.
   (C)   Restaurants. A restaurant, whose primary business is the sale of food,
may open at the commencement of its regular business hours, but may not sell
alcohol, beer, wine, or 3.2% malt liquor until the time as is allowed by law.
   (D)   Closing of stores and establishments. Businesses licensed to sell, on
an on-sale basis, liquor, beer, and 3.2% malt liquor, shall close completely,
except for cleaning purposes, during the hours the sale of liquor, beer, and
3.2% malt liquor are not allowed by city ordinance.
   (E)   City liquor store, Sundays. The City Manager and the City Liquor Store
Manager shall jointly have the sole discretion to determine specific Sundays
upon which the City Liquor Store shall be open for operation between the hours
of 11:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., including, by way of example, Memorial Day, Labor
Day, Super Bowl Sunday, and other Sundays as the City Manager and Liquor Store
Manager may deem appropriate.
(Prior Code, § 5.90) (Ord. 186, second series, passed 12-21-2004; Ord. 16,
third series, passed 11-3-2010; Ord. 27, third series, passed 4-2-2013; Ord.
28, third series, passed 5-7-2013; Ord. 41, third series, passed 8-1-2017)
MUNICIPAL LIQUOR DISPENSARY
§ 111.015 ESTABLISHMENT.
   A municipal liquor dispensary is hereby established to be operated within
the city for the sale of liquor potable as a beverage, and containing more than
3.2% of alcohol by weight, both for consumption at the dispensary, and on the
premises by the drink, and in the sealed, or closed, receptacle or container
for removal from the premises.
(Prior Code, § 5.60)
§ 111.016 LOCATION AND OPERATION.
   The dispensary shall be at such place as the Council shall determine, and
may be either leased, or owned, by the city. It shall be in the charge of a
person known as the Liquor Store Manager, who shall also be selected by the
Council, and who shall be paid the compensation as the Council shall determine.
The Liquor Store Manager shall be in full charge of the operation of the
dispensary, and shall have authority to purchase supplies as are necessary, and
to employ the additional help as he or she may need, with consent of the
Council, and at a rate of compensation to be approved by the Council, and under
rules to be determined by the Council. All employees, including the Liquor
Store Manager, shall hold their positions at the pleasure of the Council.
(Prior Code, § 5.60)
§ 111.017 LIQUOR DISPENSARY FUND.
   A Liquor Dispensary Fund is hereby created, into which all revenues received
from the operation of the dispensary shall be paid, and from which all
operating expenses shall be paid; provided, that the initial costs of rent,
fixtures, and stock may be paid for out of the General Fund of the city, but
the amounts shall be reimbursed to the General Fund out of the first moneys
coming into the Liquor Dispensary Fund not needed for carrying on the business.
Any surplus accumulating in this Fund may be transferred to the General Fund by
the Council, and expended for any municipal purpose.
(Prior Code, § 5.60)
LICENSING AND REGULATIONS
§ 111.030 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. Any beverage containing more than 0.5% alcohol by
volume, including, but not limited to, beer, wine, and liquor, as defined in
this section.
   APPLICANT. Any person making an application for a license under this
subchapter.
   APPLICATION. A form with blanks or spaces thereon, to be filled in, and
completed, by the applicant as his or her request for a license, furnished by
the city, and uniformly required as a prerequisite to the consideration of the
issuance of a license for a business.
   BEER. Malt liquor containing not less than 0.5% alcohol by volume, nor more
than 3.2% alcohol by weight (this definition includes so-called “malt coolers”
with the alcoholic content limits stated herein).
   BREWER. A person who manufactures beer for sale.
   CLUB.
      (1)   An incorporated organization organized under the laws of the state
for civic, fraternal, social, or business purposes, for intellectual
improvement, or for the promotion of sports, or a congressionally chartered
veterans’ organization, which:
         (a)   Has more than 50 members;
         (b)   Has owned, or rented, a building, or space in a building, for
more than one year that is suitable, and adequate, for the accommodation of its
members; and
         (c)   Is directed by a board of directors, executive committee, or
other similar body chosen by the members at a meeting, held for that purpose.
      (2)   No member, officer, agent, or employee shall receive any profit
from the distribution, or sale, of beverages to the members of the CLUB, or
their guests, beyond a reasonable salary or wages fixed, and voted, each year
by the governing body. The CLUB, or congressionally chartered veterans’
organization, must have been in existence for at least three years.
   COMMISSIONER. The State Commissioner of Public Safety.
   HOTEL. An establishment where food and lodging are regularly furnished to
transients, and which has:
      (1)   A dining room serving the general public at tables, and having
facilities for seating at least 30 guests at one time; and
      (2)   At least 20 guest rooms.
   INTEREST. Any pecuniary interest whatsoever, of any magnitude, in the
ownership, operation, management, or profits of an establishment, including,
but not limited to, the following: partnership interest; stock ownership;
mortgage interest; lease interest; contract for sale, or purchase, interest; or
any other INTEREST by which anyone is, or may be, entitled to receive any
payments of any kind from the licensee, excepting, and specifically excluding,
the INTEREST of anyone entitled to receive moneys, from time to time, directly
from the licensee for ordinary goods and services regularly purchased from the
licensee in the operation of the establishment. A person shall be deemed to
have an INTEREST in the same extent his or her spouse has an INTEREST.
   LICENSE. A document, issued by the city, to an applicant permitting him or
her to carry on, and transact, the business stated therein.
   LICENSE FEE. The money paid to the city pursuant to an application, and
prior to issuance of a license to transact, and carry on, the business stated
therein.
   LICENSE PREMISES. The space, or structure, described in the issued license.
In the case of a restaurant or a club licensed for on-sales of alcoholic
beverages and located on a golf course, LICENSED PREMISES means the entire golf
course, except for areas where motor vehicles are regularly parked, or
operated.
   LICENSEE. An applicant who, pursuant to his or her approved application,
holds a valid, current, unexpired license, which has neither been revoked, nor
is then under suspension, from the city for carrying on the business stated
therein.
   LIQUOR. Ethyl alcohol and distilled, fermented, spirituous, vinous, and malt
beverages containing, in excess, of 3.2% of alcohol by weight (this definition
includes so-called “wine coolers” and “malt coolers”, with the alcoholic
content limits stated herein).
   MALT LIQUOR. Any beer, ale, or other beverage made from malt by
fermentation, and containing not less than 0.5% alcohol by volume.
   MANUFACTURER. Every person who, by any process of manufacture, fermenting,
brewing, distilling, refining, rectifying/blending, or by the combination of
different materials, prepares, or produces, alcoholic beverages for sale.
   MINOR. Any natural person who has not attained the age of 21 years.
   OFF-SALE. The sale of alcoholic beverages in original packages for
consumption off the licensed premises only.
   ON-SALE. The sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the licensed
premises only.
   PACKAGE AND ORIGINAL PACKAGE. Any container, or receptacle, holding
alcoholic beverages, which container, or receptacle, is corked, capped, or
sealed by a manufacturer, or wholesaler.
   RESTAURANT. Any establishment, other than a hotel, under the control of a
single proprietor, or manager, where meals are regularly prepared on the
premises, and served at tables to the general public, and having a minimum
seating of not less than 50 guests at one time.
   SALE, SELL, AND SOLD. All barters, and all manners, or means, of furnishing
beer, wine, or liquor to persons, including the furnishing in violation, or
evasion, of law.
   WHOLESALER. Any person engaged in the business of selling alcoholic
beverages to a licensee from a stock maintained in a warehouse.
   WINE. The product made from the normal alcoholic fermentation of grapes,
including still wine, sparkling, and carbonated wine; wine made from condensed
grape must; wine made from other agricultural products than sound, ripe grapes;
imitation wine; compounds sold as wine; vermouth; cider; perry; and sake (this
definition includes “wine coolers” with the alcoholic content limits stated
herein). For purposes of on-sale wine licenses, WINE may contain up to 14%
alcohol by volume for consumption with the sale of food. For all other
purposes, WINE is a product containing not less than 0.5%, nor more than 24%,
alcohol by volume for non-industrial use.
(Prior Code, § 5.01) (Ord. 70, second series, passed 3-18-1986; Ord. 119,
second series, passed 4-20-1993; Ord. 141, second series, passed 4-16-1993;
Ord. 156, second series, passed 10-20-1998)
§ 111.031 APPLICATIONS.
   All applications shall be made at the office of the City Clerk-Treasurer
upon forms prescribed by the proper agency of the state, together with the
additional information as the Council may desire. All questions asked, or
information required, by application forms shall be answered fully, and
completely, by the applicant.
(Prior Code, § 5.02)
§ 111.032 FALSE STATEMENTS.
   It is unlawful for any applicant to intentionally make a false statement, or
omission, upon any application forms. Any false statement in the application,
or any willful omission to state any information called for on the application
form, shall, upon discovery of the falsehood, work an automatic refusal of the
license, or if already issued, shall render any license issued pursuant thereto
void and of no effect to protect the applicant from prosecution for violation
of this chapter, or any part hereof.
(Prior Code, § 5.02) Penalty, see §
111.999
§ 111.033 INVESTIGATION FEE.
   (A)   The City Clerk-Treasurer shall, upon receipt of each application
completed in accordance herewith, investigate the truth of statements made
therein, and the moral character, and business reputation, of each applicant
for license to the extent as he or she deems necessary. The applicant shall be
given an opportunity to be heard for, or against, the granting of any license.
The Council may, at its discretion, upon completion of the investigation,
grant, or refuse, the issuance of the license.
   (B)   The Council may investigate all applications for an on-sale liquor
license to determine eligibility, and return written recommendations to the
Council for, or against, the issuance of each license. Every application shall
be referred to the Chief of Police, who shall investigate the facts set forth
in the application, and conduct such additional inquiry as he or she may deem
necessary. He or she shall, in all cases, make a written recommendation to the
Council, consisting of his or her findings, with respect to the applicant, and
his or her recommendation as to whether or not the application should be
granted. In addition, prior to December 31 of each year, he or she shall
conduct the investigation of existing licenses as he or she deems necessary,
and shall furnish his or her written report of findings, and his or her
specific recommendations on the renewal, or non-renewal, of each license.
   (C)   All initial applications for an on-sale liquor license shall be
accompanied by a fee of $75, which fee shall be considered an investigation
fee, not refundable to the applicant, to cover the costs of the city in
processing the application, and the investigation thereof. If, upon application
for renewal, transfer, or other significant change in the status of the
licensee, an additional investigation is deemed necessary by the City Clerk-
Treasurer, the licensee shall pay an additional investigation fee of $50. No
additional fee of any kind shall be required as a result of license transfer
from an existing licensee to a corporation formed by licensee, and having
identical ownership interests. All initial applications for an on-sale beer
license shall be accompanied by an investigation fee in the amount of $25.
(Prior Code, § 5.02)
§ 111.034 ACTION.
   (A)   Granting. The Council may approve any application for the period of
the remainder of the then current calendar year, or for the entire ensuing
license year. All applications, including proposed license periods, must be
consistent with this chapter.
   (B)   Issuing. If an application is approved, the City Clerk-Treasurer shall
forthwith issue a license pursuant thereto in the form prescribed by the city
or the Commissioner, as the case may be, and upon payment of the license fee in
full, except as otherwise specifically permitted to be paid in installments.
All licenses shall be on a calendar year basis, unless otherwise specified
herein. For on-sale liquor licenses issued, and which are to become effective
other than on the first day of the licensed year, the fee to be paid with the
application shall be a pro-rata share of the annual license fee. For beer
licenses issued, and which are to become effective after eight months of the
licensing year have elapsed, the fee shall be reduced to one-half the annual
license fee.
   (C)   Transfer. No license shall be transferable between persons. No license
shall be transferable to a different location without prior consent of the
Council, and upon payment of the fee for a duplicate license. It is unlawful to
make any transfer in violation of this section.
   (D)   Refusal and termination. The Council may, in its sole discretion and
for any reasonable cause, refuse to grant any application. No license shall be
granted to a person of questionable moral character or business reputation.
Licenses shall terminate only by expiration, or revocation.
   (E)   Revocation or suspension. For any license granted under the provisions
of this chapter, the Council may revoke, suspend for a period not to exceed 60
days, impose a civil fine not to exceed $2,000, or any combination of these
sanctions, for each violation on a finding that the licensee has failed to
comply with a statute, regulation, or provision of the city code relating to
alcoholic beverages. The Council shall revoke the license upon conviction of
any licensee, or agent or employee of a licensee, for violating any law
relating to the sale, or possession, of beer, wine, or liquor upon premises of
the licensee, or if the revocation is mandatory by statute. If it shall be made
to appear at the hearing thereon that the violation was not willful, the
Council may order suspension; provided, that revocation shall be ordered upon
the third the violation or offense. No suspension, or revocation, shall take
effect until the licensee has been afforded an opportunity for a hearing before
the Council, a committee of the Council, or a hearing under the Administrative
Procedures Act, being M.S. Chapter 14, as it may be amended by time to time, as
may be determined by the Council in action calling the hearing. The hearing
shall be called by the Council upon written notice to the licensee served, in
person or by certified mail, not less than 15, nor more than 30, days prior to
the hearing date, stating the time, place, and purpose thereof. As additional
restrictions, or regulations, on licensees under this chapter, and in addition
to grounds for revocation, or suspension, stated in the city code or statute,
the following shall also be grounds for the action:
      (1)   The licensee suffered, or permitted, illegal acts upon the licensed
premises unrelated to the sale of beer, wine, or liquor;
      (2)   The licensee had knowledge of the illegal acts upon the licensed
premises, but failed to report the same to police;
      (3)   The licensee failed, or refused, to cooperate fully with police in
investigating the alleged illegal acts upon the licensed premises; or
      (4)   The activities of the licensee created a serious danger to the
public health, safety, or welfare.
(Prior Code, § 5.02) (Ord. 30, second series, passed 12-21-1981; Ord. 70,
second series, passed 3-18-1986; Ord. 156, second series, passed 10-20-1998)
Penalty, see §
111.999
§ 111.035 DUPLICATE LICENSES.
   Duplicates of all original licenses may be issued by the City Clerk-
Treasurer, without action by the Council, upon the licensee’s affidavit that
the original has been lost, and upon payment of a fee of $2 for issuance of the
duplicate. All duplicate licenses shall be clearly marked “DUPLICATE”.
(Prior Code, § 5.02)
§ 111.036 POSTING.
   All licensees shall post their licenses in their places of business.
(Prior Code, § 5.02)
§ 111.037 CONDITIONAL LICENSES.
   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, the Council may, upon
a finding of the necessity therefor, place the conditions and restrictions upon
a license as it, in its discretion, may deem reasonable and justified.
(Prior Code, § 5.03)
§ 111.038 INTOXICATING MALT LIQUOR SALE WITHOUT LICENSE.
   The holder of an on-sale wine license issued pursuant to this chapter who is
also licensed to sell beer at on-sale, and whose gross receipts are at least
60% attributable to the sale of food, is authorized to sell intoxicating malt
liquor at on-sale without an additional license.
(Prior Code, § 5.72) (Ord. 138, second series, passed 11-7-1995)
§ 111.039 RESIDENT MANAGER OR AGENT.
   (A)   Before a license is issued under this chapter to an individual who is
a non-resident of the city, to more than one individual, whether or not they
are residents of the city, or to a corporation, partnership, or association,
the applicant, or applicants, shall appoint, in writing, a natural person who
is a resident of the city as its manager, or agent.
   (B)   The resident manager, or agent, shall, by the terms of his or her
written consent:
      (1)   Take full responsibility for the conduct of the licensed premises;
and
      (2)   Serve as agent for service of notices, and other process relating
to the license.
   (C)   The manager, or agent, must be a person who, by reason of age,
character, reputation, and other attributes, could qualify individually as a
licensee. If the manager, or agent, ceases to be a resident of the city, or
ceases to act in the capacity for the licensee without appointment of a
successor, the license issued pursuant to the appointment shall be subject to
revocation, or suspension.
(Prior Code, § 5.05) (Ord. 30, second series, passed 12-21-1981)
§ 111.040 PREMISES LICENSED.
   A license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be valid only
for the premises described in the license, and all transactions relating to a
sale under the license must take place within the space, or structure.
(Prior Code, § 5.06) (Ord. 156, second series, passed 10-20-1998)
§ 111.041 SALE BY EMPLOYEE.
   Any sale of beer, wine, or liquor in, or from, any premises licensed under
this chapter by any employee authorized to make the sale in, or from, the place
is the act of the employer, as well as of the person actually making the sale;
and every employer is liable to all of the penalties provided by law for the
sale equally with the person actually making the sale.
(Prior Code, § 5.07)
§ 111.042 DELINQUENT TAXES AND CHARGES.
   No license under this chapter shall be granted for operation on any premises
upon which taxes, assessments, or installments thereof, or other financial
claims of the city, are owed by the applicant, and are delinquent and unpaid.
(Prior Code, § 5.08)
§ 111.043 LICENSE CONDITION AND UNLAWFUL ACT.
   (A)   All premises licensed under this chapter shall, at all times, be open
to inspection by any police officer to determine whether or not this chapter,
and all other laws, are being observed. All persons, as a condition to being
issued the license, consent to the inspection by the officers, and without a
warrant for searches or seizures.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any licensee, or agent or employee of a licensee,
to hinder, or prevent, a police officer from making the inspection.
(Prior Code, § 5.09) (Ord. 30, second series, passed 12-21-1981) Penalty, see §
111.999
§ 111.044 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   (A)   Consumption. It is unlawful for any person to consume, or any licensee
to permit consumption of, beer, wine, or liquor on licensed premises 30 minutes
after the hour when a sale thereof can legally be made.
   (B)   Removal of containers. It is unlawful for any on-sale licensee to
permit any glass, bottle, or other container, containing beer, wine, or liquor
in any quantity, to remain upon any table, bar, stool, or other place where
customers are served, 30 minutes after the hour when a sale thereof can legally
be made.
   (C)   Closing. It is unlawful for any person, other than an on-sale
licensee’s bona fide employee actually engaged in the performance of his or her
duties, to be on premises licensed under this chapter more than 30 minutes
after the legal time for making licensed sales; provided, however, that this
section shall not apply to licensees, employees of licensees, and patrons on
licensed premises for the sole purpose of preparing, serving, or consuming
food, or beverages other than beer, wine, or liquor.
(Prior Code, § 5.10) (Ord. 30, second series, passed 12-21-1981; Ord. 195,
second series, passed 5-2-2006) Penalty, see §
111.999
§ 111.045 INSURANCE CERTIFICATE REQUIRED.
   Whenever an insurance certificate is required by this chapter, the applicant
shall file with the City Clerk-Treasurer a certificate of insurance showing:
   (A)   The limits are at least as high as required;
   (B)   Coverage is effective for at least the license term approved; and
   (C)   The insurance will not be cancelled, or terminated, without 30 days’
written notice served upon the City Clerk-Treasurer. Cancellation, or
termination, of the coverage shall be grounds for license revocation.
(Prior Code, § 5.12) (Ord. 52, second series, passed 11-6-1984)
§ 111.046 FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY OF LICENSEES.
   (A)   Proof. No beer, wine, or liquor license shall be issued, or renewed,
unless, and until, the applicant has provided proof of financial responsibility
imposed by state statutes by filing with the city:
      (1)   A certificate of insurance providing at least $50,000 of coverage
because of bodily injury to any one person in any one occurrence; $100,000
because of bodily injury to two, or more, persons in any one occurrence;
$10,000 because of injury to, or destruction of property, of others in any one
occurrence; $50,000 for loss of means of support of any one person in any one
occurrence; $100,000 for loss of means of support of two, or more, persons in
any one occurrence; $50,000 for other pecuniary loss of any one person in any
one occurrence; and $100,000 for other pecuniary loss of two, or more, persons
in any one occurrence;
      (2)   A bond of a surety company with minimum coverages, as provided in
division (A)(1) above; or
      (3)   A certificate of the State Treasurer that the licensee has
deposited with him or her $100,000 in cash or securities, which may legally be
purchased by savings banks, or for trust funds having a market value of
$100,000.
   (B)   Exception. This section does not apply to on-sale beer licensees with
sales of beer of less than $25,000 for the preceding year, nor to off-sale beer
licensees with sales of beer of less than $50,000 for the preceding year, nor
does it apply to holders of on-sale wine licenses with sales of wine of less
than $25,000 for the preceding year. An affidavit of the licensee shall be
required to establish the exemption under this division (B).
   (C)   Documents submitted to Commissioner. All proofs of financial
responsibility and exemption affidavits filed with the city under this section
shall be submitted by the city to the State Commissioner of Public Safety.
(Prior Code, § 5.13) (Ord. 52, second series, passed 11-6-1984; Ord. 70, second
series, passed 3-18-1986; Ord. 156, second series, passed 10-20-1998; Ord. 15,
third series, passed 9-21-2010)
§ 111.047 MINORS; UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   (A)   Consumption. It is unlawful for any:
      (1)   Licensee to permit any minor to consume alcoholic beverages on the
licensed premises; and/or
      (2)   Minor to consume alcoholic beverages, except in the household of
the minor’s parent, or guardian, and then only with the consent of the parent,
or guardian.
   (B)   Purchasing. It is unlawful for any person:
      (1)   To sell, barter, furnish, or give alcoholic beverages to a minor,
unless the person is the parent or guardian of the minor, and then only for
consumption in the household of the parent, or guardian;
      (2)   To induce a minor to purchase, or attempt to purchase, any
alcoholic beverage; and/or
      (3)   To induce a minor to purchase, or procure, any alcoholic beverage.
   (C)   Possession. It is unlawful for a minor to possess any alcoholic
beverage with the intent to consume it at a place other than the household of
the minor’s parent, or guardian. Possession of an alcoholic beverage by a minor
at a place other than the household of the parent or guardian is prima facie
evidence of intent to consume it at a place other than the household of his or
her parent, or guardian.
   (D)   Entering licensed premises. It is unlawful for any minor, as defined
in this chapter, to enter licensed premises, or the municipal dispensary, for
the purpose of purchasing, or consuming, any alcoholic beverage. It is not
unlawful for any person, who has attained the age of 18 years, to enter
licensed premises for the following purposes:
      (1)   To perform work for the establishment, including the serving of
alcoholic beverages, unless otherwise prohibited by statute;
      (2)   To consume meals; and
      (3)   To attend social functions that are held in a portion of the
establishment where liquor is not sold. It is unlawful for a licensee to permit
a person under the age of 18 years to enter licensed premises unless attending
a social event at which alcoholic beverages are not served, or in the company
of a parent or guardian.
   (E)   Misrepresentation of age. It is unlawful for a minor to misrepresent
his or her age for the purpose of purchasing an alcoholic beverage.
   (F)   Proof of age. Proof of age for purchasing, or consuming, alcoholic
beverages may be established only by a valid driver’s license, or
identification card issued by the state, another state, or a province of
Canada, and including the photograph, and date of birth, of the licensed
person; or by a valid military identification card issued by the United States
Department of Defense; or, in the case of a foreign national, from a nation
other than Canada, by a valid passport.
(Prior Code, § 5.14) (Ord. 70, second series, passed 3-18-1986; Ord. 83, second
series, passed 4-7-1987; Ord. 156, second series, passed 10-20-1998) Penalty,
see §
111.999
§ 111.048 FIXING LICENSE FEE.
   Except as otherwise specifically provided, all fees provided for in this
chapter, including, but not by way of limitation, license fees, investigation,
and administration fees, shall be fixed, and determined, by the Council,
adopted by resolution, and uniformly enforced. The fees may, from time to time,
be amended by the Council by resolution. A copy of the resolution shall be kept
on file in the office of the City Clerk-Treasurer, and open to inspection
during regular business hours. For the purpose of fixing the fees, the Council
may categorize and classify; provided, that the categorization and
classification shall be included in the resolution authorized by this section.
(Prior Code, § 5.15) (Ord. 70, second series, passed 3-18-1986)
§ 111.049 WORKERS’ COMPENSATION.
   No license to operate a business shall be issued by the city until the
applicant presents his or her employer’s tax identification number, and
acceptable evidence of compliance with the workers’ compensation insurance
coverage requirement of the state statutes by providing the name of the
insurance company, the policy number, and dates of coverage, or the permit to
self-insure.
(Prior Code, § 5.18) (Ord. 101, second series, passed 4-17-1990)
§ 111.050 NON-ENCLOSED PREMISES.
   (A)   An applicant may make application to have an area that is contiguous
to the completely enclosed licensed premises included in the area licensed to
permit the sale, and consumption, of intoxicating, 3.2% malt liquor, and wine
in the contiguous area that is not wholly within a completely enclosed
building.
   (B)   The completed application shall be submitted to the City Clerk-
Treasurer, and distributed to the Department of Public Safety, Community
Development, Planning Division, and Building Department for review and comment
prior to submission to the City Council.
   (C)   The city staff shall review the suitability of the proposed, non-
enclosed premises in light of the applicable fire, building, and life safety
codes, zoning ordinances, past performance of the licensee in maintaining order
on the licensed premises and obeying applicable laws, the adequacy of the
proposal to provide for the safety of persons on the premises, impact on the
surrounding properties, adequacy of lighting, appropriateness of noise levels,
suitability of ingress and egress arrangements, including control of persons
entering, and leaving, for purposes of preventing consumption by minors, and
safety of seating arrangements.
   (D)   All non-enclosed areas must meet the urban design standards. Barriers
for the non-enclosed area must be constructed of wrought iron, brick, and/or
natural stone material(s) at a minimum of three feet in height.
   (E)   No sound amplification equipment shall be located in, or directed
into, the unenclosed service area, or unenclosed seating area, unless prior
approval of the City Council for a special event.
   (F)   There shall be no dispensing of alcohol beverages on the non-enclosed
premises.
   (G)   Any application granted for the inclusion of non-enclosed premises in
the licensed premises shall be granted upon the terms, and conditions, as the
Council may specify in granting the application relating to the limits of the
use, including, but not limited to, provisions relating to:
      (1)   Hours of operation in the non-enclosed area;
      (2)   Barriers to be maintained delineating the non-enclosed area, such
as requiring planters, walls, or fences;
      (3)   Minimum lighting requirements;
      (4)   Type of chairs, tables, or other fixtures to be used, and their
anchoring;
      (5)   Days of the weeks, or months, that non-enclosed premises may be
used;
      (6)   Personnel required to supervise the non-enclosed area;
      (7)   Items required by applicable fire, building, and life safety codes;
      (8)   Maximum number of persons who may be present at any one time;
      (9)   Means and methods used to restrict consumption to the licensed
area, and prevent removal, or consumption, of beverages outside the licensed
area;
      (10)   The type of beverage container to be used;
      (11)   The location, type, and number of sanitary facilities to be
provided, including receptacles extinguishing smoking materials; and
      (12)   The non-enclosed seating area shall be designed so as not to
obstruct a required entrance/exit of the main building.
   (H)   Heating of the unenclosed premises shall be electric or natural gas
only, as approved by the city. Open fire pits are prohibited.
   (I)   Any licensing of non-enclosed premises shall be deemed experimental,
and as such no expectation shall be had by the licensee that the licensing of
the non-enclosed premises will be renewed, even though no misconduct occurred
on the non-enclosed premises, in the event that the City Council determines to
repeal the general authorization for the non-enclosed area to be included in
the licensed premises.
   (J)   The area shall not be located in a required yard and/or setback.
   (K)   The area shall be located on a side of the building that is not
facing, or visible, from an abutting residential zoning district, and/or a
residential zoning district that is located across the street from the zoning
lot.
   (L)   Adequate lighting shall be provided in the unenclosed service area, or
unenclosed seating area. All exterior lighting shall comply with other lighting
provisions of the city code.
   (M)   The unenclosed seating area must be surrounded by a wall, or fence,
and landscaping in conformance with this chapter, and other provisions of the
city code. The wall, or fence, and landscaping shall be designed so as not to
allow individuals to enter, or exit, the unenclosed service or seating area,
except for direct access into the main building, or other approved access and/
or egress. The unenclosed seating area shall be designed so as not to obstruct
a required entrance/exit of the main building. The final design of the seating
area shall be reviewed by the City Council, or its designee, and the standards
for the operation, maintenance, and design of the seating area shall be part of
the license granted under the city code.
   (N)   The permitted occupancy of the unenclosed seating area shall be
established by the seating plan that is reviewed, and approved, by the City
Fire Marshal and Building Official. The permitted occupancy shall be part of
the liquor licensing requirements under this chapter.
   (O)   The City Council may modify these standards by granting a license
under the provisions of this chapter.
   (P)   This section shall be applicable for all areas where a restaurant, or
similar use, is a permitted use as per the applicable zoning ordinances located
in
Chapter 156.
(Ord. 32, third series, passed 4-15-2014)
§ 111.051 NONPROFIT, ONE-DAY LICENSE.
   (A)   License required. Any nonprofit organization desiring to serve liquids
for the purpose of mixing with liquor, and permitting the consumption, and
display, of liquor in conjunction with a social activity sponsored by it, shall
first obtain a license therefor from the city. It is unlawful for any
organization to fail to obtain the license.
   (B)   Term. The term of the license shall be one day only.
   (C)   Limitation on number. No more than ten licenses shall be issued in any
calendar year.
   (D)   Approval. In addition to Council approval, the license must be
approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety.
(Prior Code, § 5.76) (Ord. 52, second series, passed 11-6-1984) Penalty, see §
111.999
BEER LICENSING
§ 111.065 BEER LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person, directly or indirectly, on any pretense, or
by any device, to sell, barter, keep for sale, or otherwise dispose of beer, as
part of a commercial transaction, without a license therefor from the city.
This section shall not apply to sales by manufacturers to wholesalers, or to
sales by wholesalers to persons holding beer licenses from the city. Annual on-
sale beer licenses may be issued only to drug stores, restaurants, hotels,
clubs, establishments used exclusively for the sale of beer with the incidental
sale of tobacco and soft drinks, convenience stores, and organizations exempt
under 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3). Any person licensed to sell liquor at on-sale
shall not be required to obtain an on-sale beer license, and may sell beer on-
sale without an additional license.
(Prior Code, § 5.20) (Ord. 33, third series, passed 5-6-2014) Penalty, see §
111.999
§ 111.066 RESTRICTIONS AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   No license shall be issued, or renewed, if the applicant, prior to the
date of the application, has been convicted of violating any law relating to
the sale of beer or liquor; provided, that the denial is not contrary to any
other provision of the city code, or other law.
   (B)   No beer licensee shall, during the effective period of the license, be
the owner or holder of a federal retail liquor dealer’s special tax stamp for
the sale of intoxicating liquor, and ownership, or holding thereof, shall be
grounds for revocation.
   (C)   No license shall be granted to a manufacturer of beer, or to anyone
holding a financial interest in the manufacture.
   (D)   No license shall be granted within 400 feet of any public school, nor
within 400 feet of any church; provided, that licenses granted at present
locations shall not be affected by this division (D).
   (E)   No license shall be granted to any person under 21 years of age.
   (F)   No beer licensee shall permit liquor consumption upon his or her
premises, or permit any person to bring the same thereon, unless the licensee
shall also hold a current consumption and display license.
(Prior Code, § 5.22) (Ord. 70, second series, passed 3-18-1986)
§ 111.067 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   It is unlawful for any:
   (A)   Person who has not attained the age of 18 years to be employed to
sell, or serve, beer in any on-sale establishment;
   (B)   Person to knowingly induce another to make an illegal sale, or
purchase, of beer;
   (C)   Licensee to sell, or serve, beer to any person who is obviously
intoxicated;
   (D)   Licensee to fail, when doubt could exist, to require adequate proof of
age of a person upon the licensed premises;
   (E)   Licensee to sell beer on any day, or during any hour, when the sales
are not permitted by law;
   (F)   Licensee to allow consumption of beer on licensed premises on any day
when sales of beer are not permitted by law; and/or
   (G)   Person to purchase beer on any day, or during any hour, when sales of
beer are not permitted by law.
(Prior Code, § 5.22) (Ord. 70, second series, passed 3-18-1986; Ord. 83, second
series, passed 4-7-1987) Penalty, see §
111.999
§ 111.068 BEER SALE RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Hours of sale. No sale of beer shall be made between the hours of 1:00
a.m. and 8:00. a.m. on any weekday, Monday through Saturday, inclusive. Neither
shall any beer sale be made on any Sunday between the hours of l:00 a.m. and
12:00 p.m.
   (B)   Beer sales to intoxicated persons. It is unlawful to sell beer to a
person who is in an intoxicated condition, or to an habitual drunkard.
(Prior Code, § 5.23) (Ord. 119, second series, passed 4-20-1993) Penalty, see §
111.999
§ 111.069 TEMPORARY BEER LICENSE.
   (A)   Applicant. A club or charitable, religious, or nonprofit organization,
duly incorporated as a nonprofit, or religious, corporation under the laws of
the state, and having its registered office, and principal place of activity,
within the city, shall qualify for a temporary on-sale beer license, which
shall not include the serving of beer in school buildings and on school
grounds.
   (B)   Conditions.
      (1)   An application for a temporary license shall state the exact dates,
and place, of the proposed temporary sale.
      (2)   No applicant shall qualify for a temporary license for more than a
total of seven days in any calendar year.
      (3)   The Council may, but at no time shall it be under any obligation
whatsoever to, grant a temporary beer license on premises owned, or controlled,
by the city. Any such license may be conditioned, qualified, or restricted as
the Council sees fit. If the premises to be licensed are owned, or under the
control of, the city, the applicant shall file with the city, prior to issuance
of the license, a certificate of liability insurance coverage in at least the
sum of $500,000 for injury to any one person, and $500,000 for injury to more
than one person, naming the city as an insured, during the license period. The
license shall be issued only on the condition that the applicant will not sell,
in excess of $10,000 (retail value), worth of beer in any calendar year, and
thereupon shall be exempt from proof of financial responsibility, as provided
for herein.
(Prior Code, § 5.24) (Ord. 52, second series, passed 11-6-1984)
LIQUOR LICENSING
§ 111.080 LIQUOR LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, directly or indirectly, on any
pretense, or by any device, to sell, barter, keep for sale, or otherwise
dispose of liquor, as part of a commercial transaction, without a license
therefor from the city.
   (B)   This section shall not apply:
      (1)   To the potable liquors as are intended for therapeutic purposes,
and not as a beverage;
      (2)   To industrial alcohol and its compounds not prepared, or used, for
beverage purposes;
      (3)   To wine in the possession of a person duly licensed under this
chapter as an on-sale wine licensee;
      (4)   To sales by manufacturers to wholesalers duly licensed as such by
the Commissioner;
      (5)   To sales by wholesalers to persons holding liquor licenses from the
city; or
      (6)   To the municipal liquor store.
   (C)   The voters of the city, having authorized the issuance at a special
election called for that purpose, may issue on-sale liquor licenses to:
      (1)   Hotels;
      (2)   Restaurants; and
      (3)   Clubs, or congressionally chartered veterans’ organizations;
provided, that liquor sales will be made only to members and bona fide guests.
   (D)   Any person licensed to sell liquor at on-sale shall not be required to
obtain an on-sale beer license, and may sell beer on-sale without an additional
license.
(Prior Code, § 5.40) Penalty, see §
111.999
§ 111.081 LIQUOR LICENSE FEES.
   (A)   At the option of the licensee, payment of the on-sale liquor license
fee may be made in the following installments:
      (1)   The first half thereof on, or before, the first day of November
immediately preceding the license year; and
      (2)   The last half on, or before, the first day of June during the
license year.
   (B)   In the event that, during the licensed year, the licensed premises
shall be destroyed, or so damaged by fire, or otherwise, that the licensee
shall cease to carry on the licensed business, or in case the business of the
licensee shall cease by reason of his or her illness or death, or if it shall
become unlawful for the licensee to carry on the licensed business under his or
her license, except when the license is revoked, the city shall, upon the
happening of any such event, refund to the licensee, or to his or her estate,
the part of the license fee paid by him or her as corresponds to the time the
license had yet to run. In the event of death of the licensee, his or her
personal representative is hereby authorized to continue operation of the
business for not more than 90 days after the death of the licensee.
(Prior Code, § 5.41) (Ord. 70, second series, passed 3-18-1986) Penalty, see §
111.999
§ 111.082 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Application. Every person desiring a license shall file with the City
Clerk-Treasurer a written, and verified, application in the form prescribed by
the proper agency of the state, together with the additional information as the
Council may desire.
   (B)   Renewal applications. Renewal applications shall be submitted at least
60 days prior to the expiration of the license, and may be made in the
abbreviated form as the Council may approve. The Council may waive the
aforementioned 60-day requirement for good cause shown. With respect to each
renewal application of a restaurant, the Council may require the applicant to
submit certified copies of operating statements, and relevant portions of
income tax returns for appropriate preceding accounting periods.
(Prior Code, § 5.42)
§ 111.083 PERSONS ELIGIBLE.
   (A)   No license under this chapter may be issued, or renewed, to:
      (1)   A person who, within five years of the license application, has
been convicted of any felony, or a willful violation of a federal or state law,
or local ordinance governing the manufacture, sale, distribution, or possession
for sale, or distribution, of alcoholic beverages;
      (2)   A person who has had an alcoholic beverage license revoked within
five years of the license application, or to any person who, at the time of the
violation, owns any interest, whether as a holder of more than 5% of the
capital stock of a corporate licensee, as a partner or otherwise, in the
premises, or in the business conducted thereon, or to a corporation,
partnership, association, enterprise, business, or firm in which any person is,
in any manner, interested;
      (3)   A person under the age of 21 years;
      (4)   A person not of good moral character and repute; or
      (5)   A person not a citizen of the United States, or a resident alien.
   (B)   No person holding a license from the Commissioner as a manufacturer,
brewer (except as provided by statute), wholesaler, or importer, may have a
direct, or indirect, interest, in whole or in part, in a business holding an
alcoholic beverage license from the city.
(Prior Code, § 5.43) (Ord. 156, second series, passed 10-20-1998)
§ 111.084 LICENSE RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   No slot machines, or other gambling device or apparatus, shall be
permitted on licensed premises, or in any room connected therewith, except that
gambling devices may be kept, or operated, and raffles conducted, on licensed
premises and adjoining rooms when the activities are licensed by the Charitable
Gambling Control Board.
   (B)   No prostitute, or person of known immoral character, or any disorderly
person, shall be permitted on licensed premises.
   (C)   Any licensed premises may be inspected by the Health Officer at the
time, or times, as necessary, or advisable, to maintain clean, and sanitary,
conditions.
   (D)   No licensee shall sell, offer for sale, or keep for sale, liquor in
any original package which has been refilled, or partly refilled.
   (E)   No person shall be employed on licensed premises who has been
convicted of a felony.
   (F)   No person under 18 years of age may be employed in a place where
liquor is sold for consumption on the premises, except persons under 18 years
of age may be employed as musicians, or in bussing or washing dishes, in a
restaurant or hotel that is licensed to sell liquor, and may be employed as
waiters, or waitresses, at a restaurant or hotel where only wine is sold;
provided, that the person under the age of 18 may not serve, or sell, any wine.
   (G)   It is unlawful for any licensee, or employee thereof, to sell, or
serve, liquor to any person who is obviously intoxicated.
   (H)   Every licensee shall be responsible for the conduct of his or her
place of business, and for conditions of sobriety and order therein.
(Prior Code, § 5.44) (Ord. 30, second series, passed 12-21-1981; Ord. 52,
second series, passed 11-6-1984; Ord. 83, second series, passed 4-7-1987)
Penalty, see §
111.999
§ 111.085 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   It is unlawful for any:
   (A)   Person to knowingly induce another to make an illegal sale, or
purchase, of liquor;
   (B)   Licensee, or an employee of a licensee, to sell liquor on any day, or
during any hour, when sales of liquor are not permitted by law; and/or
   (C)   Person to purchase, or consume, liquor on licensed premises on any
day, or during any hour, when sales of liquor are not permitted by law.
(Prior Code, § 5.45) (Ord. 70, second series, passed 3-18-1986) Penalty, see §
111.999
§ 111.086 CLUBS; LIQUOR LICENSES.
   (A)   License required. It is unlawful for any club to sell or keep, or
offer for sale, any liquor without a license therefor from the city.
   (B)   License restrictions and regulations.
      (1)   No club shall sell liquor to persons other than its members, and
their bona fide guests.
      (2)   All liquor license restrictions, liquor sale regulations, and hours
and days of liquor sales, as stated in this chapter and relating to the on-sale
of liquor, shall be binding upon all club licensees.
   (C)   Age of manager. No club licensee shall be under the management, or
control, of a person who has not attained the age of 21 years.
(Prior Code, § 5.70) Penalty, see §
111.999
WINE LICENSING
§ 111.100 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, directly or indirectly, on any
pretense, or by any device, to sell, barter, keep for sale, charge for
possession, or otherwise dispose of wine on-sale, as part of a commercial
transaction, without a license therefor from the city.
   (B)   This section shall not apply:
      (1)   To sales by manufacturers to wholesalers duly licensed as such by
the Commissioner;
      (2)   To sales by wholesalers to persons holding on-sale, or off-sale,
liquor licenses from the city;
      (3)   To sales by wholesalers to persons holding on-sale wine licenses
from the city; or
      (4)   To sales by on-sale liquor licensees on days, and during hours,
when on-sale liquor sales are permitted.
(Prior Code, § 5.71) (Ord. 156, second series, passed 10-20-1998) Penalty, see
§
111.999
§ 111.101 LICENSE RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to consume, or any licensee to permit
consumption of, any wine on the licensed premises after the hour when a sale
can legally be made.
   (B)   It is unlawful to sell wine to persons to whom liquor sales are not
permitted by the city code.
   (C)   No wine license shall be issued to an applicant, other than a
restaurant who shall have seating facilities for seating not less than 25
guests at one time.
   (D)   It is unlawful for any licensee to make any sale of wine except for
consumption on the licensed premises, and in conjunction with the sale of food.
   (E)   No person under 18 years of age may be employed in a place where
liquor is sold for consumption on the premises, except persons under 18 years
of age may be employed as musicians, or in bussing or washing dishes, in a
restaurant or hotel that is licensed to sell liquor, and may be employed as
waiters or waitresses at a restaurant or hotel where only wine is sold;
provided, that the person under the age of 18 may not serve, or sell, any wine.
(Prior Code, § 5.71) (Ord. 30, second series, passed 12-21-1981; Ord. 83,
second series, passed 4-7-1987; Ord. 29, third series, passed 5-7-2013)
Penalty, see §
111.999
BREWER TAPROOMS, SMALL BREWER, BREW PUB LICENSING
§ 111.115 PROVISIONS OF STATE LAW ADOPTED.
   The provisions of M.S. Chapter 340A, as it may be amended from time to time,
relating to various definitions, licensing, consumption, sales, conditions of
bonds of licensees, hours of sale, and all other matters pertaining to the
retail sale, distribution, and consumption of intoxicating liquors insofar as
they are applicable to brewer taprooms and small brewer off-sale are adopted,
and made a part of this subchapter as if set out in full.
(Ord. 49, third series, passed 1-19-2021)
§ 111.116 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person or entity shall sell, or offer for sale, malt liquors brewed
on premises, on-sale or off-sale, within the city without first obtaining a
license pursuant to this subchapter.
   (B)   The City Council, upon application of a person, or entity, wishing to
obtain a license pursuant to this subchapter, may approve, or deny, the
application for any reason, or none.
(Ord. 49, third series, passed 1-19-2021)
§ 111.117 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Application. Every application for a license, pursuant to this
subchapter, to sell malt liquor shall state the name of the applicant, his or
her age, representations as to his or her character or references, as the
Council may require, his or her citizenship, the type of license applied for,
the business in connection with which the proposed license will operate and its
locations, whether the applicant is owner and operator of the business, how
long he or she has been in that business at that place, and any other
information as the Council may require from time to time. In addition to
containing that information, the application shall be in the form prescribed by
the Department of Public Safety, and shall be verified, and filed, with the
City Manager. No person shall make a false statement in an application.
   (B)   Civil damages liability insurance. Prior to the issuance of any
license pursuant to this subchapter, applicants shall file with the City
Manager a liability insurance policy in the amount of not less than $10,000
coverage for property damage; $50,000 coverage for death or injury to one
person; and $100,000 coverage for death or injury to more than one person, or
such greater or lesser amounts as may, from time to time, be provided by
resolution of the Council, which shall specifically provide for the payment by
the insurance company on behalf of the insured of all sums which the insured
shall become obligated to pay by reason of liability imposed upon him or her by
reason of M.S. § 340A.81 (the State Civil Damages Act, being M.S. § 304A.801,
as it may be amended from time to time), as it may be amended from time to
time. This policy shall be issued by an insurance company licensed to do
business in the state, and shall further provide that the policy shall not be
cancelled for any cause by either the insured, or the company, without first
giving ten days’ notice to the city, in writing, of the intention to cancel the
policy. This insurance shall, in all respect, comply with the provisions of the
State Intoxicating Liquor Act, and shall be provided in lieu of bond, or cash
security, referred herein.
   (C)   Liability insurance. Prior to the issuance of a liquor license
pursuant to this section, and in addition to the civil damages act liability
insurance provided for above, the applicant shall file with the City Manager a
general public liability insurance policy covering the licensed premises, and
the activities of the establishment, including the insurance for vehicles used
in connection with the establishment in the amount of not less than $10,000
property damage; $50,000 coverage for injury or death of one person; and
$100,000 coverage for injury or death of more than one person. The insurance
shall further provide that no cancellation of the policy for any cause shall be
made by either the insured or the insurance company within 14 days’ written
notice to the city of the intention to cancel the policy. Liability insurance
policy shall be approved as to form by the City Attorney. Operation of a
licensed business without having on file with the city at all times effective
security, as required in division (B) above, and this division (C), is a cause
for revocation of the license.
(Ord. 49, third series, passed 1-19-2021)
§ 111.118 GRANTING OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Investigation and issuance. The City Council shall investigate all
facts set out in the application. Opportunity shall be given to any person to
be heard for, or against, the granting of the license under this subchapter.
After the investigation and hearing, the Council shall, in its discretion,
grant, or refuse, the application.
   (B)   Person and premises licensed; transfer. Each license shall be issued
only to the applicant, and for the premises described in the application. No
license may be transferred to another person or place without City Council
approval. Any transfer of the license, and a transfer of the stock, without
prior Council approval, is a ground for revocation of the license.
   (C)   Persons ineligible for license. No license shall be granted to any
person made ineligible for such a license by state law.
   (D)   Places ineligible for license. No license shall be issued for any
place, or any business, ineligible for such a license under state law. No
license shall be granted for an operation on any premises on which taxes,
assessments, or other financial claims of the city, including utilities, are
delinquent or unpaid.
(Ord. 49, third series, passed 1-19-2021)
§ 111.119 BREWER TAPROOM, ON-SALE.
   (A)   Brewer taproom on-sale license authorized. Notwithstanding any
provision of the city code to the contrary, the Council may issue a brewer
taproom license for the on-sale of malt liquor produced by the brewer for
consumption on the premises of, or adjacent to, one brewer location owned by
the brewer, subject to the requirements contained in M.S. § 340A.26, as it may
be amended from time to time. The Council may not issue a license under this
section to a brewer if the brewer seeking the license, or exercising control
over the brewer seeking the license, is a brewer that brews more than 250,000
barrels of malt liquor annually, or a winery that produces more than 250,000
gallons of wine annually.
   (B)   Applicant. The applicant for a license under this section must be a
brewer licensed under M.S. § 340A.301, subd. 6(d),(I), or (j), as may be
amended from time to time.
   (C)   Terms and conditions. No license is valid until approved by the
Commissioner of Public Safety. The alcoholic beverages sold on the brewer’s
premises must be produced upon the brewery premises. Sale of alcoholic
beverages pursuant to this subchapter is restricted by the times provided,
pursuant to M.S. § 340A.504, as it may be amended from time to time. A brewer
may only hold one brewer taproom on-sale license pursuant to this subchapter.
Every licensee under this subchapter is responsible for the acts and omissions
of his or her employees and the conditions within the premises. A license
holder under this subchapter shall allow any peace officer, health officer, or
properly designated officer, or employee, of the city to enter, inspect, and
search the premises during business hours without warrant. All other applicable
laws, statutes, ordinances, rules, and regulations shall be applicable to
licenses issued pursuant to this section, and the licensees of the licenses
unless inconsistent with the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 49, third series, passed 1-19-2021)
§ 111.120 SMALL BREWER, OFF-SALE.
   (A)   Small brewer off-sale license authorized. Notwithstanding any
provision of the city code to the contrary, the Council may issue a brewer
taproom license for the off-sale of malt liquor produced by the brewer for
consumption on the premises of, or adjacent to, one brewer location owned by
the brewer, subject to the requirements contained in M.S. § 340A.28, as it may
be amended from time to time. The Council may not issue a license under this
section to a brewer if the brewer seeking the license, or exercising control
over the brewer seeking the license, is a brewer that brews more than 20,000
barrels of malt liquor annually, or a winery that produces more than 250,000
gallons of wine annually.
   (B)   Applicant. The applicant for a license under this clause must be a
brewer licensed under M.S § 340A.301, subd. 6(c), (i), or (j), as it may be
amended from time to time.
   (C)   Terms and conditions. No license is valid until approved by the
Commissioner of Public Safety. The amount of malt liquor sold off-sale may not
exceed 500 barrels annually. Sale of alcoholic beverages pursuant to this
subchapter is restricted by the times provided pursuant to M.S. § 340A.504, as
it may be amended from time to time. The malt liquor shall be packaged pursuant
to M.S. § 340A.285, as it may be amended from time to time, in 64-ounce
containers commonly known as “growlers”. A brewer may, but is not required to,
refill any container or bottle with malt liquor for off-sale consumption at the
request of a customer. The container must be refilled on premises, and filled
from the tap at the time of sale. A brewer may only hold one small brewer off-
sale license pursuant to this subchapter. Every licensee under this subchapter
is responsible for the acts, and omissions, of his or her employees, and the
conditions within the premises. A license holder under this subchapter shall
allow any peace officer, health officer, or properly designated office, or
employee, of the city to enter, inspect, and search the premises during
business hours without a warrant. All other applicable laws, statutes,
ordinances, rules, and regulations shall be applicable to licenses issued
pursuant to this section, and the licensees of the licenses unless inconsistent
with the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 49, third series, passed 1-19-2021)
§ 111.121 BREW PUB, OFF-SALE.
   (A)   Off-sale brew pub license authorized. Notwithstanding any provision of
the city code to the contrary, the Council may issue an off-sale brew pub
license for the off-sale of malt liquor produced by the brewer for consumption
on the premises as a part of a restaurant establishment, subject to the
requirements contained in M.S. § 340A.24, as it may be amended from time to
time. The off-sale brew pub license authorizes the off-sale of malt liquor
produced, and packaged, on the premises where the restaurant establishment has
been granted an on-sale liquor license by the city. The Council may not issue a
license under this section to a brew pub establishment where total retail on,
or off, sale exceeds 3,500 barrels per year; provided, that off-sales may not
total more than 750 barrels.
   (B)   Applicant. The applicant for a license under this section must be a
brewer licensed under M.S. § 340A.301, subd. 6(d), as it may be amended from
time to time.
   (C)   Terms and conditions. No license is valid until approved by the
Commissioner of Public Safety. The amount of malt liquor sold off-sale may not
exceed 750 barrels annually. Sale of alcoholic beverages pursuant to this
subchapter is restricted by the times provided pursuant to M.S. § 340A.504, as
it may be amended from time to time. The malt liquor shall be packaged pursuant
to M.S. § 340A.285, as it may be amended from time to time, in 64-ounce
containers commonly known as “growlers”. A brewer may, but is not required to,
refill any container or bottle with malt liquor for off-sale consumption at the
request of a customer. The container must be refilled on premises, and filled
from the tap at the time of sale. A brewer must hold a liquor license. Every
licensee under this subchapter is responsible for the acts, and omissions, of
his or her employees, and the conditions within the premises. A license holder
under this subchapter shall allow any peace officer, health officer, or
properly designated officer, or employee of the city, to enter, inspect, and
search the premises during business hours without a warrant. All other
applicable laws, statutes, ordinances, rules, and regulations shall be
applicable to licenses issued pursuant to this section, and the licensees of
such licenses unless inconsistent with the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 49, third series, passed 1-19-2021)
§ 111.122 FEES.
   (A)   Fees. The annual fees for a license pursuant to this subchapter shall
be established by resolution.
   (B)   Payment. Each application for a license pursuant to this subchapter
shall be accompanied by a receipt from the City Clerk-Treasurer for payment in
full of the license fee. All fees shall be paid into the General Fund. If an
application is rejected, the City Clerk-Treasurer shall refund the amount paid.
   (C)   Term pro rata fee. Each license shall be issued for a period of one
year, except that if the application is made during the license year, a license
may be issued for the remainder of the year for a pro rata fee, with any
unexpired fraction of a month being counted as one month. Every license shall
expire on December 31.
   (D)   Refund. No refund of any fee shall be made, except as authorized by
statute.
(Ord. 49, third series, passed 1-19-2021)
§ 111.123 SUSPENSION OF LICENSE; REVOCATION.
   (A)   The Council may revoke any license for violation of any statute, or
ordinance, relating to the sale of liquor, or may suspend the license for a
period not exceeding 60 days if revocation is not mandatory.
   (B)   The licensee shall be granted a hearing upon at least ten days’ notice
before revocation, or suspension, is ordered, except where mandatory revocation
is provided by law.
(Ord. 49, third series, passed 1-19-2021)
§ 111.999 PENALTY.
   Every person violates a section, division, subchapter, or provision of this
chapter when he or she performs an act thereby prohibited, or declared
unlawful, or fails to act when the failure is thereby prohibited, or declared
unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor,
except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof.
(Prior Code, § 5.99)
CHAPTER 112: AMUSEMENT AND LEISURE
Section
Amusement Devices
   
112.01   Definitions
   
112.02   License required
   
112.03   Fees
   
112.04   Exception
Billiards, Pool Halls, and Bowling Alleys
   
112.15   License required
   
112.16   Practices prohibited
AMUSEMENT DEVICES
§ 112.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   COIN AMUSEMENT. Any machine which, upon the insertion of a coin, token, or
slug, operates, or may be operated, by he public generally for entertainment,
or amusement, which machine emits music, noise, or displays motion pictures.
   ELECTRONIC OR MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE. Includes both GAMES OF SKILL and
COIN AMUSEMENT, as herein defined.
   GAME OF SKILL. Any device excepting pool and billiard tables, bowling
alleys, and shooting lanes, but including miniatures thereof, played by
manipulating special equipment and propelling balls, or other projectiles,
across a board, or field, into respective positions whereby a score is
established, the object of which is to secure a special number, or indicate a
winner which may be played by the public generally at a price paid either
directly, or indirectly, for the privilege, whether a prize is offered for the
game or not.
(Prior Code, § 6.42)
§ 112.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person to keep, or maintain, a mechanical amusement
device for use by the public without a license therefor from the city.
(Prior Code, § 6.42) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.03 FEES.
   Fees shall be set by the Council, and adopted by resolution.
(Prior Code, § 6.42) (Ord. 44, second series, passed 10-18-1982)
§ 112.04 EXCEPTION.
   This subchapter shall not apply to video games of chance under the control
of the Charitable Gambling Control Board.
(Prior Code, § 6.42) (Ord. 57, second series, passed 11-20-1984)
BILLIARDS, POOL HALLS, AND BOWLING ALLEYS
§ 112.15 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person to keep, or maintain, any pool, billiard,
snooker, or other game table, or any bowling alley (bowling lane) available for
public use, without first having obtained a license from the city.
(Prior Code, § 6.20) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.16 PRACTICES PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any pool, billiard, snooker, or other game table licensee
to be open between 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. of any secular day, or between 1:00
a.m. and 12:00 p.m. on any Sunday, and permit use of the licensed facilities.
(Prior Code, § 6.20) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 113: TOBACCO SALE, CONSUMPTION
Section
   
113.01   Purpose and intent
   
113.02   Definitions
   
113.03   License
   
113.04   Fees
   
113.05   Basis for denial of license
   
113.06   Prohibited sales
   
113.07   Vending machines
   
113.08   Self-service sales
   
113.09   Responsibility
   
113.10   Compliance checks and inspections
   
113.11   Other prohibited acts
   
113.12   Exceptions and defenses
   
113.13   Violations
 
   
113.99   Penalty
§ 113.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   Because the city recognizes that the sale of commercial tobacco, tobacco-
related devices, electronic delivery devices, and nicotine, or lobelia,
delivery products to persons under the age of 21 may violate both state and
federal laws; and because studies, which the city accepts and adopts, have
shown that youth use of any commercial tobacco product has increased to 26.4%
in the state; and because nearly 90% of people who smoke begin smoking before
they have reached the age of 21 years, and that almost no one starts smoking
after age 25; and because marketing analysis, public health research, and
commercial tobacco industry documents reveal that tobacco companies have used
menthol, mint, fruit, candy, and alcohol flavors as a way to target youth and
young adults, and that the presence of such flavors can make it more difficult
to quit; and because studies show that youth and young adults are especially
susceptible to commercial tobacco product availability, advertising, and price
promotions at tobacco retail environments; and because commercial tobacco use
has been shown to be the cause of many serious health problems which
subsequently place a financial burden on all levels of government, this chapter
is intended to regulate the sale of commercial tobacco, tobacco-related
devices, electronic delivery devices, and nicotine, or lobelia, delivery
products for the purpose of enforcing, and furthering, existing laws, to
protect youth and young adults against the serious health effects associated
with use and initiation, and to further the official public policy of the state
to prevent young people from starting to smoke, as stated in M.S. § 144.391, as
it may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 44, third series, passed 10-15-2019)
§ 113.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   CHILD-RESISTANT PACKAGING. Packaging that meets the definition set forth in
16 C.F.R § 1700.15(b), as in effect on January 1, 2015, and was tested in
accordance with the method described in 16 C.F.R. § 1700.20, as in effect on
January 1, 2015.
   CIGARS. Any roll of tobacco that is wrapped in tobacco leaf, or in any other
substance containing tobacco, with or without a tip or mouthpiece, which is not
a cigarette as defined in M.S. § 297F.01, subd. 3, as it may be amended from
time to time.
   COMPLIANCE CHECKS. The system the city uses to investigate, and ensure, that
those authorized to sell licensed products are following, and complying with,
the requirements of this chapter. COMPLIANCE CHECKS shall involve the use of
persons under the age of 21, as authorized by this chapter. COMPLIANCE CHECKS
shall also mean the use of persons under the age of 21 who attempt to purchase
licensed products for educational, research, and training purposes as
authorized by state and federal laws. COMPLIANCE CHECKS may also be conducted
by other units of government for the purpose of enforcing appropriate federal,
state, or local laws and regulations relating to licensed products.
   ELECTRONIC DELIVERY DEVICE. Any product containing, or delivering, nicotine,
lobelia, or any other substance, whether natural or synthetic, intended for
human consumption through the inhalation of aerosol or vapor from the product.
ELECTRONIC DELIVERY DEVICE includes, but is not limited to, devices
manufactured, marketed, or sold as e-cigarettes, e-cigars, e-pipes, vape pens,
mods, tank systems, or under any other product name, or descriptor. ELECTRONIC
DELIVERY DEVICE includes any component part of a product, whether or not
marketed or sold separately. ELECTRONIC DELIVERY DEVICE does not include any
product that has been approved, or certified, by the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration for sale as a tobacco-cessation product, as a tobacco-dependence
product, or for other medical purposes, and is marketed, and sold, for such an
approved purpose.
   INDOOR AREA. All space between a floor and a ceiling that is bounded by
walls, doorways, or windows, whether open or closed, covering more than 50% of
the combined surface area of the vertical planes constituting the perimeter of
the area. A wall includes any retractable divider, garage door, or other
physical barrier, whether temporary or permanent. A standard window screen
(0.011 gauge with an 18 by 16 mesh count) is not considered a wall.
   LICENSED PRODUCTS. Any tobacco, tobacco-related device, electronic delivery
device, or nicotine, or lobelia, delivery product.
   LOOSIES.
      (1)   Single, or individually-packaged, cigars or cigarettes offered for
sale, regardless of whether they have been removed from their original retail
packaging.
      (2)   Any other licensed product that has been removed from its intended
original retail packaging and offered for sale. LOOSIES does not include
individual cigars with a retail price, after any discounts are applied, and
before any sales taxes are imposed, of at least $4 per cigar.
   MOVABLE PLACE OF BUSINESS. Any form of business operated out of a truck,
van, automobile, or other type of vehicle, or transportable shelter, and not a
fixed address store front, or other permanent type of structure authorized for
sales transactions.
   NICOTINE OR LOBELIA DELIVERY PRODUCT. Any product containing, or delivering,
nicotine or lobelia intended for human consumption, or any part of such a
product, that is not a tobacco, or an electronic delivery, device, as defined
in this section. NICOTINE OR LOBELIA DELIVERY PRODUCT does not include any
product that has been approved, or otherwise certified, for legal sale by the
U.S. Food and Drug Administration as a tobacco-cessation product, a tobacco-
dependence product, or for other medical purposes, and is being marketed, and
sold, solely for that approved purpose.
   RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT. Any place of business where licensed products are
available for sale to the general public. RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS shall include,
but not be limited to, tobacco shops, grocery stores, gas stations, convenience
stores, bars, and restaurants.
   SALE. Any transfer of goods for money, trade, barter, or other
consideration.
   SELF-SERVICE MERCHANDISING. Open displays of licensed products in any manner
where any person shall have access to the licensed products, without the
assistance, or intervention, of the licensee, or the licensee’s employee. The
assistance, or intervention, shall entail the actual physical exchange of the
licensed products between the customer and the licensee, or employee. SELF-
SERVICE MERCHANDISING shall not include vending machines.
   SMOKING. Inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted or heated
cigar, cigarette, or pipe, or any other lighted, or heated, product containing,
made, or derived from nicotine, tobacco, marijuana, or other plant, whether
natural or synthetic, that is intended for inhalation. SMOKING also includes
carrying, or using, an activated electronic delivery device.
   TOBACCO or TOBACCO PRODUCTS. Any product containing, made, or derived from
tobacco that is intended for human consumption, whether chewed, smoked,
absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any other means,
or any component, part, or accessory of a tobacco product including, but not
limited to, cigarettes; cigars; cheroots; stogies; perique; granulated, plug
cut, crimp cut, ready rubbed, and other smoking tobacco; snuff; snuff flour;
cavendish; plug and twist tobacco; fine cut, and other chewing tobaccos;
shorts; refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings and sweepings of tobacco; and other
kinds, and forms, of tobacco. TOBACCO does not include any product that has
been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco-
cessation product, as a tobacco-dependence product, or for other medical
purposes, and is being marketed, and sold solely, for such an approved purpose.
   TOBACCO-RELATED DEVICES. Any tobacco product, as well as pipes, wraps,
rolling papers, or other device intentionally designed, or intended, to be used
with tobacco products. TOBACCO-RELATED DEVICES includes components of tobacco-
related devices or tobacco products, which may be marketed or sold separately.
TOBACCO-RELATED DEVICES may, or may not, contain tobacco.
   VENDING MACHINE. Any mechanical, electric or electronic, or other type of
device which dispenses licensed products upon the insertion of money, tokens,
or other form of payment directly into the machine by the person seeking to
purchase the licensed products.
(Ord. 44, third series, passed 10-15-2019)
§ 113.03 LICENSE.
   (A)   General. It is unlawful for any person to sell, or offer to sell, any
licensed products without first having obtained a license to do so from the
city.
   (B)   Application. An application for a license to sell licensed products
shall be made on a form provided by the city. The application shall contain the
full name of the applicant, the applicant’s residential and business addresses,
and telephone numbers, the name of the business for which the license is
sought, and any additional information the city deems necessary. Upon receipt
of a completed application, the City Clerk-Treasurer shall forward the
application to the Council for action at its next regularly scheduled Council
meeting. If the City Clerk-Treasurer shall determine that an application is
incomplete, he or she shall return the application to the applicant with notice
of the information necessary to make the application complete.
   (C)   Action. The Council may either approve, or deny, the license, or it
may delay action for the reasonable period of time as necessary to complete any
investigation of the application, or the applicant, it deems necessary. If the
Council shall approve the license, the City Clerk-Treasurer shall issue the
license to the applicant. If the Council denies the license, notice of the
denial shall be given to the applicant along with notice of the applicant’s
right to appeal the Council’s decision.
   (D)   Term. All licenses issued under this section shall be valid for one
calendar year from the date of issue.
   (E)   Revocation or suspension. Any license issued under this section may be
revoked or suspended as provided in §§
113.13 and
113.99.
   (F)   Transfers. All licenses issued under this section shall be valid only
on the premises for which the license was issued, and only for the person to
whom the license was issued. No transfer of any license to another location, or
persons, shall be valid without the prior approval of the Council.
   (G)   Movable place of business. No license shall be issued to a movable
place of business. Only fixed location businesses shall be eligible to be
licensed under this section.
   (H)   Displays. All licenses shall be posted, and displayed, in plain view
of the general public on the licensed premises.
   (I)   Renewals. The renewal of a license under this section shall be handled
in the same manner as the original application. The request for a renewal shall
be made at least 30 days, but no more than 60 days, before the expiration of
the current license.
   (J)   Issuance as privilege and not a right. The issuance of a license is a
privilege, and does not entitle the license holder to an automatic renewal of
the license.
   (K)   Smoking prohibited. Smoking, including smoking for the purpose of the
sampling of licensed products, is prohibited within the indoor area of any
retail establishment licensed under this section.
   (L)   Samples prohibited. No person shall distribute samples of any licensed
product free of charge, or at nominal cost.
(Ord. 44, third series, passed 10-15-2019) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.04 FEES.
   No license shall be issued under this chapter until the appropriate license
fee shall be paid in full. The fee for a license under this chapter shall be
$15.
(Ord. 44, third series, passed 10-15-2019)
§ 113.05 BASIS FOR DENIAL OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The following shall be grounds for denying the issuance, or renewal,
of a license under this chapter; however, except as may otherwise be provided
by law, the existence of any particular ground for denial does not mean that
the city must deny the license:
      (1)   The applicant is under the age of 21 years;
      (2)   The applicant has been convicted, within the past five years, of
any violation of a federal, state, or local law, or city code provision, or
other regulation relating to licensed products;
      (3)   The applicant has had a license to sell licensed products
suspended, or revoked, within the preceding 12 months of the date of
application;
      (4)   The applicant fails to provide any information required on the
application, or provides false, or misleading, information; and
      (5)   The applicant is prohibited by federal, state, or local law, city
code provision, or other regulation, from holding the license.
   (B)   If a license is mistakenly issued or renewed to a person, it shall be
revoked upon the discovery that the person was ineligible for the license under
this chapter.
(Ord. 44, third series, passed 10-15-2019)
§ 113.06 PROHIBITED SALES.
   (A)   Proof of age. It shall be the affirmative duty of every licensee, and
his or her employees, to ascertain the age of every prospective purchaser who
reasonably appears to be 30 years of age or less.
      (1)   Proof of age for purchasing licensed products may be established
only by one of the following:
         (a)   A valid driver’s license, or identification card, issued by the
state, another state, or a province of Canada, including the photograph and
date of birth of the licensed person;
         (b)   A valid military identification card issued by the United States
Department of Defense; or
         (c)   In case of a foreign national, a nation other than Canada, by a
valid passport.
      (2)   For any prosecution of this section, it is a defense for the
defendant to prove, by preponderance of the evidence, that the defendant
reasonably, and in good faith, relied upon representations of proof of age in
divisions (A)(1)(a) through (A)(1)(c) above.
   (B)   Signage. Notice of the legal sales age and age verification
requirement must be posted prominently, and in plain view, at all times at each
location where licensed products are offered for sale. The required signage,
which will be provided to the licensee by the city, must be posted in a manner
that is clearly visible to anyone who is, or is considering, making a purchase.
   (C)   General prohibited sales. No person shall sell, or offer to sell, any
licensed product:
      (1)   By means of loosies, as defined;
      (2)   Containing opium, morphine, jimson weed, bella donna, strychnos,
cocaine, marijuana, or other deleterious, hallucinogenic, toxic, or controlled
substances, except nicotine and other substances found naturally in tobacco, or
added as part of an otherwise lawful manufacturing process. It is not the
intention of this provision to ban the sale of lawfully-manufactured
cigarettes, or other products subject to this section; and
      (3)   By any other means, or to any other person, or in any other manner,
or form, prohibited by federal, state, or other local law, city code provision,
or other regulations.
   (D)   Liquid packaging. No person shall sell, or offer to sell, any liquid,
whether or not the liquid contains nicotine, which is intended for human
consumption, and use in an electronic delivery device, in packaging that is not
child-resistant. Upon request by the city, a licensee must provide a copy of
the certificate of compliance, or full laboratory testing report, for the
packaging used.
(Ord. 44, third series, passed 10-15-2019)
§ 113.07 VENDING MACHINES.
   It is unlawful for any person licensed under this chapter to allow the sale
of licensed products by the means of a vending machine, unless persons under 21
years of age are, at all times, prohibited from entering the licensed
establishment.
(Ord. 44, third series, passed 10-15-2019) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.08 SELF-SERVICE SALES.
   It is unlawful for a licensee under this chapter to allow the sale of
licensed products by any means whereby the customer may have access to the
items without having to request the item from the licensee, or the licensee’s
employee, and whereby there is not a physical exchange of the licensed product
between the licensee, or his or her clerk, and the customer. All licensed
products shall either be stored behind a counter or other area not freely
accessible to customers, or in a case, or other storage unit not left open, and
accessible, to the general public.
(Ord. 44, third series, passed 10-15-2019) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.09 RESPONSIBILITY.
   All licensees under this chapter shall be responsible for the actions of
their employees in regard to the sale of licensed products on the licensed
premises, and the sale of the item by an employee shall be considered a sale by
the license holder. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting
the city from also subjecting the clerk to whatever administrative penalties
are appropriate under this chapter, state or federal law, or other applicable
law or regulation.
(Ord. 44, third series, passed 10-15-2019)
§ 113.10 COMPLIANCE CHECKS AND INSPECTIONS.
   All licensed premises must be open to inspection by law enforcement, or
other authorized city officials, during regular business hours. From time to
time, but at least once per year, the city will conduct compliance checks. In
accordance with state law, the city will conduct at least one compliance check
that involves the participation of two persons: one person between the ages of
15 and 17, and one person between the ages of 18 and 20, to enter licensed
premises to attempt to purchase licensed products. Prior written consent is
required for any person under the age of 18 to participate in a compliance
check. Persons used for the purpose of compliance checks will be supervised by
law enforcement, or other designated personnel.
(Ord. 44, third series, passed 10-15-2019)
§ 113.11 OTHER PROHIBITED ACTS.
   Unless otherwise provided by this chapter, the following acts are an
administrative violation of this chapter.
   (A)   Prohibited furnishing or procurement. It is a violation of this
chapter for any person 21 years of age, or older, to purchase, or otherwise
obtain, any licensed product on behalf of a person under the age of 21. It is
also a violation for any person 21 years of age, and older, to coerce, or
attempt to coerce, a person under the age of 21 to illegally purchase, or
attempt to purchase, any licensed product.
   (B)   Use of false identification. It is a violation of this chapter for any
person to use any form of false identification, whether the identification is
that of another person, or has been modified, or tampered with, to represent an
age older than the actual age of the person using that identification.
(Ord. 44, third series, passed 10-15-2019) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.12 EXCEPTIONS AND DEFENSES.
   (A)   Religious, spiritual, or cultural ceremonies or practices. Nothing in
this chapter prevents the provision of tobacco, or tobacco-related devices, to
any person as part of an indigenous practice, or a lawfully recognized
religious, spiritual, or cultural ceremony or practice.
   (B)   Reasonable reliance. It is an affirmative defense to a violation of
this chapter for a person to have reasonably relied on proof of age, as
described by state law.
(Ord. 44, third series, passed 10-15-2019)
§ 113.13 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Notice. Upon discovery of a suspected violation, the alleged violator
shall be issued, either personally or by mail, a citation that sets forth the
alleged violation, and which shall inform the alleged violator of his or her
right to be heard on the accusation.
   (B)   Hearings. If a person accused of violating this chapter so requests, a
hearing shall be scheduled, the time and place of which shall be published, and
provided, to the accused violator.
   (C)   Hearing officer. The Council shall serve as the hearing officer.
   (D)   Decision. If the hearing officer determines that a violation of this
chapter did occur, that decision, along with the hearing officer’s reasons for
finding a violation, and the penalty to be imposed under this chapter, shall be
recorded, in writing, a copy of which shall be provided to the accused
violator. Likewise, if the hearing officer finds that no violation occurred, or
finds grounds for not imposing any penalty, the findings shall be recorded, and
a copy provided to the acquitted accused violator.
   (E)   Appeals. Appeals of any decision made by the hearing officer shall be
filed in the district court for the jurisdiction of the city in which the
alleged violation occurred within ten business days of the date of the
decision.
   (F)   Continued violation. Each violation, and every day in which a
violation occurs or continues, shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 44, third series, passed 10-15-2019)
§ 113.99 PENALTY.
   Unless otherwise prescribed by state or federal law, the following penalties
shall be the exclusive remedy for violations of this chapter.
   (A)   Licensees. Any licensee found to have violated this chapter, or whose
employee shall have violated this chapter, shall be charged an administrative
fine of $75 for a first violation of this chapter, and $200 for a second
offense at the same licensed premises within a 24-month period. In addition,
after the second offense, the license shall be suspended for not less than
seven days.
   (B)   Other individuals. Individuals, other than persons under 21 years of
age, found to be in violation of this chapter, shall be charged with a petty
misdemeanor with a maximum fine of $300.
   (C)   Persons under the age of 21. Persons under the age of 21 who use a
false identification to purchase, or attempt to purchase, licensed products
may, within the discretion of law enforcement, be subject to noncriminal, non-
monetary civil penalties, such as tobacco-related education classes, diversion
programs, community services, or another penalty that the city determines to be
appropriate, or, in the alternative, be guilty of a petty misdemeanor with a
maximum fine of $300.
   (D)   Misdemeanor. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the city from
seeking prosecution as a misdemeanor for any violation of this chapter by any
person 21 years of age or older.
(Ord. 44, third series, passed 10-15-2019)
CHAPTER 114: TRANSIENT MERCHANTS, PEDDLERS, MOBILE FOOD UNITS
Section
   
114.01   Purpose
   
114.02   Definitions
   
114.03   License required
   
114.04   Exceptions
   
114.05   Ineligible people
   
114.06   Application
   
114.07   Fees; duration
   
114.08   Standards of conduct
   
114.09   Mobile food units
   
114.10   Exclusion by placard
   
114.11   Special events
   
114.12   Suspension; revocation
   
114.13   Violations and penalties; enforcement
§ 114.01 PURPOSE.
   This chapter is not intended to interfere with legitimate business
activities of peddlers, as the same are herein defined, whether the same be
local or interstate. These provisions are intended only to, as nearly as
possible, ferret out the illegitimate, or confidence, operators, and to
regulate, and control, all those who would use their unique presence on
property within the city, either in person, or by means of a telephone contact,
or their unique proximity to its residents, for purposes of harassment,
nuisance, theft, or other unlawful activities.
(Prior Code, § 6.22)
§ 114.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   LICENSEE. An individual, partnership, corporation or association licensed
within the city under this chapter and includes a person who is or will be
conducting the regulated activity on behalf of the licensee.
   MOBILE FOOD UNIT. A food and beverage service establishment that is a
vehicle-mounted unit or freestanding food stand.
   NONCOMMERCIAL DOOR-TO-DOOR ADVOCATE. A person who goes door-to-door for the
primary purpose of disseminating religious, political, social or other
ideological beliefs. For the purpose of this chapter, the term DOOR-TO-DOOR
ADVOCATE shall fall under the term "solicitor" and include door-to-door
canvassing and pamphleteering, and is intended for noncommercial purposes.
   OCCUPANT. A person living, staying, or working at a residence, including a
guest.
   PEDDLER. Includes a person who goes from place-to-place exhibiting
merchandise for sale, making sales, and delivering articles to purchasers.
   PERSON. A natural person, a firm, partnership, corporation, or any other
association of people, and includes the manager or agent of that person or
organization.
   REGULATED ACTIVITY. The activity of a peddler, transient merchant, solicitor
or mobile food unit as defined in this chapter. The term only includes
activities that involve the sale of a product or service. It does not include
activities that involve only statements of opinion or belief or that request
only a donation.
   SOLICITOR. Includes a person who goes from place-to-place soliciting orders
for the sale of merchandise or personal services for future delivery or future
performance, whether or not the person has sample of merchandise or is
collecting advance payments for the orders. The word also includes activity
that has as its ultimate purpose the obtaining of orders, even though it may
not initially purport to do so. For the purposes of this chapter, the term
SOLICITOR shall have the same meaning as the term "canvasser".
   TRANSIENT MERCHANT. A person who temporarily sets up a business out of a
vehicle, trailer, tent or other portable shelter, or empty storefront in a
commercial district where retail sales are a permitted or conditional use for
the purpose of exposing or displaying for sale, selling or attempting to sell
and delivering goods, wares, products, merchandise or other personal property
and who does not remain or intend to remain in any location for more than 14
consecutive days.
(Prior Code, § 6.22) (Ord. 019, fourth series, passed 3-20-2024)
§ 114.03 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   A person engaging in a regulated activity within the city must first obtain
a license from the City Clerk/Treasurer or designee.
(Prior Code, § 6.22) (Ord. 019, fourth series, passed 3-20-2024) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.04 EXCEPTIONS.
   A person engaging in the following activities is not required to obtain a
license from the city:
   (A)   Selling personal property at garage sales, rummage sales, or estate
sales. This includes persons participating in an organized multi-person bazaar
or flea market;
   (B)   Selling newspapers, newsletters, or other similar publications on an
established customer delivery route, when attempting to establish a regular
delivery route, or when publications are delivered to the community at large;
   (C)   Selling products of the farm or garden grown or raised by the seller,
including meat, but such activities must comply with applicable health
regulations;
   (D)   Selling at an auction conducted by a licensed auctioneer, or any
officers of the court conducting a court-ordered sale;
   (E)   Calling upon residents in connection with a regular route service for
the sale and delivery of perished food and dairy products. This includes
initial contacts to establish a customer delivery route. This exception does
not relieve that person of duty to comply with other applicable city
requirements;
   (F)   Sales or offers for sales by peddlers or solicitors who appear at the
customer's home or place of business by an appointment which was made prior to
such appearance are exempt from the provisions of this chapter;
   (G)   Noncommercial door-to-door advocates. No license or registration shall
be required of any person going from house-to-house, door-to-door, business-to-
business, street-to-street or any other type of place to place when the
activity is for the purpose of exercising that person's state or federal
constitutional rights, such as freedom of speech, press, religion, and the
like, except that this exemption does not apply if the person's exercise of
constitutional rights is merely incidental to a commercial activity;
   (H)   Any person selling or attempting to sell at wholesale any goods,
wares, products, merchandise, or other personal property to a commercial retail
seller of the items being sold by the wholesaler; and
   (I)   Disseminating religious, political, social or ideological beliefs,
including pamphleteering and canvassing for noncommercial purposes, or
soliciting for, or selling, merchandise on behalf of tax-exempt and nonprofit
organizations.
(Ord. 019, fourth series, passed 3-20-2024)
§ 114.05 INELIGIBLE PEOPLE.
   The following people are not eligible for a license from the city:
   (A)   A person whose license for a regulated activity was revoked by the
city or another governmental body within three years before the application
date;
   (B)   A person who has been denied a license for regulated activity by the
city or another governmental body because of circumstances that occurred within
three years before the application date;
   (C)   A person who has violated, or whose representative has violated, a
provision of this chapter within three years before the application date, or
who violates a provision of this chapter during the application period pending
issuance of the license;
   (D)   A person who has been convicted three years before the application
date of a crime that adversely reflects on the person's ability to honestly,
safely, or lawfully conduct the regulated activities, unless the individual can
show sufficient evidence of rehabilitation as defined in M.S. § 364.03, subd.
3, as it may be amended from time to time;
   (E)   A person who has falsified information, or omitted material
information, required by this chapter; or
   (F)   A person who produces documentation of identification that is torn,
pasted, peeled, or otherwise damaged or altered.
(Ord. 019, fourth series, passed 3-20-2024)
§ 114.06 APPLICATION.
   Application for a license must be made at least ten working days before the
regulated activity is proposed to begin and must include an accurate, sworn
statement in writing, on a form furnished by the city, that gives the
information listed below and includes the required supporting documentation:
   (A)   Full legal name;
   (B)   Complete home and local address of the applicant;
   (C)   A brief description of the proposed activity, its location, and the
merchandise or service involved;
   (D)   The date and hours of the day during which the activity will be
conducted;
   (E)   Name, address, and phone number of the person on whose behalf the
orders are solicited, together with credentials establishing the applicant's
relationship to the person;
   (F)   Whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime other
than petty traffic violations; the nature, time and location of the offense;
and the punishment or penalty imposed;
   (G)   The last cities or other localities, not exceeding five, where the
applicant conducted the proposed activity immediately preceding the date of the
application and where within those areas the activity took place;
   (H)   Make, model, year, color, and state license number of each motor
vehicle to be used in connection with the proposed activity;
   (I)   Social security number, date of birth, and driver's license or state
or tribal identification card number;
   (J)   Passport information and visa status if the applicant is not a United
States citizen;
   (K)   The name, address, and phone number of the person or company employing
the individual, if different from the information in division (E) above;
   (L)   A copy of all documents to be used by the applicant in the regulated
activity;
   (M)   Phone number(s) for the applicant; and
   (N)   Mobile food unit additional requirements.
      (1)   Valid copies of all necessary licenses or permits required by the
state or county;
      (2)   Pictures of the mobile food unit vehicle and a site plan showing
location of the vehicle on the property. Plans and specifications for the non-
vehicular mobile food stand or unit and a site plan showing the proposed
location of the stand or unit on the property;
      (3)   A copy of the written permission from the property owner or
property owner's agent where the mobile food vendor will be conducting
business;
      (4)   A certificate of insurance; and
      (5)   A list of other communities or locations where the applicant has
been a mobile food vendor.
(Ord. 019, fourth series, passed 3-20-2024)
§ 114.07 FEES; DURATION.
   The application must be accompanied by the required license fees specified
in the annual city fee schedule, which may be amended from time to time by
action of the City Council. A license is valid only for the time periods in the
calendar year in which it is issued.
(Ord. 019, fourth series, passed 3-20-2024)
§ 114.08 STANDARDS OF CONDUCT.
   (A)   Except for those people specified in §
114.05, a person may conduct regulated activity in the city only if they carry
a license and it has not been revoked, suspended, or impounded. The license
must be shown upon request.
   (B)   A licensee must not transfer its license to another person. A license
that has a photograph removed is invalid. Use of that invalid license is a
violation of this chapter.
   (C)   A person must not use a license issued to someone other than that
person.
   (D)   A person conducting regulated activity must not go onto private
property for that purpose when there are signs prominently posted indicating
that trespassing and/or solicitation is unwelcome or prohibited.
   (E)   A person must not be on a street, highway, or adjacent boulevard and
direct regulated activity toward the occupants of any motor vehicle in transit
and must not obstruct the free flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic on any
public street, sidewalk, or other public right-of-way.
   (F)   A person must not conduct regulated activity in a manner that creates
a health or safety hazard. No person shall call attention to their business or
items to be sold by means of blowing a horn, whistle, bell, or crying out or by
any other noise, so as to be unreasonably audible within an enclosed structure.
   (G)   A person must conduct regulated activity in a reasonably courteous
manner at all times, must not engage in offensive, obscene, or abusive
language, must not push open a door not opened by an occupant, must not place
any portion of the person's body through an open doorway without the invitation
of an occupant, and must not physically attempt to stop an occupant from
closing a door.
   (H)   A licensee must immediately leave private property when requested to
do so by an occupant or owner and must leave immediately upon completion of a
transaction or a successful attempt to contact an occupant.
   (I)   A licensee entering onto residential property must go directly to a
door of the house, unless there is an adult present outside of the house or in
an open garage. At no time may a licensee go to a window or to the back yard,
unless invited to do so by the occupant.
   (J)   A person conducting regulated activity must not make untrue statements
to the people contacted regarding the purpose of the contact, orders placed by
the neighbors, or the goods and services offered.
   (K)   A licensee must not make statements to the people contacted indicating
or implying that the city license constitutes an endorsement of their
activities or products by the city.
   (L)   While conducting regulated activity, a licensee must not be
accompanied by a person who is not licensed or is not listed in the license
application.
   (M)   No person shall conduct business in residential zoned areas before 10:
00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m.
(Ord. 019, fourth series, passed 3-20-2024)
§ 114.09 MOBILE FOOD UNITS.
   (A)   State license. Mobile food units shall hold a valid license from the
State of Minnesota Department of Health or Department of Agriculture. A license
is valid for one vehicle or stand. Any conditions of the State Health
Department shall be incorporated into the license issued under this section. A
copy of the license shall be submitted to the city.
   (B)   Insurance. A certificate of insurance evidencing the following forms
of insurance shall be submitted to the city: commercial general liability
insurance, including products and completed operations coverage, with a limit
not less than $1,000,000 for each occurrence/$2,000,000 aggregate.
   (C)   Duration of sales and unit standards. A license shall be valid for one
year, unless otherwise identified on the application. The license is valid for
one vehicle or stand only. The mobile food unit can operate in the same
location for the time period indicated on the application. The unit, stand or
vehicle must not have rust, peeling paint, dents and must be maintained in a
professional manner. The vehicle or stand must be approved for aesthetics by
the city. The license must be displayed in plain view on the vehicle or stand.
   (D)   Overnight storage. No overnight storage of a mobile food unit on city
property, including public rights-of-way, shall be permitted.
   (E)   Noise and lighting. No shouting, blowing a horn, ringing a bell, or
use of any sound devices upon any streets, alleys, parks, or other public
places of the city or upon any private premises in the city shall be permitted.
No vendor shall use or maintain any outside amplifying equipment, televisions,
or similar entertainment devices. Lighting will be downcast, concealing light
source from view, and must not spill onto adjacent properties and rights-of-
way. Ice cream trucks traveling through a residential district may have outdoor
music or noise-making devices to announce their presence.
   (F)   Parking. Mobile food trucks must be located on a paved surface. A
mobile food unit may not operate in a traffic lane, on a sidewalk, or in any
location which causes an obstruction of traffic, such as queuing of patrons or
advancement of vehicles. A pedestrian walkway of six feet must be maintained on
the service side of the vehicle.
   (G)   Hours of operation. Hours of operation shall be allowed from 8:00 a.m.
to 10:00 p.m. In the case of an event authorized under a special event permit,
the hours will match the time period indicated in the permit.
   (H)   Waste disposal. Mobile food units shall provide waste disposal, clean
up all litter and garbage generated by this use and maintain their site in a
clean and hazard free condition. All waste liquids shall be kept in leakproof,
non-absorbent containers, which shall be kept covered with tight-fitting lids
and properly disposed of. No waste liquids, garbage, litter or refuse shall be
dumped or drained into the sidewalks, streets, gutters, drains or public trash
receptacles. The licensee shall be responsible for all litter and garbage left
by customers.
   (I)   Self-containment. Mobile units can connect to public utilities with an
electrical inspection. No power, cable, or equipment shall be extended at any
grade across any city street, alley, or sidewalk. Any generators must be self-
contained and any noise created by their operation shall not cause a public
nuisance.
   (J)   Inspections. Mobile units shall comply with all applicable fire codes
and may be inspected by the city prior to operation.
   (K)   Locations. Mobile food units shall only be allowed to operate on
private property in zoning districts where retail sales are allowed as
permitted or conditional uses under the city's zoning ordinance. Mobile food
units may be allowed in public rights-of-way, residential zoning districts or
parks.
   (L)   The mobile food vendor shall not set up in a manner so as to create a
traffic hazard and shall follow police orders. The mobile food unit shall not
have a drive through. Ingress and egress to private property shall be through
existing driveways only.
   (M)   Mobile food units providing external seating must not block any
sidewalk or driveway area or occupy any required parking spaces.
   (N)   Ice cream novelty trucks are allowed to operate within the public
right-of-way in residential districts.
   (O)   Mobile food units are prohibited from vending activities with 150 feet
of a food service building or within 500 feet of a community event, unless part
of the sponsor license and/or special event permit for the event.
   (P)   No mobile food unit shall sell alcoholic beverages.
   (Q)   Mobile food unit vendors shall maintain a fire extinguisher at all
times.
   (R)   Mobile food vendors shall maintain their immediate sales location in a
clean and hazard-free condition.
   (S)   The mobile food vendor shall not operate in such a manner so as to
constitute a public nuisance.
(Ord. 019, fourth series, passed 3-20-2024)
§ 114.10 EXCLUSION BY PLACARD.
   No peddler, solicitor or transient merchant, unless invited to do so by the
property owner or tenant, shall enter the property of another for the purpose
of conducting business when the property is marked with a sign or placard at
least four inches long by four inches wide, with print of at least 48-point in
size stating "No Peddlers, Solicitors, or Transient Merchants" or "Peddlers,
Solicitors and Transient Merchant Prohibited" or other comparable statement. No
person other than the property owner or tenant shall remove, deface or
otherwise tamper with any sign or placard under this section.
(Ord. 019, fourth series, passed 3-20-2024)
§ 114.11 SPECIAL EVENTS.
   The following standards shall apply to all events that are authorized by a
special event permit:
   (A)   It is not necessary for each transient merchant or mobile food unit to
obtain a license under this chapter provided that the sponsor, promoter or
organizer of the event obtains a permit and maintains a list of all
participants and assumed responsibility for their activities and conduct.
   (B)   The sponsor, promoter or organizer of the event may designate where
peddlers and transient merchants and mobile food units set up their booths,
sales stands or vehicles.
(Ord. 019, fourth series, passed 3-20-2024)
§ 114.12 SUSPENSION; REVOCATION.
   (A)   The city may suspend or revoke an identification card and/or license
if the person who is acting on behalf of the licensee or licensee has:
      (1)   Violated a provision of this chapter, or other local laws governing
the same activity, during the license period;
      (2)   Violated a criminal law during the license period that adversely
reflects on the ability to honestly, safely, or lawfully conduct the regulated
activity; or
      (3)   Submitted false information or omitted material information in the
licensing process required by this chapter.
   (B)   If a license is revoked or suspended, all licenses issued to people
acting on behalf of the licensee are automatically revoked or suspended.
(Ord. 019, fourth series, passed 3-20-2024)
§ 114.13 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES; ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The Chief of Police and their designees are authorized to enforce this
chapter. They may impound a license when a person has been found violating a
provision of this chapter, when cause exists for suspending or revoking the
license, or when the license has been suspended or revoked. When impounding a
license, the official must send a notice to the licensee and at the address on
the application form, giving the parties ten days to submit a written request
for a hearing before the City Council. Failure to timely request an appeal
constitutes a waiver of that appeal and results in an automatic suspension of
the license or card for three years.
   (B)   It is a petty misdemeanor for any person to violate any provision of
this chapter, except as otherwise provided by the City Code.
(Ord. 019, fourth series, passed 3-20-2024)
CHAPTER 115: TAXICABS
Section
   
115.01   Definitions
   
115.02   Licenses required
   
115.03   Number of licenses
   
115.04   Appointment
   
115.05   License issuance and display; vehicle marking
   
115.06   Insurance required
   
115.07   Rates
   
115.08   Mechanical condition
   
115.09   Drivers
   
115.10   Certificate of inspection
§ 115.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   DRIVER. The person driving, and having physical control over, a taxicab,
whether he or she be the licensee, or in the employ of the licensed operator.
   OPERATOR. A licensee owning, or otherwise having control of, one, or more,
taxicabs.
   TAXICAB. Any passenger conveyance being driven, on call, or traversing a
scheduled, or unscheduled, route for public use, or hire, upon payment of a
fare, or at regular fare rates, but not including vehicles such as are designed
for mass transportation as buses, trains, or streetcars.
(Prior Code, § 6.23)
§ 115.02 LICENSES REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person to drive, or operate, a taxicab without a
license therefor from the city. The annual fee for the taxicab license shall be
established by resolution of the Council.
(Prior Code, § 6.23) (Ord. 201, second series, passed 4-3-2007) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 115.03 NUMBER OF LICENSES.
   The Council shall have the right to limit the number of licenses issued
under this chapter, and the number of taxicabs to be operated in the city.
(Prior Code, § 6.23)
§ 115.04 APPOINTMENT.
   An applicant for a taxicab license shall appoint, in writing, the City
Clerk-Treasurer to be his or her true, and lawful, attorney upon whom all legal
process in any action, or proceeding, against the applicant arising out of the
operation of the taxicab shall be served, and in writing, shall agree that any
legal process against the applicant, which is served upon the attorney, shall
be of the same legal force, and validity, as if served upon the person, and
that the authority shall continue in force as long as any liability remains
outstanding, arising out of the operation of the taxicab, or by reason of, or
under, the license herein contemplated; and the written appointment shall be
filed in the office of the City Clerk-Treasurer.
(Prior Code, § 6.23)
§ 115.05 LICENSE ISSUANCE AND DISPLAY; VEHICLE MARKING.
   All licenses shall be issued for specific conveyances, except as otherwise
herein provided. License tags, including number and year for which issued,
shall be plainly visible from the front of the conveyance. Both sides of every
licensed taxicab, when in use, shall be plainly, and permanently, marked as
such with a painted sign, or appurtenances showing the full, or abbreviated,
name of the licensed operator.
(Prior Code, § 6.23)
§ 115.06 INSURANCE REQUIRED.
   No taxicab vehicle license shall be issued until the applicant obtains, and
files with the City Clerk-Treasurer, evidence of, and the licensee shall at all
times during which the license shall be effective, maintain liability insurance
in the amount of $100,000 for one person; $300,000 for two, or more, persons;
and $50,000 for property damage. The policy providing the insurance shall
provide for ten days’ written notice to the City Clerk-Treasurer before any
cancellation of the policy may become effective.
(Prior Code, § 6.23) (Ord. 201, second series, passed 4-3-2007)
§ 115.07 RATES.
   Each applicant shall file with the City Clerk-Treasurer, before a taxicab
license is issued or renewed, a schedule of proposed maximum rates to be
charged by him or her during the licensed period for which the application is
made. The schedule of proposed maximum rates, or a compromise schedule thereof,
shall be approved by the Council before granting the license. The schedule
shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the taxicab in full view of
passengers riding therein. Nothing herein shall prevent a taxicab licensee from
petitioning the Council for review of the rates during the licensed period, and
the Council may likewise consider the petition, and make new rates effective at
any time. No taxicab licensee shall charge rates in excess of maximum rates
approved by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 6.23)
§ 115.08 MECHANICAL CONDITION.
   Before issuing a taxicab license, the applicant shall present to the Council
a certificate signed by a competent, and experienced, mechanic showing that the
taxicab conveyance is in good mechanical condition, that it is thoroughly safe
for transportation of passengers, and that it is in neat, and clean, condition.
The similar certificate may be required, from time to time, during the licensed
period. In lieu of the certificate, the Council may accept the report of the
Chief of Police relative thereto.
(Prior Code, § 6.23)
§ 115.09 DRIVERS.
   (A)   Operators shall not permit any person to be a driver unless the person
shall:
      (1)   Be of good moral character; and
      (2)   Possess a valid driver’s license for the class of vehicle operated.
   (B)   Additionally, no driver shall be permitted to operate a taxicab while
under the influence of alcohol, or any mood-altering drug (prescription or non-
prescription). No driver shall possess any controlled substance or alcoholic
beverage while operating a taxicab.
(Prior Code, § 6.23) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 115.10 CERTIFICATE OF INSPECTION.
   No taxicab vehicle license shall be issued until the applicant files, with
the City Clerk-Treasurer, a certification that each vehicle licensed has been
inspected by a certified mechanic, and has passed the inspection.
(Prior Code, § 6.23) (Ord. 201, second series, passed 4-3-2007)
CHAPTER 116: LAWFUL GAMBLING
Section
   
116.01   Provisions of state law adopted
   
116.02   Allocation of profits
   
116.03   Records and reports
   
116.04   Prescribed action for violation
§ 116.01 PROVISIONS OF STATE LAW ADOPTED.
   The provisions of M.S. Chapter 349, “Bingo, Gambling Devices, and Video
Games of Chance”, as it may be amended from time to time, relating to the
definition of terms, licensing, charitable gamblings, and all other matters
pertaining to lawful gambling, and gambling licenses, are adopted and made a
part of this chapter as if set out in full.
(Prior Code, § 6.29) (Ord. 94, second series, passed 8-16-1988)
§ 116.02 ALLOCATION OF PROFITS.
   Every organization operating within the city, which is the holder of a
license to conduct lawful gambling in accordance with M.S. Chapter 349, as it
may be amended from time to time, shall allocate annually 50% of the profit
from the conduct of lawful gambling to a lawful purpose within the county.
(Prior Code, § 6.29) (Ord. 115, second series, passed 11-3-1992)
§ 116.03 RECORDS AND REPORTS.
   Every organization licensed to conduct lawful gambling within the city shall
submit copies of all reports the organization is required to submit to the
State Charitable Gambling Control Board to the office of the City Clerk-
Treasurer at the same time and intervals.
(Prior Code, § 6.29)
§ 116.04 PRESCRIBED ACTION FOR VIOLATION.
   Failure of an organization to comply with the allocation of profits for
lawful purpose herein shall be prima facie grounds for the Council to adopt a
resolution disapproving any gambling license of an organization who fails to
comply with this chapter, and to adopt a resolution requesting the State
Charitable Gambling Control Board to suspend the organization’s license for
wilful violation of this chapter. This section shall authorize a civil action
to compel an organization to comply with the provisions of this chapter. All
costs of the action, including allowable attorney’s fees, are the liability of
the organization.
(Prior Code, § 6.29) (Ord. 94, second series, passed 8-16-1988)
CHAPTER 117: BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
   
117.01   Definition
   
117.02   License required
   
117.03   Restriction
§ 117.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT. A business, usually established in
buildings originally constructed for residential purposes, which provides
lodging and breakfast for tourists or travelers.
(Prior Code, § 6.30)
§ 117.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person to keep, or maintain, a bed and breakfast
establishment without first having obtained a license from the city.
(Prior Code, § 6.30) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 117.03 RESTRICTION.
   Before issuing a bed and breakfast license, the city may require compliance
with certain safety, zoning, and other regulations dictated by the unique
character of the property on which it is proposed to operate a bed and
breakfast establishment.
(Prior Code, § 6.30) (Ord. 120, second series, passed 4-20-1993)
CHAPTER 118: PAWNBROKERS, SECONDHAND GOODS DEALERS
Section
   
118.01   Definitions
   
118.02   License required
   
118.03   Persons disqualified
   
118.04   Unemployment clearance required
   
118.05   Change in ownership
   
118.06   Pawn tickets
   
118.07   Records; retention
   
118.08   Effect of non-redemption
   
118.09   Permitted changes
   
118.10   Records; prohibitions
   
118.11   Redemption; risk of loss
   
118.12   Motor vehicle title pawn transaction; special provisions
   
118.13   Transition
   
118.14   Violation
§ 118.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   PAWN TRANSACTION. Any loan on the security of pledged goods, or any purchase
of pledged goods, on the condition that the pledged goods are left with the
pawnbroker, and may be redeemed, or repurchased, by the seller for a fixed
price within a fixed period of time.
   PAWNBROKER. A person engaged in whole, or in part, in the business of
lending money on the security of pledged goods left in pawn, or in the business
of purchasing tangible personal property to be left in pawn on the condition
that it may be redeemed, or repurchased, by the seller for a fixed price within
a fixed period of time.
   PAWNSHOP. The location at which, or premises in which, a pawnbroker
regularly conducts business.
   PLEDGED GOODS. Tangible personal property, other than a choice in action,
securities, bank drafts, or printed evidence of indebtedness, that are
purchased by, deposited with, or otherwise actually delivered into the
possession of a pawnbroker in connection with a pawn transaction.
(Prior Code, § 6.31)
§ 118.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business as a
pawnbroker unless the person has a valid license authorizing engagement in the
business. Any pawn transaction made without benefit of a license is void.
   (B)   A separate license is required for each place of business. The city
may issue more than one license to a person if that person complies with this
chapter for each license.
   (C)   No expiration, revocation, suspension, or surrender of any license
shall impair, or affect, the obligation of any pre-existing lawful contract
between the licensee and any pledgor.
   (D)   The Chief of Police shall be notified by the city of any licensee
whose license has expired, or been surrendered, suspended, or revoked, as
provided by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6.31) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 118.03 PERSONS DISQUALIFIED.
   No license under this chapter may be issued, or renewed, to a person who:
   (A)   Is a minor;
   (B)   Has been convicted of any crime related to the occupation of
pawnbroker; or
   (C)   Is not of good moral character or repute.
(Prior Code, § 6.31)
§ 118.04 UNEMPLOYMENT CLEARANCE REQUIRED.
   No license shall be granted, transferred, or renewed, and shall be revoked
if the Commissioner notifies the city that the licensee owes the state
delinquent unemployment insurance contributions, reimbursements, or benefit
overpayments.
(Prior Code, § 6.31)
§ 118.05 CHANGE IN OWNERSHIP.
   Any change, directly or beneficially, in the ownership of any licensed
pawnshop, shall require the application for a new license, and the new owner
must satisfy all current eligibility requirements.
(Prior Code, § 6.31)
§ 118.06 PAWN TICKETS.
   (A)   Entries of pawn tickets. At the time of making the pawn, or purchase,
transaction, the pawnbroker shall immediately, and legibly, record in English
the following information by using ink, or other indelible medium, on forms, or
in a computerized record approved by the city:
      (1)   A complete, and accurate, description of the property, including
model and serial number, if indicated on the property;
      (2)   The full name, residence address, residence telephone number, and
date of birth of the pledgor or seller;
      (3)   The date and time of pawn, or purchase, transaction;
      (4)   The identification number and state of issue from one of the
following forms of identification of the seller or pledgor:
         (a)   Current, valid state driver’s license;
         (b)   Current, valid state identification card; or
         (c)   Current, valid photo identification card issued by another
state, or province of Canada.
      (5)   Description of the pledgor, including approximate height, sex, and
race;
      (6)   Amount advanced or paid;
      (7)   The maturity date of the pawn transaction, and the amount due; and
      (8)   The monthly, and annual, interest rates, including all pawn fees
and charges.
   (B)   Printed pawn ticket. The following shall be printed on all pawn
tickets:
      (1)   The statement that “Any personal property pledged to a pawnbroker
within this State is subject to sale or disposal when there has been no payment
made on the account for a period of not less than 60 days past the date of the
pawn transaction, renewal, or extension; no further notice is necessary. There
is no obligation for the pledgor to redeem pledged goods”;
      (2)   The statement that “The pledgor of this item attests that it is not
stolen, it has no liens or encumbrances against it, and the pledgor has the
right to sell or pawn the item”;
      (3)   The statement that “This item is redeemable only by the pledgor to
whom the receipt was issued, or any person identified in a written and
notarized authorization to redeem the property identified in the receipt, or a
person identified in writing by the pledgor at the time of the initial
transaction and signed by the pledgor. Written authorization for release of
property to persons other than the original pledgor must be maintained along
with the original transaction record”; and
      (4)   A blank line for the pledgor’s signature.
(Prior Code, § 6.31)
§ 118.07 RECORDS; RETENTION.
   (A)   The pledgor, or seller, shall sign a pawn ticket, and receive an exact
copy of the pawn ticket.
   (B)   The pawnbroker shall maintain, on the premises, a record of all
transactions of pledged, or purchased, goods for a period of three years. These
records shall be a correct copy of the entries made of the pawn transactions. A
pawnbroker shall, upon request, provide to the appropriate law enforcement
agency a complete record of pawn items.
(Prior Code, § 6.31)
§ 118.08 EFFECT OF NON-REDEMPTION.
   (A)   A pledgor shall have no obligation to redeem pledged goods, or make
any payment on a pawn transaction. Pledged goods not redeemed within at least
60 days of the date of the pawn transaction, renewal, or extension, shall
automatically be forfeited to the pawnbroker, and qualified right, title, and
interest in, and to, the goods shall automatically vest in the pawnbroker.
   (B)   The pawnbroker’s right, title, and interest in the pledged goods under
this section is qualified only by the pledgor’s right, while the pledged goods
remain in possession of the pawnbroker, and not sold to a third party, to
redeem the goods by paying the loan plus fees, and/or interest accrued up the
date of redemption.
   (C)   A pawn transaction that involves holding only the title to property is
subject to M.S. Chapters 168A or 336, as they are amended from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 6.31)
§ 118.09 PERMITTED CHANGES.
   (A)   A pawnbroker may contract for, and receive, a pawnshop charge, not to
exceed 3% per month, of the principal amount advanced in the pawn transaction,
plus a reasonable fee for storage and services. A fee for storage and services
may not exceed $20 if the property is not in the possession of the pawnbroker.
   (B)   The pawnshop charge allowed under division (A) above shall be deemed
earned, due, and owing as of the date of the pawn transaction, and a like sum
shall be deemed earned, due, and owing on the same day of the succeeding month.
However, if full payment is made more than two weeks before the next succeeding
date, the pawnbroker shall remit one-half of the pawnshop charge for that month
to the pledgor.
   (C)   Interest shall not be deducted in advance, nor shall any loan be
divided or split so as to yield greater interest or fees, than would be
permitted upon a single, consolidated loan, or for otherwise evading any
provisions of this chapter.
   (D)   Any interest, charge, or fees contracted for, or received, directly or
indirectly, in excess of the amount permitted under this section, shall be
uncollectible, and the pawn transaction shall be void.
   (E)   A schedule of charges permitted by this section shall be posted on the
pawnshop premises in a place clearly visible to the general public.
(Prior Code, § 6.31)
§ 118.10 RECORDS; PROHIBITIONS.
   A pawnbroker, and any clerk, agent, or employee of a pawnbroker, shall not:
   (A)   Make any false entry in the records of pawn transactions;
   (B)   Falsify, obliterate, destroy, or remove from the place of business the
records, books, or accounts relating to the licensee’s pawn transactions;
   (C)   Refuse to allow the appropriate law enforcement agency, the Attorney
General, or any other duly authorized state or federal law enforcement officer
to inspect the pawn records, or any pawn goods, in the person’s possession
during the ordinary hours of business, or other times acceptable to both
parties;
   (D)   Fail to maintain a record of each pawn transaction for three years;
   (E)   Accept a pledge, or purchase property, from a person under the age of
18 years;
   (F)   Make any agreement requiring the personal liability of a pledgor or
seller, or waiving any provision of this chapter, or providing for a maturity
date less than one month after the date of the pawn transaction;
   (G)   Fail to return pledged goods to a pledgor or seller, or provide
compensation as set forth in state statutes, upon payment of the full amount
due the pawnbroker, unless either the date of redemption is more than 60 days
past the date of the pawn transaction, renewal, or extension, and the
pawnbroker has sold the pledged goods, pursuant to state statutes, or the
pledged goods have been taken into custody by a court or a law enforcement
officer, or agency;
   (H)   Sell or lease, or agree to sell or lease, pledged or purchased goods
back to the pledgor or seller in the same, or a related, transaction;
   (I)   Sell, or otherwise charge, for insurance in connection with a pawn
transaction; or
   (J)   Remove pledged goods from the pawnshop premises, or other storage
place approved by the city at any time before unredeemed, pledged goods are
sold pursuant to statute.
(Prior Code, § 6.31)
§ 118.11 REDEMPTION; RISK OF LOSS.
   Any person to whom the receipt for pledged goods was issued, or any person
identified in a written, and notarized, authorization to redeem the pledged
goods identified in the receipt, or any person identified, in writing, by the
pledgor at the time of the initial transaction, and signed by the pledgor,
shall be entitled to redeem, or repurchase, the pledged goods described on the
ticket. In the event the goods are lost or damaged while in possession of the
pawnbroker, the pawnbroker shall compensate the pledgor in cash or replacement
goods acceptable to the pledgor, for the fair market value of the lost of
damaged goods. Proof of compensation shall be a defense to any prosecution or
civil action.
(Prior Code, § 6.31)
§ 118.12 MOTOR VEHICLE TITLE PAWN TRANSACTION; SPECIAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   In addition to the other requirements of this chapter, a pawnbroker
who holds a title to a motor vehicle as part of a pawn transaction shall:
      (1)   Be licensed as a used motor vehicle dealer under M.S. Chapter 168,
as it may be amended from time to time, and post the license on the pawnshop
premises;
      (2)   Verify that there are no liens or encumbrances against the motor
vehicle with the Department of Public Safety; and
      (3)   Verify that the pledgor has automobile insurance on the motor
vehicle, as required by law.
   (B)   A pawnbroker may not sell a motor vehicle covered by a pawn
transaction until 90 days after recovery of the motor vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 6.31)
§ 118.13 TRANSITION.
   Pawnbrokers in business on the effective date of this chapter must apply for
a license, and pay the required fee within six months.
(Prior Code, § 6.31)
§ 118.14 VIOLATION.
   A violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 6.31) (Ord. 157, second series, passed 10-20-1998) Penalty, see
§
10.99
CHAPTER 119: SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Section
   
119.01   Purpose
   
119.02   Findings
   
119.03   Definitions
   
119.04   Classification
   
119.05   License required
   
119.06   Issuance of license
   
119.07   Fees
   
119.08   Inspection
   
119.09   Expiration of license
   
119.10   Suspension
   
119.11   Revocation
   
119.12   Transfer of license
   
119.13   Location of sexually-oriented businesses
   
119.14   Additional regulations for adult motels
   
119.15   Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films,
videos, or live entertainment; viewing rooms
   
119.16   Additional regulations for escort agencies
   
119.17   Additional regulations for nude model studios
   
119.18   Additional regulations concerning public nudity
   
119.19   Prohibition against children in a sexually-oriented business
   
119.20   Hours of operation
   
119.21   Exemptions
§ 119.01 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually-oriented businesses
in order to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the
citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable, and uniform, regulations to
prevent the deleterious location, and concentration, of sexually-oriented
businesses within the city. The provisions of this chapter have neither the
purpose, nor effect, of imposing a limitation, or restriction, on the content
of any communicative materials, including sexually-oriented materials.
Similarly, it is not the intent, nor effect, of this chapter to restrict, or
deny, access by adults to sexually-oriented materials protected by the First
Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors, and exhibitors, of sexually-
oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent, nor
effect, of this chapter to condone, or legitimize, the distribution of obscene
material.
(Prior Code, § 11.70)
§ 119.02 FINDINGS.
   Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of adult uses in
other communities, including, Phoenix, Arizona; Minneapolis, Minnesota;
Houston, Texas; Indianapolis, Indiana; Amarillo, Texas; Los Angeles,
California; Austin, Texas; Seattle, Washington; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; and
Beaumont, Texas; and also on findings found in the report of the Attorney
General’s Working Group On The Regulation Of Sexually-Oriented Businesses (June
6, 1989, of the state), the Council finds:
   (A)   Sexually-oriented businesses in the city lend themselves to ancillary
unlawful, and unhealthy, activities that are presently uncontrolled by the
operators of the establishments. Further, there is presently no mechanism to
make the owners of these establishments responsible for the activities that
occur on their premises;
   (B)   Certain employees of sexually-oriented businesses defined in this
chapter as adult theaters and cabarets engage in higher incident of certain
types of sexually-oriented behavior at these businesses than employees of other
establishments;
   (C)   Sexual acts, including masturbation, oral and anal sex, occur at
sexually-oriented businesses, especially those that provide private, or semi-
private, booths or cubicles for viewing films, videos, or live sex shows, as
defined under this chapter as adult book stores, adult novelty shops, adult
video stores, adult motion picture theaters, or adult arcades;
   (D)   Offering, and providing, such space encourages such activities, which
create unhealthy conditions;
   (E)   Persons frequent certain adult theaters, adult arcades, and other
sexually-oriented businesses for the purpose of engaging in sex within the
premises of the sexually-oriented businesses;
   (F)   At least 50 communicable diseases may be spread by activities
occurring in sexually-oriented businesses, including, but not limited to
syphilis, gonorrhea, human immunodeficiency virus infection (AIDS), genital
herpes, hepatitis B, non A, non B amebiasis, salmonella infections, and
shigella infections;
   (G)   Sanitary conditions in some sexually-oriented businesses are
unhealthy, in part, because the activities conducted there are unhealthy, and,
in part, because of the unregulated nature of the activities, and the failure
of the owners, and the operators, of those facilities to self-regulate those
activities, and maintain those facilities;
   (H)   Numerous studies and reports have determined that semen is found in
the areas of sexually-oriented businesses where persons view adult-oriented
films;
   (I)   Sexually-oriented businesses have operational characteristics which
should be reasonably regulated in order to protect those substantial
governmental concerns;
   (J)   A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to place
the burden of that reasonable regulation on the owners, and the operators, of
the sexually-oriented businesses. Further, a licensing procedure will place a
heretofore nonexistent incentive on the operators to see that the sexually-
oriented business is run in a manner consistent with the health, safety, and
welfare of its patrons and employees, as well as the citizens of the city. It
is appropriate to require reasonable assurances that the licensee is the actual
operator of the sexually-oriented business, fully in possession, and control,
of the premises and activities occurring therein;
   (K)   Removal of doors on adult booths, and requiring sufficient lighting on
premises with adult booths advances a substantial governmental interest in
curbing the illegal, and unsanitary, sexual activity occurring in adult
theaters;
   (L)   Requiring licensees of sexually-oriented businesses to keep
information regarding current employees and certain past employees will help
reduce the incidence of certain types of criminal behavior by facilitating the
identification of potential witnesses or suspects, and by preventing minors
from working in the establishments;
   (M)   The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately
responsible for the day to day operation, and maintenance, of the sexually-
oriented business, where the information is substantially related to the
significant governmental interest in the operation of the uses, will aid in
preventing the spread of sexually-transmitted diseases;
   (N)   It is desirable in the prevention of the spread of communicable
diseases to obtain a limited amount of information regarding certain employees
who may engage in the conduct which this chapter is designed to prevent, or who
are likely to be witnesses to, such activity;
   (O)   The fact that an applicant for an adult use license has been convicted
of a sexually-related crime leads to the rational assumption that the applicant
is likely to engage in that conduct in contravention of this chapter;
   (P)   The barring of the individual from the management of adult uses for a
period of five years serves as a deterrent to, and prevents, conduct which
leads to the transmission of sexually-transmitted diseases; and
   (Q)   The general welfare, health, and safety of the citizens of the city
will be promoted by the enactment of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 11.70)
§ 119.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   ADULT ARCADE. Any place to which the public is permitted, or invited,
wherein coin operated, slug operated, or for any form of consideration, or
electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still, or motion
picture machines, projectors, video, or laser disc players, or other image
producing devices, are maintained to show images to five, or fewer, persons per
machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished,
or characterized, by the depicting, or describing, of specified sexual
activities, or specified anatomical areas.
   ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE, or ADULT VIDEO STORE.
      (1)   A commercial establishment which, as one of its principal purposes,
offers for sale, or rental, for any form of consideration, any one, or more of
the following:
         (a)   Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion picture, video cassettes or video reproductions,
slides, or other visual representations that are characterized by the
depiction, or description, of specified sexual activities, or specified
anatomical areas; or
         (b)   Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for use
in connection with specified sexual activities.
      (2)   A commercial establishment may have other principal business
purposes that do not involve the offering for sale, or rental, of material
depicting, or describing, specified sexual activities, or specified anatomical
areas, and still be categorized as ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE, or
ADULT VIDEO STORE. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt the
commercial establishments from being categorized as an ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT
NOVELTY STORE, or ADULT VIDEO STORE so long as one of its principal business
purposes is the offering for sale, or rental, for consideration the specified
materials which are characterized by the depiction of specified sexual
activities, or specified anatomical areas.
   ADULT CABARET. A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial
establishment that regularly features:
      (1)   Persons who appear in a state of nudity, or semi-nude;
      (2)   Live performances that are characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas, or by specified sexual activities; or
      (3)   Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other
photographic reproductions that are characterized by the exposure of specified
anatomical areas, or by specified sexual activities.
   ADULT MOTEL. A hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment which:
      (1)   Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration;
provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which
are characterized by the depiction, or description, of specified sexual
activities, or specified anatomical areas; and has a sign visible from the
public right-of-way that advertises the availability of this type of
photographic reproductions;
      (2)   Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less
than ten hours; or
      (3)   Allows a tenant, or occupant, of a sleeping room to subrent the
room for a period of time that is less than ten hours.
   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A commercial establishment where, for any form
of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar
photographic reproductions are regularly shown that are characterized by the
depiction, or description, of specified sexual activities, or specified
anatomical areas.
   ADULT THEATER. A theater, concern, hall, auditorium, or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity,
or semi-nude, or live performances that are characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas, or specified sexual activities.
   EMPLOYEE. A person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually-
oriented business on a full-time, part-time, or contract basis, whether or not
the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent, or
otherwise, and whether or not the person is paid a salary, wage, or other
compensation by the operator of the business. EMPLOYEE does not include a
person exclusively on the premises for repair, or maintenance, of the premises,
or equipment on the premises, or for the delivery of goods to the premises.
   ESCORT. A person who, for consideration, agrees, or offers, to act as a
companion, guide, or date for another person; or who agrees, or offers, to
privately model lingerie, or to privately perform a striptease for another
person.
   ESCORT AGENCY. A person or business association who furnishes, offers to
furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business
purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration.
   ESTABLISHMENT. Any of the following:
      (1)   The opening, or commencement, of any sexually-oriented business as
a new business;
      (2)   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually-
oriented business, to any sexually-oriented business;
      (3)   The additions of any sexually-oriented business to any other
existing sexually-oriented business; or
      (4)   The relocation of any sexually-oriented business.
   LICENSEE. A person in whose name a license to operate a sexually-oriented
business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on
the application for a license; and in the case of an employee, a person in
whose name a license has been issued authorizing employment in a sexually-
oriented business.
   NUDE MODEL STUDIO. Any place where a person who appears semi-nude, in a
state of nudity, or who displays specified anatomical areas, and is provided to
be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly
depicted by other persons who pay money, or any form of consideration. NUDE
MODEL STUDIO shall not include a proprietary school licensed by the state, or a
college, junior college, or university supported entirely, or in part, by
public taxation; a private college or university which maintains, and operates,
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior
college, or university supported entirely, or partly, by taxation; or in a
structure:
      (1)   That has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure, and no
other advertising that indicates a nude, or semi-nude, person is available for
viewing;
      (2)   Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at
least three days in advance of the class; and
      (3)   Where no more than one nude, or semi-nude, model is on the premises
at any one time.
   NUDITY OR A STATE OF NUDITY. The showing of the human male or female
genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft, or cleavage with less than a
fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully
opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or the showing of the covered male
genitals in a discernible turgid state.
   PERSON. An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association, or other legal entity.
   SEMI-NUDE or IN A SEMI-NUDE CONDITION. The showing of the female breast
below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest point, or
the showing of the male, or female, rear of the body which lies between two
imaginary lines running parallel to the ground when a person is standing, the
first, or top, of the line drawn at the top of the cleavage of the nates, and
the second, or bottom, line drawn at the lowest visible point of the cleavage,
or the lowest point of the curvature of the fleshy protuberance, whichever is
lower, and between two imaginary lines on each side of the body, which lines
are perpendicular to the ground and to the horizontal lines described above,
and which perpendicular lines are drawn through the point at which each nate
meets the outer side of each leg. This definition shall include the entire
lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any portion of
the cleavage of the human female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt,
leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel; provided, the areola is not
exposed in whole, or in part.
   SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER. A business, or commercial enterprise, that, as one
of its principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration:
      (1)   Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between
persons of the opposite sex; or
      (2)   Activities between male and female persons, and/or persons of the
same sex when one, or more, of the persons is in a state of nudity, or semi-
nude.
   SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS. An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty
store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture
theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, or sexual encounter
center.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREA.
      (1)   The human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely, and opaquely, covered; or
      (2)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, or a female breast below a point immediately above the top of
the areola.
   SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY. Any of the following offenses:
      (1)   Prostitution, or promotion of prostitution; dissemination of
obscenity; sale, distribution, or display of harmful material to a minor;
sexual performance by a child; possession, or distribution, of child
pornography; public lewdness; indecent exposure; indecency with a child;
engaging in organized criminal activity; sexual assault; molestation of a
child; gambling; or distribution of a controlled substance; or any similar
offenses to those described above under the criminal, or penal, code of other
states or countries, for which:
         (a)   Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction,
or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever
is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense;
         (b)   Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction,
or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the
later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or
         (c)   Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last
conviction, or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two, or more,
misdemeanor offenses, or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within
any 24-month period.
      (2)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect
on the disqualification of the applicant, or a person residing with the
applicant.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Any of the following:
      (1)   The fondling, or other erotic touching, of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts;
      (2)   Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, or copulation, masturbation, or sodomy; or
      (3)   Excretory functions as part of, or in connection with, any of the
activities set forth in divisions (1) and (2) above.
   SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT OF A SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS. The increase in
floor areas occupied by the business by more than 25%, as the floor areas exist
on January 1, 2000.
   TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS. Any of the
following:
      (1)   The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;
      (2)   The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest
in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or
      (3)   The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device
which transfers the ownership, or control, of the business, except for transfer
by bequest, or other operation of law, upon the death of the person possessing
the ownership control.
(Prior Code, § 11.70)
§ 119.04 CLASSIFICATION.
   Sexually-oriented businesses are classified as follows:
   (A)   Adult arcades;
   (B)   Adult bookstores, adult novelty stores, or adult video stores;
   (C)   Adult cabarets;
   (D)   Adult motels;
   (E)   Adult motion picture theaters;
   (F)   Adult theaters;
   (G)   Escort agencies;
   (H)   Nude model studios; and
   (I)   Sexual encounter centers.
(Prior Code, § 11.70)
§ 119.05 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   It is unlawful:
      (1)   For any person to operate a sexually-oriented business without a
valid sexually-oriented business license issued by the city pursuant to this
chapter;
      (2)   For any person who operates a sexually-oriented business to employ
a person to work for the sexually-oriented business who is not licensed as a
sexually-oriented business employee by the city pursuant to this chapter; and
      (3)   For any person to obtain employment with a sexually-oriented
business without having secured a sexually-oriented business employee license
pursuant to this chapter.
   (B)   An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the
city.
   (C)   All applicants must be qualified according to the provisions of this
chapter. The application may request, and the applicant shall provide, the
information (including fingerprints) as to enable the city to determine whether
the applicant meets the qualifications established in this chapter.
   (D)   If a person who wishes to operate a sexually-oriented business is an
individual, the person must sign the application for a license as applicant. If
a person who wishes to operate a sexually-oriented business is other than an
individual, each individual who has a 20%, or greater, interest in the business
must sign the application for a license as applicant. Each applicant must be
qualified under the following division (E), and each applicant shall be
considered a licensee if a license is granted.
   (E)   The completed application for a sexually-oriented business license
shall contain the following information, and shall be accompanied by the
following documents:
      (1)   If the applicant is:
         (a)   An individual, the individual shall state his or her legal name
and any aliases, and submit proof that he or she is 18 years of age;
         (b)   A partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name,
and the names of all partners, whether the partnership is general or limited,
and a copy of the partnership agreement, if any; and
         (c)   A corporation, the corporation shall state its complete name,
the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good
standing under the laws of its state of incorporation, the names, and capacity,
of all officers, directors, and principal stockholders, and the name of the
registered corporate agent, and the address of the registered office for
service of process.
      (2)   If the applicant intends to operate the sexually-oriented business
under a name other than that of the applicant, he or she must state the
sexually-oriented business’ fictitious name, and submit the required
registration documents;
      (3)   Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the applicant, has
been convicted of a specified criminal activity, as defined in this chapter,
and if so, the specified criminal activity involved, the date, place, and
jurisdiction of each;
      (4)   Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the applicant, has
had a previous license under this chapter, or other similar sexually-oriented
business ordinances from another city, or the county denied, suspended, or
revoked, including the name and location, of the sexually-oriented business for
which the permit was denied, suspended, or revoked, as well as the date of the
denial, suspension, or revocation, and whether the applicant, or a person
residing with the applicant, has been a partner in a partnership, or an
officer, director, or principal stockholder of a corporation that is licensed
under this chapter whose license has previously denied, suspended, or revoked,
including the name, and location, of the sexually-oriented business for which
the permit was denied, suspended, or revoked, as well as the date of denial,
suspension, or revocation;
      (5)   Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the applicant,
holds any other licenses under this chapter, or other similar sexually-oriented
business ordinance from another city or county and, if so, the names, and
locations, of the other licensed businesses;
      (6)   The single classification of license for which the applicant is
filing;
      (7)   The location of the proposed sexually-oriented business, including
a legal description of the property, street address, and telephone number(s),
if any;
      (8)   The applicant’s mailing address and residential address;
      (9)   A recent photograph of the applicant(s);
      (10)   The applicant’s driver’s permit number, Social Security number,
and/or his or her state, or federally, issued tax identification number;
      (11)   A sketch, or diagram, showing the configuration of the premises,
including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The
sketch, or diagram, need not be professionally prepared, but it must be drawn
to a designated scale, or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the
premises to an accuracy of plus, or minus, six inches;
      (12)   A current certificate, and straight-line drawing prepared within
30 days prior to application by a registered land surveyor depicting the
property lines, and the structures, containing any existing sexually-oriented
businesses within 1,000 feet of the property to be certified; the property
lines of any established religious institution/synagogue, school, public park,
or recreation area within 1,000 feet of the property to be certified. For
purposes of this section, a use shall be considered existing or established if
it is in existence at the time an application is submitted; and
      (13)   If an applicant wishes to operate a sexually-oriented business,
other than an adult motel, which shall exhibit on the premises, in a viewing
room, or booth of less than 150 square feet of floor space, films, video
cassettes, other video reproductions, or live entertainment which depict
specified sexual activities, or specified anatomical areas, then the applicant
shall comply with the application requirements set forth in §
119.16.
   (F)   Before any applicant may be issued a sexually-oriented business
employee license, the applicant shall submit on a form to be provided by the
city the following information:
      (1)   The applicant’s name, or any other name (including stage names), or
aliases used by the individual;
      (2)   Age, date, and place of birth;
      (3)   Height, weight, hair, and eye color;
      (4)   Present residence address and telephone number;
      (5)   Present business address and telephone number;
      (6)   Date, issuing state, and number of driver’s permit, or other
identification card information;
      (7)   Social Security number; and
      (8)   Proof that the individual is at least 18 years of age.
   (G)   Attached to the application form for a sexually-oriented business
employee license, as provided above, shall be the following:
      (1)   A color photograph of the applicant clearly showing the applicant’s
face, and the applicant’s fingerprints on a form provided by the Police
Department. Any fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the
applicant;
      (2)   A statement detailing the license history of the applicant for the
five years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application,
including whether the applicant previously operated, or is seeking to operate,
in this, or any other, county, city, state, or country, has ever had a license,
permit, or authorization to do business denied, revoked, or suspended. In the
event of any denial, revocation, or suspension, state the name, the name of the
issuing, or denying, jurisdiction, and describe, in full, the reason for the
denial, revocation, or suspension. A copy of any order of denial, revocation,
or suspension shall be attached to the application; and
      (3)   A statement whether the applicant has been convicted of a specified
criminal activity, as defined in this chapter and, if so, the specified
criminal activity involved, and the date, place, and jurisdiction of each.
(Prior Code, § 11.70) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 119.06 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Upon the filing of the application for a sexually-oriented business
employee license, the city shall issue a temporary license to the applicant.
The application shall then be referred to the appropriate city departments for
an investigation to be made on the information as is contained on the
application. The application process shall be completed within 30 days from the
date the completed application is filed. After the investigation, the city
shall issue a license, unless it is determined by a preponderance of the
evidence that one, or more, of the following findings is true:
      (1)   The applicant has failed to provide information reasonably
necessary for issuance of the license, or has falsely answered a question, or
request for information, on the application form;
      (2)   The applicant is under 18 years;
      (3)   The applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity,
as defined in this chapter;
      (4)   The sexually-oriented business employee license is to be used for
employment in a business prohibited by local or state law, statute, rule, or
regulation, or prohibited by particular provisions of this chapter; and/or
      (5)   The applicant has had a sexually-oriented business employee license
revoked by the city within two years of the date of the current application. If
the sexually-oriented business employee license is denied, the temporary
license previously issued is immediately deemed null and void. Denial,
suspension, or revocation of a license issued pursuant to this division (A)
shall be subject to appeal as set forth in this section.
   (B)   A license granted pursuant to this section shall be subject to annual
renewal upon the written application of the applicant, and a finding by the
city that the applicant has not been convicted of any specified criminal
activity, as defined in this chapter, or committed any act during the existence
of the previous license, which would be grounds to deny the initial license
application. The renewal of the license shall be subject to the payment of the
fee as set forth in §
119.07.
   (C)   Within 30 days after receipt of a completed sexually-oriented business
application, the city shall approve, or deny, the issuance of a license to an
applicant. The city shall approve the issuance of a license to an applicant
unless it is determined, by a preponderance of the evidence, that one, or more,
of the following findings is true:
      (1)   An applicant is under 18 years of age;
      (2)   An applicant, or a person with whom the applicant is residing, is
overdue in payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed
against, or imposed upon, him or her in relation to any business;
      (3)   An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary
for issuance of the license, or has falsely answered a question, or request for
information, on the application form;
      (4)   An applicant, or a person with whom the applicant is residing, has
been denied a license by the city to operate a sexually-oriented business
within the preceding 12 months;
      (5)   An applicant, or a person with whom the applicant is residing, has
been convicted of a specified criminal activity, as defined in this chapter;
      (6)   The premises to be used for the sexually-oriented business has not
been approved by the Health Department, Fire Department, and the Building
Official as being in compliance with applicable city code provisions;
      (7)   The license fee required by this chapter has not been paid; and/or
      (8)   An applicant of the proposed establishment is in violation of, or
is not in compliance with, any of the provisions of this chapter.
   (D)   The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the
person, or persons, to the whom it is granted, the expiration date, the address
of the sexually-oriented business, and the classification for which the license
is issued, as found in §
119.04. All licenses shall be posted in a conspicuous place at, or near, the
entrance to the sexually-oriented business so that they may be easily read at
any time.
   (E)   The Health Department, Fire Department, and the Building Official
shall complete their certifications that the premises is in compliance, or not
in compliance, within 20 days of receipt of the application by the city.
   (F)   A sexually-oriented business license shall be issued for only one
classification, as found in §
119.04.
(Prior Code, § 11.70)
§ 119.07 FEES.
   (A)   Every application for a sexually-oriented business license (whether
for a new license, or for renewal of an existing license) shall be accompanied
by a nonrefundable application, and investigation, fee, as set by the Council.
   (B)   All license applications and fees shall be submitted to the City
Clerk-Treasurer.
(Prior Code, § 11.70)
§ 119.08 INSPECTION.
   (A)   An applicant, or licensee, shall permit representatives of the Police
Department, Health Department, Fire Department, Zoning Department, or other
city departments, or agencies, to inspect the premises of a sexually-oriented
business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at any time it is
occupied, or open, for business.
   (B)   A person who operates a sexually-oriented business, or his or her
agent, or employee, commits a misdemeanor if he or she refuses to permit the
lawful inspection of the premises at any time it is occupied, or open, for
business.
(Prior Code, § 11.70)
§ 119.09 EXPIRATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance, and may
be renewed only by making application as provided in this chapter. Application
for renewal shall be made at least 30 days before the expiration date, and when
made less than 30 before the expiration date, the expiration of the license
will not be affected.
   (B)   When the city denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not be
issued a license for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to
denial, the city finds that the basis for denial of the renewal license has
been corrected, or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least
90 days have elapsed since the date denial became final.
(Prior Code, § 11.70)
§ 119.10 SUSPENSION.
   The city shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed 30 days if it
determines that a licensee, or an employee of a licensee, has:
   (A)   Violated, or is not in compliance with, any section of this chapter;
   (B)   Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually-oriented business
premises, as authorized by this chapter; or
   (C)   Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually-oriented
business premises.
(Prior Code, § 11.70)
§ 119.11 REVOCATION.
   (A)   The city shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension occurs, and
the license has been suspended within the preceding 12 months.
   (B)   The city shall revoke a license if it determines that:
      (1)   A licensee gave false, or misleading, information in the material
submitted during the application process;
      (2)   A licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of
controlled substances on the premises;
      (3)   A licensee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises;
      (4)   A licensee knowingly operated the sexually-oriented business during
a period of time when the licensee’s license was suspended;
      (5)   Except in the case of an adult motel, a licensee has knowingly
allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation,
or other sex act to occur in, or on, the licensed premises; and/or
      (6)   A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city, county, or state
for any taxes, or fees, past due.
   (C)   When the city revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one
year, and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually-oriented license for one
year from the date the revocation became effective.
   (D)   If, subsequent to revocation, the city finds that the basis for the
revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license
if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the revocation became
effective.
   (E)   After denial of an application, or denial of a renewal of an
application, or suspension, or revocation, of any license, the applicant, or
licensee, may seek prompt judicial review of the administrative action in any
court of competent jurisdiction.
   (F)   The administrative action shall be promptly reviewed by the court.
(Prior Code, § 11.70)
§ 119.12 TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   A licensee shall not transfer his or her license to another, nor shall a
licensee operate a sexually-oriented business under the authority of a license
at any place other than the address designated in the application.
(Prior Code, § 11.70)
§ 119.13 LOCATION OF SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES.
   (A)   A person commits a misdemeanor if that person operates, or causes to
be operated, a sexually-oriented business in any zoning district other than I-
1 or I-2, as defined, and described, in
Chapter 156.
   (B)   A person commits an offense if the person operates, or causes to be
operated, a sexually-oriented business within 1,000 feet of:
      (1)   A church, synagogue, mosque, temple, or building which is used
primarily for religious worship, and related religious activities;
      (2)   A public, or private, educational facility including, but not
limited to, child day care facilities, nursery schools, preschools,
kindergartens, elementary schools, prate schools, intermediate schools, junior
high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational schools, junior
colleges, and universities. School includes the school grounds, but does not
include the facilities used primarily for another purpose, and only
incidentally as a school;
      (3)   A boundary of a residential district, as defined in
Chapter 156; a public park, or recreational area which has been designated for
park or recreational activities, including, but not limited to, a park,
playground, nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field, basketball
or tennis courts, pedestrian/bicycle paths, wilderness areas, or other similar
public land within the city that is under the control, operation, or management
of the city park and recreation authorities;
      (4)   The property line of a lot devoted to a residential use, as defined
in
Chapter 156;
      (5)   An entertainment business which is oriented primarily toward
children or family entertainment; or
      (6)   A licensed premises, licensed pursuant to the alcoholic beverage
control regulations of the state.
   (C)   A person commits a misdemeanor if that person causes, or permits the
operation, establishment, substantial enlargement, or transfer of ownership, or
control, of a sexually-oriented business within 1,000 feet of another sexually-
oriented business.
   (D)   A person commits a misdemeanor if that person causes, or permits the
operation, establishment, or maintenance of more than one sexually-oriented
business in the same building, structure, or portion thereof, or the increase
of floor area of any sexually-oriented business in any building, structure, or
portion thereof containing another sexually-oriented business.
   (E)   For the purpose of division (B) above, measurement shall be made in a
straight line, without regard to the intervening structures or objects, from
the nearest portion of the building, or structure, used as the part of the
premises where a sexually-oriented business is conducted, to the nearest
property line of the premises of a use listed herein. Presence of a city,
county, or other political subdivision boundary shall be irrelevant for
purposes of calculating, and applying, the distance requirements of this
section.
   (F)   For purposes of division (C) above, the distance between any two
sexually-oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without
regard to the intervening structures or objects, or political boundaries, from
the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located.
   (G)   Any sexually-oriented business lawfully operating on January 1, 2000,
that is in violation of this section, shall be deemed a non-conforming use. The
non-conforming use will be permitted to continue for a period not to exceed one
year, unless sooner terminated for any reason, or voluntarily discontinued for
a period of 30 days, or more. The non-conforming uses shall not be increased,
enlarged, extended, or altered, except that the use may be changed to a
conforming use. If two, or more, sexually-oriented businesses are within 1,000
feet of one another, and otherwise in a permissible location, the sexually-
oriented business which was first established, and continually operating at a
particular location, is the conforming use, and the later established business
(es) are non-conforming.
   (H)   A sexually-oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is
not rendered a non-conforming use by the location, subsequent to the grant, or
renewal, of the sexually-oriented business license, of a use listed in division
(A) above, within 1,000 feet of the sexually-oriented business. This provision
applies only to the renewal of a valid license, and does not apply when an
application for a license is submitted after a license has expired, or been
revoked.
(Prior Code, § 11.70)
§ 119.14 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS OF ADULT MOTELS.
   (A)   Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or a similar
commercial establishment has been rented, and vacated, two, or more, times in a
period of time that is less than ten hours creates a rebuttable presumption
that the establishment is an adult motel, as that term is defined in this
chapter.
   (B)   A person commits a misdemeanor if, as the person in control of a
sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment that does
not have a sexually-oriented license, rents, or subrents, a sleeping room to a
person, and within ten hours from the time the room is rented, rent, or
subrents, the same sleeping room again.
   (C)   For purposes of division (B) above, the terms RENT or SUBRENT means
the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration.
(Prior Code, § 11.70)
§ 119.15 REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO EXHIBITION OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT FILMS,
VIDEOS, OR LIVE ENTERTAINMENT; VIEWING ROOMS.
   (A)   A person who operates, or causes to be operated, a sexually-oriented
business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a
viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space, a film, video
cassette, live entertainment, or other video reproduction which depicts
specified sexual activities, or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with
the following requirements:
      (1)   Upon application for a sexually-oriented license, the application
shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof
specifying the location of one, or more, manager’s stations, and the location
of all overhead lighting fixtures, and designating any portion of the premises
in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager’s station may not exceed 32
square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at which
the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared
diagram in the nature of an engineer’s, or architect’s, blueprint shall not be
required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north, or to some
designated street or object, and should be drawn to a designated scale, or with
marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all
areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus, or minus, six
inches. The city may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if
the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted, and certifies
that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was
prepared;
      (2)   The application shall be sworn to be true, and correct, by the
applicant;
      (3)   No alteration in the configuration, or location, of a manager’s
station may be made without the prior approval of the city;
      (4)   It is the duty of the licensee of the premises to ensure that at
least one licensed employee is on duty, and situated, in each manager’s station
at all times that any patron is present inside the premises;
      (5)   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner
that there is an unobstructed view from a manager’s station of every area of
the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding
restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the
premises has two, or more, manager’s stations designated, then the interior of
the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed
view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for
any purpose from at least one of the manager’s stations. The view required in
this division (A)(5) must be by direct line of sight from the manager’s
station;
      (6)   It shall be the duty of the licensees to ensure that the view area
specified above remains unobstructed by any doors, curtains, partitions, walls,
merchandise, display racks, or other materials and, at all times, to ensure
that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been
designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application
filed pursuant to provisions of this section;
      (7)   No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any
time;
      (8)   The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of
sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted
access at an illumination of not less than one foot-candle, as measured at the
floor level;
      (9)   It shall be the duty of the licensees to ensure that the
illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is
present in the premises;
      (10)   No licensee shall allow openings of any kind to exist between
viewing rooms, or booths;
      (11)   No person shall make, or attempt to make, an opening of any kind
between viewing booths, or rooms;
      (12)   The licensee shall, during each business day, regularly inspect
the walls between the viewing booths to determine if any openings, or holes,
exist;
      (13)   The licensee shall cause all floor coverings in viewing booths to
be nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting; and
      (14)   The licensee shall cause all wall surfaces and ceiling surfaces in
viewing booths to be constructed of, or permanently covered by, nonporous,
easily cleanable material. No wood, plywood, composition board, or other porous
material shall be used within 48 inches of the floor.
   (B)   A person having a duty under this section commits a misdemeanor if he
or she knowingly fails to fulfill that duty.
(Prior Code, § 11.70)
§ 119.16 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR ESCORT AGENCIES.
   (A)   An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of 18
years.
   (B)   A person commits an offense if the person acts as an escort, or agrees
to act as an escort, for any person under the age of 18 years.
(Prior Code, § 11.70)
§ 119.17 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR NUDE MODEL STUDIOS.
   (A)   A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of 18
years.
   (B)   A person under the age of 18 years commits an offense if the person
appears semi-nude, or in a state of nudity, in, or on, the premises of a nude
model studio. It is a defense to prosecution under this section if the person
under 18 years was in a restroom not open to public view, or visible to any
other person.
   (C)   A person commits an offense if the person appears in a state of
nudity, or knowingly allows another to appear in a state of nudity, in an area
of a nude model studio premises which can be viewed from the public right-of-
way.
   (D)   A nude model studio shall not place, or permit, a bed/sofa, or
mattress, in any room on the premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a
reception room open to the public.
(Prior Code, § 11.70)
§ 119.18 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS CONCERNING PUBLIC NUDITY.
   (A)   It is a misdemeanor for a person who knowingly, and intentionally, in
a sexually-oriented business, appears in a state of nudity, or depicts
specified sexual activities.
   (B)   It is a misdemeanor for a person who knowingly, or intentionally, in a
sexually-oriented business appears in a semi-nude condition, unless the person
is an employee who, while semi-nude, shall be at least ten feet from any patron
or customer, and on a stage at least two feet from the floor.
   (C)   It is a misdemeanor for an employee, while semi-nude in a sexually-
oriented business, to solicit any pay, or gratuity, from any patron or
customer, or for any patron or customer to pay, or give any gratuity, to any
employee, while the employee is semi-nude in a sexually-oriented business.
(Prior Code, § 11.70) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 119.19 PROHIBITION AGAINST CHILDREN IN A SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS.
   A person commits a misdemeanor if the person knowingly allows a person under
the age of 18 years on the premises of a sexually-oriented business.
(Prior Code, § 11.70) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 119.20 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   No sexually-oriented business, except for an adult motel, may remain open at
any time between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on weekdays and
Saturdays, and 1:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. on Sundays.
(Prior Code, § 11.70)
§ 119.21 EXEMPTIONS.
   It is a defense to prosecution under §
119.18 that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class
operated:
   (A)   By a proprietary school, licensed by the state, or a college, junior
college, or university supported entirely, or partly, by taxation;
   (B)   By a private college, or university, which maintains, and operates,
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior
college, or university supported entirely, or partly, by taxation; or
   (C)   In a structure:
      (1)   Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure, and
no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing;
      (2)   Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at
least three days in advance of the class; and
      (3)   Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one
time.
(Prior Code, § 11.70) (Ord. 156, second series, passed 10-20-1998)
CHAPTER 120: UTILITY SERVICES
Section
Plumbers
   
120.01   License required
   
120.02   Restrictions
Service Pipe Installers
   
120.15   License required
   
120.16   Insurance required
Garbage and Refuse Haulers
   
120.30   Garbage and refuse defined
   
120.31   License required
   
120.32   Exception
   
120.33   Rates and standards of operation
   
120.34   Conditions of license
   
120.35   License fee
   
120.36   Insurance required
   
120.37   Revocation of license
PLUMBERS
§ 120.01 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person to engage in the work, or business, of
plumbing, or the installation of water or sewer pipes, without a license
therefor from the city.
(Prior Code, § 6.25) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 120.02 RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Any applicant for an initial license under this subchapter shall have
a license from the State Board of Health. The applicant shall file proof of
holding the license. Any revocation, or suspension, of the state license shall
be grounds for revocation, or suspension, of the license from the city.
   (B)   Any applicant for a license under this subchapter shall give bond to
the city in the penal sum of $2,000, conditioned upon faithful, and lawful,
performance of all work in the city. Proof of filing the bond with the state
shall relieve the applicant of this requirement.
   (C)   Any applicant for a license under this subchapter shall provide
evidence of public, and product, liability insurance, with limits of at least
$50,000 per person; $100,000 per occurrence; and $10,000 property damage. Proof
of filing the evidence with the state shall relieve the applicant of this
requirement.
(Prior Code, § 6.25) (Ord. 51, passed 12-6-1983; Ord. 57, second series, passed
11-20-1984; Ord. 97, passed 10-3-1989)
SERVICE PIPE INSTALLERS
§ 120.15 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to sell, or offer for sale, any
merchandise or service on any street or public property without a license
therefor from the city.
   (B)   Before issuance of any license, the Council shall require a report
from the Chief of Police as to any possible traffic hazard, or danger to
persons or property, that are reasonably foreseeable if the license is issued.
(Prior Code, § 6.28) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 120.16 INSURANCE REQUIRED.
   Any applicant for a license under this subchapter shall provide evidence of
public, and product, liability insurance with limits of at least $1,000,000 per
occurrence, including coverage for X (Explosion), C (Collapse), and U
(Underground).
(Prior Code, § 6.28) (Ord. 102, second series, passed 4-17-1990)
GARBAGE AND REFUSE HAULERS
§ 120.30 GARBAGE AND REFUSE DEFINED.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   GARBAGE AND REFUSE. Refuse of all kinds, both organic and inorganic, which
accumulate in the ordinary operation of a household, including all putrescible
wastes, animal offal, the carcasses of dead animals, and other refuse small
enough to go into a 30 gallon container, but specifically excluding grass
trimmings/ashes, tree branches, leaves, human excreta, sewage, and other water
carried wastes. Also excluded are all non-putrescible wastes such as rocks,
earth, sand, gravel, brick, stone, plaster, wood, and other similar substances
which may accumulate as a result of construction, or demolition, operations.
(Prior Code, § 6.24)
§ 120.31 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to haul garbage, or other refuse, for
hire without a license therefor from the city, or to haul garbage, or other
refuse, from his or her own residence or business property, other than as
herein excepted.
   (B)   The city shall control the number of licensed residential haulers by
the issuance of a contract/agreement. There shall be no limit on the number of
licensed haulers of commercial/industrial garbage, or refuse, which will be
contracted independently.
(Prior Code, § 6.24) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 120.32 EXCEPTION.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall prevent persons from hauling grass
clippings, leaves, tree branches, rocks, earth, sand, gravel, brick, plaster,
or wood, as the result of construction or demolition operations. All materials
must be contained in the type of vehicle which will prohibit the possible loss
of cargo. All material shall be deposited in an approved disposal site.
(Prior Code, § 6.24)
§ 120.33 RATES AND STANDARDS OF OPERATION.
   (A)   All license applicants shall specifically describe the vehicle, or
vehicles, in which the garbage, or rubbish, is to be hauled or transported, and
shall have tight packer-type vehicles in good condition to prevent loss in
transit of liquid, or solid, cargo, and that the same be dumped, or unloaded,
only at an approved sanitary landfill, as strictly in accordance with
regulations relating thereto.
   (B)   Included therein a schedule of charges, or fees, to be made for the
services. No increase of the charges, or fees, as stated in the application,
shall be made by the licensee during the period of such license effective
period.
   (C)   All pickup vehicles must not exceed the gross axle weight as posted on
all streets, or avenues, of the city.
(Prior Code, § 6.24)
§ 120.34 CONDITIONS OF LICENSE.
   The Council may adopt conditions prerequisite to the granting of the license
to collect garbage, or may grant a license subject to continued compliance with
certain conditions. Any conditions adopted pursuant to this section shall be in
addition to the conditions imposed by other city code provisions, or state
laws.
(Prior Code, § 6.24)
§ 120.35 LICENSE FEE.
   Upon the affirmative vote of a majority of members of the Council, and upon
paying a license fee, as established by the Council from time to time, and upon
providing proof of insurance, as required by this subchapter, the City Clerk-
Treasurer shall issue a license to the applicant as a garbage and rubbish
collector for the period of one year, for which terms expires on December 31 of
each year.
(Prior Code, § 6.24)
§ 120.36 INSURANCE REQUIRED.
   Before a garbage and refuse collector’s license shall be issued, the
applicant shall file with the City Clerk-Treasurer evidence that he or she has
provided public liability insurance on all vehicles in at least the sum of
$20,000 for the injury of one person; $40,000 for the injury of two, or more,
persons in the same accident; and $5,000 for property damages.
(Prior Code, § 6.24)
§ 120.37 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   Any license so granted may be revoked by the Council, by a majority vote
thereof, at any time if the licensee fails to comply with, or violates any,
provision of this subchapter, and any other city code provision regulating the
collection of garbage, and other refuse.
(Prior Code, § 6.24) (Ord. 131, second series, passed 12-7-1993)
CHAPTER 121: FRANCHISE PROCEDURES
Section
General Provisions
   
121.01   Definition
   
121.02   Franchise ordinances
   
121.03   Power of regulation reserved
   
121.04   Conditions in every franchise
   
121.05   Further provisions of franchises
Electric Franchises
   
121.20   Definitions
   
121.21   Franchise required
   
121.22   Term
   
121.23   Required consideration
   
121.24   Effective date
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 121.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   FRANCHISE. Any special privileges granted to any person in, over, upon, or
under any of the streets, or public places, of the city, whether the privilege
has heretofore been granted by it, or by the state, or shall hereafter be
granted by the city, or by the state.
(Prior Code, § 2.62)
§ 121.02 FRANCHISE ORDINANCES.
   The Council may grant franchises by ordinance. Franchise rights shall always
be subject to the superior right of the public to the use of streets and public
places. All persons desiring to make any burdensome use of the streets, or
public places, inconsistent with the public’s right in such places, or desiring
the privilege of placing in, over, upon, or under any street or public place
any permanent, or semi-permanent, fixtures for the purpose of constructing, or
operating, railways, telegraphing, or transmitting electricity, or transporting
by pneumatic tubes, or for furnishing to the city, or its inhabitants, or any
portion thereof, transportation facilities, water, light, heat, power, gas, or
any other such utility, or for any other purpose, shall be required to obtain a
franchise before proceeding to make use of the streets, or public places, or
before proceeding to place fixtures in such places.
(Prior Code, § 2.62)
§ 121.03 POWER OF REGULATION RESERVED.
   The city shall have the right, and power, to regulate, and control, the
exercise by any person, of any franchise however acquired, and whether the
franchise has been heretofore granted by it, or by the state.
(Prior Code, § 2.62)
§ 121.04 CONDITIONS IN EVERY FRANCHISE.
   All conditions specified in this subchapter shall be a part of every
franchise, even though they may not be expressly contained in the franchise:
   (A)   The grantee shall be subject to, and will perform on its part, all the
terms of this subchapter, and will comply with all pertinent provisions of the
City Charter and city code, as the same may, from time to time, be amended;
   (B)   The grantee shall, in no case, claim, or pretend, to exercise any
power to fix fares, rates, and charges; but that fares, rates, and charges
shall, at all times, be just, fair, and reasonable for the services rendered,
and shall, in all cases, be fixed and, from time to time, changed, unless
regulated by an agency of the state in the manner following:
      (1)   A reasonable rate shall be construed to be one which will, with
efficient management, normally yield above all operating expenses and
depreciation, a fair return upon all money invested;
      (2)   If possible, maximum rates and charges shall be arrived at by
direct negotiation with the Council; and
      (3)   If direct negotiations fail to produce an agreement, the Council
shall, not less than 30 days before the expiration of any existing rate
schedule or agreement, appoint an expert as its representative, the franchisee
shall likewise appoint an expert as its representative, and the two of them
shall appoint a third person, preferably an expert, and the three of them shall
constitute a board of arbitration. The board shall report its findings as soon
as possible, and the rates and charges it shall agree upon by majority vote
shall be legal and binding, subject only to review by a court of competent
jurisdiction upon application of one of the parties.
   (C)   The Council shall have the right to require reasonable extensions of
any public service system from time to time, and to make rules and regulations
as may be required to secure adequate, and proper, service, and to provide
sufficient accommodations for the public;
   (D)   The grantee shall not issue any capital stock on account of the
franchise, or the value thereof, and that the grantee shall have no right to
receive, upon condemnation proceedings brought by the city to acquire the
public utility exercising the franchise, any return on account of the
franchise, or its value;
   (E)   No sale, or lease, of the franchise shall be effective until the
assignee, or lessee, shall have filed with the city an instrument, duly
executed, reciting the facts of the sale or lease, accepting the terms of the
franchise, and agreeing to perform all the conditions required of the grantee
thereunder;
   (F)   Every grant of a franchise permitting the erection of poles, masts, or
other fixtures in the streets, and for the attachment of wires thereto, or for
the laying of tracks in, or of, pipes or conduits under the streets or public
places, or for placing in the streets, or other public places, any permanent,
or semi-permanent, fixtures whatsoever, shall be subject to the conditions that
the Council shall have the power to require alterations therein, or relocation
or rerouting thereof, as the Council may, at any time, deem necessary for the
safety, health, or convenience of the public. Particularly, the Council shall
have the power to require the removal of poles, masts, and other fixtures
bearing wires, and placing underground all facilities for whatsoever purpose
used;
   (G)   Every franchise shall contain a provision granting the city the right
to acquire the same in accordance with statute; and
   (H)   The franchisee may be obligated by the city to pay the city fees to
raise revenue, or defray increased costs accruing as a result of utility
operations, or both, including, but not limited to, a sum of money based upon
gross operating revenues, or gross earnings, from its operations in the city.
(Prior Code, § 2.62)
§ 121.05 FURTHER PROVISIONS OF FRANCHISES.
   The enumeration, and specification, of particular matters which must be
included in every franchise, or renewal or extension thereof, shall not be
construed as impairing the right of the city to insert in any such franchise,
or renewal or extension thereof, other, and further, conditions and
restrictions as the Council may deem proper to protect the city’s interests,
nor shall anything contained in this subchapter limit any right, or power,
possessed by the city over existing franchises.
(Prior Code, § 2.62)
ELECTRIC FRANCHISES
§ 121.20 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   CITY. The boundaries as they exist on the effective date of this subchapter,
and as they may be changed by law from time to time hereafter.
   ELECTRIC SERVICE PROVIDER. A public electric utility, and a person who
performs any one, or more, of the activities described in this subchapter, and
may, as contemplated herein, be the ultimate user, or consumer, of the electric
energy.
   FRANCHISE FEE. The consideration paid, or provided, to the city, as
described in this subchapter.
   PERSON. A natural person, any partnership, joint venture, corporation,
cooperative, limited liability company, or any public corporation, political
subdivision, or agency of the state, or any other legal entity that may be
created by law.
   PUBLIC ELECTRIC UTILITY. A person now, or hereafter, operating, maintaining,
or controlling equipment, or facilities, for furnishing electric service at
retail, regardless of the nature of the ownership of the person, and so
includes, but not by way of limitation, a cooperative electric association, and
investor owned utility, a municipally owned utility, and any joint venture,
partnership, or other combination of the foregoing.
(Prior Code, § 2.63)
§ 121.21 FRANCHISE REQUIRED.
   (A)   A franchise shall be granted only by ordinance. Every ordinance
granting a franchise shall contain all the terms, and conditions, of the
franchise, except to the extent reserved by the Council, by this subchapter, or
any other city code provision, or by law for the public health and safety. The
grantee shall bear the costs of publication of the franchise ordinance, and
shall make a sufficient deposit with the City Clerk-Treasurer to guarantee
publication before the ordinance is passed.
   (B)   Except pursuant to a franchise granted by the city, it is unlawful for
any person to:
      (1)   Operate a public electric utility, or perform any one, or more, of
the traditional functions of a public electric utility, including, but not by
way of limitation, producing, transmitting, furnishing, or delivering electric
energy, or causing to be produced, transmitted, furnished, or delivered
electric energy for light, power, heat, or other purposes, to, or for, the
public, or to, or for, any one, or more persons within the corporate limits of
the city;
      (2)   Place, or maintain, any permanent, or semi-permanent, lines, wires,
or fixtures in, over, upon, or under any street or public place within the
corporate limits of the city for the purpose of operating a public electric
utility, or performing any one, or more, of the traditional functions of a
public electric utility, including, but not by way of limitation, producing,
transmitting, furnishing, or delivering, or causing electric energy to be
produced, transmitted, furnished, or delivered, or for any other purpose to, or
for, the public, or to, or for any one, or more, persons;
      (3)   Interconnect, or cause an interconnection, between any electric
transmission or distribution system, wherever located, and any building,
structure, or facility of any kind within the city for the purpose of
delivering, or causing the delivery, of electric energy for the benefit of the
owner, the user, or occupant thereof; or
      (4)   Receive electric energy within the city from any person not a
franchisee by the city, except upon payment to the city of a franchise fee, as
provided herein.
(Prior Code, § 2.63) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 121.22 TERM.
   No exclusive, or perpetual, franchise, or privilege, shall ever be granted,
or created, nor shall any franchise, or privilege, be granted for a term of
more than 20 years.
(Prior Code, § 2.63)
§ 121.23 REQUIRED CONSIDERATION.
   (A)   (1)   As a part of any franchise ordinance adopted, the city shall
impose upon the grantee an obligation to pay, or provide consideration, to the
city which may be less than, equivalent to, or greater than costs of the city
related to the recovery of the rental value of the public rights-of-way, the
costs associated with the supervision, and maintenance, thereof, and the costs
of administration, and supervision, of the franchise ordinance. The franchise
fee may be expressed:
         (a)   As a specified charge per kilowatt hour of electric energy
transmitted, furnished, delivered, or received, which fees shall be calculated
by the Council, and imposed upon each kilowatt hour of electric energy
transmitted, furnished, delivered, or received within the city;
         (b)   As a percentage of the gross revenues, or other consideration,
billed, charged, and payable for the production, transmission, furnishing,
delivery, or receipt of electric energy and power; or
         (c)   In such other manner, or fashion, as the Council may determine.
      (2)   The franchise fee may be changed by ordinance from time to time;
however, no change shall be adopted until at least 30 days after written notice
enclosing the proposed ordinance has been served upon the grantee of a
franchise by certified mail. The franchise fee may not be changed more often
than once in each calendar year.
   (B)   If, for whatever reason, a franchise ordinance, as required herein, is
not in force, a franchise fee shall, nonetheless, be due, and payable, to the
city. The franchise fee, in such circumstances, shall be calculated by the City
Clerk-Treasurer to provide to the city the financial, or other consideration,
as would be payable to the city under the terms of other franchise ordinances
governing other electric service providers or, if there be none, an amount
reasonably comparable to the city’s electric utility payments to the city
General Fund, plus the fair market value of the city’s electric utility
provision of goods and services to, and for, the benefit of the city, as may be
in effect from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 2.63)
§ 121.24 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   No electric service provider currently providing retail electric service
within the city shall be subject to §§
121.21 or
121.23 until 90 days from the effective date of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 2.63) (Ord. 153, second series, passed 10-20-1998)
CHAPTER 122: TETRAHYDROCANNABINOL (THC) PRODUCTS
Section
   
122.01   Purpose and intent
   
122.02   Definitions
   
122.03   License
   
122.04   Fees
   
122.05   Ineligibility and basis for denial of license
   
122.06   Procedure upon denial, suspension, non-renewal, or revocation of
license
   
122.07   Prohibited acts
   
122.08   Other illegal acts
   
122.09   Storage
   
122.10   Responsibility
   
122.11   Compliance checks and inspections
 
   
122.99   Penalty
§ 122.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the sale of legalized adult-use
of any product that contains tetrahydrocannabinol and that meets the
requirements to be sold for human or animal consumption under M.S. § 151.72
("THC Products") for the following reasons:
   (A)   By enacting 2022 Session Law Chapter 98, Article 13, the Minnesota
Legislature amended M.S. § 151.72 to allow the sale of certain products
containing tetrahydrocannabinol (THC).
   (B)   The new law does not prohibit municipalities from adopting and
enforcing local ordinances to regulate THC product businesses including, but
not limited to, local zoning and land use requirements and business license
requirements.
   (C)   The National Academies of Science, Engineering, and Medicine note that
the growing acceptance, accessibility, and use of THC products, including for
medical purposes, have raised important public health concerns, while the lack
of aggregated knowledge of cannabis-related health effects has led to
uncertainty about the impact of its use.
   (D)   The city recognizes the danger THC use presents to the health,
welfare, and safety of youth in St. James.
   (E)   The Minnesota Legislature recognized the danger of THC product use
among the public at large by setting potency and serving size requirements.
   (F)   The Minnesota Legislature recognized the danger of THC product use
among youth by prohibiting the sale of any product containing THC to those
under the age of 21, requiring that edible THC products be packaged without
appeal to children and in child-resistant packaging or containers.
   (G)   State law authorizes the Board of Pharmacy to adopt product and
testing standards in part to curb the illegal sale and distribution of THC
products and ensure the safety and compliance of commercially available THC
products in the State of Minnesota.
   (H)   The city has the opportunity to be proactive and make decisions that
will mitigate this threat and reduce exposure of young people to the products
or to the marketing of these products and improve compliance among THC product
retailers with laws prohibiting the sale or marketing of THC products to youth.
   (I)   Laws prohibiting the sale or marketing of THC products to youth are
needed to ensure and improve compliance among THC product retailers.
   (J)   A local regulatory system for THC product retailers is appropriate to
ensure that retailers comply with THC product laws and business standards of
the city to protect the health, safety, and welfare of our youth and most
vulnerable residents.
   (K)   A requirement for a THC product retailer license will not unduly
burden legitimate business activities of retailers who sell or distribute THC
products to adults but will allow the city to regulate the operation of lawful
businesses to discourage violations of state and local THC product related
laws.
   (L)   In making these findings and enacting this chapter, it is the intent
of the city to ensure responsible THC product retailing, allowing legal sale
and access without promoting increases in use, and to discourage violations of
THC product-related laws, especially those which prohibit or discourage the
marketing, sale or distribution of THC products to youth under 21 years of age.
(Ord. 012, fourth series, passed 9-19-2023)
§ 122.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPLICANT. The natural person or business entity applying for a license
under this section, and in the case of an applicant that is not a natural
person, any owner of the applicant.
   ASSISTANCE or INTERVENTION. The actual physical exchange of the licensed
product between the customer and the licensee or employee.
   CITY. The City of St. James, Minnesota.
   COMPLIANCE CHECKS. The system the city uses to investigate and ensure that
those authorized to sell licensed products are following and complying with the
requirements of this chapter. COMPLIANCE CHECKS involve the use of persons
under 21 who purchase or attempt to purchase licensed products. COMPLIANCE
CHECKS may also be conducted by the city or other units of government for
educational, research, and training purposes, or for investigating or enforcing
federal, state, or local laws and regulations relating to licensed products.
   EXCLUSIVE LIQUOR STORE. An establishment that meets the definition of
EXCLUSIVE LIQUOR STORE in M.S. § 340A.101, subd. 10.
   FIXED PLACE OF BUSINESS. Any form of business operated from a fixed address
storefront or other permanent type of structure that is not a moveable place of
business.
   INSPECTIONS. The routine evaluation of a licensed establishment to ensure
compliance with all license conditions, this chapter, this code, state
statutes, and federal law.
   LICENSE. A license issued under this section.
   LICENSED PRODUCT or THC PRODUCT. Any product that contains more than trace
amounts of tetrahydrocannabinol and that meets the requirements to be sold for
human or animal consumption under M.S. § 151.72, as may be amended from time to
time. LICENSED PRODUCT and THC PRODUCT does not include medical cannabis as
defined in M.S. § 152.22, subd. 6, as may be amended from time to time.
   MEDICAL CANNABIS. Shall have the meaning provided in M.S. § 152.22, subd. 6,
as the same may be amended from time to time.
   MOVEABLE PLACE OF BUSINESS. Any form of business operated out of a kiosk,
truck, van, automobile, or other type of vehicle or transportable shelter and
not a fixed address storefront or other permanent type of structure authorized
for sales transactions.
   RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT. Any place of business facility that sells goods or
merchandise directly to the public at retail value, including but not limited
to, convenience stores, grocery stores, restaurants, and drug stores.
   SALE. Any transfer of goods for money, trade, barter, or other
consideration.
   SCHOOL. Any public or private elementary, vocational, or secondary school; a
public or private college or university; or a state licensed day care center.
   SELF-SERVICE MERCHANDISING. Open displays of licensed products in any manner
where any person has access to the licensed products without the assistance or
intervention of the licensee or the licensee's employee. Assistance or
intervention means the actual physical exchange of the licensed product between
the customer and the licensee or employee.
   VENDING MACHINE. Any mechanical, electric, electronic, or other type of
device that dispenses licensed products upon the insertion of money, tokens, or
other form of payment directly into the machine by the person seeking to
purchase the licensed product.
(Ord. 012, fourth series, passed 9-19-2023)
§ 122.03 LICENSE.
   (A)   License required. No natural person, corporation, partnership, limited
liability company, or business entity of any type shall sell, donate, give
away, or otherwise transfer any THC product, or offer to do so, without first
having obtained a license to do so from the city.
   (B)   Application. An application for a license to sell licensed products or
THC products shall be made on a form provided by the city and include all
information the city deems necessary. The city shall conduct a background
investigation of the applicant(s) on all new applications. The investigation
shall consider all facts and information bearing upon the question of the
applicant's fitness to receive the license and to perform the duties imposed by
this chapter. The city may conduct a background check on an applicant for a
renewal of a license if it is in the public interest to do so. If a license is
mistakenly issued or renewed to a person, it shall be revoked upon the
discovery that the person was ineligible for the license under this chapter and
the city shall provide the person with a notice of revocation, along with
information on the right to appeal.
      (1)   Verification. Every application for a license shall be verified and
filed with the City Clerk/Treasurer.
      (2)   Form of applicant. The application shall show whether the applicant
is a natural person. The following information shall be required:
         (a)   Natural person. If the applicant is a natural person, the
following information shall be required:
            1.   Full legal name, place and date of birth and street of
applicant;
            2.   Whether the applicant has ever used or been known by a name
other than his or her true legal name and, if so, what was such name(s), and
information concerning dates and places where used;
            3.   The name of the business, if it is to be conducted under a
designation, name, or style other than the full individual name of the
applicant;
            4.   Street address at which the applicant lived during the
preceding five years;
            5.   Kind, name, and location of every business or occupation the
applicant has been engaged in during the preceding five years;
            6.   Names and addresses of the applicant's employers and business
partners, if any, for the preceding five years;
            7.   Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of any felony,
crime, or violation of any ordinance, other than traffic offenses; except that
alcohol-related driving offenses shall be reported. If so, the applicant shall
furnish information as to the time, place and offense for which convictions
were had;
            8.   Whether the applicant has ever been engaged as an employer or
in operating a business of a similar nature. If so, the applicant shall furnish
information as to the time, place, and length of time of such operation;
            9.   Whether the applicant has ever been in the military service.
If so, the applicant shall upon request exhibit all discharges;
            10.   The name of the operating officer, manager or proprietor or
other agent in charge of the premises to be licensed; and
            11.   Certification that the applicant has liability insurance
covering the applicant's sale of THC product.
         (b)   Partnership or limited liability partnership. If the applicant
is a partnership or limited liability partnership, the names and addresses of
all partners and all information concerning each partner as is required of a
single applicant in division (B)(2)(a) above. A managing partner, or partners,
shall be designated. The interest of each partner in the business shall be
disclosed. A true copy of the applicant's partnerships' agreement, if any,
shall be submitted with the application. If and in the event the composition of
the partnership shall change at any time subsequent to the initial application,
any amended partnership agreements must be filed with the city.
         (c)   Corporation, limited liability company, or other business
entity. If the applicant is a corporation, limited liability company, or other
business entity, the following information shall be required:
            1.   Company name and state of incorporation or organization;
            2.   A true copy of certificate of articles of incorporation or
organization, articles of incorporation or organization, and, if a foreign
corporation, any certificate of authority to conduct business in the State of
Minnesota as may be required by state law;
            3.   The name of the operating officer, manager, proprietor, or
other agent in charge of the premises to be licensed, giving all the
information about said person as is required of a single applicant in division
(B)(2)(a)1.;
            4.   A list of all persons who, whether individually or with
another, own or control any interest in said corporation or association
together with their addresses and all information as is required of a single
applicant in division (B)(2)(a)(i); and
            5.   The name of the business, if it is to be conducted under a
designation, name, or style other than the full legal name of the applicant.
      (3)   Legal description and street address. The street address and exact
legal description of the premises to be licensed, together with a plan, sketch,
or drawing of the area showing dimensions, location of building, street access,
parking facilities and the locations of and distances to the nearest place of
worship and school building.
      (4)   Floorplan. A diagram or sketch depicting the licensed premises and
the area within the licensed premises where the licensed product will be sold.
      (5)   Age 21 and older retailer. Certification as to whether access to
the licensed premises will be limited to persons age 21 or older.
      (6)   Disclosure of ownership interests. At the time of application, each
applicant that is not a natural person shall furnish the city with a list of
all persons that have an interest of 5% or more in the business. The list shall
name all owners and show the interest held by each, either individually or
beneficially for others. It is the duty of each business licensee to notify the
City Clerk-Treasurer in writing of any change in ownership in the business. Any
change in the ownership or control of the business shall be deemed equivalent
to a transfer of the license; any such license shall be revoked 30 days after
any such change in ownership or control unless the licensee has notified the
Council of the change in ownership by submitting a new license application for
the new owners and the Council has approved the transfer of the license by
appropriate action. Any time an additional investigation is required because of
a change in ownership or control of a business, the licensee shall pay an
additional investigation fee to be determined by the city. The city may at any
reasonable time examine the transfer records and minute books of any business
licensee to verify and identify the owners, and the city may examine the
business records of any other licensee to the extent necessary to disclose the
interest which persons other than the licensee have in the licensed business.
The Council may revoke any license issued upon its determination that a change
of ownership of a licensee has actually resulted in the change of control of
the licensed business so as materially to affect the integrity and character of
its management and its operation, but no such action shall be taken until after
a hearing by the Council on notice to the licensee.
      (7)   Additional information. Any additional information the city deems
necessary.
   (C)   Incomplete application. If the City Clerk-Treasurer determines that
the application is incomplete, he/she shall return the application to the
applicant with notice of the information needed to make the application
complete. The applicant shall be informed of an incomplete application within
ten business days.
   (D)   Investigation.
      (1)   On an initial application for a license and on application for
transfer of an existing license, the applicant shall pay with the application
an investigation fee of $500. The city shall request that its Chief of Police
conduct a preliminary background and financial investigation of the applicant.
The application in such case shall be made on a form prescribed by the State
Bureau of Criminal Apprehension and with such additional information as the
Council may require. If the Council deems it in the public interest to have an
investigation made on a particular application for renewal of a license, it
shall so determine. If the Council determines that a comprehensive background
and financial investigation of the applicant is necessary, it may conduct the
investigation itself or contract with the Bureau of Criminal Apprehension for
the investigation. If an investigation outside the state is required, the
applicant shall be charged the cost not to exceed $10,000, which shall be paid
by the applicant after deducting any initial investigation fee already paid.
The fee shall be payable by the applicant whether or not the license is
granted. Upon completion of the investigation, the Chief of Police shall make a
written report and recommendation to the City Council of his or her findings,
including a specific report on any violation of federal or state law or
municipal regulations.
      (2)   As an alternative to the investigation process set forth in
division (D)(1) above, an applicant may pay an investigation fee of $500 and
submit the results of a comparable background investigation completed by an
agency of the State of Minnesota within the 12 months prior to the application.
To do so, the applicant must authorize the city to obtain any and all related
information from said agency so that the Council may review it to determine if
any additional investigation is necessary. If the Council determines that the
agency's investigation is insufficient for these licensing purposes, then the
Council may require the investigation described in division (D)(1) above.
   (E)   Public hearing. For initial and renewal applications, upon receipt of
the written report and recommendation by the Police Chief of the City of St.
James, and within 21 days thereafter, the City Manager shall cause to be
scheduled a public hearing; with notice thereof to be published in the official
newspaper ten days in advance of the scheduled hearing, setting forth the day,
time and place when the hearing will be held, the name of the applicant, the
premises where the business is to be conducted, the nature of the business, and
such other information as the Council may direct. At the hearing, opportunity
shall be given to any person to be heard for or against the granting of the
license. After such investigation and hearing, the Council shall grant or
refuse the application in its discretion.
   (F)   Action. The City Council may either approve or deny the application
for a license, or it may delay action for a reasonable period of time as
necessary to complete any investigation of the application or the applicant it
deems necessary. A four-fifths vote of the City Council shall be required for
the granting of any license. If the City Council approves the license, the City
Clerk-Treasurer shall issue the license to the applicant. If the City Council
denies the license, notice of the denial shall be given to the applicant along
with notice of the applicant's right to appeal the City Council's decision
pursuant to §
122.06. If a license application is denied, the earliest an applicant may
reapply is 12 months from the date the license is denied.
   (G)   Term. All licenses issued under this chapter shall expire on December
31 of each year. License fees shall be prorated on a monthly basis for the
portion of any year remaining on an initial application and with any portion of
a licensed month counting as a full month.
   (H)   Revocation or suspension. Any license issued under this chapter may be
revoked or suspended whenever the City Council deems there is cause to do so.
Cause exists whenever a licensee violates any provision of this section or no
longer meets the license eligibility requirements of this section.
   (I)   Transfers. All licenses issued under this chapter shall be valid only
on the premises for which the license was issued and only for the person or
business to whom the license was issued. The transfer of any license to another
location, business, or person is prohibited.
   (J)   Display. All licenses shall be posted and displayed in plain view of
the general public on the licensed premises.
   (K)   Renewals. The renewal of a license issued under this section shall be
handled in the same manner as the original application, provided, however that
the City Council may waive the requirement of a background on an application
for a renewal of a license if the City Council deems it is in the public
interest to do so. The request for a renewal shall be made at least 30 days but
no more than 60 days before the expiration of the current license.
   (L)   Issuance as privilege and not a right. The issuance of a license
issued under this chapter is a privilege and does not entitle the applicant to
a license, nor does it entitle a license holder to automatic renewal of the
license.
(Ord. 012, fourth series, passed 9-19-2023)
§ 122.04 FEES.
   No license shall be issued under this chapter until the appropriate license
fee shall be paid in full. The fee for a license under this chapter shall be
established by the City Council and adopted in the city fee schedule, and may
be amended from time to time. Each application for a license shall be
accompanied by a receipt from the City Clerk-Treasurer for payment in full of
the license fee and the fixed investigation fee. All fees shall be paid into
the General Fund. If an application for a license is rejected or denied, the
City Clerk-Treasurer shall refund the amount paid as a license fee, which shall
not include the fixed investigation fee.
(Ord. 012, fourth series, passed 9-19-2023)
§ 122.05 INELIGIBILITY AND BASIS FOR DENIAL OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Ineligibility.
      (1)   Moveable place of business. No license shall be issued to a
moveable place of business. Only fixed location businesses shall be eligible to
be licensed under this chapter. Licensed products may only be sold within a
retail establishment.
      (2)   Exclusive liquor store. No license shall be issued to an exclusive
liquor store as defined in M.S. § 340A.101, subd. 10, as the same may be
amended from time to time.
      (3)   On-sale liquor licenses. No licenses shall be issued to the holder
of an on-sale beer, wine, or liquor license issued by the City of St. James.
      (4)   Restaurants. No license shall be issued to any restaurant.
      (5)   Number of licenses. No more than five licenses may be issued in the
city.
      (6)   Financial delinquencies. No license shall be granted or renewed for
operation on any premises on which real estate taxes, assessments, or other
financial claims of the city or of the state are due, delinquent, or unpaid. If
an action has been commenced pursuant to the provisions of M.S. Chapter 278, as
the same may be amended, questioning the amount or validity of taxes, the
Council may, on application by the licensee, waive strict compliance with this
provision; no waiver may be granted, however, for taxes, or any portion
thereof, which remain unpaid for a period exceeding one year after becoming due
unless such one-year period is extended through no fault of the licensee.
      (7)   Zoning ordinance applies. A license shall be issued to locations
zoned B-2, B-3, or B-4 districts.
   (B)   Grounds for denial. Grounds for denying the issuance or renewal of a
license under this chapter include, but are not limited to, the following:
      (1)   The applicant, or any owner of an applicant that is not a natural
person, is under the age of 21 years.
      (2)   The applicant is prohibited by federal, state, or other local law,
ordinances, or other rule or regulation from holding a license.
      (3)   The applicant has been convicted within the past five years for
any:
         (a)   Violation of a federal, state, or local law relating to the
licensed products or any controlled substance law; or
         (b)   Gross misdemeanor or felony, including alcohol-related driving
offenses but excluding other traffic offenses.
      (4)   The applicant has had a license to sell licensed products suspended
or revoked during the 12 months preceding the date of application, or the
applicant has or had an interest in another premises authorized to sell
licensed products, whether in the city or in another jurisdiction, that has had
a license to sell licensed products suspended or revoked during the same time
period, provided the applicant had an interest in the premises at the time of
the revocation or suspension, or at the time of the violation that led to the
revocation or suspension.
      (5)   The applicant has had any license issued by the city or any other
jurisdiction suspended or revoked during the 12 months preceding the date of
application, or the applicant has or had an interest in another premises,
whether in the city or in another jurisdiction, that has had a license
suspended or revoked during the same time period, provided the applicant had an
interest in the premises at the time of the revocation or suspension, or at the
time of the violation that led to the revocation or suspension.
      (6)   The applicant is a business that does not have an operating officer
or manager who is eligible pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
      (7)   The applicant is the spouse of a person ineligible for a license
pursuant to this section or who, in the judgement of the City Council, is not
the real party in interest or beneficial owner of the business to be operated
under the license.
      (8)   The applicant fails to provide any information required on the
application or provides false or misleading information. Any false statement on
an application, or any willful omission of any information called for on such
application form, shall cause an automatic refusal of license, or if already
issued, shall render any license issued pursuant thereto void and of no effect
to protect the applicant from prosecution for violation of this chapter, or any
part thereof.
      (9)   The proposed licensed premises is located within 300 feet of any
school or addiction recovery center. The distances herein referred to shall be
measured in a straight line from the nearest property boundary of the licensed
premises to the nearest property boundary of the school or addiction recovery
center.
      (10)   A license issued under this chapter shall be for a single fixed
location only.
   (C)   Background checks. Upon receipt of an application for a license under
this chapter, the city shall conduct a background investigation on all new
applications and applications to transfer a license. If a license is mistakenly
issued or renewed to a person, it shall be revoked upon the discovery of the
mistake, and the city shall provide the licensee with a notice of revocation,
along with information on the right to appeal.
(Ord. 012, fourth series, passed 9-19-2023)
§ 122.06 PROCEDURE UPON DENIAL, SUSPENSION, NON-RENEWAL, OR REVOCATION OF
LICENSE.
   A determination by the city to deny, suspend, revoke, or not renew any
license under this chapter may be appealed to the City Council of St. James by
filing with the City Clerk-Treasurer a written notice of appeal within 15 days
of the date on which notice of the city's denial, suspension, or revocation is
mailed to the licensee. In that event, the appeal will be heard by the Council
at its next meeting occurring at least 15 days but not more than 45 days after
the filing of the notice of appeal. At any appeal of a determination by the
city under this chapter, the licensee or applicant, or an attorney representing
said party, may appear and make a presentation to the City Council. The
licensee or applicant shall present to the City Council the basis for the
determination being appealed, and the City Council may receive and consider any
evidence it deems relevant to the issue. After the hearing, the Council may
uphold, reverse, or modify the prior decision based upon the provisions of this
chapter and upon the protection of the public health, safety, or general
welfare. The City Council shall issue written findings and determination within
31 days of the hearing, unless the Council extends that time for good cause. A
decision of the City Council made following an appeal as set forth herein may
be appealed by writ of certiorari to the Court of Appeals of the State of
Minnesota pursuant to its Rules of Civil Appellate Procedure and Minnesota
Statutes.
(Ord. 012, fourth series, passed 9-19-2023)
§ 122.07 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   (A)   In general. No person shall sell, donate, give away, or otherwise
dispense or distribute any licensed product, or offer to do so:
      (1)   By means of any type of vending machine;
      (2)   By means of self-service merchandising; provided, however that
self-service merchandising is permitted in a licensed establishment where entry
to the premises is restricted to persons of age 21 or older;
      (3)   By any other means, to any other person, or in any other manner or
form prohibited by state or other local law, ordinance provision, or other
regulation;
      (4)   That is not packaged in strict compliance with state laws, rule,
and regulations;
      (5)   From any location other than a fixed place of business that is a
licensed premises. Delivery of licensed products from a licensee to a purchaser
who is located off the licensed premises is strictly prohibited;
      (6)   By any form of internet/online transaction;
      (7)   By acceptance or redemption of any coupon, price promotion, or
other instrument or mechanism, whether in paper, digital, electronic, mobile,
or any other form, that provides any THC products to a consumer at no cost or
at a price that is less than the non-discounted, standard price listed by a
retailer on the item or on any related shelving, posting, advertising, or
display at the location where the item is sold or offered for sale, including
all applicable taxes; or
      (8)   No person shall sell or offer for sale a product containing THC
that does not meet all the requirements of M.S. § 151.72, subd. 3.
   (B)   Controlled substance. No person shall sell, offer to sell, or
otherwise provide any licensed products containing opium, morphine, jimson
weed, belladonna, strychnos, cocaine, marijuana, or other deleterious,
hallucinogenic, toxic, or controlled substances not authorized by state or
federal law.
   (C)   Legal age. No person shall sell any licensed product to any person
under the age of 21.
      (1)   Age to sell. No person under the age of 18 shall sell any licensed
product to any person.
      (2)   Age to purchase. No person, regardless of license status, shall
sell any licensed product to any person under the age of 21.
      (3)   Age verification. Licensees, including their employees and
representatives, shall verify by means of government issued photographic
identification that the purchaser is at least 21 years of age.
      (4)   Signage. All licensees shall post and display in plain view of the
general public on the licensed premise, a sign supplied by the City of St.
James, which shall state that it is illegal to sell licensed products to anyone
under the age of 21 years and that the possession and use of such items by
anyone under the age of 21 is also illegal under state, federal, and/or local
law. Said signs shall be issued to the licensee along with their license.
   (D)   Samples prohibited. No person shall distribute samples of any licensed
product free of charge or at a nominal cost. Sampling is prohibited on any
licensed premises.
   (E)   Other prohibitions. No person shall sell, offer to sell, or otherwise
provide, dispense, or distribute any licensed products by any means, to any
other person, or in any other manner or form prohibited by federal, state, or
other local law, ordinance provision, or other regulation. Possession on the
premises by the licensee of any licensed product in a package indicating that
the contents do not comply with the requirements of state laws, rules, or
regulations shall be prima facie evidence that the contents of the package
violate this chapter. It shall be the licensee's burden to prove, by a
preponderance of the evidence, that the contents do comply.
   (F)   Sales to obviously intoxicated or impaired persons. No person shall
sell, give, furnish, dispense, distribute, or in any way procure for another
person any licensed products for use by an obviously intoxicated person or a
person who is obviously impaired by or under the influence of licensed products
or any controlled or intoxicating substance.
   (G)   On-site consumption prohibited. No licensed product may be sold,
given, distributed, dispensed, or otherwise furnished for consumption or use on
any premises that holds a license issued under this chapter.
(Ord. 012, fourth series, passed 9-19-2023)
§ 122.08 OTHER ILLEGAL ACTS.
   Unless otherwise provided, the following acts shall be a violation of this
chapter:
   (A)   Illegal possession. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any
person under the age of 21 to have any THC product in his or her possession.
This division shall not apply to persons under the age of 21 who are lawfully
involved in a compliance check or to employees of a licensee who are at least
18 years of age and are acting in the course and scope of their employment for
a licensee.
   (B)   Illegal use. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person
under the age of 21 to consume or otherwise use any licensed product.
   (C)   Illegal procurement. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any
person under 21 years of age to purchase or attempt to purchase or otherwise
obtain any licensed product, and it shall be a violation of this chapter for
any person to purchase or otherwise obtain such items on behalf of a person
under 21 years of age. It shall further be a violation for any person to coerce
or attempt to coerce a person under 21 years of age to illegally purchase or
otherwise obtain or use any licensed product. This division shall not apply to
persons under 21 years of age who are lawfully involved in a compliance check.
   (D)   Use of false identification. It shall be a violation of this chapter
for any person under 21 years of age to attempt to disguise his or her true age
by the use of any form of false identification, including but not limited to an
identification card of another real or fictional person and one on which the
age of the person has been modified or tampered with to represent an age older
than the actual age of the person.
   (E)   Tampering with packaging. No licensee shall directly or through any
other person alter or tamper with the contents of any original package so as to
change its composition or THC content while in the original package. Possession
on the premises by the licensee of any licensed product in a package differing
in composition or THC content in the product when received from the
manufacturer or wholesaler from whom it was purchased shall be prima facie
evidence that the contents of the original package has been changed or tampered
with. It shall be the licensee's burden to prove, by the preponderance of the
evidence, that the contents have not been tampered with.
   (F)   Restrictions on consumption and use. No person shall consume or
possess licensed products on a public street, highway, sidewalk, park, public
or private school property, or in any public facility, on any form of public
transportation or transit, at any other public place, or at any location where
medical cannabis possession and use are prohibited by M.S. § 152.23, as the
same may be amended from time to time. Provided, however, that nothing herein
shall prohibit any person from possessing licensed product while using a public
street, highway, or sidewalk, to travel directly from the point of a lawful
purchase to a place of lawful use.
   (G)   Taxicabs. No person shall consume licensed products while riding in
any taxicab licensed by the city. No person who is licensed by the city to
operate a taxicab shall operate a taxicab while possessing, using, or being
under the influence of any licensed product.
   (H)   Other city-issued licenses. No person shall possess, use, distribute,
or be under the influence of any licensed product while performing any task for
which any license has been issued by the city. A violation of this division
shall be grounds for suspension, revocation, or non-renewal of any such
license.
(Ord. 012, fourth series, passed 9-19-2023)
§ 122.09 STORAGE.
   Unless the licensee restricts access to the entire licensed premises to
persons age 21 or older, all licensed products shall either be stored behind a
counter or other area not freely accessible to customers, or in a case or other
storage unit not left open and accessible to the general public.
(Ord. 012, fourth series, passed 9-19-2023)
§ 122.10 RESPONSIBILITY.
   All licensees are responsible for the actions of their employees, agents,
and other representatives with regard to the sale, offer to sell, and
furnishing of licensed products on the licensed premises. The sale, offer to
sell, or furnishing of any licensed product by an employee or other
representative of a licensee shall be considered an act of both the employee or
representative and the licensee. Nothing in this section shall be construed as
prohibiting the city from also subjecting a licensee's employee, agent, or
other representative to any civil penalties or criminal prosecution that the
city deems to be appropriate under this chapter, state or federal law, or other
applicable law or regulation.
(Ord. 012, fourth series, passed 9-19-2023)
§ 122.11 COMPLIANCE CHECKS AND INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   All premises licensed under this chapter shall be open to inspection
by the city during regular business hours. The city shall conduct compliance
checks at its discretion.
   (B)   No person used in compliance checks shall attempt to use a false
identification misrepresenting their age. All persons lawfully engaged in a
compliance check shall answer all questions about their age asked by the
licensee or their employee, and produce any identification, if any exists, for
which they are asked. Persons used for the purpose of compliance checks shall
be supervised by law enforcement or other designated personnel. Nothing in this
section shall prohibit compliance checks authorized by state or federal laws
for educational, research, or training purposes, or required for the
enforcement of a particular state or federal law.
   (C)   Additionally, from time to time, the city will conduct inspections to
determine compliance with any or all other aspects of this chapter.
(Ord. 012, fourth series, passed 9-19-2023)
§ 122.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Administration civil penalties; individuals. If a person who is not a
licensee is found to have violated this chapter, the person shall be charged an
administrative penalty as follows:
      (1)   First violation. The city shall impose a civil fine of $300.
      (2)   Second violation within 12 months. The Council shall impose a civil
fine of $500.
      (3)   Third violation within 12 months. The Council shall impose a civil
fine of $800.
   (B)   Administrative civil penalties; licensee. If a licensee or an employee
or representative of a licensee is found to have violated this chapter, the
licensee shall be charged an administrative penalty as follows:
      (1)   First violation. The city shall impose a civil fine of $1,000 and
suspend the licenses for not less than two consecutive days.
      (2)   Second violation within 36 months. The Council shall impose a civil
fine of $2,000 and suspend the license for not less than five consecutive days.
      (3)   Third violation within 36 months. The Council shall impose a civil
fine of $5,000 and suspend the license for not less than ten consecutive days.
      (4)   Fourth violation within 36 months. The Council shall revoke the
license for not less than one year.
   (C)   Administrative penalty procedures. Notwithstanding anything to the
contrary in this chapter: if one of the foregoing penalties is imposed by the
city, no penalty shall take effect until the licensee or person has been served
with notice (served personally or by mail delivered to the business address of
the licensee) of the alleged violation and of the opportunity for a hearing
before the Council pursuant to §
122.06. Such notice must be in writing and must provide that a right to a
hearing before the Council must be requested within 15 business days of mailing
or personal service of the notice or such hearing right shall terminate.
   (D)   Misdemeanor prosecution. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the
city from seeking prosecution as a misdemeanor for any alleged violation of
this chapter.
   (E)   Continuing violations. Each day that a violation of this chapter
continues shall be considered a separate offense.
   (F)   Persons under the age of 21. Persons under the age of 21 who use a
false identification to purchase or attempt to purchase licensed products may
only be subject to non-criminal, non-monetary civil penalties or remedies such
as THC-related education classes, diversion programs, community services, or
another non-monetary, civil penalty that the city determines to be appropriate.
The City Council will consult with educators, parents, guardians, persons under
the age of 21, public health officials, court personnel, and other interested
parties to determine an appropriate remedy for persons under the age of 21 in
the city in the best interest of the underage person. The remedies for persons
under 21 who use a false identification to purchase or attempt to purchase
licensed products may be established by ordinance and amended from time to
time.
(Ord. 012, fourth series, passed 9-19-2023)
CHAPTER 123: SPECIAL EVENTS
Section
   
123.01   Purpose and findings
   
123.02   Definitions
   
123.03   Permit required
   
123.04   Application for permit
   
123.05   Permit review process
   
123.06   Permit issuance
   
123.07   Indemnification agreement
   
123.08   Insurance requirements
   
123.09   Cleanup deposit
   
123.10   Transferability of permit
   
123.11   Permit revocation
 
   
123.99   Penalty
§ 123.01 PURPOSE AND FINDINGS.
   The purpose of this chapter is to govern the time, place, and manner of
certain special events on public or private property. This chapter is enacted
to ensure that special events do not create disturbances, become nuisances,
menace or threaten life, health and property, disrupt traffic or threaten or
damage private or public property. The purpose of this chapter is to promote
the orderly, compatible and safe use of property for special events and to
assure adequate provision of parking, traffic, sanitary facilities, utilities,
peace and tranquility of residential neighborhoods and safety services.
(Ord. 018, fourth series, passed 3-20-2024)
§ 123.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPLICANT. Any individual, partnership, corporation, association, society,
or group seeking and/or receiving a special event permit from the City of St.
James.
   CITY. The City of St. James, Minnesota.
   PROPERTY, PRIVATE. Any property not under ownership by the City of St. James
or as listed below under the definition of PROPERTY, PUBLIC.
   PROPERTY, PUBLIC. Any property owned by the City of St. James, to include
but is not limited to streets, rights-of-way, parks, easements, boulevards,
pavilions/shelters, buildings and parking lots.
   SPECIAL EVENT. A temporary outdoor use on private or public property that
extends beyond the normal uses and standards allowed by zoning ordinance of the
city; in which attendance in excess of 50 people is anticipated, and impacts
are anticipated on surrounding neighbors, businesses, or the community as a
whole. SPECIAL EVENTS include, but are not limited to art shows, car shows,
sidewalk sales, haunted houses, carnivals, grand openings, festivals, home
exhibitions, parades, circus, block parties, fairs, concerts, street dances,
tournaments, or other attended outdoor entertainment or celebration that is
held on public or private property. A SPECIAL EVENT shall not apply to the
following: a permanent place of worship, stadium, athletic field, arena,
theater, or auditorium; family gatherings, including family reunions,
graduation parties, baptisms, confirmations, weddings, and other similar types
of events held on private property; garage sales/estate sales; and established
through the City of St. James, such as National Night Out or Music in the Park.
(Ord. 018, fourth series, passed 3-20-2024)
§ 123.03 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person on or after the effective date of this chapter shall conduct or
allow to be conducted any special event as defined within this chapter without
first obtaining a special event permit.
(Ord. 018, fourth series, passed 3-20-2024)
§ 123.04 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   (A)   Any person or organization desiring to sponsor a special event that is
not exempted by this chapter must apply to the city for a special event permit.
The special event permit application must be submitted not less than 30 days in
advance of the date in which the event is to occur.
   (B)   A written application for a special event permit shall be filed on
forms provided by the city. The written application shall be signed by the
person(s) or parties conducting the event and shall be accompanied by the fee,
as established by the fee schedule approved by City Council. Special event
applications must include the following information:
      (1)   Type and description of the special event and a list of all
activities to take place at the event;
      (2)   Name of the sponsoring entity and the names of at least two contact
persons and their addresses, email addresses, and phone numbers, along with a
phone number where they can be reached the day(s) of the event;
      (3)   Proposed date(s) of the special event, together with the beginning
and ending times for each date;
      (4)   Proposed location of the special event, including a diagram of the
proposed area to be used showing the location of any barricade, perimeter/
security fencing, entertainment, stages, portable toilets, parking areas, trash
containers, and any other items related to the event;
      (5)   Estimated number of special event staff, participants, and
spectators;
      (6)   Any public health plans, including supplying water to the site,
solid waste collection and the number of toilet facilities that will be
available;
      (7)   Any plans for first aid facilities and the name of the person or
entity providing these services;
      (8)   Any fire prevention and emergency medical service plans;
      (9)   Security plans;
      (10)   Parking plans;
      (11)   Cleanup plans;
      (12)   The admission fee, donation, or other consideration to be charged
or requested for admission to the special event, if such event is held on
public property;
      (13)   Whether any sound amplification or public address system will be
used or if there will be any playing of music or musical instruments;
      (14)   Proof of written notification to all property owners within 350
feet of the location on which a special event is to be held at least ten days
prior to the special event. Such notice shall contain the date, time, and
location of the special event; and
      (15)   Any other information as requested by the city, that it deems
reasonably necessary in order to determine the nature of the special event.
(Ord. 018, fourth series, passed 3-20-2024)
§ 123.05 PERMIT REVIEW PROCESS.
   (A)   The City Council shall review the special event permit application and
make a determination on whether to issue or deny the permit request.
   (B)   Permit conditions. The City Council may condition the issuance of a
special event permit by imposing reasonable conditions concerning the time,
place and manner of the special event. Such conditions are necessary to protect
the safety, health, and welfare of persons and property. Such conditions may
include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   Alternation of the date(s), time(s), route or location of the
special event proposed;
      (2)   Elimination of an activity at the special event which cannot be
mitigated to a point as to ensure public safety and welfare, or which causes
undue liability to the city;
      (3)   Requirements concerning the accommodation of pedestrian or
vehicular traffic;
      (4)   Requirements for the use of traffic cones or barricades;
      (5)   Requirements for the use of city personnel and equipment;
      (6)   Requirements for the provision of first aid or sanitary facilities;
      (7)   Requirements for the use of event monitors and the providing of
notice of the special event permit conditions to the event's participants;
      (8)   Requirements on the number and types of vehicles, animals or
structures to be allowed at the special event and the inspection and approval
of structures by the city for safety purposes;
      (9)   Compliance with animal protection ordinances and laws;
      (10)   Requirements for the use of garbage containers, portable toilets,
and the cleanup and restoration of the property;
      (11)   Restrictions on the use of amplified sound and compliance with
noise ordinances, regulations, and laws; and
      (12)   Restrictions on the sale or consumption of food and alcohol.
   (C)   Permit denial. The City Council may deny an application for a special
event permit for any of the following reasons:
      (1)   The information contained in the application or supplemental
information is false or non-existent in any material detail;
      (2)   The applicant fails to supplement the application after having been
notified by the city of additional information or documents needed;
      (3)   The applicant fails to pay the required fee or fails to sign the
application;
      (4)   The applicant fails to agree to abide by or comply with all of the
conditions and terms of the special event permit;
      (5)   The time, route, hours, location, or size of the special event will
unnecessarily disrupt the movement of other traffic within the area of the
special event;
      (6)   The special event is of the size or nature that requires the
diversion of too many law enforcement officers to properly police the event,
site and contiguous areas so that allowing the special event would unreasonably
deny law enforcement protection to the remainder of the city and its residents;
      (7)   The proposed special event violates the zoning ordinance;
      (8)   Another special event permit application has already been approved
for the same time and place requested by the applicant or so close in time and
place as to cause traffic congestion, or the city is unable to meet the needs
to provide law enforcement and other city services for both special events;
      (9)   The location of the special event would cause undue hardship to
adjacent businesses and residents;
      (10)   The location of the special event would substantially interfere
with any construction or maintenance work scheduled to take place upon or along
public property or right-of-way;
      (11)   The special event would endanger public safety and health;
      (12)   The applicant fails to comply with the insurance requirements;
      (13)   The special event would create or constitute a public nuisance; or
      (14)   The special event would cause significant damage to public
property or facilities.
   (D)   The City Clerk/Treasurer shall provide written notification of a
denial of the special event permit. Any applicant shall have the right to
appeal the denial of a special event permit to the City Council. The appeal
shall be filed within five days after the receipt of the denial to the City
Clerk/Treasurer. The City Council shall act upon the appeal at the next
scheduled meeting following the receipt of the notice of appeal.
(Ord. 018, fourth series, passed 3-20-2024)
§ 123.06 PERMIT ISSUANCE.
   The City Clerk/Treasurer shall issue the special event permit once the
application has been approved by the City Council and the applicant has agreed
to comply with the terms and conditions of the permit as well as the
requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 018, fourth series, passed 3-20-2024)
§ 123.07 INDEMNIFICATION AGREEMENT.
   If the special event, or any portion of the event, is to be held on city
property or right-of-way, prior to the issuance of a special event permit, the
applicant and/or authorizing officer or the sponsoring organization, if any,
must sign an agreement to indemnify, defend and hold the city, its officials,
employees, and agents harmless from any claim that arises in whole or in part
out of the special event; except any claims arising solely out of the negligent
acts or omissions of the city, its officials, employees or agents.
(Ord. 018, fourth series, passed 3-20-2024)
§ 123.08 INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Liability insurance required. The applicant or sponsor of the special
event must possess or obtain liability insurance to protect against loss from
liability imposed by law for damages on account of bodily injury or property
damage arising from the special event. If the event is held on private
property, verification of insurance shall be provided to the City Clerk/
Treasurer prior to the issuance of the special event permit. If the event is
held on public property, a certificate of insurance must be filed with the City
Clerk/Treasurer prior to issuance of the special event permit. The certificate
of insurance must name the city, its officials, employees, and agents as an
additional insured. Insurance coverage must be maintained for the duration of
the special event.
   (B)   Minimum limits. For events held on public property, insurance coverage
must be public liability insurance and property damage insurance with minimum
limits of $1,000,000.
(Ord. 018, fourth series, passed 3-20-2024)
§ 123.09 CLEANUP DEPOSIT.
   The applicant or sponsor of the special event involving the sale of food or
beverages for immediate consumption, erection of structures, horses or other
animals or another activity likely to create a substantial need for cleanup may
be required by the City Council to provide a cleanup deposit prior to the
issuance of the special event permit. The cleanup deposit shall be in an amount
set by City Council. The cleanup deposit will be returned to the applicant or
sponsor if the area used for the special event has been cleaned and restored to
the same condition as it existed prior to the event. If the property used for
the event has not been properly cleaned or restored within 24 hours of the
event completion, the applicant or sponsor will be billed for the actual cost
by the city for the cleanup and restoration. The cleanup deposit will be
applied toward the payment of the bill.
(Ord. 018, fourth series, passed 3-20-2024)
§ 123.10 TRANSFERABILITY OF PERMIT.
   No permit granted under this chapter shall be transferred to any other
person, group, or place without the consent of the City Council, upon written
application made therefor.
(Ord. 018, fourth series, passed 3-20-2024)
§ 123.11 PERMIT REVOCATION.
   The permit for a special event may be revoked by the City Council at any
time if any of the conditions necessary for the issuing of or contained within
the permit are not complied with or if any provisions of this chapter are
violated.
(Ord. 018, fourth series, passed 3-20-2024)
§ 123.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or group to sponsor or conduct a
special event which requires a permit pursuant to this chapter unless a valid
special event permit has been issued for the event.
   (B)   The special event permit authorizes the applicant or sponsor to
conduct only such a special event as is described in the permit, and in
accordance with the terms and conditions of the permit. It shall be unlawful
for the permittee or sponsor to willfully violate the terms or conditions of
the permit.
   (C)   It is a petty misdemeanor for any person to violate any provision of
this chapter, except as otherwise provided by the City Code.
(Ord. 018, fourth series, passed 3-20-2024)
CHAPTER 124: CANNABIS
Section
   
124.01   Purpose and intent
   
124.02   Definitions
   
124.03   Registration of cannabis businesses
   
124.04   Requirements for cannabis businesses
   
124.05   Temporary cannabis events
   
124.06   Lower-potency hemp edibles
   
124.07   Local government as a cannabis retailer
   
124.08   Use in public places
   
124.99   Penalty administration and enforcement
§ 124.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The City of St. James makes the following legislative findings:
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to implement the provisions of M.S.
Chapter 342, which authorizes the City of St. James to protect the public
health, safety, welfare of the St. James residents by regulating cannabis and
hemp businesses within the city.
   (B)   The City of St. James finds and concludes that the proposed provisions
are appropriate and lawful land use regulations for St. James, that the
proposed amendments will promote the community's interest in reasonable
stability in zoning for now and in the future, and that the proposed provisions
are in the public interest and for the public good.
(Ord. 028, fourth series, passed 5-20-2025)
§ 124.02 DEFINITIONS.
   Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by context, all terms
shall be given their commonly accepted definitions. The following words, terms,
and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to
them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different
meaning:
   APPLICANT. An applicant means an entity with a license issued by the OCM
that is applying for an initial registration or for registration renewal.
   THE ACT.  Means M.S. Chapter 342, as it may be amended from time to time.
   CANNABIS BUSINESS. Has the same meaning as defined in M.S. § 342.01.
   CANNABIS CULTIVATION BUSINESS. A cannabis business licensed to grow cannabis
plants within the approved amount of space from seed or immature plant to
mature plant, harvest cannabis flower from mature plant, package and label
immature plant and seedlings and cannabis flower for sale to other cannabis
businesses, transport cannabis flower to a cannabis manufacturer located on the
same premises, and perform other actions approved by the State of Minnesota
Office of Cannabis Management.
   CANNABIS DELIVERY BUSINESS. A cannabis delivery business means a business
with a cannabis delivery service license or delivery service endorsement from
the State of Minnesota Office of Cannabis Management.
   CANNABIS MANUFACTURING BUSINESS. A cannabis manufacturing business means a
business with a cannabis manufacturer license, or manufacturing endorsement
from the State of Minnesota Office of Cannabis Management.
   CANNABIS RETAIL BUSINESS.  A retail location and the retail location(s) of a
mezzo businesses with a retail operations endorsement, microbusinesses with a
retail operations endorsement, medical combination businesses operating a
retail location, lower-potency hemp edible retailers.
   CANNABIS RETAILER.  Any person, partnership, firm, corporation, or
association, foreign or domestic, selling cannabis product to a consumer and
not for the purpose of resale in any form.
   CANNABIS TESTING BUSINESS. A cannabis testing business means a business with
a cannabis testing facility license or testing endorsement from the State of
Minnesota Office of Cannabis Management.
   CANNABIS TRANSPORTATION BUSINESS. A business with a cannabis transporter
license or transportation endorsement from the State of Minnesota Office of
Cannabis Management.
   CANNABIS WHOLESALING BUSINESS. A business with a cannabis wholesaler license
or wholesaling endorsement from the State of Minnesota Office of Cannabis
Management.
   DAYCARE.  A location licensed with the Minnesota Depaitment of Human
Services to provide the care of a child in a residence outside the child's own
home for gain or otherwise, on a regular basis, for any part of a 24-hour day.
   LOWER-POTENCY HEMP EDIBLE.  As defined under M.S. §342.0 l, subd. 50.
   OFFICE OF CANNABIS MANAGEMENT. Minnesota Office of Cannabis Management,
referred to as "OCM" in this chapter.
   PLACE OF PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION. A business, accommodation, refreshment,
entertainment, recreation, or transportation facility of any kind, whether
licensed or not, whose goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages or
accommodations are extended, offered, sold, or otherwise made available to the
public.
   
   PRELIMINARY LICENSE APPROVAL.  OCM pre-approval for a cannabis business
license for applicants who qualify under M.S. § 342.17.
   POTENTIAL LICENSE. Potential license means an applicant that has not
received a license from the OCM.
   PUBLIC PLACE. A public park or trail, public street or sidewalk; any
enclosed, indoor area used by the general public, including, but not limited
to, restaurants; bars; any other food or liquor establishment; hospitals;
nursing homes; auditoriums; arenas; gyms; meeting rooms; common areas of rental
apartment buildings, and other places of public accommodation.
   RESIDENTIAL TREATMENT FACILITY.  As defined under M.S. § 245.462, Subd. 23.
   TEMPORARY CANNABIS EVENT. A secured event, or a secured portion of a larger
separately licensed event, devoted to cannabis activities as permitted by state
law and local regulations.
   SCHOOL. Any public or private elementary, vocational, or secondary school,
or a public or private college or university.
   STATE LICENSE. An approved license issued by the State of Minnesota's Office
of Cannabis Management to a cannabis retail business.
(Ord. 028, fourth series, passed 5-20-2025)
§ 124.03 REGISTRATION OF CANNABIS BUSINESSES.
   (A)   Cannabis business initial zoning certification.
      (1)   Pursuant to M.S. Chapter 342, within 30 days of receiving a copy of
a state license application from OCM, the City of St. James shall certify on a
form provided by OCM whether a potential licensee complies with local zoning
ordinances and, if applicable, whether the proposed business complies with the
state fire code and building code.
      (2)   Successful approval of a site for zoning compliance does not
guarantee that the potential licensee will receive retail registration. A
complete application for retail registration must still be applied for and
obtained by a retailer before any retail sale to a customer.
   (B)   Retailer registration.
      (1)   Before making retail sales to customers or patients, a retailer
must register with the city. Making retail sales to customers without an active
registration is prohibited.
      (2)   Subject to M.S. § 342.22, Subd. 5(e), the city may impose a civil
penalty, as specified in the city's fee schedule, for making a sale to a
customer or patient without valid registration from the city and a valid
license from OCM.
   (C)   Compliance checks prior to retail registration. Prior to issuance of a
cannabis retail business registration, the City of St. James shall conduct a
preliminary compliance check to ensure compliance with local ordinances.
   (D)   Registration and application procedure.
      (1)   Fees.
         (a)   A registration fee, as established in the City of St. James' fee
schedule, shall be charged to applicants depending on the type of retail
business license applied for.
         (b)   Initial registration fees and renewal registration fees are
nonrefundable.
      (2)   Application submittal. The City of St. James shall issue a local
retail registration to a retailer that adheres to the requirements of M.S. §
342.22, and which qualifies for a registration under the provisions of
Chapter 124.
         (a)   An applicant for initial registration or renewal shall fill out
an application form, as provided by the City of St. James. Information required
on the form shall include, but is not limited to:
            1.   Full name of the property owner and applicant;
            2.   Address, email address, and telephone number of the applicant;
            3.   The address and parcel ID for the property which the retail
registration is sought;
            4.   Certification that the applicant complies with the
requirements of local ordinances established pursuant to M.S. § 342.13; and
            5.   Proof of taxes, assessments, utility charges or other
financial claims of the city or the state are current.
         (b)   The applicant shall include with the registration form:
            1.   The required local registration fee as required in division
(D)(1) above;
            2.   A copy of a valid state license or written notice of OCM
license preapproval;
            3.   A narrative describing the proposed business;
            4.   A site plan showing the building to house the business,
available parking; and
            5.   Floor plans for the proposed business which show compliance to
all Minnesota Building Code requirements.
         (c)   Once an application is considered complete, the City of St.
James shall process the required fee and forward the application to the Zoning
Administrator if any changes need to be reviewed. City Council shall approve
all retail registrations.
      (3)   Application approval.
         (a)   Applications will be processed on a first-come, first-served
basis based on the city receiving a complete application and payment of all
fees.
         (b)   The date a certification under division (A) above is issued will
have no impact on the applicant's registration processing.
         (c)   Complete applications shall be approved by the City Council
unless one of the following reasons for denial applies:
            1.   The cannabis retail business would exceed the maximum number
of registered cannabis retail businesses permitted in the city under division
(G) of this section; or
            2.   The applicant is unable to meet the requirements of this
chapter or applicable zoning regulations for the proposed business location.
         (d)   Registration shall not be transferable to a new owner.
      (4)   Annual compliance checks.
         (a)   The City of St. James shall complete at minimum one compliance
check per calendar year of every cannabis business to assess if the business
meets age verification requirements, as required under M.S. § 342.22 Subd. 4(b)
and M.S. § 342.24 and this chapter.
         (b)   The City of St. James shall conduct at minimum one unannounced
age verification compliance check at least once per calendar year.
         (c)   Age verification compliance checks shall involve persons at
least 17 years of age but under the age of 21 who, with the prior written
consent of a parent or guardian if the person is under the age of 18, attempt
to purchase adult-use cannabis flower, adult-use cannabis products, lower-
potency hemp edibles, or hemp-derived consumer products under the direct
supervision of a law enforcement officer or an employee of the City of St.
James.
         (d)   Any failures under this section must be reported to the Office
of Cannabis Management.
      (5)   Location change. A state-licensed cannabis retail business shall be
required to submit a new application for registration under §
124.05(C)(2) if it seeks to move to a new location still within the legal
boundaries of the City of St. James.
   (E)   Renewal of registration.
      (1)   Each year, a state-licensed cannabis retail business shall apply to
renew local registration on a form established by the City of St. James.
         (a)   Renewal fees. A renewal fee for local registration shall be
required starting at the second renewal, as established in the City of St.
James' fee schedule.
         (b)   Renewal application. The application for renewal of a local
retail registration shall include, but is not limited to, all items required
under division (D)(2) above.
      (2)   The City of St. James shall renew the local registration of a
state-licensed cannabis retail business concurrent with and subject to OCM
renewal of the state license for the business.
   (F)   Suspension of registration.
      (1)   When suspension is warranted. The City of St. James may suspend a
cannabis retail business' registration if it violates the ordinance of St.
James or poses an immediate threat to the health or safety of the public. The
city shall immediately notify the cannabis retail business in writing the
grounds for the suspension.
      (2)   Notification to OCM. The City of St. James shall immediately notify
the OCM in writing the grounds for the suspension. OCM will provide the city
and cannabis business retailer a response to the complaint within seven
calendar days and perform any necessary inspections within 30 calendar days.
      (3)   Length of suspension.
         (a)   The suspension of a cannabis retail business registration may be
for up to 30 calendar days, unless OCM suspends the license for a longer
period. The business may not make sales to customers if their registration is
suspended.
         (b)   The City of St. James may reinstate a registration ifit
determines that the violations have been resolved.
         (c)   The City of St. James shall reinstate a registration if OCM
determines that the violation(s) have been resolved.
      (4)   Civil penalties. Subject to M.S. § 342.22, Subd. 5(e), the City of
St. James may impose a civil penalty, as specified in the city's fee schedule,
for registration violations, not to exceed $2,000.
   (G)   Limiting of registrations. The City of St. James shall limit the
number of cannabis retail business to two.
(Ord. 028, fourth series, passed 5-20-2025) Penalty, see §
124.99
§ 124.04 REQUIREMENTS FOR CANNABIS BUSINESSES.
   (A)   Minimum buffer requirements.
      (1)   The City of St. James prohibits local registration of a new
cannabis business where retail sales would physically occur within 350 feet of
the property line of any schools, daycares, residential treatment facility, or
parks that include attractions that are regularly used by minors.
      (2)   Pursuant to M.S. § 462.357 Subd. 1(e), nothing in division (A)
above shall prohibit an active cannabis business or a cannabis business seeking
registration from continuing operation at the same site if a school, daycare,
residential treatment facility, attraction within a public park that is
regularly used by minors, moves within the minimum buffer zone. Except public
parks include St. James Downtown Park, Helping Hands, and Plaza de Saint James.
   (B)   Zoning and land use.
      (1)   Cultivation. Cannabis businesses licensed or endorsed for
cultivation are permitted as an agricultural use in the following zoning
districts:
         (a)   Planned Industrial District (I-1).
         (b)   General Industrial District (I-2).
      (2)   Cannabis manufacturer. Cannabis businesses licensed or endorsed for
cannabis manufacture are permitted as an industrial use in the following zoning
districts:
         (a)   Planned Industrial District (I-1).
         (b)   General Industrial District (I-2).
      (3)   Hemp manufacturer. Cannabis businesses licensed or endorsed for
hemp manufacture are permitted as an industrial use in the following zoning
districts:
         (a)   Planned Industrial District (I-1).
         (b)   General Industrial District (I-2).
      (4)   Wholesale. Cannabis businesses licensed or endorsed for wholesale
are permitted as an industrial use in the following zoning districts:
         (a)   Planned Industrial District (I-1).
         (b)   General Industrial District (I-2).
         (c)   Special use permit. Service Business District (B-2), General
Business District (B-3), Highway Commercial Business District (B-4).
      (5)   Cannabis retail. Cannabis businesses licensed or endorsed for
cannabis retail are permitted as a commercial use in the following zoning
districts:
         (a)   Service Business District (B-2).
         (b)   General Business District (B-3).
         (c)   Highway Commercial Business District (B-4).
         (d)   Special use permit. Planned Industrial District (I-1), General
Industrial District (I-2).
      (6)   Cannabis transportation. Cannabis businesses licensed or endorsed
for transportation are permitted as an industrial use in the following zoning
districts:
         (a)   Planned Industrial District (I-1).
         (b)   General Industrial District (I-2).
      (7)   Cannabis delivery. Cannabis businesses licensed or endorsed for
delivery are permitted as an industrial use in the following zoning districts:
         (a)   Planned Industrial District (I-1).
         (b)   General Industrial District (I-2).
   (C)   Hours of operation. Cannabis businesses are limited to retail sale of
cannabis, cannabis flower, cannabis products, lower-potency hemp edibles, or
hemp-derived consumer products between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.,
seven days per week.
   (D)   Advertising. Cannabis businesses are permitted to erect signs in
accordance to St. James City Code §
156.033.
(Ord. 028, fourth series, passed 5-20-2025) Penalty, see §
124.99
§ 124.05 TEMPORARY CANNABIS EVENTS.
   (A)   License required for temporary cannabis events.
      (1)   License required. A special event permit is required to be issued
and approved by the City of St. James prior to holding a temporary cannabis
event. Permit review and issuance shall follow the procedures for special
events under
Chapter 123 of the City Code.
(Ord. 028, fourth series, passed 5-20-2025) Penalty, see §
124.99
§ 124.06 LOWER-POTENCY HEMP EDIBLES.
   (A)   Sale of low-potency hemp edibles. The sale of low-potency edibles is
permitted, subject to the conditions within this chapter.
   (B)   Zoning districts.
      (1)   Cultivation. Cannabis businesses licensed or endorsed for
cultivation are permitted as a retail or cultivation use in the following
zoning districts:
         (a)   Commercial use; low-potency hemp edibles retail. Service
Business District (B-2), General Business District (B-3), Highway Commercial
Business District (B-4).
         (b)   Commercial use; special use permit. Planned Industrial District
(I-1), General Industrial District (I-2).
         (c)   Cultivation. Planned Industrial District (I-1), General
Industrial District (I-2).
         (d)   Cultivation; special use permit. Service Business District (B-
2), General Business District (B-3), Highway Commercial Business District (B-
4).
   (C)   Additional standards.
      (1)   Sales within municipal liquor store. The sale of low-potency
edibles and beverages are permitted in a municipal liquor store.
      (2)   Age requirements. The sale of low-potency edibles is permitted only
in places that admit those 21 years of age or older.
      (3)   Beverages. The sale of low-potency hemp beverages is permitted in
places that meet requirements in this chapter.
      (4)   Storage of product. Low-potency edibles shall be sold behind a
counter and stored in a locked case.
(Ord. 028, fourth series, passed 5-20-2025) Penalty, see §
124.99
§ 124.07 LOCAL GOVERNMENT AS A CANNABIS RETAILER.
   (A)   The City of St. James may establish, own, and operate one municipal
cannabis retail business subject to the restrictions in this chapter.
   (B)   The City of St. James shall be subject to all same retail license
requirements and procedures applicable to all other applicants.
(Ord. 028, fourth series, passed 5-20-2025)
§ 124.08 USE IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   No person shall use cannabis flower, cannabis products, lower-potency hemp
edibles, or hemp derived consumer products in a public place or place of public
accommodation unless the premises is an establishment, or an event licensed to
permit on-site consumption of adult-use.
(Ord. 028, fourth series, passed 5-20-2025) Penalty, see §
124.99
§ 124.99 PENALTY ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   Any violation of the provisions of the chapter or failure to comply with any
of its requirements constitutes a misdemeanor and is punishable as defined by
law. Each day each violation continues or exists, constitutes a separate
offense. Violations of this chapter can occur regardless of whether or not a
permit is required for a regulated activity listed in this chapter. Violation
of this chapter shall be grounds for enforcement against any business license
issued by the City of St. James.
(Ord. 028, fourth series, passed 5-20-2025)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   CURFEW FOR MINORS
      
131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
      
132.   CLANDESTINE DRUG LAB SITES
      
133.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 130: CURFEW FOR MINORS
Section
   
130.01   Curfew for minors
§ 130.01 CURFEW FOR MINORS.
   (A)   Purpose. The curfew for minors established by this section is
maintained for four primary reasons:
      (1)   To protect the public from illegal acts of minors committed during
the curfew hours;
      (2)   To protect minors from improper influences that prevail during the
curfew hours, including involvement with gangs;
      (3)   To protect minors from criminal activity that occurs during the
curfew hours; and
      (4)   To help parents control their minor children.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      EMERGENCY ERRAND. A task that if not completed promptly threatens the
health, safety, or comfort of the minor or a member of the minor’s household.
The term shall include, but shall not be limited to, seeking urgent medical
treatment, seeking urgent assistance from law enforcement or fire department
personnel, and seeking shelter from the elements or urgent assistance from a
utility company due to a natural or human-made calamity.
      OFFICIAL CITY TIME. The time of day as determined by reference to the
master clock used by the Police Department.
      PLACES OF AMUSEMENT, ENTERTAINMENT, OR REFRESHMENT. Those places that
include, but are not limited to, movie theaters, pinball arcades, shopping
malls, nightclubs catering to minors, restaurants, and pool halls.
      PRIMARY CARE or PRIMARY CUSTODY. The person who is responsible for
providing food, clothing, shelter, and other basic necessities to the minor.
The person providing primary care or custody to the minor shall not be another
minor.
      SCHOOL ACTIVITY. An event which has been placed on a school calendar by
public or parochial school authorities as a school sanctioned event.
   (C)   Hours.
      (1)   Minors under the age of 16 years. No minor under the age of 16
years shall be in or upon the public streets, alleys, parks, playgrounds or
other public grounds, public places, public buildings; nor in or upon places of
amusement, entertainment or refreshment; nor in or upon any vacant lot, between
the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. the following day, official city time.
      (2)   Minors ages 16 years to 18 years. No minor of the ages of 16 or 17
years shall be in or upon the public streets, alleys, parks, playgrounds or
other public grounds, public places, public buildings; nor in or upon places of
amusement, entertainment, or refreshment; nor in or upon any vacant lot,
between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. the following day, official
city time.
   (D)   Effect on control by adult responsible for minor. Nothing in this
section shall be construed to give a minor the right to stay out until the
curfew hours designated in this section if otherwise directed by a parent,
guardian, or other adult person having the primary care and custody of the
minor; nor shall this section be construed to diminish or impair the control of
the adult person having the primary care or custody of the minor.
   (E)   Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply in the
following situations:
      (1)   To a minor accompanied by his or her parent or guardian, or other
adult person having the primary care and custody of the minor;
      (2)   To a minor who is upon an emergency errand at the direction of his
or her parent, guardian, or other adult person having the primary care and
custody of the minor;
      (3)   To a minor who is in any of the places described in this section if
in connection with or as required by an employer engaged in a lawful business,
trade, profession, or occupation; or to a minor traveling directly to or from
the location of the business, trade, profession, or occupation and the minor’s
residence. Minors who fall within the scope of this exception shall carry
written proof of employment and proof of the hours the employer requires the
minor’s presence at work;
      (4)   To a minor who is participating in or traveling directly to or from
an event which has been officially designated as a school activity by public or
parochial school authorities; or who is participating in or traveling directly
to or from an official activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city,
a civic organization, school, religious institution, or similar entity that
takes responsibility for the minor and with the permission of the minor’s
parent, guardian, or other adult person having the primary care and custody of
the minor;
      (5)   To a minor who is passing through the city in the course of
interstate travel during the hours of curfew;
      (6)   To a minor who is attending or traveling directly to or from an
activity involving the exercise of First Amendment rights of free speech,
freedom of assembly, or freedom of religion;
      (7)   To minors on the sidewalk abutting his or her residence or abutting
the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor does not complain to the
city’s designated law enforcement provider about the minor’s presence; or
      (8)   To a minor who is married or has been married, or is otherwise
legally emancipated.
   (F)   Duties of person legally responsible for minor. No parent, guardian,
or other adult having the primary care or custody of any minor shall permit any
violation of the requirements of this section by the minor.
   (G)   Duties of other persons. No person operating or in charge of any place
of amusement, entertainment, or refreshment shall permit any minor to enter or
remain in his or her place of business during the hours prohibited by this
section unless the minor is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian, or
other adult person having primary care or custody of the minor, or unless one
of the exceptions to this section applies.
   (H)   Defense. It shall be a defense to prosecution under this section that
the owner, operator, or employee of an establishment promptly notified the
city’s designated law enforcement provider that a minor was present on the
premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.
Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 131: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
Section
Disturbing the Peace
   
131.01   Dangerous trespasses and other acts
   
131.02   Unlawful use and furnishing of tobacco; possession by a minor
   
131.03   Disorderly conduct
   
131.04   Radio and television interference
Dangerous Weapons and Articles
   
131.15   Definitions
   
131.16   Acts prohibited
   
131.17   Discharge of firearms and explosives
   
131.18   Possession and sale of fireworks
   
131.19   Exposure of unused container
   
131.20   Use of bow and arrow
   
131.21   Seizure and confiscation
Unlawful Gathering
   
131.35   Definitions
   
131.36   Law enforcement officer directive
   
131.37   Violation
   
131.38   Loitering
 
   
131.99   Penalty
DISTURBING THE PEACE
§ 131.01 DANGEROUS TRESPASSES AND OTHER ACTS.
   It is unlawful for any person to:
   (A)   Smoke in the presence of explosives, or inflammable materials, or in a
building, or area, in which “No Smoking” notices have been prominently posted;
   (B)   Interfere with, or obstruct, the prevention, or extinguishing, of any
fire, or disobey the lawful orders of a law enforcement officer, or
firefighter, present at the fire;
   (C)   Show a false light, or signal, or interfere with any light, signal, or
sign controlling, or guiding, traffic upon a highway, railway track, or
navigable water, or in the air;
   (D)   Place an obstruction upon a railroad track;
   (E)   Expose another, or his or her property, to an obnoxious, or harmful,
gas, fluid, or substance, with intent to injure, molest, or coerce;
   (F)   Trespass, or permit, animals under his or her control to trespass upon
a railroad track;
   (G)   Permit domestic animals, or fowls, under his or her control to go upon
the lands of another within the city;
   (H)   Interfere, unlawfully, with any monument, sign, or pointer erected, or
marked, to designate a point of a boundary line or a political subdivision, or
a tract of land;
   (I)   Trespass upon the premises of another without claim of right;
   (J)   Enter the premises of another with intent to take, or injure, any
fruit, fruit trees, or vegetables growing thereon without the permission of the
owner, or occupant; or
   (K)   Without the permission of the owner, tamper with, or get into or upon,
a motor vehicle, or ride in, or upon, such motor vehicle knowing it was taken,
and is being driven by another without the permission of the owner.
(Prior Code, § 10.23) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.02 UNLAWFUL USE AND FURNISHING OF TOBACCO; POSSESSION BY A MINOR.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, under the age of 18 years, to use
tobacco in any form.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to furnish tobacco by any manner, or
means, and in any form, to any person under the age of 21 years.
(Prior Code, § 10.06) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.03 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   It is unlawful for any person, in a public, or private, place, knowing, or
having reasonable grounds to know, that it will, or will tend to, alarm, anger,
or disturb others, or provoke any assault, or breach of the peace, to do the
following:
   (A)   Engage in brawling, or fighting;
   (B)   Disturb an assembly, or meeting, not unlawful in its character;
   (C)   Engage in offensive, obscene, or abusive language, or in boisterous,
and noisy, conduct tending reasonably to arouse alarm, anger, or resentment in
others;
   (D)   Willfully, and lewdly, expose his or her person, or the private parts
thereof, or procure another to so expose himself or herself; and any open, or
gross, lewdness, or lascivious, behavior, or any act of public indecency;
   (E)   Whether or not posted with signs so prohibiting, voluntarily enter the
waters of any river or public swimming pool at any time when the waters are not
properly supervised by trained, life-saving personnel in attendance for that
purpose, or enter such waters without being garbed in a bathing suit sufficient
to cover his or her person, and equal to the standards generally adopted, and
accepted, by the public;
   (F)   Urinate, or defecate, in a place other than:
      (1)   If on public property, then in a plumbing fixture provided for that
purpose;
      (2)   If on the private property of another, then in a plumbing fixture
provided for that purpose; or
      (3)   If on private property not owned, or controlled, by another, then
within a building.
   (G)   Cause the making, or production, of an unnecessary noise by shouting,
or by any other means, or mechanism, including the blowing of any automobile,
or other vehicle horn;
   (H)   Use a sound amplifier upon streets and public property without prior
written permission from the city;
   (I)   Use a flash or spotlight in a manner so as to annoy, or endanger,
others;
   (J)   Cause defacement, destruction, or otherwise damage to any premises, or
any property located thereon;
   (K)   Strew, scatter, litter, throw, dispose of, or deposit any refuse,
garbage, or rubbish unto any premises, except into receptacles provided for
such purpose;
   (L)   Look, or peer, into a tanning booth occupied by another person;
   (M)   Enter any motor vehicle of another without the consent of the owner or
operator; or
   (N)   Fail, or refuse, to vacate, or leave, any premises after being
requested, or ordered, whether orally or in writing, to do so, by the owner, or
person in charge thereof, or by any law enforcement agent, or official;
provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to any person who is
owner, or tenant, of the premises involved, nor to any law enforcement, or
other government official, who may be present thereon at that time as part of
his or her official duty, nor shall it include the spouse, children, employee,
or tenant of the owner, or occupier.
(Prior Code, § 10.42) (Ord. 122, second series, passed 4-20-1993) Penalty, see
§
131.99
§ 131.04 RADIO AND TELEVISION INTERFERENCE.
   It is unlawful for any person to maintain, use, or operate any apparatus, or
device, whether electrical, mechanical, or of any other type, so as to cause
interference with radio, or television, reception. This section shall not apply
to electro-medical devices; provided, that they are equipped so far as
reasonably possible with apparatus tending to reduce such interference.
(Prior Code, § 10.60) Penalty, see §
131.99
DANGEROUS WEAPONS AND ARTICLES
§ 131.15 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
      DANGEROUS WEAPONS AND ARTICLES. This definition shall include, but shall
not be limited to, clubs, black-jacks, spring guns, brass or metal knuckles,
daggers, dirks, bowie knives, razors, throwing stars, nonchaku or any knife
with a switch blade which opens automatically under spring pressure with a
button, or release, mechanism, or by any other mechanical contrivance.
      FIREARMS. Any gun, pistol, revolver, shot-gun, rifle, wrist rocket,
slingshot, air rifle, air gun, BB gun, spring gun, stun gun, potato gun, or any
similar device for the propulsion of shot, metal pellets, or other projectile
by whatever means, and any other dangerous, or deadly, weapon or instrument.
   (B)   Nothing in division (A) above shall prohibit the possession of the
articles therein mentioned if the purpose of the possession is for public
exhibition by museums, or collectors of art.
(Ord. 21, third series, passed 6-21-2011)
§ 131.16 ACTS PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to:
   (A)   Recklessly handle, or use, a gun, or other dangerous weapon or
explosive, so as to endanger the safety of another;
   (B)   Intentionally point a gun of any kind, capable of injuring, or
killing, a human being, and whether loaded, or unloaded, at, or toward,
another;
   (C)   Manufacture, or sell, for any unlawful purpose any weapon known as a
slingshot, or sand club;
   (D)   Manufacture, transfer, or possess metal knuckles, or a switch blade
knife opening automatically;
   (E)   Possess any other dangerous article, or substance, for the purpose of
being used unlawfully as a weapon against another;
   (F)   Sell, or have in his or her possession, any device designed to
silence, or muffle, the discharge of a firearm;
   (G)   Permit, as a parent or guardian, any child under 12 years of age to
handle, or use, outside of the parent’s, or guardian’s, presence, a firearm, or
air gun of any kind, or any ammunition or explosive; or
   (H)   Furnish a minor under 18 years of age with a firearm, air gun,
ammunition, or explosive without the written consent of his or her parents or
guardian, or of the Police Department.
(Ord. 21, third series, passed 6-21-2011) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.17 DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS AND EXPLOSIVES.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to fire, or discharge, any cannon, gun,
pistol, or other firearm, firecracker, sky rocket, or other fireworks, air gun,
air rifle, or other similar device commonly referred to as a BB gun.
   (B)   Nothing in division (A) above shall apply to a display of fireworks by
an organization, or group of organizations, authorized, in writing, by the
Council, or to a peace officer in the discharge of his or her duty, or to a
person in the lawful defense of his or her person or family. This section shall
not apply to the discharge of firearms in a range authorized, in writing, by
the Council.
(Ord. 21, third series, passed 6-21-2011) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.18 POSSESSION AND SALE OF FIREWORKS.
   It is unlawful for any person to sell, possess, or have in his or her
possession for the purpose of sale, except as allowed in §
131.17(B), any firecrackers, sky rockets, or other fireworks.
(Ord. 21, third series, passed 6-21-2011) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.19 EXPOSURE OF UNUSED CONTAINER.
   It is unlawful for any person, being the owner, or in possession or control
thereof, to permit an unused refrigerator, ice box, or other container,
sufficiently large to retain any child, and with doors which fasten
automatically when closed, to expose the same accessible to children, without
removing the doors, lids, hinges, or latches.
(Ord. 21, third series, passed 6-21-2011) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.20 USE OF BOW AND ARROW.
   It is unlawful for any person to shoot a bow and arrow, except in the
physical education program in a school supervised by a member of its faculty, a
community-wide supervised class, or event, specifically authorized by the Chief
of Police, or a bow and arrow range authorized by the Council.
(Ord. 21, third series, passed 6-21-2011) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.21 SEIZURE AND CONFISCATION.
   (A)   If any police officer personally observes conduct in violation of §§
131.16,
131.17(A),
131.18, and
131.20, the firearm, dangerous weapon, or article shall be immediately seized,
and held in the custody of the City Police Department pending the appropriate
court action.
   (B)   If the court determines a violation of §§
131.16,
131.17(A),
131.18, and
131.20 has occurred, the firearm, dangerous weapon, or article involved in the
violations shall be forfeited to, and confiscated by, the city.
(Ord. 21, third series, passed 6-21-2011) Penalty, see §
131.99
UNLAWFUL GATHERING
§ 131.35 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   DOWNTOWN BUSINESS DISTRICT. Zoning District B-2, B-3, as defined in the city
code, §
156.005(D) officials maps, as well as all city-owned property located therein.
   POLICE DIRECTIVE. A directive by a licensed peace officer having probable
cause to believe that specified offenses, or specified behaviors, have been
committed by members of a group, or by individuals so as to constitute an
unlawful gathering.
   PROBABLE CAUSE. A reasonable ground for suspicion supported by circumstances
sufficiently strong in themselves to warrant a cautious person in believing
that specified offenses, or specified behaviors, have been committed by members
of a group, or by individuals.
   SPECIFIED BEHAVIORS.
      (1)   Screaming, or yelling, at pedestrians, or persons, in vehicles
except where an emergency exists.
      (2)   Making offensive hand gestures to persons driving by in vehicles.
      (3)   Directing profanity at passers by.
   SPECIFIED OFFENSES. Violations of the following sections of the city code
shall constitute SPECIFIED OFFENSES:
      (1)   Section
111.047, Minors, unlawful acts;
      (2)   Sections
72.01 through
72.08, bicycles;
      (3)   Section
72.20 through
72.22, skateboards and roller blades;
      (4)   Sections
90.20 through
90.27, littering;
      (5)   Section
131.02, unlawful use and furnishing of tobacco; possession by a minor;
      (6)   Sections
131.15 through
131.21, dangerous weapons and articles;
      (7)   Sections
131.01, dangerous trespasses and other acts;
      (8)   Section
130.01, curfew;
      (9)   
Chapter 113, tobacco;
      (10)   Section
90.02(A), public nuisance; permitting thereof;
      (11)    Section
131.03, disorderly conduct;
      (12)   Section
90.03, noise control;
      (13)   Section
133.01, graffiti abatement; and
      (14)   Section
131.38, loitering.
   UNLAWFUL GATHERING. A gathering of three, or more, people in a public area
in the Downtown Business District, in which any of the individuals present
engages in any specified offenses, or specified behaviors.
(Prior Code, § 10.45)
§ 131.36 LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER DIRECTIVE.
   If a law enforcement officer has probable cause to believe that any
individual, or individuals, in a gathering have committed specified offenses,
or specified behaviors, the law enforcement officer may direct the members of
the gathering to leave the Downtown Business District.
(Prior Code, § 10.45)
§ 131.37 VIOLATION.
   Any person present at an unlawful gathering who refuses to leave in response
to the directive of a law enforcement officer is guilty of a crime.
(Prior Code, § 10.45) (Ord. 191, passed 10-18-2005) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.38 LOITERING.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to loiter, wander, stand, or remain idle
either along, or with others in a public place in a manner so as to violate any
of the following provisions:
      (1)   To obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk, or
other public place or building by hindering, or impeding, or an act tending to
hinder, or impede, the free, and uninterrupted, passage of vehicles, traffic,
or pedestrians;
      (2)   To commit in, or upon, any public street, public highway, public
sidewalk, or other public place, or building, any act, or thing, which is an
obstruction, or interference, to the free and uninterrupted use of property, or
with any business lawfully conducted by anyone in, or upon, or facing, or
fronting on, any public street, public highway, public sidewalk, or other
public place or building, all of which prevents the free, and uninterrupted,
ingress, egress, and regress therein, thereon, and thereto;
      (3)   To loiter, stand, sit, or lie in, or upon, any public property,
private sidewalk, street, curb, crosswalk, walkway area, parking lot, mall, or
other portion of private property open for public use, so as to unreasonably
block, obstruct, or hinder free passage of the public; and/or
      (4)   To, without consent of the owner or occupant, unreasonably block,
obstruct, or hinder free access to the entrance of any building, or part of a
building, open to the public.
   (B)   When any person causes, or commits, any of the conditions enumerated
in division (A) above, and is ordered by the owner, agent, manager, or person
in charge of the premises, or by a police officer, or any law enforcement
officer, to stop causing, or committing, the conditions and to move on, or
disperse, any person who fails, or refuses, to obey such an order, or returns
to the premises within 36 hours after having been so requested, or ordered, to
vacate shall be guilty of a violation of this section.
(Prior Code, § 10.46) (Ord. 190, second series, passed 10-18-2005) Penalty, see
§
131.99
§ 131.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provisions of this chapter, for which no
specific penalty is prescribed, shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   In addition to any confiscation or forfeiture, violation of §§
131.15 through
131.21 shall be a misdemeanor, and have a maximum penalty of a fine of $1,000,
90 days in jail, or both.
(Ord. 21, third series, passed 6-21-2011)
CHAPTER 132: CLANDESTINE DRUG LAB SITES
Section
General Provisions
   
132.01   Purpose; jurisdiction
   
132.02   Definitions
   
132.03   Interpretation, application
   
132.04   Disclaimer of liability
   
132.05   Fees
Administration
   
132.20   Declaration of site as a chemical investigation site; public health
   
132.21   Medical guidelines for assessing health status of exposed
   
132.22   Law enforcement to affected public; public health; child protection
authorities
   
132.23   Notice of the chemical investigation site; public health nuisance to
owner and occupant
   
132.24   Notice filed with property record; motor vehicle record
   
132.25   Property owner’s, and occupant’s, responsibility to act
   
132.26   Property owner’s responsibility for costs; opportunity for recovery
   
132.27   Special assessments to recover public costs
   
132.28   Authority to modify, or remove, declaration of a chemical
investigation site; public health nuisance
   
132.29   Waste generated from cleaning up clandestine drug labs
   
132.30   Exceptions; appeals
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 132.01 PURPOSE; JURISDICTION.
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   Professional reports, based on assessments, testing, and
investigations, show that chemicals used in the production of illicit drugs can
condense, penetrate, and contaminate on the land, surfaces, furnishings, and
equipment in, or near, structures where clandestine drug labs are located.
      (2)   These conditions present health, and safety, risks to occupants,
and visitors, of the structures and land through fire, explosion, and skin and
respiratory exposure to chemicals.
      (3)   This chapter establishes responsibilities, and guidelines, for
involved parties to assure that:
         (a)   People are not unnecessarily exposed to the dangers of these
structures, or land; and
         (b)   Proper steps are taken to remove contaminants, and assure
appropriate tests are completed to verify that affected structures, and land,
are sufficiently cleaned for human contact.
      (4)   This chapter assists, and guides, appropriate public authorities,
property owners, and occupants to prevent injury, and illness, to members of
the public, particularly children.
      (5)   This chapter is intended to reduce exposure to chemicals used at
clandestine drug lab operations in structures, including dwellings, buildings,
motor vehicles, trailers, appliances, or the land where they are located.
      (6)   This chapter is intended to minimize the cost to the city for
cleanup of clandestine drug lab sites.
   (B)   Jurisdiction. This chapter shall apply to all areas within the
corporate limits of the city.
(Prior Code, § 10.62)
§ 132.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   CHEMICAL INVESTIGATION SITE. A clandestine drug lab site that is under
notice, and order, for cleanup and/or remediation as a public health nuisance,
as authorized by M.S. Chapter 145A, as it may be amended from time to time, and
this chapter.
   CHILD. Any person less than 18 years of age.
   CLANDESTINE DRUG LAB OPERATION. The unlawful manufacture, or attempt to
manufacture, a controlled substance within any area of a structure, such as a
dwelling, building, motor vehicle, trailer, boat, or other structure or
appliance.
   CLANDESTINE DRUG LAB SITE. Any parts of a structure, such as a dwelling,
building, motor vehicle, trailer, or appliance occupied, or affected, by
conditions, and/or chemicals, typically associated with a clandestine drug lab
operation.
   CLEANUP. Proper removal, and/or containment, of substances hazardous to
humans, and/or the environment, at a chemical investigation site. CLEANUP is a
part of remediation.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. A drug, substance, or immediate precursor in schedules
I through V of M.S. § 152.02, as it may be amended from time to time. The term
shall not include distilled spirits, wine, malt beverages, intoxicating
liquors, or tobacco.
   LAW ENFORCEMENT. Any licensed peace officer.
   OWNER. Any person, firm, or corporation who owns, in whole or in part, the
land and/or structures, such as buildings, motor vehicle, trailer, boat, or
other appliance, at a clandestine drug lab site.
   PUBLIC HEALTH AUTHORITY. The city and, if so designated, the County Human
Services, which may be designated, and authorized, to act as agents of the
city, pursuant to the Local Public Health Act, M.S. § 145A, as it may be
amended from time to time.
   PUBLIC HEALTH NUISANCE. The same meaning attributed to it in M.S. § 145A.02,
subd. 17, as it may be amended from time to time.
   REMEDIATION. Methods, such as assessment, evaluation, testing, venting,
detergent scrubbing, enclosure, encapsulation, demolition, and/or removal of
contaminated materials from a chemical investigation site.
   STRUCTURE. A dwelling, building, motor vehicle, trailer, boat, ice fishing
house, appliance, or any other area, or location, either fixed or temporary.
(Prior Code, § 10.62)
§ 132.03 INTERPRETATION, APPLICATION.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall be interpreted, and applied, as
the minimum requirements necessary to protect the public health, safety, and
welfare.
   (B)   Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this chapter are
either more restrictive, or less restrictive, than comparable provisions
imposed by any other law, city code provision, statute, resolution, or
regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive, or which
impose higher standards, or requirements, shall apply.
(Prior Code, § 10.62)
§ 132.04 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   Liability on the part of, or a cause of, action against the city, or any
employee, or agent thereof, for any damages that may result from reliance on
this chapter shall be eliminated, or limited, as provided by M.S. § 466.02, as
it may be amended from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 10.62)
§ 132.05 FEES.
   Fees for the administration of this chapter may be established, and amended
periodically, by resolution of the Council.
(Prior Code, § 10.62)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 132.20 DECLARATION OF SITE AS A CHEMICAL INVESTIGATION SITE; PUBLIC HEALTH.
   Clandestine drug lab sites, as defined herein, are declared by this chapter
to be a chemical investigation site public health nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 10.62)
§ 132.21 MEDICAL GUIDELINES FOR ASSESSING HEALTH STATUS OF EXPOSED.
   Medical guidelines for assessing the health status, and determining medical
care needs, of persons, particularly children, that are found, or known to be,
occupants or frequent visitors at a clandestine drug lab site, may be
established, and updated, as necessary by the medical consultant who provides
consultation services under contract to the Public Health Authority.
(Prior Code, § 10.62)
§ 132.22 LAW ENFORCEMENT TO AFFECTED PUBLIC; PUBLIC HEALTH; CHILD PROTECTION
AUTHORITIES.
   (A)   Law enforcement authorities, as permitted by M.S. § 13.82, as it may
be amended from time to time, who identify a clandestine drug lab site, or
clandestine drug lab operation, shall notify the Public Health Authority within
one working day of identifying the lab site. The obligation to promptly notify
may be delayed to accomplish appropriate law enforcement objectives, but only
to the extent that public health, and child protection responsibilities, are
not unnecessarily compromised. The notice shall include sufficient information
to inform the recipients of the following:
      (1)   Property, or structure, location by street address and other
identifiable location;
      (2)   Property, or structure, owner’s, and occupant’s, identities,
especially the identities of any children, and women of child-bearing age,
found, or known to be associated, with the site;
      (3)   Chemicals found, and indications of chemical residues;
      (4)   Equipment in a dwelling, or structure, that is typically associated
with the manufacture of a controlled substance; and
      (5)   Conditions typically associated with a clandestine drug lab site,
or operation, including weapons, illicit drugs, filth, fire, or electrical
shock and other harmful conditions, as determined by state law.
   (B)   Upon identification of the clandestine drug lab site, or operation,
law enforcement agencies may treat, store, transport, or dispose of all
hazardous waste found at the site in a manner consistent with rules and
regulations adopted by the State Department of Health, State Pollution Control,
the county, and the city.
   (C)   When a law enforcement agency completes its work under division (B)
above, and is prepared to leave the sites, the agency shall affix a warning
sign to the entrance of the affected part of the structure. The warning sign
shall be those that have been prepared in advance for such situations through
the collaboration of county law enforcement, public health, and city officials.
The warning sign shall be of a size, and contain information sufficient to
alert visitors, or returning occupants, that the site is a chemical
investigation site public health nuisance, may be dangerous to enter, and must
not be entered except by authorization of the Public Health Authority, and/or
law enforcement agency identified on the sign.
(Prior Code, § 10.62)
§ 132.23 NOTICE OF THE CHEMICAL INVESTIGATION SITE; PUBLIC HEALTH NUISANCE TO
OWNER AND OCCUPANT.
   (A)   After the Public Health Authority receives notice from a law
enforcement agency that they have identified a clandestine drug lab site, and
posted the appropriate chemical investigation site public health nuisance
warning sign, the Public Health Authority shall serve the known lawful
occupants, and owners, of the site pursuant to M.S. § 145A.04, subd. 8(b), as
it may be amended from time to time, with notice of their responsibilities
relative to the chemical investigation site public health nuisance.
   (B)   The Public Health Authority shall notify, and order, the property
owner of record, and known occupant, or agent, to have the public health
nuisance removed, or abated, within ten days, as provided in M.S. § 145A.04, as
it may be amended from time to time, and this chapter. The Public Health
Authority notice, and order, shall include the following:
      (1)   A replica of the chemical investigation site public health nuisance
declaration that is posted at the site’s entrance(s);
      (2)   Information about the potentially hazardous condition of the
chemical investigation site;
      (3)   A summary of the property owner’s, and occupant’s, responsibilities
under this chapter; and
      (4)   Information on locating professional services necessary to remove,
and abate, the chemical investigation site public health nuisance status, as
provided in this chapter and in M.S. § 145A.04, as it may be amended from time
to time.
   (C)   The Public Health Authority shall endeavor to provide information, in
writing, about the chemical investigation site public health nuisance
declaration, and potential hazard(s), to the following additional concerned
parties:
      (1)   Neighbors within close proximity that can be reasonably affected by
the conditions found;
      (2)   The local municipal clerk;
      (3)   Local law enforcement;
      (4)   Other state and local authorities, such as the State Pollution
Control Agency, and the State Department of Health, that may have public, and
environmental, protection responsibilities at the site; and
      (5)   The County Administrator.
(Prior Code, § 10.62)
§ 132.24 NOTICE FILED WITH PROPERTY RECORD; MOTOR VEHICLE RECORD.
   (A)   If, after ten days of receiving the notice, and orders, the Public
Health Authority is unable to obtain any reasonable assurance, or plan, from
the property owner, or occupant, that the structure is being properly vacated,
cleaned, remediated, and tested, the Public Health Authority shall provide a
copy of the chemical investigation site public health nuisance notice, and
order to the County Recorder, and to the lien and mortgage holders of the
affected structure, and/or properties. The County Recorder is authorized to
file that information with the property record, to notify other persons with
interest in the property about the property’s chemical investigation site
public health nuisance status.
   (B)   When the affected property is a motor vehicle, boat, or trailer, the
Public Health Authority shall notify the appropriate state and local agencies
that maintain motor vehicle, boat, or trailer records, and the holders of
liens, or security interests, against the vehicle or trailer.
(Prior Code, § 10.62)
§ 132.25 PROPERTY OWNER’S, AND OCCUPANT’S, RESPONSIBILITY TO ACT.
   (A)   Property owner(s), and occupant(s), provided with a notice, which also
includes the posted warning sign informing them about the chemical
investigation site public health nuisance, shall promptly act to vacate
occupants from those parts of a structure that are a chemical investigation
site public health nuisance. This includes dwellings, buildings, motor
vehicles, trailers, boats, appliances, or any other affected area, or location.
   (B)   Within ten business days of receiving the public health notice and
order to cleanup the chemical investigation site public health nuisance, the
property owner(s), and/or occupant(s), shall take the following actions:
      (1)   Notify the Public Health Authority that the affected parts of the
dwellings, buildings, and/or motor vehicles have been, and will remain, vacated
and secured until the Public Health Authority provides notice that the public
health nuisance no longer exists;
      (2)   Contract with one, or more, acceptable environmental hazard testing
and cleaning firms. Acceptable firms are those that have provided assurance of
appropriate equipment, procedures, and personnel, as determined by the State
Department of Health, and/or the Public Health Authority, to accomplish the
following:
         (a)   A detailed, on-site assessment of the extent of contamination at
the site, and the contamination of the personal property therein;
         (b)   Soil testing of the site, and testing of all property and soil
in proximity to the site, that the environmental hazard testing, and cleaning,
firm determines may have been affected by the conditions found at the site;
         (c)   A complete cleanup of the site (including, but not limited to,
the cleanup, or removal, of contaminated plumbing, ventilation systems,
fixtures, and contaminated soil), or a demolition of the site, and a complete
cleanup of the demolished site;
         (d)   A complete cleanup, or disposal, at an approved dumpsite, of all
personal property in the site;
         (e)   A complete cleanup of all property and soil in proximity to the
site that is found to have been affected by the conditions found at the site;
and
         (f)   Remediation testing and follow-up testing to determine that all
health risks are sufficiently reduced, according to the State Department of
Health guidelines, to allow safe human occupancy, and use, of the site, and use
of the personal property therein.
      (3)   Provide the Public Health Authority with the identity of the
testing and cleaning firm the owner, or occupant, has contracted with for
remediation of the structures(s), as described above;
      (4)   Provide the Public Health Authority with the contractor’s plan, and
schedule, for remediation that will abate the chemical investigation site
public health nuisance declaration; and
      (5)   The property owner, or occupant, may request an extension of time
to consider options for arranging cleanup, or removal, of the affected parts of
the structure. The owner, or occupant, must show good cause for any extension.
Any extension shall be dependant on the owner’s assurance that the affected
parts of the structure will not be occupied, pending appropriate cleanup or
demolition.
(Prior Code, § 10.62)
§ 132.26 PROPERTY OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY FOR COSTS; OPPORTUNITY FOR RECOVERY.
   (A)   Consistent with M.S. Chapter 145A, as it may be amended from time to
time, the property owner shall be responsible for:
      (1)   Private contractor’s fees, cleanup, remediation, and testing of the
chemical investigation site public health nuisance conditions; and
      (2)   City fees, and costs, of administering notices and enforcing,
vacating, cleanup, remediation, and testing of affected parts of the property.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter is intended to limit the property owners,
agents, occupants, or the city’s right to recover costs, or damages, from
persons contributing to the public health nuisance, such as the operators of
the clandestine drug lab, and/or other lawful sources.
   (C)   The city’s administrative, and enforcement, services, referenced in
division (A) above, include, but are not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Posting warning notices, or signs, at the site;
      (2)   Notification of affected parties;
      (3)   Securing the site, providing limited access to the site, and
prosecution of unauthorized persons found at the site;
      (4)   Expenses related to the recovery of costs, including the assessment
process;
      (5)   Laboratory fees;
      (6)   Cleanup services;
      (7)   Administrative fees; and
      (8)   Other associated costs.
(Prior Code, § 10.62)
§ 132.27 SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS TO RECOVER PUBLIC COSTS.
   (A)   The city is authorized under M.S. § 145A.04, subd. 8(c), as it may be
amended from time to time, to proceed, within ten business days of service of a
notice for abatement, or removal, of the public health nuisance, to initiate
the assessment, and cleanup, when:
      (1)   The property owner is not located; or
      (2)   The Public Health Authority determines that the owner refuses to,
or cannot, pay the costs, or arrange timely assessment and cleanup that is
acceptable to the designated Public Health Authority.
   (B)   The City Coordinator (or the Coordinator’s formally identified
designee) shall be fully authorized to act, consistent with state law, on
behalf of the city, to direct funds to assure prompt remediation of the
chemical investigation sites.
   (C)   When the estimated cost of testing, cleanup, and remediation exceeds
75% of the County Assessor’s market value of the structure and land, the City
Coordinator (or the Coordinator’s formally identified designee) is authorized
to notify the property owner of the county’s intent to remove, and dispose of,
the affected real property instead of proceeding with cleaning and remediation.
   (D)   The property owner will be given up to ten business days to appeal to
the City Coordinator (or the Coordinator’s formally identified designee), and,
if appealed, will be given the opportunity to show cause as to why the removal
should not occur. The appeal is also the owner’s opportunity to assume
responsibility, and provide acceptable plans, and schedule for effectively
cleaning, remediation, and testing of the structure. If, within ten business
days of the Coordinator’s notice, the owner fails to appropriately appeal, or
assume responsibility, the City Clerk-Treasurer is authorized to arrange
removal, and disposition, of the hazardous structure.
   (E)   The property owner shall be responsible for all costs, including those
the city incurred to abate the public health nuisance, including contractor’s
fees and public costs for services that were performed in association with a
clandestine drug lab site, or chemical dump site cleanup. The city’s costs may
also include, but shall not be limited to, those set forth in §
132.26(C). Fees and costs specified above that are not paid for in any other
way may be collected through a special assessment on the property, as allowed
by M.S. § 145A.08, as it may be amended from time to time, or by any other
applicable federal, state, county, and city laws, city code provisions, and/or
applicable Council resolution.
   (F)   The cost of testing, cleanup, and remediation shall be certified by
the Public Health Authority, or his or her designee. Notice of cost, and demand
for payment, shall be forwarded to the property owner by certified mail at the
property owner’s last known address, as shown on property tax records. If
payment in full is not made within 30 days of mailing of notice, the Public
Health Authority may request that all costs be assessed against the property.
   (G)   Payment on the special assessment shall be collected at the time real
estate taxes are due. The amount due, interest rate, and/or payment rate may be
adjusted by action of the Council.
   (H)   The city may also seek recovery of costs through other methods allowed
by federal or state law.
(Prior Code, § 10.62)
§ 132.28 AUTHORITY TO MODIFY, OR REMOVE, DECLARATION OF A CHEMICAL
INVESTIGATION SITE; PUBLIC HEALTH NUISANCE.
   (A)   The designated Public Health Authority may modify conditions of the
declaration, and order removal of the declaration of the chemical investigation
site public health nuisance.
   (B)   The modification, or removal, shall occur only after the Public Health
Authority has determined that levels of contamination are sufficiently reduced
through remediation to warrant modification, or removal, of the declaration.
The Public Health Authority may rely on information from competent sources,
including those supplied by the property owner, and/or others, such as state
and local health, safety, law enforcement, and pollution control authorities to
reach the decision.
   (C)   When the declaration is modified, or removed, the Public Health
Authority shall forward that information to the County Recorder for addition to
the property record if notice of the nuisance declaration was previously filed
with the Recorder, as described above. Similarly, notice shall be provided to
the motor vehicle, or other license records agencies and lien holders, if a
notice had previously been provided to them.
(Prior Code, § 10.62)
§ 132.29 WASTE GENERATED FROM CLEANING UP CLANDESTINE DRUG LABS.
   Waste generated from the chemical investigation site public health nuisances
shall be treated, stored, transported, and disposed in accordance with
applicable rules, and regulations, adopted by the State Department of Health,
the State Pollution Control Agency, and the county, and city, rules and
regulations for solid waste, and for hazardous household, and other hazardous,
waste.
(Prior Code, § 10.62)
§ 132.30 EXCEPTIONS; APPEALS.
   Administration of this chapter, including guidance for, challenges to, and
penalties, shall be according to the authorities provided in M.S. Chapter 145A,
as it may be amended from time to time, other applicable state law, and the
city rules and regulations for solid waste, and for hazardous household, and
other hazardous, wastes.
(Prior Code, § 10.62)
CHAPTER 133: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS AND PROPERTY
Section
Damage to Property
   
133.01   Graffiti abatement
Public Indecency
   
133.15   Public nudity; liquor establishments
DAMAGE TO PROPERTY
§ 133.01 GRAFFITI ABATEMENT.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a
different meaning.
      GRAFFITI. Any writing, printing, marks, signs, symbols, figures, designs,
inscriptions, or other drawings which are scratched, scrawled, painted, drawn,
or otherwise placed on any exterior surface of a building, wall, fence,
sidewalk, curb, or other permanent structure on public, or private, property,
and which have the effect of defacing the property.
      GRAFFITI MATERIALS. Materials including paint, aerosol, or pressurized
containers of paint, indelible markers, ink, dye, or other substance capable of
defacing property.
   (B)   Unlawful acts.
      (1)   It is unlawful for any person to intentionally place graffiti on
any exterior surface located on public, or private, property.
      (2)   It is unlawful for any person to possess graffiti materials for the
purpose of placing graffiti on any exterior surface located on public, or
private, property.
   (C)   Violations. Violations of division (B) above shall constitute a
misdemeanor.
   (D)   Unlawful conduct regarding the permitting of graffiti by owners of
property.
      (1)   It is unlawful for the owner of any property to allow graffiti to
be placed on any external surface on the owner’s property, and the owner of any
property shall remove therefrom graffiti which has been placed there.
      (2)   In the event that the Police Department finds that graffiti exists,
the Police Department shall mail a written order to the owner of the subject
real property, addressed to the owner’s last known address, containing the
following:
         (a)   A description of the real estate sufficient for identification;
         (b)   Information that the police have found graffiti exists on the
property;
         (c)   A request that the owner remove, or obliterate, the graffiti
within 30 days;
         (d)   Inform the owner that unless corrective action is taken within
the time allotted, the city may remove the graffiti, and charge all costs
incurred therein against the real estate as a special assessment to be
collected in the same manner as taxes against real estate; and
         (e)   A warning that any subsequent offense may be prosecuted as a
misdemeanor.
      (3)   The first offense by any property owner shall be civil in nature,
and shall not be treated as a criminal offense. The city shall keep an adequate
record of all violations. The second, and any subsequent, offenses by any
property owner within five years shall be prosecuted as a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 10.44) (Ord. 144, second series, passed 2-18-1997) Penalty, see
§
10.99
PUBLIC INDECENCY
§ 133.15 PUBLIC NUDITY; LIQUOR ESTABLISHMENTS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a
different meaning.
      NUDITY. Uncovered, or less than opaquely covered, post-pubertal human
genitals, pubic areas, the post-pubertal human female breast below a point
immediately above the top of the areola, or the covered human male genitals in
a discernibly turgid state. For purposes of this definition, a female breast is
considered uncovered if the nipple only, or the nipple and the areola only, are
covered.
      OBSCENE PERFORMANCE. A play, motion picture, dance, show, or other
presentation, whether pictured, animated, or live, performed before an
audience, and which in whole, or in part, depicts, or reveals, nudity, sexual
conduct, sexual excitement, or sado-masochistic abuse, or which includes
obscenities, or explicit verbal descriptions, or narrative accounts, of sexual
conduct.
      OBSCENITIES. Slang words currently, and generally, rejected for regular
use in mixed society, that are used to refer to genitals, female breasts,
sexual conduct, or excretory functions or products, either that have no other
meaning or that, in context, are clearly used for their bodily, sexual, or
excretory meaning.
      SADO-MASOCHIST ABUSE. Flagellation, or torture, by, or upon, a person who
is nude, or clad in undergarments, or in revealing, or bizarre, costume, or the
condition of being fettered, bound, or otherwise physically restrained on the
part of one so clothed.
      SEXUAL CONDUCT. Human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or any touching
of the genitals, pubic areas or buttocks of the human male or female, or the
breasts of the female, whether alone or between members of the same, or
opposite, sex, or between humans and animals in an act of apparent sexual
stimulation, or gratification.
      SEXUAL EXCITEMENT. The condition of human male, or female, genitals, or
the breasts of the female, when in a state of sexual stimulation, or the
sensual experiences of humans engaging in, or witnessing, sexual conduct or
nudity.
   (B)   Unlawful act. It is unlawful for any person issued a license provided
for in Chapter 111 to permit, upon the licensed premises, any nudity, obscene
performance, or continued use of obscenities by any agent, employee, patron, or
other person.
(Prior Code, § 5.86) (Ord. 30, second series, passed 12-21-1981) Penalty, see §
10.99
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
      
151.   HOUSING AND STREET NUMBERING
      
152.   STREETS AND PUBLIC PROPERTY
      
153.   TREES
      
154.   AIRPORT ZONING
      
155.   SUBDIVISIONS
      
156.   ZONING
      
157.   LOT DIVISION
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
Section
   
150.01   Building code adopted; territory
   
150.02   Fire code adopted
   
150.03   Building permits required
   
150.04   Permits and fees
   
150.05   Unsafe buildings
   
150.06   Permits and special requirements for moving buildings
   
150.07   Kitchen exhaust hoods and duct systems
§ 150.01 BUILDING CODE ADOPTED; TERRITORY.
   (A)   Code adopted by reference. The State Building Code, as adopted by the
Commissioner of Labor and Industry, pursuant to M.S. Chapter 326B, as it may be
amended from time to time, including all of the amendments, rules, and
regulations established, adopted, and published, from time to time, by the
State Commissioner of Labor and Industry, through the Building Codes and
Standards Unit, is hereby adopted by reference, with the exception of the
optional chapters, unless specifically adopted in this section. The State
Building Code is hereby incorporated in this section as if fully set out
herein.
   (B)   Application, administration, and enforcement.
      (1)   The application, administration, and enforcement of the code shall
be in accordance with the State Building Code. The code shall be enforced
within the extraterritorial limits permitted by M.S. § 326B.121, subd. 2(d), as
it may be amended from time to time, when so established by this section.
      (2)   The code enforcement agency of this municipality is called the City
Building Official. This code shall be enforced by the State Certified Building
Official designated by this municipality to administer the code, in accordance
with M.S. § 326B.133, subd. 1, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (C)   Permits and fees. The issuance of permits, and the collection of fees,
shall be as authorized in Minn. Rules Chapter 1300. Permit fees shall be
assessed for work governed by this code in accordance with the fee schedule
adopted by the municipality (for example, city code number, ordinance number,
and the like). In addition, a surcharge fee shall be collected on all permits
issued for work governed by this code, in accordance with M.S. § 326B.148, as
it may be amended from time to time.
   (D)   Violations. A violation of the code is a misdemeanor (M.S. § 326B.082,
subd. 16, as it may be amended from time to time).
   (E)   Building code optional chapters.
      (1)   The State Building Code, Chapter 1300, allows the municipality to
adopt by reference, and enforce, certain optional chapters of the most current
edition of the State Building Code.
      (2)   The following optional provisions identified in the most current
edition of the State Building Code are hereby adopted, and incorporated, as
part of the building code for this municipality: None.
   (F)   Contiguous territory. The city hereby extends enforcement of the State
Building Code to contiguous, unincorporated territory two miles distant from
the corporate limits of the city in all directions.
(Prior Code, § 4.11) (Ord. 205, second series, passed 8-7-2007; Ord. 48, third
series, passed 8-4-2020) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.02 FIRE CODE ADOPTED.
   (A)   Adoption. The 1982 edition of the State Uniform Fire Code is hereby
adopted as though set forth verbatim herein. One copy of the code shall be
marked “CITY OF ST. JAMES - OFFICIAL COPY”, and kept on file in the office of
the City Clerk-Treasurer, and open to inspection, and use, by the public.
   (B)   Storage of flammable and explosives material. No bulk plants for
storage of flammable or combustible liquids, or bulk storage of liquified
petroleum gas, not established on the effective date of this section, shall be
permitted. No storage of explosives or blasting agents shall be permitted.
(Prior Code, § 10.51) (Ord. 60, second series, passed 11-20-1984)
§ 150.03 BUILDING PERMITS REQUIRED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, alter,
repair, move, improve, remove, convert, or demolish any building or structure,
or any part or portion thereof, including, but not limited to, the plumbing,
electrical, ventilating, heating, or air conditioning systems therein, or cause
the same to be done, without first obtaining a separate building or mechanical
permit for each building, structure, or mechanical components from the
Superintendent of Public Works.
   (B)   Building permits shall not be required for utility sheds under 120
square feet, or maintenance (shingles, windows, and siding) of any structure of
less than $1,000 in value.
(Prior Code, § 4.03) (Ord. 29, second series, passed 12-21-1981; Ord. 145,
second series, passed 8-5-1997) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.04 PERMITS AND FEES.
   The issuance of permits, and the collection of fees, shall be as authorized
in M.S. § 326B.121, subd. 1, as it may be amended from time to time. Permit
fees shall be assessed for the work governed by the Building Code in accordance
with the fee schedules Exhibit A and Exhibit B, adopted by the city in the 2020
Uniform Building Code, and incorporated herein by reference. Permit Fee
Schedules Exhibit A and Exhibit B may be viewed in the office of City Clerk-
Treasurer.
(Prior Code, § 4.05) (Ord. 205, second series, passed 8-7-2007)
§ 150.05 UNSAFE BUILDINGS.
   (A)   Definition and abatement. All buildings or structures which are
structurally unsafe, or not provided with adequate egress, or which constitute
a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which, in relation
to existing use, constitute a hazard to safety or health, or public welfare, by
reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, fire hazard, or
abandonment, as specified in the SBC, another provision of the city code, or
any other law, are, for the purpose of this section, UNSAFE BUILDINGS. All
UNSAFE BUILDINGS are hereby declared to be public nuisances, and shall be
abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition, or removal in accordance with the
procedure specified herein.
   (B)   Notice to owner. The Building Official shall examine, or cause to be
examined, every building or structure, or portion thereof, reported as
dangerous or damaged and, if such is found to be an unsafe building, the
Building Official shall give to the owner of the building written notice
stating the defects therein. This notice may require the owner, or person in
charge, of the building or premises, within 48 hours, to commence either the
required repairs or improvements, or demolition and removal of the building or
structure, or portions thereof, and all work shall be completed within 90 days
from the date of notice, unless otherwise stipulated by the Building Official.
If necessary, the notice also shall require the building, structure, or portion
thereof to be vacated forthwith, and not reoccupied until the required repairs,
and improvements, are completed, inspected, and approved by the Building
Official. Proper service of the notice shall be by personal service upon the
owner of record, if he or she shall be found within the city. If he or she is
not found therein, the service may be made upon the owner by registered mail,
or certified mail; provided, that if the notice is by registered mail, or
certified mail, the designated period within which the owner, or person in
charge, is required to comply with the order of the Building Official shall
begin as of the date of delivery shown upon the return receipt.
   (C)   Posting of signs. The Building Official shall cause to be posted, at
each entrance to the building, a notice to read: “DO NOT ENTER, UNSAFE TO
OCCUPY. Building Department, City of St. James.” The notice shall remain posted
until the required repairs, demolition, or removal are completed. The notice
shall not be removed without written permission of the Building Official, and
no person shall enter the building except for the purpose of making the
required repairs, or of demolishing the building.
   (D)   Right to demolish. In case the owner shall fail, neglect, or refuse to
comply with the notice to repair, rehabilitate, or to demolish, and remove, the
building or structure, or portion thereof, the Council may order the owner of
the building prosecuted as a violator of the provisions of this section, and
may order the Building Official to proceed with the work specified in the
notice. A statement of the cost of the work shall be transmitted to the
Council, who shall cause the same to be paid and levied as a special assessment
against the property.
   (E)   Costs. Costs incurred under division (D) above shall be paid out of
the treasury. The costs shall be charged to the owner of the premises involved
as a special assessment on the land on which the building, or structure, is
located, and shall be collected in the manner provided for special assessments.
   (F)   Unlawful act. It is unlawful for the owner of any property to suffer,
or permit, an unsafe building, as defined herein, to remain thereon.
(Prior Code, § 4.09) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.06 PERMITS AND SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR MOVING BUILDINGS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a
different meaning.
      COMBINED MOVING PERMIT. A permit to move a building on both a street and
a highway.
      HIGHWAY. A public thoroughfare for vehicular traffic which is a state
trunk highway, county state-aid highway, or county road.
      HIGHWAY MOVING PERMIT. A permit to move a building on a highway for which
a fee is charged, which does not include route approval, but does include
regulation of activities which do not involve the use of the highway; which
activities include, but are not limited to, repairs or alterations to a
municipal utility required by reason of the movement.
      MOVING PERMIT. A document allowing the use of a street, or highway, for
the purpose of moving a building.
      STREET. A public thoroughfare for vehicular traffic which is not a state
trunk highway, county state-aid highway, or county road.
      STREET MOVING PERMIT. A permit to move a building on a street for which a
fee is charged, which does include route approval, together with the use of the
street and activities including, but not limited to, repairs or alterations to
a municipal utility required by reason of the movement.
   (B)   Moving permit required and application.
      (1)   It is unlawful for any person to move a building on any street
without a moving permit from the city.
      (2)   It is unlawful for any person to move a building on any highway
without a highway moving permit from the city.
      (3)   The application for a moving permit shall state the dimensions,
weight, and approximate loaded height of the structure, or building, proposed
to be moved, the places from which, and to which, it is to be moved, the route
to be followed, the dates and times of moving and parking, the name and address
of the mover, and the municipal utility and public property repairs, or
alterations, that will be required by reason of the movement. In the case of a
street moving permit or combined moving permit, the application shall also
state the size, and weight, of the structure, or building, proposed to be
moved, and the street alterations, or repairs, that will be required by reason
of the movement.
   (C)   Permit and fee. The moving permit shall state the date, or dates, of
moving, hours, routing, movement, and parking. Permits shall be issued only for
moving buildings by building movers licensed by the state, except that a permit
may be issued to a person moving his or her own building, or a person moving a
building which does not exceed 12 feet in width, 25 feet in length, or 16 feet
in loaded height. Fees to be charged shall be separate for each of the
following:
      (1)   A moving permit fee to cover use of streets and route approval; and
      (2)   A fee equal to the anticipated amount required to compensate the
city for any municipal utility and public property (other than streets)
repairs, or alterations, occasioned by the movement. All permit fees shall be
paid in advance of issuance.
   (D)   Building permit and code compliance. Before any building is moved from
one location to another within the city, or from a point of origin without the
city to a destination within the city, regardless of the route of movement, it
shall be inspected, and a building permit shall have been issued for at least
the work necessary to bring it into full compliance with the State Building
Code.
   (E)   Notice. Upon the granting of a building permit for the moving of a
building within the city, regardless of origin or destination, the city shall
cause to have notice given to all property owners and residents along the
proposed route of moving the building, as well as all occupants and residents
within 300 feet of the destination of the building. The notice shall advise the
residents and occupants of dwellings of the proposed move, the expected date
and time of the move, the route of the move, and the destination. The notice
shall also advise the residents, or occupants, of the name, address, and
telephone number of the moving company. The notice shall also contain such
other information as the Building Official, City Manager, or city staff shall
deem appropriate. Buildings 16 feet or less in height, and 24 feet or less in
width, are exempt from the provisions of this division (E).
   (F)   Proof of tax payment. It is unlawful to move any building (including a
manufactured home) if the point of origin, or destination (or both), is within
the city, and regardless of the route of movement, without having paid in full
all real, and personal, property taxes, special assessments, and municipal
utility charges due on the premises of origin, and filing written proof of the
payment with the city.
(Prior Code, § 4.10) (Ord. 100, second series, passed 4-17-1990; Ord. 167,
second series, passed 12-5-2000) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.07 KITCHEN EXHAUST HOODS AND DUCT SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Definition of commercial kitchen exhaust hoods and duct systems. A
system containing hoods, filters, grease extractors, ducts, and exhaust fans
located over commercial cooking appliances and domestic cooking appliances used
for commercial purposes that produce grease laden vapors.
   (B)   Cleaning. All commercial kitchen exhaust hood and duct systems shall
be cleaned to prevent the accumulation of grease. Cleanings shall be recorded,
and records shall state the extent, time, and date of cleaning. The records
shall be maintained on the premises.
   (C)   Portable fire extinguishers. Commercial kitchens shall be equipped
with a K-Class fire extinguisher.
   (D)   Extinguishing systems. Commercial kitchen hood extinguishing systems
shall be serviced at least every 12 months by a licensed inspector, and after
activation of the system (MSFC 904.14.1). Inspection, testing, and maintenance
requirements are based on the type of system that is installed.
   (E)   Dry-chemical and wet-chemical extinguishing systems. Dry-chemical and
wet-chemical extinguishing systems shall be inspected, tested, and maintained
by a licensed contractor every 12 months and after an activation of the system.
Additionally, on a monthly basis, the system owner must conduct a “quick check”
of the following (IFC 901.6.1, NFPA 17, § 11.2, and NFPA 17A, § 7.2):
      (1)   The extinguishing system is in its proper location;
      (2)   The manual actuators are unobstructed;
      (3)   The tamper indicators and seals are in tact;
      (4)   The maintenance tag, or certificate, is in place;
      (5)   The system shows no physical damage or condition that might prevent
operation;
      (6)   The pressure gauge(s) is in operable range;
      (7)   The nozzle blow-off caps, where provided, are in tact and
undamaged; and
      (8)   Neither the protected equipment nor the hazard has been modified or
relocated.
   (F)   Inspection and correction.
      (1)   The Fire Department may inspect any commercial kitchen exhaust hood
and duct system as frequently as the Fire Department may deem necessary to
ensure compliance with this section. The Department will provide adequate
written notification prior to any inspections.
      (2)   All owners, or operators, of commercial kitchen exhaust hood and
duct systems, having received a notice of a violation of this section from the
Fire Department, shall correct the violation so listed within the time limit
specified in the notice.
   (G)   Violation. A violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 14, third series, passed 6-1-2010) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 151: HOUSING AND STREET NUMBERING
Section
Housing Regulations
   
151.01   Housing code adopted
   
151.02   Basement homes
   
151.03   House numbering
Minimum Maintenance and Occupancy Standards
   
151.15   Purpose
   
151.16   Application
   
151.17   Definitions
   
151.18   Responsibilities of owners
   
151.19   Maintenance of shared or public areas
   
151.20   Maintenance of occupied areas
   
151.21   Storage and disposal of rubbish; garbage
   
151.22   Responsibility for pest extermination
   
151.23   Rodent harborage prohibited in occupied areas
   
151.24   Sanitary maintenance of fixtures and facilities
   
151.25   Minimum heating capability and maintenance
   
151.26   Removal of snow and ice
   
151.27   Maintenance of driving and parking areas
   
151.28   Maintenance of yards
   
151.29   Foundations, exterior walls, roofs
   
151.30   Windows, doors, and screens
   
151.31   Facilities to function
   
151.32   Permissible occupancy per dwelling unit
   
151.33   Basements not permissible for living
   
151.34   Commencement of proceedings
   
151.35   Notice and order
   
151.36   Appeals
   
151.37   Appeal to Council
   
151.38   Violations
Mobile Home Parks Minimum Standards
   
151.50   Purpose
   
151.51   Definitions
   
151.52   Permits
   
151.53   Inspection of mobile home parks
   
151.54   Notices, hearings, and orders
   
151.55   Environmental, open space, and access requirements
   
151.56   Water supply
   
151.57   Sewage disposal
   
151.58   Service building, and other community service facilities
   
151.59   Refuse handling
   
151.60   Insect and rodent control
   
151.61   Fuel supply and storage
   
151.62   Fire protection
   
151.63   Miscellaneous requirements
 
   
151.99   Penalty
HOUSING REGULATIONS
§ 151.01 HOUSING CODE ADOPTED.
   The Uniform Housing Code, 1985 edition, published by the International
Conference of Building Officials, is hereby adopted by reference as though set
forth verbatim herein. One copy of the code shall be marked “CITY OF ST. JAMES
- OFFICIAL COPY”, and kept on file in the office of the City Clerk-Treasurer,
and open to inspection, and use, by the public.
(Prior Code, § 4.20) (Ord. 88, second series, passed 7-5-1988)
§ 151.02 BASEMENT HOMES.
   It is unlawful for any person, after the effective date of this section, to
construct a basement house for dwelling purposes.
(Prior Code, § 4.30) (Ord. 117, passed 1-19-1993)
Cross-reference:
   Basements not permissible for living, see §
151.33
§ 151.03 HOUSE NUMBERING.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the owner, or owners, of any building, or
buildings, in the city and fronting upon any street or avenue therein, to
place, and keep, in a conspicuous place on the front of the building, or
buildings, the proper house number, or house numbers, as assigned by the City
Clerk-Treasurer. The number, or numbers, must be standard Arabic numerals
(numbers shall not be written out); in a color distinguishable from its
background; at least four inches in height, unless street numbers posted prior
to the effective date of this section that were in compliance with previous
ordinance requirements as to numeral height will be considered to remain in
compliance until they are removed for any reason, including maintenance or
replacement; and street numbers that are constructed of laser-cut masonry may
be allowed at the height of the cut brick, with a minimum height of three
inches. Numbers must be free, and clear, of any obstructions hindering clear
visibility.
   (B)   The Code Enforcement Officer, or his or her authorized representative,
shall be enforced with the intent to ensure that each residential, commercial,
or industrial structure is clearly identified by its assigned street address in
order to enable emergency, and other public service, personnel to promptly
identify same at all times. Prior to the issuance of any citations for
violations of this section, the Enforcement Officer shall deliver a written
warning, either in person or by first class mail, which shall describe the
violation, and direct the correction of the violation within ten business days
of the written notice. Thereafter, if subsequent inspection reveals the
violation has not been corrected, then the Enforcement Officer shall issue a
citation for the violation.
   (C)   A violation of this section shall be a petty misdemeanor.
(Ord. 23, third series, passed 9-20-2011)
MINIMUM MAINTENANCE AND OCCUPANCY STANDARDS
§ 151.15 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to protect the public health,
safety, and the general welfare of the people of the city. The general
objectives include, among others, the following:
      (1)   To protect the character, and stability, of all buildings and
property within the city;
      (2)   To correct, and prevent, conditions that adversely affect, or are
likely to adversely affect, the life, safety, general welfare, and health,
including the physical, mental, and social well-being of persons occupying
buildings within the city;
      (3)   To provide minimum standards for cooking, heating, and sanitary
equipment necessary to the health, and safety, of occupants of buildings;
      (4)   To provide minimum standards for light and ventilation necessary to
health and safety;
      (5)   To prevent the overcrowding of dwellings by providing space
standards per occupant for each dwelling;
      (6)   To provide minimum standards for the maintenance of existing
buildings, and to thus prevent slums and blight; and
      (7)   To preserve the value of land and buildings throughout the city.
   (B)   With respect to rental disputes, and except as otherwise specifically
provided by the terms of this section, it is not the intention of the Council
to intrude upon the fair, and accepted, contractual relationship between tenant
and landlord. The Council does not intend to intervene as an advocate of either
party, nor to act as an arbiter, nor to be receptive to complaints for tenant
or landlord which are not specifically, and clearly, relevant to the provisions
of this section. In the absence of relevancy with regard to rental disputes, it
is intended that the contracting parties exercise the legal sanctions as are
available to them without the intervention of city government. Neither, in
enacting this section, is it the intention of the Council to interfere, or
permit interference, with legal rights to personal privacy.
(Prior Code, § 4.21)
§ 151.16 APPLICATION.
   Every building, as well as its premises, and all occupied premises within
the city shall conform to the requirements of this section, irrespective of
when the building may have been constructed, altered, or repaired.
(Prior Code, § 4.21)
§ 151.17 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING. A structure subordinate to the main, or principal,
building which is not authorized, nor used, for living or sleeping by human
occupants, and which is located on the premises.
   APPROVED. Acceptable to this jurisdiction.
   BUILDING. Any structure used, or intended, for supporting, or sheltering,
any use or occupancy.
   COMPLIANCE OFFICER. The Building Official, Code Enforcement Officer, or
Police Chief.
   DWELLING. A building, or portion thereof, designed, or used, predominantly
for residential occupancy of a continued nature, including one-family
dwellings, two-family dwellings, and multiple family dwellings, but not
including hotels and motels.
   DWELLING UNIT. A single residential accommodation which is arranged,
designed, used, or if vacant, intended for use exclusively as a domicile for
one family. Where a private garage is structurally attached, it shall be
considered as part of the building in which the DWELLING UNIT is located.
   FAMILY. One, or more, persons related to the other by blood, marriage, or
adoption, or a group of not more than four persons not all so related,
maintaining a common household in a dwelling unit, and using common cooking and
kitchen facilities. Group or foster care of not more than six wards, or
clients, by an authorized person, or persons, related by blood, marriage, or
adoption, together with their domestic servants or gratuitous guests, all
maintaining a common household in a dwelling unit approved, and certified, by
the appropriate public agency.
   FLUSH WATER CLOSET. An approved toilet system with a bowl and trap made in
one piece connected to the city water and sewer system.
   GARBAGE. Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food.
   HABITABLE BUILDING. Any building, or part thereof, that meets minimum
standards for use as a home, or place of abode, by one, or more, persons.
   HABITABLE ROOM. A room, or enclosed floor space, used, or intended to be
used, for living, sleeping, cooking, or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms,
water closet compartments, laundries, furnace rooms, unfinished basements
(those without required ventilation, required electrical outlets, and required
exit facilities), pantries, utility rooms of less than 50 square feet of floor
space, foyers, communicating corridors, stairways, closets, storage spaces and
workshops, hobby and recreation areas in parts of the structure below ground
level, or in attics.
   HEATED WATER. Water heated to a temperature of not less than 120°F, or
lesser temperature required by a government authority, measured at the faucet
outlet.
   KITCHEN. A space which contains a sink with counter working space, adequate
space for installing cooking and refrigeration equipment, and adequate space
for storage of cooking utensils.
   MULTIPLE FAMILY DWELLING. A dwelling, or portion thereof, containing three,
or more, dwelling units.
   NONRESIDENTIAL BUILDING. All other buildings, or structures, other than
dwellings or dwelling units.
   OCCUPANT. Any person (including owner or operator) occupying any structure,
building, or part thereof, dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, or premises.
   PERMISSIBLE OCCUPANT LOAD. The maximum number of persons permitted to occupy
a building, or space within a building.
   REFUSE. All putrescible, and non-putrescible, waste solids, including
garbage and rubbish.
   REPAIR. To restore to a sound, and acceptable, state of operation,
serviceability, or appearance.
   RODENT HARBORAGE. Any place where rodents can live, nest, or seek shelter.
   ROOMING UNIT. Any room, or group of rooms, forming a single habitable unit
used for living or sleeping, but not for cooking and eating purposes.
   SAFETY. The condition of being reasonably free from danger and hazards which
may cause accidents and diseases.
   STRUCTURE. That which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any
kind, or any piece of work artificially built up, or composed of, parts joined
together in some definite manner.
   SUBSTANDARD BUILDING. Any dwelling which does not conform to the minimum
standards established by the city code.
(Prior Code, § 4.21)
§ 151.18 RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS.
   No owner, or person, shall occupy, or let, another person occupy any
building, unless it and the premises are clean, sanitary, fit for human
occupancy, and comply with all applicable legal requirements of the state and
the city.
(Prior Code, § 4.21) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.19 MAINTENANCE OF SHARED OR PUBLIC AREAS.
   Every owner of a building shall maintain in a clean, sanitary, and safe
condition the shared, or public, areas of the building, or premises thereof.
(Prior Code, § 4.21) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.20 MAINTENANCE OF OCCUPIED AREAS.
   All occupants of a building shall maintain in a clean, sanitary, and safe
condition the part, or parts, of the building, and premises thereof, that they
control.
(Prior Code, § 4.21) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.21 STORAGE AND DISPOSAL OF RUBBISH; GARBAGE.
   (A)   All occupants of a building shall store, and dispose of, all their
rubbish in a clean, sanitary, and safe manner, as described in §§
90.20 through
90.27 of the city code.
   (B)   All occupants of a building shall store, and dispose of, all their
garbage in a clean, sanitary, and safe manner, as described in §§
90.20 through
90.27 of the city code, within seven days.
(Prior Code, § 4.21) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.22 RESPONSIBILITY FOR PEST EXTERMINATION.
   Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit, or an
occupant of a nonresidential building containing a single unit, shall be
responsible for the extermination of vermin infestations and/or rodents on the
premises. Every occupant of a nonresidential building containing more than one
unit shall be responsible for the extermination whenever their unit is the only
one infested. Notwithstanding, however, whenever an infestation is caused by
the failure of the owner to maintain a building in a reasonable rodent proof,
or reasonable vermin proof, condition, extermination shall be the
responsibility of the owner. Whenever extermination is the responsibility of
the owner, the extermination must be performed by a licensed pest control
contractor.
(Prior Code, § 4.21) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.23 RODENT HARBORAGE PROHIBITED IN OCCUPIED AREAS.
   No occupant of a building shall accumulate boxes, lumber, scrap metal, or
any other similar materials in a manner that may provide a rodent harborage in,
or about, any dwelling unit or building. Stored materials shall be stacked
neatly.
(Prior Code, § 4.21) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.24 SANITARY MAINTENANCE OF FIXTURES AND FACILITIES.
   Every occupant of a building shall keep all supplied fixtures, and
facilities therein, in a clean and sanitary condition, and shall be responsible
for the exercise of reasonable care in the proper use, and operation, thereof.
(Prior Code, § 4.21) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.25 MINIMUM HEATING CAPABILITY AND MAINTENANCE.
   In every dwelling unit or rooming unit when the control of the supplied heat
is the responsibility of a person other than an occupant, a temperature of at
least 68°F shall be maintained three feet above the floor.
(Prior Code, § 4.21) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.26 REMOVAL OF SNOW AND ICE.
   Every occupant, and/or owner, shall be responsible for the removal of snow
or ice from the parking lots, sidewalks, and driveways on the premises.
Individual snowfalls of two inches or more, or successive snowfalls
accumulating to a depth of two inches, shall be removed from parking lots and
driveways within 24 hours after the cessation of snow to a depth of one inch,
and shall be removed from steps and walkways within the time specified in §
152.04 of the city code.
(Prior Code, § 4.21) (Ord. 017, fourth series, passed 1-2-2024) Penalty, see §
 
151.99
§ 151.27 MAINTENANCE OF DRIVING AND PARKING AREAS.
   The owner of a building shall be responsible for providing, and maintaining
in good condition, delineated parking areas and driveways. No parking shall be
permitted in the front setback (front yard) of a R-1 or R-2 unless it is an
approved driveway or parking area. An exemption to this section would be during
snowfall or snow removal.
(Prior Code, § 4.21) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.28 MAINTENANCE OF YARDS.
   The owner shall be responsible for providing, and maintaining, premises
yards consistent with §
152.05(C) of the city code.
(Prior Code, § 4.21) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.29 FOUNDATIONS, EXTERIOR WALLS, ROOFS.
   The foundation, exterior walls, and exterior roof shall be substantially
water tight and protected against vermin and rodents, and shall be kept in
sound condition and repair. Every exterior wall shall be free of deterioration,
holes, breaks, loose or rotting boards, or timbers, and any other thing which
might admit rain or dampness to the interior portion of the walls, or the
exterior spaces of the building. All exterior wood surfaces, other than decay
resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by paint or
other protective covering, or treatment. If the exterior surface is unpainted
or determined by the Code Enforcement Officer to be paint blistered, the
surface shall be painted. If the exterior surface of the painting on any brick,
block, or stone wall is loose or has fallen out, the surface shall be repaired.
(Prior Code, § 4.21) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.30 WINDOWS, DOORS, AND SCREENS.
   Every window, exterior door, and other exterior openings, shall be
substantially tight, and shall be kept in sound condition and repair. Every
window, other than a fixed window or storm window, shall be capable of being
easily opened. Every window, door, and frame shall be constructed, and
maintained, in relation to the adjacent wall construction as to completely
exclude rain, wind, vermin, and rodents from entering the building. Every
openable window shall be supplied with 16 mesh screens during the insect
season, and shall be equipped with an approved lock if located less than six
feet above grade.
(Prior Code, § 4.21) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.31 FACILITIES TO FUNCTION.
   Every supplied facility, piece of equipment, or utility required under city
code provisions, and every chimney and flue, shall be installed and maintained,
and shall function effectively in a safe, sound, and working condition.
(Prior Code, § 4.21) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.32 PERMISSIBLE OCCUPANCY PER DWELLING UNIT.
   The maximum permissible occupancy of any dwelling unit shall be determined
as follows:
   (A)   For the first occupant, 150 square feet of habitable room floor space,
and for every additional occupant thereof, at least 100 square feet of
habitable room floor space;
   (B)   In no event shall the total number of occupants exceed two times the
number habitable rooms, less the kitchen is in the dwelling unit; and
   (C)   Not more than one family, except for temporary guests, shall occupy a
dwelling unit.
(Prior Code, § 4.21) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.33 BASEMENTS NOT PERMISSIBLE FOR LIVING.
   Basements unfinished shall not be occupied for the purpose of living.
(Prior Code, § 4.21) Penalty, see §
151.99
Cross-reference:
   Basement homes, see §
151.02
§ 151.34 COMMENCEMENT OF PROCEEDINGS.
   Whenever possible, a building inspection shall be initiated within three
business days of receipt of any complaint alleging a particular building to be
substandard. Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer has inspected, or cause to
be inspected, any building, and has found, and determined, that the building is
a substandard building, he or she shall commence proceedings to cause the
repair, rehabilitation, vacation, or demolition of the building.
(Prior Code, § 4.21) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.35 NOTICE AND ORDER.
   (A)   The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a notice and order directed
to the record owner of the building.
   (B)   The notice and order shall contain:
      (1)   The street address and a legal description sufficient for
identification of the premises upon which the building is located;
      (2)   A statement that the Code Enforcement Officer has found the
building to be substandard with a brief, and concise, description of the
conditions found to render the building dangerous;
      (3)   A statement of the action required to be taken, as determined by
the Code Enforcement Officer:
         (a)   If the Code Enforcement Officer has determined that the
building, or structure, must be repaired, the order shall require that all
required permits be secured therefor, and the work physically commenced within
the time (not to exceed 30 days from the date of the order), and completed
within the time as the Code Enforcement Officer shall determine is reasonable
under all circumstances; and/or
         (b)   If the Code Enforcement Officer has determined that the
building, or structure, must be vacated, the order shall require that the
building, or structure, shall be vacated within a certain time from the date of
the order, as determined by the Code Enforcement Officer.
      (4)   Statements advising that if any required repair, or demolition,
work (without vacation being required) is not commenced within the time
specified, the Code Enforcement Officer:
         (a)   Will order the building vacated and posted to prevent further
occupancy until the work is completed; and
         (b)   May proceed to cause the work to be done, and charge the cost
thereof against the property or its owner.
      (5)   Statements advising that any person having record title, or legal
interest, in the building may appeal from the notice, and order any actions of
the Code Enforcement Officer.
(Prior Code, § 4.21) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.36 APPEALS.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved by any notice, or order, of the Code Enforcement
Officer issued under this section may file a petition with the City Clerk-
Treasurer within ten days after the notice or order.
   (B)   Upon receipt of the review, the City Manager, or his or her designee,
shall set a date for a hearing and give the petitioner at least five days prior
written notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing.
   (C)   At the hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to show
cause why the notice, or order, should be modified or withdrawn. The petitioner
may be represented by counsel of the petitioner’s choosing at his or her
expense.
   (D)   The hearing shall be conducted by the City Manager; provided, he or
she did not participate in the drafting of the order.
(Prior Code, § 4.21) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.37 APPEAL TO COUNCIL.
   Any decision rendered pursuant to §
151.36 may be appealed to the Council (Housing Board). A petitioner seeking a
decision must file written notice of appeal with the City Clerk-Treasurer
within ten days after the decision of the City Manager. The matter will
thereupon be placed on the Council agenda as soon as practical. The Council
shall review the findings of fact and conclusions to determine whether they
were correct. The Council may modify, reverse, or affirm the decision of the
City Manager upon the same standard set forth in the previous section. (See §
151.36.)
(Prior Code, § 4.21) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.38 VIOLATIONS.
   Violation of this subchapter shall be a petty misdemeanor, and/or remedied
by the guidelines set forth by this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 4.21) Penalty, see §
151.99
MOBILE HOME PARKS MINIMUM STANDARDS
§ 151.50 PURPOSE.
   The purposes of this subchapter are to promote health, safety, order,
convenience, and general welfare by enforcing minimum standards for mobile home
parks, the location and use of mobile homes, and the design, construction,
alteration, and arrangement of homes on the lots, and authorizing the
inspection of mobile home parks.
(Prior Code, § 4.40)
§ 151.51 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   DRIVEWAY. A minor private way used by vehicles and pedestrians on a mobile
home lot.
   MOBILE HOME. A manufactured, transportable, single-family dwelling unit over
29 feet in length, and 5,000 pounds in weight, suitable for year-round
occupancy, and containing a water supply, waste disposal, and electrical
conveniences designed for attachment to outside systems, and inhabited by human
beings for more than 72 consecutive hours.
   MOBILE HOME LOT. A parcel of land for the placement of a single mobile home
and the exclusive use of its occupants.
   MOBILE HOME PARK. A contiguous parcel of land which has been developed for
the placement of mobile homes, and is owned by an individual, a firm, trust,
partnership, public or private association, or corporation.
   MOBILE HOME STAND. Part of an individual lot which has been reserved for the
placement of one mobile home unit.
   PARK MANAGEMENT. The person who owns, or has charge, care, or control of,
the mobile home park.
   PARK STREET. A private way which affords principal means of access to
individual mobile home lots, or auxiliary buildings.
   PERMIT. A written permit, or certification, issued by the Building Official
permitting the construction, alteration, and extension of any permanent
structure within the mobile home park under provisions of this section, and
regulations issued hereunder.
   SERVICE BUILDING. A structure housing toilet, lavatory, and other
facilities, as may be required by this subchapter.
   SEWER CONNECTION. The connection consisting of all pipes, fittings, and
appurtenances from the drain outlet of the mobile home to the inlet of the
corresponding sewer riser pipe of the sewerage system serving the mobile home
park.
   SEWER RISER PIPE. The portion of the sewer lateral which extends vertically
to the ground elevation, and terminates at each mobile home lot.
   WATER CONNECTION. The connection consisting of all pipes, fittings, and
appurtenances from the water riser pipe to the water inlet pipe of the
distribution system within the mobile home.
   WATER RISER PIPE. The portion of the water supply system serving the mobile
home park which extends vertically to the ground elevation, and terminates at a
designated point at each mobile home lot.
(Prior Code, § 4.40)
§ 151.52 PERMITS.
   (A)   Valid permit. It is unlawful for any person to construct, alter, or
extend any mobile home park, or structures within the park that are permanent
in nature, unless he or she holds a valid permit issued by the Building
Official in the name of the person for the specific construction, alteration,
or extension proposed, where PERMANENT means structures that are not on wheels
or mobile.
   (B)   Applications. All applications for permits shall contain the
following:
      (1)   Name and address of the applicant;
      (2)   Location and legal description of the mobile home park; and
      (3)   Complete engineering plans and specifications of the proposed park
including, but not limited to the following: The area and dimensions of the
tract of land; topography sketch of land; the number, location, and size of all
mobile home lots; the location, and width, of roadways and walkways; the
location of water and sewer lines, and riser pipes; plans, and specifications,
of the water supply, and refuse and sewage disposal facilities; plans, and
specifications, of all buildings constructed, or to be constructed, within the
mobile home park; the location, and details, of lighting and electrical
systems; a landscaping plan approved by the city; and park ground area and
recreation equipment be shown on the landscaping plan.
   (C)   Fee. All applications for a permit shall be accompanied by a fee which
shall be based on total valuation of the work to be done. The fees shall be in
accordance with established building permit fees required in the city.
   (D)   Review of applications. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall
review all applications for permits issued hereunder, and shall hold hearings
as they may deem proper with respect thereto. The findings, and
recommendations, of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be forwarded to
the Council for appropriate action.
   (E)   Denial. Any person whose application for permit under this section has
been denied may request, and shall be granted, a hearing on this matter before
the Planning and Zoning Commission.
(Prior Code, § 4.40) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.53 INSPECTION OF MOBILE HOME PARKS.
   (A)   Compliance with section. The Building Official is hereby authorized,
and directed, to make the inspections as are necessary to determine
satisfactory compliance with this section, including the power to enter, at
reasonable times, upon any private, or public, property for those purposes.
   (B)   Registration record. The Building Official, Chief of Police, or their
duly authorized representatives, shall have the power to inspect the register
containing a record of all residents of the mobile home park.
   (C)   Access. It shall be the duty of the park management to give the
Building Official free access to all lots at reasonable times for the purpose
of inspection.
   (D)   Repairs. It shall be the duty of every occupant of a mobile home park
to give the owner thereof, or his or her agent, or employee, access to any part
of the mobile home park at reasonable times for the purpose of making repairs,
or alterations, as are necessary to effect compliance with this section.
(Prior Code, § 4.40)
§ 151.54 NOTICES, HEARINGS, AND ORDERS.
   (A)   Notice. Whenever the Building Official determines that there are
reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provision
of this section, the Building Official shall give notice of the alleged
violation to the person to whom the permit was issued, as herein after
provided. The notice shall:
      (1)   Be in writing;
      (2)   Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
      (3)   Allow 30 days’ time for the performance of any act it requires. If
work cannot be completed in the 30-day period, extensions may be granted if
reasons for hardship do prevail, and can be verified; and
      (4)   Be served upon the owner, or his or her agent, as the case may
require; provided, that the notice, or order, shall be deemed to have been
properly served upon the owner, or his or her agent, when a copy thereof has
been sent by registered mail to his or her last known address, or when he or
she has been served with the notice by any method authorized, or required, by
the laws of this state.
   (B)   Hearing. Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in
connection with the enforcement of any provision of this section may request,
and shall be granted, a hearing of the same before the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
   (C)   Emergency. Whenever the Building Official finds that any emergency
exists which requires immediate action to protect the public health, he or she
may, without notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such
an emergency, and requiring that action be taken, as he or she may deem
necessary to meet the emergency, including the suspension of the permit.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, the order shall be
effective immediately. Any person to whom such an order is directed shall
comply therewith immediately, but upon petition to the Building Official shall
be afforded a hearing before the Planning and Zoning Commission as soon as
possible. Pending any hearing, emergency orders shall be in full force and
effect until, and unless, later removed, modified, or changed by the Building
Official, Planning and Zoning Commission, or the Council.
(Prior Code, § 4.40)
§ 151.55 ENVIRONMENTAL, OPEN SPACE, AND ACCESS REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   General requirements. Condition of soil, groundwater level, drainage,
and topography shall not create hazards to the property, or the health and
safety of the occupants. The site should not be exposed to objectionable smoke,
noise, odors, or other adverse influences, and no portion subject to
unpredictable, or sudden, flooding.
   (B)   Area. Minimum total park area shall be ten acres.
   (C)   Soil and ground cover requirements. Exposed ground surfaces in all
parts of every mobile home park shall be paved, or covered, with stone,
screenings, or other solid material, or protected with a vegetable growth that
is capable of preventing soil erosion, and of eliminating objectionable dust.
   (D)   Site drainage requirements. The ground surface in all parts of every
mobile home park shall be graded, and equipped, to drain all surface water in a
safe, efficient manner.
   (E)   Use requirements.
      (1)   No part of any park shall be used for nonresidential purposes,
except uses that are required for the direct servicing, and well-being, of park
residents, and for the management, and maintenance, of the park.
      (2)   Nothing contained in this division (E) shall be deemed as
prohibiting the sale of a mobile home located on a mobile home stand, and
connected to the pertinent utilities.
   (F)   Required separation between mobile homes.
      (1)   Mobile homes shall be separated from each other, and from other
buildings and structures, by at least 20 feet, or the sum of the heights of
both trailer units, whichever is greater. Mobile homes placed end to end must
have a minimum clearance of 15 feet.
      (2)   An accessary structure, such as an awning, cabana, storage,
cabinet, carport, windbreak, and porch, which has a floor area exceeding 25
square feet, and has an opaque top or roof, shall, for purposes of all
separation requirements, be considered to be a part of the mobile home.
      (3)   Minimum lot sizes shall not be less than 5,000 square feet.
   (G)   Open space. A minimum of 500 square feet per mobile home shall be
provided for definable play area and open space within the mobile home park.
The areas of open space and play area shall not be areas included within any
setback, nor shall they include any areas of less than 20 feet in length or
width.
   (H)   Required setbacks, buffer strips, and screening.
      (1)   All mobile homes shall be located at least 30 feet from any
property boundary line abutting upon a public street or highway, and at least
20 feet from other property boundary lines.
      (2)   There shall be a minimum distance of 15 feet between the mobile
home stand and abutting park street.
      (3)   All mobile home parks located adjacent to residential,
recreational, commercial, or industrial land used shall provide screening, such
as fences, shrubs, and trees, along the property boundary line separating the
park and the uses, and shall be maintained in a neat, and orderly, fashion.
   (I)   Cluster development. Cluster development shall be encouraged; in such
cases, the Planning and Zoning Commission and Council may vary, or modify, the
strict application and requirements of divisions (F), (G), and (H) above, as
applied herein, to more readily accommodate this development concept.
   (J)   Average density. Notwithstanding the type of development concept used,
the maximum density shall be seven mobile homes per acre.
   (K)   Accessory buildings.
      (1)   One accessory building for outside storage of equipment and refuse
is required.
      (2)   The accessory buildings shall be a minimum of 48 square feet, and
designed of weather resistant material that will enhance the general appearance
of the lot.
   (L)   Park street system and car parking.
      (1)   All mobile home parks shall be provided with safe, and convenient,
vehicular access from abutting public streets, or roads, to each mobile home
lot. The access shall be provided by streets, driveways, or other means.
      (2)   Entrances to mobile home parks shall be designed to minimize
congestion and hazards, and allow free movement of traffic on adjacent streets.
No parking shall be permitted on the park entrance street for a distance of 100
feet from its point of beginning.
      (3)   Surfaced roadways shall be of adequate width to accommodate
anticipated traffic, and in any case shall meet the following minimum
requirements:
         (a)   All streets, except minor streets, shall be a minimum of 30 feet
in width from the face of the curb to the face of the curb. Streets without
curb shall be considered minor streets;
         (b)   Dead end streets shall be limited in length to 500 feet, and
shall be provided at the closed end with a cul-de-sac having an outside roadway
diameter of at least 100 feet. All dead end streets shall be marked with
approved signs at the entrance to the dead end street; and
         (c)   Minor streets 25 feet in width shall be acceptable only if they
are less than 500 feet long, and serving less than eight mobile homes, or of
any length if mobile home lots abut on one side only.
      (4)   Off-street parking areas are for the use of park occupants and
guests. The areas shall be furnished at a rate of at least two car spaces for
each mobile home lot, of which at least one-half of the spaces may be in
compounds. All off-street parking areas shall be paved concrete or bituminous
surface, or crushed rock treated with oil so it is dust-free.
      (5)   All parks shall be furnished with lighting units so spaced, and
equipped, with luminaries placed at mounting heights as will provide the
following average maintained levels of illumination for the safe movement of
pedestrians, and vehicles, at night:
         (a)   All parts of the park street system shall be 0.6 foot-candle;
and
         (b)   Potentially hazardous locations, such as major street
intersection and steps, or stepped ramps, shall be individually illuminated,
with a minimum of 0.6 foot-candle.
      (6)   (a)   All streets shall be provided with a paved concrete, or
bituminous, surface. Pavement edges shall be protected to prevent raveling of
the wearing surface, and shifting of the pavement base. Street surfaces shall
be maintained, and free of cracks, holes, and other hazards.
         (b)   Longitudinal grades of all streets shall range between 0.4% and
8%. Transverse grades (crown) of all streets shall be sufficient to ensure
adequate transverse drainage.
         (c)   If conditions warrant, an adequate storm sewer system shall be
provided to dispose of all runoff water. The storm sewer system may be
connected to the existing city storm sewer system upon city approval.
         (d)   Within 50 feet of an intersection, streets shall be at right
angles. A distance of at least 85 feet shall be maintained between the
centerlines of offset intersection streets. Intersections of more than two
streets at one point shall be avoided.
   (M)   Walks.
      (1)   All parks shall be provided with safe, convenient, all season
pedestrian access of adequate width for intended use, durable and convenient to
maintain, and between individual mobile homes, the park streets and all
community facilities provided for park residents. Sudden changes in alignment
and gradient shall be avoided.
      (2)   A common walk system shall be provided, and maintained, between
locations where pedestrian traffic is concentrated. The common walks shall have
a minimum width of four and a half feet.
      (3)   All mobile homes shall be connected to common walks, to paved
streets, or to paved driveways, or parking spaces connecting to a paved street.
The individual walks shall have a minimum width of two feet.
   (N)   Patio. Each mobile home lot shall have a four-inch concrete patio,
with minimum dimensions of nine feet by 20 feet.
   (O)   Trees. A minimum of one tree per lot is required. In open area and
park area, a minimum of 20 trees per acre is required.
   (P)   Skirt. All mobile homes shall have skirts around the entire trailer
made of metal, plastic, fiberglass, or comparable, non-combustible material
approved by the Building Official, and shall be painted to match the
appropriate trailer so that it will enhance the general appearance thereof.
   (Q)   Tie-downs. No mobile homes shall be occupied unless not less than four
corners are fastened to the ground by tie-down facilities of a type, and
placement, approved by the Building Official.
(Prior Code, § 4.40)
§ 151.56 WATER SUPPLY.
   All mobile homes shall be serviced by the city water system.
(Prior Code, § 4.40)
§ 151.57 SEWAGE DISPOSAL.
   All mobile homes shall be serviced by city sanitary sewerage system.
(Prior Code, § 4.40)
§ 151.58 SERVICE BUILDING, AND OTHER COMMUNITY SERVICE FACILITIES.
   (A)   General. The requirements of this section shall apply to service
buildings, recreation buildings, and other community service facilities, such
as management offices, repair shops, storage areas, sanitary facilities,
laundry facilities, indoor recreation areas, and commercial uses supplying
essential goods or services for the exclusive use of park occupants.
   (B)   Structural requirements for buildings. All portions of the structure
shall be properly protected from damage by ordinary uses and by decay,
corrosion, termites, and other destructive elements. Exterior portions shall be
of the materials, and be so constructed, and protected, as to prevent entrance,
or penetration, of moisture and weather.
   (C)   Barbecue pits, fireplaces, stoves, and incinerators. Cooking shelters,
barbecue pits, fireplaces, woodburning stoves, and incinerators shall be so
located, constructed, maintained, and used as to minimize fire hazards and
smoke nuisances both on the property on which used, and on neighboring
properties, and shall comply with all appropriate provisions of the city code,
laws, or other regulations.
   (D)   Antennas. No outside antennas of any kind shall be allowed on any
mobile home. There shall be erected in each mobile home park, on a major
service building located therein, one UHF antenna and related equipment
sufficient to serve each unit in the entire park. All leads to mobile homes
from the antenna shall be placed underground.
(Prior Code, § 4.40)
§ 151.59 REFUSE HANDLING.
   The storage, collection, and disposal of refuse in the mobile home park
shall be so conducted as to create no health hazards, rodent harborage, insect
breeding, accident or fire hazards, or air pollution.
(Prior Code, § 4.40)
§ 151.60 INSECT AND RODENT CONTROL.
   (A)   Grounds, buildings, and structures. Ground buildings and structures
shall be maintained free of insect and rodent harborage and infestation.
Extermination methods, and other measures to control insects and rodents, shall
conform with the requirements of the City Health Code.
   (B)   Parks. Parks shall be maintained free of accumulation of debris which
may provide rodent harborage or breeding places for flies, mosquitoes, and
other pests.
   (C)   Storage areas. Storage areas shall be so maintained as to prevent
rodent harborage; lumber, pipe, and other building material shall be stored at
least one foot above ground.
   (D)   Screens. Where the potential for insect and rodent infestation exists,
all exterior openings in, or beneath, any structure shall be appropriately
screened with wire mesh, or other suitable materials.
   (E)   Brush, weeds, and grass. The growth of brush, weeds, and grass shall
be controlled to prevent harborage of ticks, chiggers, and other noxious
insects. Parks shall be so maintained as to prevent the growth of ragweed,
poison ivy, poison oak, poison sumac, and other noxious weeds considered
detrimental to health. Open areas shall be maintained free of heavy undergrowth
of any description.
(Prior Code, § 4.40)
§ 151.61 FUEL SUPPLY AND STORAGE.
   Natural gas piping systems shall be installed, and maintained, in accordance
with applicable codes and regulations governing the systems, and no outside, or
buried, fuel tanks will be allowed.
(Prior Code, § 4.40)
§ 151.62 FIRE PROTECTION.
   (A)   Litter, rubbish, and the like. Mobile home parks shall be kept free of
litter, rubbish, and other flammable materials.
   (B)   Fire extinguishers. Portable fire extinguishers rated for classes A,
B, and C fires shall be kept visible in service buildings and at other
locations conveniently, and readily, accessible for use by all of the
occupants, and shall be maintained in good operating condition. Their capacity
shall be not less than ten pounds.
   (C)   Fires. Fires shall be made only in stoves, indoor incinerators, and
other equipment intended for such purposes.
   (D)   Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be installed if the park water
supply system is capable to serve them in accordance with the following
requirements:
      (1)   The water supply system shall permit the operation of standard city
fire hydrants; and
      (2)   Fire hydrants, if provided, shall be located within 300 feet of any
mobile home, service building, or other structure in the park.
(Prior Code, § 4.40)
§ 151.63 MISCELLANEOUS REQUIREMENTS.
   The responsibilities of the park management are as follows:
   (A)   The operator shall operate the park in compliance with this section,
and shall provide adequate supervision to maintain the park, its facilities,
and equipment in good repair and in a clean, and sanitary, condition;
   (B)   The park management shall notify the park occupants of all applicable
provisions of this section, and inform them of their duties, and
responsibilities, under this section;
   (C)   It shall be the duty of the operator of the mobile home park to keep a
register containing a record of all mobile home owners and occupants located
within the park. The register shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The name, and address, of each mobile home occupant;
      (2)   The name, and address, of the owner of each mobile home and motor
vehicle by which it is towed;
      (3)   The make, model, year, and license number of each mobile home and
motor vehicle, and the state, territory, or country issuing the license; and
      (4)   The date of arrival, and departure, of each mobile home.
   (D)   The park shall keep the register available for inspection at all times
by law enforcement officers, public health officials, and other officials whose
duty necessitates acquisition of the information contained in the register. The
register record for each occupant registered shall not be destroyed for a
period of three years following the date of departure of the registrant from
the park.
(Prior Code, § 4.40)
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   Every person who violates a section, division, subchapter, or provision of
this chapter when he or she performs an act thereby prohibited, or declared
unlawful, or fails to act when the failure is thereby prohibited, or declared
unlawful, or performs an act prohibited, or declared unlawful, or fails to act
when the failure is prohibited, or declared unlawful, by a code adopted by
reference by this chapter, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as
for a misdemeanor, except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof.
(Prior Code, § 4.99)
CHAPTER 152: STREETS AND PUBLIC PROPERTY
Section
Streets and Sidewalks
   
152.01   Application
   
152.02   Scope and orders of peace officer
   
152.03   Traffic and parking
   
152.04   Ice and snow on public sidewalks and other public property
   
152.05   Regulation of grass, weeds, and trees in streets
   
152.06   Construction and reconstruction of roadway surfacing, sidewalk, curb,
and gutter
   
152.07   Street openings or excavations
   
152.08   Obstructions, fire, dumping, signs, and other structures
   
152.09   Limiting time of railway street crossing obstruction
   
152.10   Requirement of sewer and water main service lateral installation
   
152.11   Load limits
   
152.12   Curb setback
   
152.13   Private use of public streets, sidewalks, and parking lots
   
152.14   Curb and gutter, street, and sidewalk painting or coloring
   
152.15   Sidewalk maintenance and repair
   
152.16   Street lighting
 
   
152.99   Penalty
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
§ 152.01 APPLICATION.
   (A)   The provisions of §§
70.01 through
70.06,
71.01 through
71.99, and
152.01 through
152.99, applicable to the drivers of vehicles upon the streets, shall apply to
the drivers of all vehicles including, but not limited to, those owned, or
operated, by the United States, this state, or any county, city, town,
district, or any other political subdivision of the state, subject to the
specific exemptions as set forth in §§
70.01 through
70.06,
71.01 through
71.99, and
152.01 through
152.99, with reference to authorized emergency vehicles.
   (B)   Every person riding a bicycle or an animal, or driving an animal
drawing a vehicle upon a roadway, shall be subject to the provisions of §§
70.01 through
70.06,
71.01 through
71.99, and
152.01 through
152.99, applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except those provisions which,
by their nature, can have no application. Provisions specifically referring to
bicycles shall be in addition to other provisions of the sections above
applying to vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 7.01)
§ 152.02 SCOPE AND ORDERS OF PEACE OFFICER.
   (A)   Scope. The provisions of §§
70.01 through
70.06,
71.01 through
71.99, and
152.01 through
152.99, relate exclusively to the streets, alleys, and private roads in the
city, and the operation and parking of vehicles refer exclusively to the
operation and parking of vehicles upon such streets, alleys, and private roads.
   (B)   Orders of a peace officer. It is a misdemeanor for any person to
willfully fail, or refuse, to comply with any lawful order, or direction, of
any peace officer invested by law with authority to direct, control, or
regulate traffic.
(Prior Code, § 7.02)
§ 152.03 TRAFFIC AND PARKING.
   (A)   Council action. No device, sign, or signal shall be erected, or
maintained, for traffic or parking control unless the Council shall first have
approved, and directed, the same, except as otherwise provided in this section;
provided, that when traffic and parking control is marked or sign-posted, the
marking or sign-posting shall attest to Council action thereon.
   (B)   Temporarily restricting, or directing, traffic and parking. 
      (1)   When clearly marked, barricaded, or sign-posted, traffic and
parking may be temporarily restricted for any public, or private, use. All
restrictions shall be in accordance with the uniform policy promulgated by the
Council which may act through the City Manager or the Chief of Police.
      (2)   Restricted or prohibited use of parking and traffic lanes may be
designated by painting the same upon streets and curbs. The work shall be done
under the direction of the City Manager or the Chief of Police, and in
compliance with the provisions of §§
70.01 through
70.06,
71.01 through
71.99, and
152.01 through
152.99.
      (3)   It is unlawful to use traffic or parking lanes contrary to sign-
posting, or marking, authorized, and described, in this section.
      (4)   Experimental restrictions and directions may be placed on traffic
and parking by the City Manager and the Chief of Police, and it shall be their
duty to do so when an extra hazardous condition is observed or arises. It is
unlawful to violate any restriction, or direction, when the same has been duly
marked, barricaded, or sign-posted.
(Prior Code, § 7.03) (Ord. 32, second series, passed 12-21-1981) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.04 ICE AND SNOW ON PUBLIC SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (A)   Ice and snow a nuisance. All snow and ice remaining upon public
sidewalks is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance, and shall be
abated by the owner, or tenant, of the abutting private property within 12
hours after snow or ice has ceased to be deposited.
   (B)   City to remove snow and ice. The city may cause to be removed from all
public sidewalks, beginning 24 hours after snow or ice has ceased to fall, all
snow and ice which may be discovered thereon, and it shall keep a record of the
cost of removal, and the private property adjacent to which accumulations were
found and removed.
   (C)   Cost of removal to be assessed. The City Clerk-Treasurer shall, upon
direction of the Council, and on receipt of the information provided for in
division (B) above, extend the cost of the removal of snow or ice as a special
assessment against the lots, or parcels, of ground abutting on walks which were
cleared, and the special assessments shall, at the time of certifying taxes to
the County Auditor, be certified for collection as other special assessments
are certified and collected.
   (D)   Civil suit for cost of removal. The City Clerk-Treasurer shall, in the
alternative, upon direction of the Council, bring suit in a court of competent
jurisdiction to recover from the persons owning land adjacent to which
sidewalks were cleared, as provided in division (B) above hereof, the cost of
clearing, and the cost, and disbursements, of a civil action therefor.
   (E)   Placing snow or ice in public street or on other city property. It is
a misdemeanor for any person not acting under a specific contract with the city
to remove snow from private property or alleys, and place the same on a public
street in such quantity, or in such manner, as to cause a hazard to travel,
without adequate arrangements for the immediate removal thereof; and it is also
a misdemeanor for any person not acting under a contract with the city to dump
snow on other city property.
   (F)   Excessive snow. Circumstances of excessive snow where the removal of
snow from city streets makes it difficult, if not impossible, for some private
property owners to keep snow removed from their sidewalks, by unanimous
agreement of the Street/Park Superintendent, City Manager, and Mayor, the city
may declare a moratorium that the requirement of private property owners to
remove ice and snow from their sidewalk at a reasonable period of time as to be
determined by the Street/Park Superintendent, City Manager, and City Clerk-
Treasurer. The public shall be notified in a manner as the City Manager deems
appropriate.
(Prior Code, § 7.04) (Ord. 12, third series, passed 4-6-2010) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.05 REGULATION OF GRASS, WEEDS, AND TREES IN STREETS.
   (A)   City to control tree planting; standards. The city shall have control,
and supervision, of planting shrubs and trees upon, or overhanging, all streets
or other public property. The city may establish, and enforce, uniform
standards relating to the species, and types, of trees to be planted,
placement, and the maintenance, and removal, thereof. The standards shall be
kept on file in the office of the City Clerk-Treasurer, and may be revised from
time to time by action of the Council upon the recommendation of the Street/
Park Superintendent.
   (B)   Permit to plant or remove trees. It is a misdemeanor for any person to
plant, or remove, any tree upon, or overhanging, streets without first
procuring from the city a permit in writing to do so.
   (C)   Duty of property owners to cut grass and weeds, and maintain trees and
shrubs. Every owner of property abutting on any street shall cause the grass
and weeds to be cut from the line of the property nearest to the street to the
center of the street. If the grass or weeds in place attain a height in excess
of six inches, it shall be prima facie evidence of a failure to comply with
this division (C). Every owner of property abutting on any street shall,
subject to the provisions herein requiring a permit therefor, trim, cut,
remove, and otherwise maintain all trees and shrubs in unhazardous and healthy
condition from the line of the property nearest to the street to the center
thereof.
   (D)   City may order work done. The city may, in cases of failure to comply
with this section, perform such work with employees of the city, keeping an
accurate account of the cost thereof for each lot, piece, or parcel of land
abutting upon such street.
   (E)   Assessment. If maintenance work described in division (D) above is
performed by the city, the Street/Park Superintendent shall forthwith, upon
completion thereof, ascertain the cost attributable to each lot, piece, or
parcel of abutting land to the City Clerk-Treasurer who shall, at the next
regular meeting thereof, present the certificate to the Council, and obtain its
approval thereof. When the certificate has been approved, it shall be extended
as to the cost therein stated as a special assessment against the abutting
land, and the special assessment shall, at the time of certifying taxes to the
County Auditor, be certified for collection as other special assessments are
certified and collected.
(Prior Code, § 7.05)
§ 152.06 CONSTRUCTION AND RECONSTRUCTION OF ROADWAY SURFACING, SIDEWALK, CURB,
AND GUTTER.
   (A)   Methods of procedure.
      (1)   Abutting, or affected, property owners may contract for, construct,
or reconstruct roadway surfacing, sidewalk, curb, or gutter in accordance with
this section if advance payment is made therefor, or arrangements for payment
considered adequate by the city are completed in advance.
      (2)   With, or without, petition by the methods set forth in the local
improvement code of state statutes, presently beginning with M.S. § 429.011, as
it may be amended from time to time.
   (B)   Permit required. It is a misdemeanor to construct a sidewalk, curb,
gutter, driveway, or roadway surfacing in any street or other public property
in the city without a permit in writing from the Street/Park Superintendent.
Application for the permit shall be made on forms approved, and provided, by
the city, and shall sufficiently describe the contemplated improvements, the
contemplated date of the beginning of work, and the length of time required to
complete the same; provided, that no permit shall be required for any
improvement ordered installed by the Council. All applications shall contain an
agreement by the applicant to be bound by this chapter, and plans and
specifications consistent with the provisions of this chapter, and good
engineering practices, shall also accompany the application. A permit from the
city shall not relieve the holder from damages to the person, or property, of
another caused by the work.
   (C)   Specification and standards. All construction and reconstruction of
roadway surfacing, sidewalk, curb, or gutter improvements, including curb cuts,
shall be strictly in accordance with specifications, and standards, on file in
the office of the City Clerk-Treasurer, and open to inspection and copying
there. The specifications, and standards, may be amended from time to time by
the city, but shall be uniformly enforced.
   (D)   Time limitations on construction. All construction, reconstruction,
resurfacing, and repair of any sidewalks done in conformance with this section
shall be completed within 60 days of the commencement of the construction,
reconstruction, or repair, unless a waiver of the time requirement, based upon
substantial hardship, is granted by the Building Official.
(Prior Code, § 7.06) (Ord. 212, second series, passed 1-15-2008)
§ 152.07 STREET OPENINGS OR EXCAVATIONS.
   (A)   General. It is a misdemeanor for any person, except a city employee
acting within the course, and scope, of his or her employment, or a contractor
acting within the course, and scope, of a contract with the city, to make any
excavation, opening, or tunnel in, over, across, or upon a street, or other
public property, without first having obtained a written permit from the
Street/Park Superintendent as herein provided.
   (B)   Application. Application for a permit to make a street excavation
shall describe with reasonable particularity, the name and address of the
applicant, the place, purpose, and size of the excavation, and other
information as may be necessary, or desirable, to facilitate the investigation
hereinafter provided for, shall be signed by the property owner and contractor,
if any, and filed with the City Clerk-Treasurer.
   (C)   Investigation and payment of estimated costs. Upon receipt of the
application, the City Clerk-Treasurer shall refer the application to the
Street/Park Superintendent who shall cause the investigation to be made, as he
or she may deem necessary, to determine estimated cost of repair, such as back-
filling, compacting, resurfacing, and replacement, and the conditions as to the
time of commencement of work, manner of procedure, and time limitation upon the
excavation. The foregoing estimated costs shall include permanent, and
temporary, repairs due to weather or other conditions, and the cost of the
investigation shall be included in the estimate.
   (D)   Protection of the city and the public.
      (1)   Work shall progress expeditiously to completion in accordance with
any time limitation placed thereon so as to avoid unnecessary inconvenience to
the public. In the event that work is not performed in accordance therewith, or
shall cease or be abandoned without due cause, the city may, after six hours’
notice in writing to the holder of the permit of its intention to do so,
correct the work, fill the excavation, and repair the public property, and the
cost thereof shall be paid by the person holding the permit.
      (2)   Prior to commencement of the work described in the application, the
applicant shall furnish the city satisfactory evidence, in writing, that the
applicant will keep in effect public liability insurance of not less than
$100,000 for any person; $300,000 for any occurrence; and property damage
insurance of not less than $25,000, issued by an insurance company authorized
to do business in the state on which the city is named as a co-insured.
      (3)   Before issuance of a permit, the applicant shall, in writing, agree
to indemnify, and hold the city harmless, from any liability for injury, or
damage, arising out of the action of the applicant in performance of the work,
or any expense whatsoever incurred by the city incident to a claim, or action,
brought, or commenced, by any person arising therefrom.
   (E)   Issuance of permit. The Street/Park Superintendent shall issue the
permit after:
      (1)   Completion of the investigation;
      (2)   Payment by the applicant in advance of all estimated costs as
aforesaid;
      (3)   Agreement by the applicant to the conditions of time and manner as
aforesaid; and
      (4)   Agreement, in writing, by the applicant to pay all actual cost of
repair over, and above, the estimate, including cost of the investigation.
   (F)   Repairs. All temporary, and permanent, repairs, including back-
filling, compacting, and resurfacing, shall be made, or contracted for, by the
city in a manner prescribed by the Street/Park Superintendent, and an accurate
account of costs thereof shall be kept.
   (G)   Cost adjustment. Within 60 days following completion of the permanent
repairs, the Street/Park Superintendent shall determine actual costs of
repairs, including cost of investigation, and prepare, and furnish, to the
permit holder an itemized statement thereof, and claim additional payment from,
or make refund to, the permit holder, as the case may be.
   (H)   Alternate method of charging. In lieu of the above provisions relating
to cost and cost adjustment for street openings, the city may charge, on the
basis of surface square feet removed, excavated cubic feet, or a combination of
surface square feet and excavated cubic feet, on an established unit price
uniformly charged.
(Prior Code, § 7.07) (Ord. 32, second series, passed 12-21-1981)
§ 152.08 OBSTRUCTIONS, FIRE, DUMPING, SIGNS, AND OTHER STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Obstructions. It is a misdemeanor for any person to place, deposit,
display, or offer for sale, any fence, goods, or other obstructions upon any
street, public sidewalk, or other public property without first having obtained
a written permit from the Council, and then only in compliance in all respects
with the terms and conditions of the permit, and taking precautionary measures
for the protection of the public.
   (B)   Fires. It is a misdemeanor for any person to build, or maintain, a
fire upon a roadway.
   (C)   Dumping in streets. It is a misdemeanor for any person to throw, or
deposit, in any street, public sidewalk, or any other public place any nails,
dirt, glass, tin cans, metal scraps, garbage, leaves, grass or tree limbs,
shreds or rubbish, or to empty any water containing salt or other injurious
chemical thereon. It is a violation of this section to haul any soil or
material, not adequately enclosed or covered, thereby permitting the same to
fall upon the streets.
   (D)   Signs and other structures. It is a misdemeanor for any person to
place, or maintain, a sign or other structure in the traveled, or untraveled,
portion of any street, public sidewalk, or other public property without first
having obtained a written permit from the Council, and then only under the
conditions as the Council may, by resolution, impose. In a district zoned for
commercial, or industrial, enterprises, special permission allowing an
applicant to erect, and maintain, signs overhanging the street may be granted
upon such terms, and conditions, as may be set forth in the zoning, or
construction, provisions of the city code.
(Prior Code, § 7.08) (Ord. 32, second series, passed 12-21-1981) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.09 LIMITING TIME OF RAILWAY STREET CROSSING OBSTRUCTION.
   It is unlawful for any person operating, or in charge, of a railroad train,
car, engine, or other railroad equipment, or combination of equipment, to
permit the same to be parked, or left standing, upon any street crossing so as
to close the crossing to vehicular traffic for a longer period than ten
minutes.
(Prior Code, § 7.09) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.10 REQUIREMENT OF SEWER AND WATER MAIN SERVICE LATERAL INSTALLATION.
   (A)   Requirement of sewer and water laterals. No petition for the
improvement of a street shall be considered by the Council if the petition
contemplates constructing therein any part of a pavement, or stablized base, or
curb and gutter, unless all sewer and water main installations shall have been
made therein, including the installation of service laterals to the curb, if
the area along the street will be served by the utilities installed in the
street.
   (B)   Sewer system service and water main service laterals. No sewer system
shall be hereafter constructed, or extended, unless service laterals to platted
lots and frontage facing thereon shall be extended simultaneously with
construction of mains.
   (C)   Waiver. The Council may waive the requirements of this section only if
it finds the effects thereof are burdensome, and upon the notice and hearing as
the Council may deem necessary or proper.
(Prior Code, § 7.10)
§ 152.11 LOAD LIMITS.
   The City Manager, upon the recommendation of the Street/Park Superintendent,
may, from time to time, impose upon vehicular traffic on any part, or all, of
the streets load limits as may be necessary or desirable. The limits, and the
specific extent, or weight, to which loads are limited, shall be clearly, and
legibly, sign-posted thereon. It is unlawful for any person to operate a
vehicle on any street in violation of the limitation so posted.
(Prior Code, § 7.11) (Ord. 32, second series, passed 12-21-1981) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.12 CURB SETBACK.
   (A)   Permit required. It is a misdemeanor for any person to hereafter
remove, or cause to be removed, any curb from its position abutting upon the
roadway to another position without first making application to the Council,
obtaining Council approval, and a permit therefor. The permit may be issued
upon the conditions as the Council may prescribe.
   (B)   Agreement required. No permit shall be issued until the applicant, and
abutting landowner if other than applicant, shall enter into a written
agreement with the city agreeing to pay all costs of constructing, and
maintaining, the setback area in at least as good condition as the abutting
roadway, and further agreeing to demolish, and remove, the setback and
reconstruct the area as was at the expense of the landowner, his or her heirs
or assigns, if the area, in the Council’s opinion, is, or may become, a public
hazard. The agreement shall be recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds
(County Recorder), and shall run with the adjoining land.
   (C)   Sign posting. Signs posting “Angle Parking Only” shall be purchased
from the city and erected, and maintained, at the expense of the adjoining
landowner in the setback area as the Council may direct. It is a misdemeanor
for any person to park other than at an angle in the designated setback areas.
   (D)   Public rights preserved. The setback parking areas shall be kept open
for public parking, and the abutting landowner shall, at no time, acquire any
special interest or control of, or in, such areas.
(Prior Code, § 7.12)
§ 152.13 PRIVATE USE OF PUBLIC STREETS, SIDEWALKS, AND PARKING LOTS.
   (A)   Authority, permission, and procedure. Upon an application duly made to
the City Manager, and reviewed and recommended by the Street/Park
Superintendent, the Council may, in its discretion, grant special permission
whereby on-street parking, or the use of city-owned parking lots or ramps, or
public sidewalks, may be temporarily, or permanently, prohibited or restricted
for private reasons and purposes (including, but not limited to, establishment
of private, or leased, parking, loading zones, taxi parking, bus stops, or
display of merchandise on sidewalks) at such places, on such terms, and for
such compensation as the Council may deem just and equitable. In establishing
the amount of the compensation to be paid to the city, the Council shall
consider the amount of space, location thereof, loss of parking meter revenues,
if any, public inconvenience, and hazards to persons or property. Upon
complaint of any aggrieved person at any time, and by reason of any specific
special permission so granted, the Council shall, at its next regular meeting
after receipt of the complaint, call a hearing thereon to be held after ten
days’ notice, in writing, to the applicant and complainant, and published
notice at least ten days prior to the hearing. After the hearing, the Council
shall, by resolution, decide whether to terminate, continue, or re-define the
terms of permission, and the decision shall be final and binding on all persons
directly, or indirectly, interested therein, except that the Council may, on
its own motion, reconsider the same.
   (B)   Public vehicles. Free and reserved on-street parking shall be limited
to city-owned, and operated, vehicles.
   (C)   Forbidden practices. It is unlawful for any person to park, or
otherwise infringe upon a grant of right under this section, when clearly, and
distinctly, marked, or sign-posted. It is unlawful for any person not granted
the right to assert the same, or for any grantee of such right to exceed the
same under claim thereto.
(Prior Code, § 7.13) (Ord. 32, second, series, passed 12-21-1981) Penalty, see
§
152.99
§ 152.14 CURB AND GUTTER, STREET, AND SIDEWALK PAINTING OR COLORING.
   It is unlawful for any person to paint, letter, or color any street,
sidewalk, or curb and gutter for advertising purposes, or to paint or color any
street, sidewalk, or curb and gutter for any purpose, except as the same may be
done by city employees acting within the course, or scope, of their employment;
provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to uniformly coloring
concrete or other surfacing, or uniformly painted house numbers, as such
coloring may be approved by the City Manager.
(Prior Code, § 7.14) (Ord. 32, second series, passed 12-21-1981) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.15 SIDEWALK MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR.
   (A)   Primary responsibility. It is the primary responsibility of the owner
of property upon which there is abutting any sidewalk to keep, and maintain,
the sidewalk in safe, and serviceable, condition.
   (B)   Construction, reconstruction, and repair specifications. All
construction, reconstruction, or repair of sidewalks shall be done in strict
accordance with specifications on file in the office of the City Clerk-
Treasurer.
   (C)   Notice; no emergency. Where, in the opinion of the Council, no
emergency exists, notice of the required repair, or reconstruction, shall be
given to the owner of the abutting property. The notice shall require
completion of the work within 90 days, and shall be mailed to the owner, or
owners, shown to be on the records of the County Officer who mails tax
statements.
   (D)   Notice; emergency. Where, in the opinion of the City Manager, with the
concurrence of the Mayor, an emergency exists, notice of the required repair,
or reconstruction, shall be given to the owner of the abutting property. The
notice shall require completion of the work within ten days, and shall be
mailed to the owner, or owners, shown to be such on the records of the County
Officer who mails tax statements.
   (E)   Failure of owner to reconstruct or make repairs. If the owner of the
abutting property fails to make repairs, or accomplish reconstruction as herein
required, the City Manager shall report the failure to the Council, and the
Council may order the work to be done under its direction, and the cost thereof
assessed to the abutting property owner as any other special assessment.
   (F)   Duty to inspect. In order to accomplish the purpose of this section,
it shall be the duty of the Street/Park Superintendent to inspect sidewalks
within the city, or cause the same to be inspected under his or her direction.
(Prior Code, § 7.15) (Ord. 32, second series, passed 12-21-1981)
§ 152.16 STREET LIGHTING.
   (A)   All street lights located on public streets, and within public rights-
of-way, within the corporate limits of the city are solely owned, and operated,
by the city.
   (B)   It is the policy of the city to install street lights on all city
streets. In general, city-installed street lights will be located at
intersections, cul-de-sacs, at the apex of sharp curves, and dead-end streets
serving more than three homes.
      (1)   The timing, and placement, of street lights on city streets is at
the discretion of the city.
      (2)   Should the city, in its discretion, approve installation of street
lighting in response to a request for additional street lighting on a existing
public residential street, the city may, at its discretion, charge a security
light fee to the party requesting the additional street lighting.
      (3)   Middle of block street lighting will be considered a security light
in blocks that are less than 300 feet in length.
      (4)   City installation of street lights in conjunction with a
transportation project will require participation from the entity proposing the
transportation project. City installation of street lights not in conjunction
with such a project will generally be funded out of the General Fund.
   (C)   Street lights on, or along, alleys, private parking lots, or any other
area so deemed by the Electric Superintendent of the city shall be provided by
the city, and billed to the benefitted property owner(s), or individual
requesting the service, based upon a fee to be established by a City Council
resolution.
(Ord. 24, third series, passed 9-20-2011)
§ 152.99 PENALTY.
   Every person that violates a section, division, subchapter, or provision of
this chapter when he or she performs an act thereby prohibited, or declared
unlawful, or fails to act when the failure is thereby prohibited, or declared
unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows:
   (A)   Where the specific section, division, subchapter, or provision
specifically makes the violation a misdemeanor, he or she shall be punished as
for a misdemeanor; where a violation is committed in a manner, or under
circumstances so as to endanger, or be likely to endanger, any person or
property, he or she shall be punished as for a misdemeanor; where he or she
stands convicted of violation of any provision of this chapter, exclusive of
violations relating to the standing, or parking, of an unattended vehicle,
within the immediate preceding 12-month period for the third, or subsequent
time, he or she shall be punished as for a misdemeanor.
   (B)   As to any violation not constituting a misdemeanor under the
provisions of division (A) above, he or she shall be punished as for a petty
misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 7.99)
CHAPTER 153: TREES
Section
Shade Tree Disease
   
153.01   Policy and purpose
   
153.02   Definitions
   
153.03   Scope and adoption by reference
   
153.04   Unlawful act
   
153.05   Inspection and diagnosis
   
153.06   Abatement of nuisance
   
153.07   Procedure for removal of infected trees and wood
   
153.08   Spraying trees
   
153.09   Transporting wood prohibited
   
153.10   Interference prohibited
   
153.11   Additional duties of tree inspector
   
153.12   Diseased trees in streets
   
153.13   Subsidies
SHADE TREE DISEASE
§ 153.01 POLICY AND PURPOSE.
   The city has determined that the health of oak and elm trees is threatened
by fatal diseases known as oak wilt and Dutch elm disease. It has further
determined that the loss of oak and elm trees located on public, and private,
property would substantially depreciate the value of property and impair the
safety, good order, general welfare, and convenience of the public. It is
declared to be the intention of the Council to control, and prevent, the spread
of these diseases, and provide for the removal of dead, or diseased, trees, as
nuisances.
(Prior Code, § 10.50)
§ 153.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   NUISANCE.
      (1)   Any living, or standing, tree infected to any degree with a shade
tree disease; or
      (2)   Any logs, branches, stumps, or other parts of any dead, or dying,
tree so infected, unless such parts have been fully burned, or treated, under
the direction of the Tree Inspector.
   SHADE TREE DISEASE. Dutch elm disease, or oak wilt disease.
   TREE INSPECTOR. The Superintendent of Public Works, or other employee of the
city as the Council may designate, and who shall thereafter qualify, together
with his or her duly designated assistants.
(Prior Code, § 10.50)
§ 153.03 SCOPE AND ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.
   M.S. §§ 89.51 et seq., as they may be amended from time to time, are hereby
adopted by reference, together with the Rules and Regulations of the State
Commissioner of Agriculture relating to shade tree diseases; provided, that
this section shall supercede such statutes, or rules and regulations, only to
the extent of inconsistencies.
(Prior Code, § 10.50)
§ 153.04 UNLAWFUL ACT.
   It is a petty misdemeanor for any person to keep, maintain, or permit upon
premises owned by him or her, or upon public property where he or she has the
duty of tree maintenance, any nuisance as herein defined.
(Prior Code, § 10.50) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 153.05 INSPECTION AND DIAGNOSIS.
   It is the power, and duty, of the Tree Inspector to enter upon public, and
private, property, at any reasonable time, for the purpose of inspecting for,
and diagnosing, shade tree disease. In cases of suspected shade tree disease,
and in performance of his or her duties, the Tree Inspector may remove
specimens, samples, and biopsies as may be necessary, or desirable, for
diagnosis.
(Prior Code, § 10.50)
§ 153.06 ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE.
   Abatement of a nuisance, defined herein, shall be by spraying, removing,
burning, or otherwise effectively treating the infected tree, or wood, to
prevent spread of shade tree disease. The abatement procedures shall be carried
out in accordance with the current technical, and expert, methods and plans as
may be designed by the Commissioner of Agriculture of the state. The city shall
establish specifications for tree removal, and disposal, methods consistent
therewith.
(Prior Code, § 10.50)
§ 153.07 PROCEDURE FOR REMOVAL OF INFECTED TREES AND WOOD.
   (A)   Whenever the Tree Inspector finds, with reasonable certainty, that the
infection, or danger of infection, exists in any tree, or wood, on any public,
or private, property, he or she shall proceed as follows:
      (1)   If the Tree Inspector finds that the danger of infection of other
trees is not imminent because of dormancy of shade tree disease, he or she
shall make a written report of his or her findings to the Council, which shall
proceed by:
         (a)   Abating the nuisance as a public improvement under M.S. Chapter
429, as it may be amended from time to time; or
         (b)   Abating the nuisance as provided in division (B) below.
      (2)   If the Tree Inspector finds that danger of infection of other trees
is imminent, he or she shall notify the owner of the property, or the abutting
property, as the case may be, by certified mail that the nuisance will be
abated within a specified time, not less than five days from the date of
mailing of the notice. The Tree Inspector shall immediately report the action
to the Council, after the expiration of the time limited by the notice he or
she may abate the nuisance; and
      (3)   If the Tree Inspector finds, with reasonable certainty, that
immediate action is required to prevent the spread of shade tree disease, he or
she may proceed to abate the nuisance forthwith. He or she shall report the
action immediately to the Council, and to the abutting property owner, or to
the owner of the property where the nuisance is located.
   (B)   Upon receipt of the Tree Inspector’s report required by division (A)
(1) above, the Council shall, by resolution, order the nuisance abated. Before
action is taken on the resolution, the Council shall publish notice of its
intention to meet to consider taking action to abate the nuisance. This notice
shall be mailed to affected property owners, and published once, no less than
one week prior to the meeting. The notice shall state the time, and place, of
the meeting, the streets affected, action proposed, the estimated cost of the
abatement, and the proposed basis of assessment, if any, of costs. At the
hearing or adjournment thereof, the Council shall hear property owners with
reference to the scope, and desirability, of the proposed project. The Council
shall thereafter adopt a resolution confirming the original resolution with the
modifications as it considers desirable, and provide for the doing of the work
by day labor or by contract.
   (C)   The Tree Inspector shall keep a record of the costs of abatements done
under this section, and shall report monthly to the City Clerk-Treasurer all
work done for which assessments are to be made, stating, and certifying, the
description of the land, lots, parcels involved, and the amount chargeable to
each.
   (D)   On, or before, September 1 of each year the City Clerk-Treasurer shall
list the total unpaid charges for each abatement against each separate lot, or
parcel, to which they are attributable under this section. The Council may then
spread the charges, or any portion thereof, against the property involved as a
special assessment under M.S. § 429.101, as it may be amended from time to
time, and other pertinent statutes for certification to the County Auditor and
collection the following year along with current taxes.
   (E)   No damage shall be awarded the owner for destruction of any tree,
wood, or part thereof pursuant to this section.
(Prior Code, § 10.50)
§ 153.08 SPRAYING TREES.
   (A)   Whenever the Tree Inspector determines that any tree or wood is
infected, or threatened, with infection, he or she may spray, or treat, all
nearby high value trees with an effective concentrate or fungicide, or both.
Activities authorized by this section shall be conducted in accordance with
technical, and expert, opinions and plans of the Commissioner of Agriculture,
and under the supervision of the Commissioner, and his or her agents, whenever
possible.
   (B)   The notice, and assessment, provisions of §
153.07 apply to spraying, and treatment, operations conducted under this
section.
(Prior Code, § 10.50)
§ 153.09 TRANSPORTING WOOD PROHIBITED.
   It is a petty misdemeanor for any person to transport any elm wood, or, in
the months of April, May, or June, to transport any oak wood, without having
obtained a permit from the Tree Inspector. The Tree Inspector shall grant
permits only when the purposes of this section will be served thereby.
(Prior Code, § 10.50) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 153.10 INTERFERENCE PROHIBITED.
   It is a petty misdemeanor for any person to prevent, delay, or interfere
with the Tree Inspector while he or she is engaged in the performance of duties
imposed by this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 10.50)
§ 153.11 ADDITIONAL DUTIES OF TREE INSPECTOR.
   It is the additional duty of the Tree Inspector to coordinate, under the
direction, and control, of the Council, all activities of the city relating to
the control, and prevention, of shade tree disease. He or she shall recommend
to the Council the details of a program for the control of the diseases, and
perform the duties incident to such a program adopted by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 10.50)
§ 153.12 DISEASED TREES IN STREETS.
   The rights, duties, and responsibilities of property owners set forth in
this subchapter shall be equally applicable to, and binding upon, abutting
property owners with tree maintenance responsibilities under §
152.05.
(Prior Code, § 10.50)
§ 153.13 SUBSIDIES.
   The duty of any property owner to bear the cost of removing, or maintaining,
trees, whether by private contract or assessment, shall be subject to a subsidy
policy, if any, established by the city for the treatment, or removal, of trees
infected with shade tree disease.
(Prior Code, § 10.50)
CHAPTER 154: AIRPORT ZONING
Section
   
154.01   Authority and purpose
   
154.02   Definitions
   
154.03   Zones
   
154.04   Height zones
   
154.05   Use restrictions
   
154.06   Non-conforming uses
   
154.07   Variances
   
154.08   Permits
   
154.09   Hazard marking and lighting
   
154.10   Administration
   
154.11   Appeals and review
 
   
154.99   Penalty
§ 154.01 AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE.
   The city finds it necessary for the purpose of promoting public health,
safety, order, convenience, and general welfare by protecting the lives, and
property, of users of the municipal airport, and of owners and occupants of
land in its vicinity, to adopt airport zoning regulations as authorized by
State Laws, 1945, Chapter 303, and accordingly have submitted the provisions of
this chapter to the Commissioner of Aeronautics, and duly obtained his or her
approval, and held a public hearing on September 21, 1953 pursuant to notice as
required.
(Prior Code, § 13.01)
§ 154.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   AIRPORT. The municipal airport.
   AIRPORT HAZARD. Any structure or tree, or use of land which obstructs the
airspace required for the flight of aircraft in landing, or taking off, at the
airport, or is otherwise hazardous to the landing, or taking off, of aircraft.
   NON-CONFORMING USE. Any structure, tree, or use of land which does not
conform to a regulation prescribed in this chapter, or an amendment thereto, as
of the effective date of the regulation.
   STRUCTURE. Any object constructed, or installed, by humans, including, but
without limitation, buildings, towers, smokestacks, and overhead transmission
lines.
   TREES. Any object of natural growth.
(Prior Code, § 13.01)
§ 154.03 ZONES.
   (A)   Approach zones for instrument runways. An airport approach zone is
established at each end of every airport runway designated for use for
instrument landings or take-offs. The zone shall comprise all the land embraced
within the following lines:
      (1)   A line 1,000 feet long running at right angles to the centerline of
the runway 500 feet on either side of the centerline at the end of the paved
portion of the runway;
      (2)   A line 4,000 feet long running at right angles to the projected
centerline of the runway 2,000 feet on either side thereof at a distance two
miles from the first line; and
      (3)   Two lines making the shortest connections between the ends of the
above-described lines.
   (B)   Other approach zone. An airport approach zone is established at each
end of every runway not designated for use for instrument lands or take-offs.
The zone shall be 500 feet wide at the end of the runway, and 2,500 feet wide
at a distance of two miles from the end of the runway. Otherwise, the limits of
the zone shall be measured as in the zone described in division (A) above.
   (C)   Turning zones. An airport turning zone is hereby established embracing
the area between each two airport approach zones. The outer boundary of the
zones shall be a series of intersecting arcs completely around the airport, one
being swung on a two-mile radius from the midway point of the inner boundary of
each airport approach zone. All zones established by this section shall be as
indicated on the map attached hereto, and made a part hereof.
(Prior Code, § 13.01)
§ 154.04 HEIGHT ZONES.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, no structure shall be
constructed, altered, or maintained, and no tree shall be allowed to grow to a
height, above the level of the airport in excess of the height limit in any
airport approach or turning zone.
   (B)   The following height limits are hereby established:
      (1)   Airport approach zones to instrument runways. One foot in height
for each 40 feet in distance from the nearest point on the shortest boundary of
the zone;
      (2)   Airport approach zones to non-instrument runways. One foot in
height for each 30 feet in distance from the nearest point on the shortest
boundary of the zone; and
      (3)   Airport turning zones. Seventy-five feet in height in the area
within a distance of one-half mile of the nearest point on the boundary of the
airport; in the area outside the half-mile distance, 75 feet plus an additional
one foot in height for 30 feet in distance beyond one-half mile.
(Prior Code, § 13.01)
§ 154.05 USE RESTRICTIONS.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of §
154.04, no use may be made of land in an airport approach, or turning zone, in
a manner so as to create electrical interference with radio communication
between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to distinguish
between airport lights and others, result in glare in the eyes of pilots using
the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport, or otherwise
endanger the landing, taking off, or maneuvering of aircraft.
(Prior Code, § 13.01)
§ 154.06 NON-CONFORMING USES.
   The regulations prescribed in §§
154.04 and
154.05 shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering, or other
change, or alteration, of any non-conforming use, or otherwise interfere with
the continuance of any non-conforming use, except as otherwise provided in §
154.08(B).
(Prior Code, § 13.01)
§ 154.07 VARIANCES.
   Any person desiring to erect, or increase, the height of any structure, or
permit the growth of any tree, or otherwise use his or her property not in
accord with the regulations prescribed in this chapter, may apply to the
Airport Zoning Board of Adjustment for a variance from the regulation in
question. The variance shall be allowed where a literal application, or
enforcement, of the regulations would result in practical difficulty, or
unnecessary hardship, and the relief granted would not be contrary to the
public interest, but do substantial justice, and be in accordance with, the
spirit of the regulations; provided, any variance may be allowed, subject to
any reasonable condition that the Board of Adjustment may deem necessary to
effectuate the purposes of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 13.01)
§ 154.08 PERMITS.
   (A)   Future uses. No material change shall be made in the use of land, no
structure shall be erected, altered, or moved, and no tree shall be planted in
any zone created in §
154.03 herein without a permit therefor. Application for a permit shall be made
to the City Engineer, and shall indicate the use for which the permit is
desired, with sufficient particularity to permit it to be determined whether
the use would conform to the regulations herein prescribed. If the
determination is in the affirmative, the City Engineer shall issue the permit
applied for.
   (B)   Non-conforming uses.
      (1)   Before any non-conforming structure, or tree, may be replaced,
substantially altered, or repaired, rebuilt, or replanted, a permit shall be
secured authorizing the replacement, change, or repair. No permit shall be
granted that would allow the structure, or tree, to be made higher, or become a
greater hazard to air navigation, than it was when the applicable regulation
was adopted; and whenever the City Engineer determines that a non-conforming
structure, or tree, has been abandoned, or more than 80% torn down, physically
deteriorated, or decayed:
         (a)   No permit shall be granted that would allow the structure, or
tree, to exceed the applicable height limit, or otherwise deviate from the
zoning regulations; and
         (b)   Whether application is made for a permit under this division (B)
or not, the City Engineer may, by appropriate action, compel the owner of the
non-conforming structure, or tree, at his or her own expense, to lower, remove,
reconstruct, or equip the object as may be necessary to conform to the
regulations or, if the owner of the non-conforming structure, or tree, shall
neglect, or refuse, to comply with such an order after ten days’ notice
thereof, the Engineer may proceed to have the object so lowered, removed,
reconstructed, or equipped, and assess the cost, and expense, thereof upon the
object or the land whereon it is, or was, located. Unless the an assessment is
paid within 90 days from the service of notice thereof on the agent, or owner,
of the object or land, the sum shall bear interest at the rate of 8% per annum
until paid, and shall be collected in the same manner as are general taxes.
      (2)   Except as indicated herein, all applications for permits for
replacement, change, or repair of non-conforming uses shall be granted.
(Prior Code, § 13.01)
§ 154.09 HAZARD MARKING AND LIGHTING.
   Any permit, or variance, granted under §§
154.07 and
154.08 may, if the action is deemed advisable to effectuate the purposes of
this chapter, and reasonable in the circumstances, be so conditioned as to
require the owner of the structure, or tree, in question to permit the city, at
its own expense, to install, operate, and maintain thereon markers and lights
as may be necessary to indicate to the flyers the presence of an airport
hazard.
(Prior Code, § 13.01)
§ 154.10 ADMINISTRATION.
   It shall be the duty of the City Engineer to enforce this chapter through
appropriate legal channels. All applications for permits and variances shall be
made to the City Engineer. Those applications which are by this chapter to be
decided by the City Engineer shall be promptly considered, and granted, or
denied, by him or her. Applications for action by the Board of Adjustment shall
be forthwith transmitted by the City Engineer to the Board for hearing and
decision.
(Prior Code, § 13.01)
§ 154.11 APPEALS AND REVIEW.
   Any person aggrieved, or taxpayer affected, by any decision of the City
Engineer made in his or her administration of this chapter, or the Council,
when it is of the opinion that a decision of the City Engineer is an improper
application of airport zoning regulations of concern to the Council, may appeal
to the Board of Adjustment in accordance with State Laws, 1945, Chapter 303, §
31. Any person aggrieved, or taxpayer affected, by any decision of the Board of
Adjustment, or the Council, when it is of the opinion that a decision of the
Board of Adjustment is illegal, may secure judicial review of the decision in
the manner provided by State Laws, 1945, Chapter 303, § 34.
(Prior Code, § 13.01) (Ord. 119, passed 4-20-1993)
§ 154.99 PENALTY.
   Every person that violates a section, division, subchapter, or provision of
this chapter when he or she performs an act thereby prohibited, or declared
unlawful, or fails to act when the failure is thereby prohibited, or declared
unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor,
except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof.
(Prior Code, § 13.99) (Ord. 119, passed 4-20-1993)
CHAPTER 155: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
   
155.01   Purpose
   
155.02   Jurisdiction
   
155.03   Application
   
155.04   Approvals necessary for acceptance of subdivision plats
   
155.05   Definitions
   
155.06   Procedure
   
155.07   Data required for preliminary plats
   
155.08   Data required for final plats
   
155.09   Design standards
   
155.10   Basic improvements
   
155.11   Registered land use surveys, and conveyance by metes and bounds
   
155.12   Variances
   
155.13   Compliance
   
155.14   Violations
 
   
155.99   Penalty
§ 155.01 PURPOSE.
   In order to safeguard the best interests of the city, and to assist the
subdivider in harmonizing his or her interests with those of the city at large,
this chapter is adopted. Because each new subdivision becomes a permanent unit
in the basic structure of the expanding community, and to which the community
will be forced to adhere, and because piecemeal planning of subdivisions will
bring on undesirable disconnected patchwork of pattern, and poor circulation of
traffic unless its design, and arrangement, is correlated to a comprehensive
plan of the city aiming at a unified scheme of community interests, all
subdivisions of land hereafter submitted for approval to the Planning and
Zoning Commission shall, in all respects, fully comply with the regulations
hereinafter set forth in this chapter. It is the purpose of this chapter to
make certain regulations, and requirements, for the platting of land within the
city pursuant to the authority contained in state statutes annotated, which
regulations the Council deems necessary for health, safety, and the general
welfare.
(Prior Code, § 12.01)
§ 155.02 JURISDICTION.
   The regulations herein governing plats and the subdivision of land shall
apply within the corporate limits of the city, and the unincorporated area
within two miles of its limits; provided, that where a municipality lies less
than four miles from the limits of the city, these regulations shall apply only
to a line equidistant from the city and the municipality; and, provided
further, that the governing body, or bodies, of unincorporated areas adjacent
to the city have not adopted ordinances for the regulation of subdivision of
land, or platting.
(Prior Code, § 12.01)
§ 155.03 APPLICATION.
   Any plat, hereafter made, for each subdivision, or each part thereof, lying
within the jurisdiction of this chapter, shall be prepared, presented for
approval, and recorded as herein prescribed. The regulations contained herein
shall apply to the subdivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two, or
more, lots, tracts, or other division of land for the purpose of sale or
building development, whether immediate or future, including the resubdivision,
or replatting, of land or lots. Division of land into tracts larger than two
and one-half acres in area, and 150 feet in width, shall be exempt from the
requirements of this chapter, where no new street is involved.
(Prior Code, § 12.01)
§ 155.04 APPROVALS NECESSARY FOR ACCEPTANCE OF SUBDIVISION PLATS.
   Before any plat shall be recorded, or be of any validity, it shall have been
approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission and by the Council as having
fulfilled the requirements of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 12.01)
§ 155.05 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   ALLEY. A public right-of-way which affords a secondary means of access to
abutting property.
   BLOCK. An area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by
streets, or by streets and the exterior boundary, or boundaries, of the
subdivision, or a combination of the above with a river or lake.
   BUILDING PERMIT. The building permit required under the building code of the
city.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The group of maps, charts, and texts that make up the
comprehensive guide plan of the city.
   DESIGN STANDARDS. The specifications to land owners, or subdividers, for the
preparation of plats, both preliminary and final, indicating, among other
things, the optimum, minimum, or maximum dimensions of such items as rights-of-
way, blocks, easements, and lots.
   EASEMENT. A grant by a property owner for the use of a strip of land for the
purpose of constructing, and maintaining, utilities, including, but not limited
to, sanitary sewers, water mains, electric lines, telephone lines, TV and FM
transmission lines, storm sewer or storm drainage ways, gas lines, and
roadways.
   EASEMENT, SLOPE. A grant by a property owner for the use of a strip of land
for the purpose of constructing a slope or grade transition from the existing
property grade to a new street grade.
   FINAL PLAT. A drawing, or map, of a subdivision meeting all the requirements
of the city, and in the form as required by the county for purposes of
recording.
   INTERSECTION, STREET. The point of crossing, or meeting, of two or more
streets.
   LOT. A portion of a subdivision, or other parcel of land, intended for
building development, or for transfer of ownership.
   PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS. Public lands and open spaces in the city dedicated,
or reserved, for recreation purposes.
   PEDESTRIAN WAY. A public, or private, right-of-way across a block, or within
a block, to provide access, to be used by pedestrians, and which may be used
for the installation of utility lines.
   PERCENTAGE OF GRADE. The rise, or fall, of a slope in feet and tenths of a
foot for each 100 feet of horizontal distance. The centerline of a street shall
be used to determine the street rise of grade.
   PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION. The Planning and Zoning Commission of the
city.
   PRELIMINARY PLAT. A tentative drawing, or map, of a proposed subdivision
meeting requirements herein enumerated.
   PROTECTIVE COVENANTS. Contracts made between private parties as to the
manner in which land may be used, with the view to protecting, and preserving,
the physical, and economic, integrity of any given area.
   STREET. A public right-of-way affording primary access by pedestrians and
vehicles to abutting properties, whether designated as a street, highway,
thoroughfare, parkway, thoroughway, road, avenue, boulevard, place, or however
otherwise designated.
   STREET, COLLECTOR. Streets that carry traffic from minor streets to the
major system of thoroughfares and highways, including the principal entrance
streets of residential districts as shown on the comprehensive plan.
   STREETS, CUL-DE-SAC. A minor street with only one outlet, and having an
appropriate terminal for the safe, and convenient, reversal of traffic
movement.
   STREETS, MARGINAL ACCESS. Minor streets which are parallel, and adjacent, to
thoroughfares and highways; and which provide access to abutting properties,
and protection from through traffic.
   STREETS, MINOR. Streets which are used primarily for access to abutting
properties.
   STREETS, PRIVATE. A private right-of-way affording access by pedestrians and
vehicles which is under individual, rather than municipal, control.
   STREET, THOROUGHFARES. Arterial streets which are used primarily for heavy
traffic, and serving as an arterial trafficway between the various districts of
the community, as shown on the comprehensive plan.
   STREET WIDTH. The shortest distance between lines of lots delineating the
street right-of-way.
   SUBDIVISION. A described tract of land which is to be, or has been, divided
into two, or more, lots or parcels, any of which resultant parcels is less than
two and one-half acres in area, for the purpose of transfer of ownership or
building development, or, if a new street is involved, any division of a parcel
of land. The term includes RESUBDIVISION, and where it is, appropriate to the
context, relates either to the process of subdividing, or to the land
subdivided.
   TANGENT. A straight line departing from a curve which is perpendicular to
the radius of that curve.
   TRACT. A parcel of land intended for division, or development, of a
subdivision.
   U.S.G.S. DATUM. The United States Geodetic Survey Datum.
   VERTICAL CURVE. The surface curvature on a street centerline located between
lines of different percentage of grade.
(Prior Code, § 12.01)
§ 155.06 PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Preliminary plat. Before dividing any tract of land into two, or more,
lots or parcels, the following procedure shall be followed:
      (1)   Submittal to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
         (a)   A preliminary plat shall be submitted to the City Engineer at
least ten days prior to the Planning and Zoning Commission meeting at which the
same shall be considered. The City Engineer shall prepare a report thereon,
setting out whether or not the plat meets the requirements of state law, city
code, and the comprehensive guide plan. He or she shall present the report,
together with his or her recommendations thereon, to the next meeting of the
Commission following its filing with him or her as hereinabove set out;
         (b)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider the plat at
the meeting at which it is submitted, and may consider the same at special, or
adjourned, meetings as it shall determine are necessary;
         (c)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the authority to
recommend approval, or disapproval, of the preliminary plat, to approve it with
conditions attached, and to disapprove it until, and unless, certain conditions
are first complied with; and
         (d)   Upon the making of its determination, the Planning and Zoning
Commission shall embrace the same within a motion, which shall include all
conditions it requires for approval, or conditions upon which approval will be
granted, and shall set forth the reasons for the approval given. A copy of the
motion shall be sent forthwith to the subdivider, and a copy thereof to the
Council, together with the plat if it is approved, conditionally or otherwise.
      (2)   Submittal to the Council.
         (a)   Upon the adoption of the motion hereinabove provided by the
Planning and Zoning Commission, the plat shall come before the Council for
review;
         (b)   The Council may hold the public hearing on the plat as it shall,
in its discretion, determine, and upon notice as it shall provide;
         (c)   The Council shall have authority to approve, disapprove, modify,
and amend the motion of the Planning and Zoning Commission, and it may refer
the same to the Planning and Zoning Commission for further study. A referral to
the Planning and Zoning Commission shall not be deemed a final action thereon
by the Council, and the Planning and Zoning Commission shall report back
thereon no later than 45 days following the Council meeting at which it was
referred;
         (d)   Upon final decision by the Council, it shall embrace its
decision in a motion; provided, however, it may adopt the motion of the
Planning and Zoning Commission by reference;
         (e)   Upon decision by the Council, the City Clerk-Treasurer shall
transmit a copy of the motion, or notice of adoption without change, to the
subdivider;
         (f)   The approval of the preliminary plat shall not constitute an
acceptance of the subdivision, but it shall be deemed to be an authorization to
proceed with the preparation of the final plat;
         (g)   The approval of the preliminary plat by the Council shall be
effective for a period of one year from the date of approval by the Council;
and
         (h)   The subdivider may file a final plat limited to the portion of
the preliminary plat which he or she proposes to record, and develop, at the
time; provided, that the portion must conform to all requirements of this
chapter. If some portion, or all, of the final plat has not been submitted to
the Planning and Zoning Commission for approval within the time hereinabove
provided, a preliminary plat must again be submitted to the Planning and Zoning
Commission and the Council for approval, unless the Commission and the Council
shall waive this requirement.
   (B)   Final plat. After the preliminary plat has been approved, and the
subdivider determines to proceed to secure approval of all, or a part thereof,
as a final plat, the final plat shall be submitted as follows:
      (1)   Submittal to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
         (a)   The final plat shall be submitted to the City Engineer at least
ten days prior to the Planning and Zoning Commission meeting at which the same
shall be considered. The City Engineer shall prepare a report thereon setting
out whether or not the final plat is in substantial agreement with the
preliminary plat, and if not, in which particulars it varies therefrom, and
whether or not it conforms to the requirements of state law and provisions of
the city code, and that the final plat meets all the conditions attached to the
final approval of the preliminary plat;
         (b)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider the final plat
at the meeting at which it is submitted, and may consider it at the special, or
adjourned, meetings as it shall determine are necessary;
         (c)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the authority to
recommend approval, or disapproval, of the final plat. If it shall determine
that it cannot approve it unless certain conditions are attached, it shall, by
motion, set forth the conditions for approval, and forthwith send a copy of the
conditions to the subdivider, and all further action on the plat shall be
suspended until the subdivider shall respond thereto; provided, that if no
further action is taken by the subdivider within a period of three months from
the date of the adoption of the conditions, the plat shall be deemed to be
disapproved;
         (d)   Final action by motion on the final plat shall be communicated
forthwith to the subdivider by the Secretary of the Planning and Zoning
Commission, and a copy of the motion shall be sent to the Council, together
with the plat, and the other data as the Commission shall determine; and
         (e)   If the Planning and Zoning Commission approved the final plat,
the Chairperson and the Secretary shall sign the same.
      (2)   Submittal to the Council.
         (a)   Upon the adoption of the motion of approval, or disapproval, by
the Planning and Zoning Commission, the final plat shall come before the
Council for review;
         (b)   The Council shall have the authority to hold the hearings on the
final plat as it shall determine, and upon notice as it shall provide;
         (c)   If the Council is not satisfied with the final plat as
presented, it may:
            1.   Disapprove the same;
            2.   Set forth the conditions, and requirements, as it shall
require to be fulfilled before the same is approved; or
            3.   Refer the same to the Planning and Zoning Commission for the
further action as it shall determine. Upon the referral, the Planning and
Zoning Commission shall act thereon at the next meeting, and report back to the
Council no later than 45 days after the action of the Council.
         (d)   If the Council shall determine to accept the plat, it shall by
resolution so determine, and the resolution shall provide for the acceptance of
all streets, alleys, easements or other public ways, parks, and other spaces
dedicated to public purposes; and
         (e)   The action of the Council finally determining the matter shall
be communicated by the City Clerk-Treasurer to the subdivider, and if the plat
be disapproved, the City Clerk-Treasurer shall set forth the reasons given by
the Council for the determination.
(Prior Code, § 12.02)
§ 155.07 DATA REQUIRED FOR PRELIMINARY PLATS.
   (A)   Filing. The owner, or subdivider, shall prepare, and submit, a
preliminary plat, together with any necessary supplementary information. Three
copies of a preliminary plat of any proposed subdivision shall be filed with
the City Engineer. Every preliminary plat shall contain the required data set
forth in this section.
   (B)   Identification and description. The following data regarding
identification and description of the preliminary plat shall be provided:
      (1)   Proposed name of the subdivision, which name shall not duplicate
the name of any plat heretofore recorded in the county;
      (2)   Location by section, township, and range, or by other legal
description;
      (3)   Names and addresses of the owner and subdivider having control of
the lands included in the preliminary plat, and the designer of the plat and
the surveyor;
      (4)   Graphic scale not less than one inch to 100 feet;
      (5)   North point; and
      (6)   Date of preparation.
   (C)   Existing conditions. The following data regarding existing conditions
shall be provided:
      (1)   Boundary line survey, including measured distances and angles,
which shall close by latitude and departure with an error of closure not
exceeding one foot in 7,500 feet;
      (2)   Total acreage in the preliminary plat computed to one-tenth of an
acre;
      (3)   Location and names of existing, or platted, streets or other public
ways, parks, and other public open spaces, permanent buildings and structures,
easements and section and corporate lines within the tract, and to a distance
of 100 feet beyond the tract;
      (4)   If the proposed subdivision is a rearrangement, or a replat of any
former plat, the lot and block arrangement of the original plat, along with its
original names, shall be indicated by dotted, or dashed, lines. Also, any
revised, or vacated, roadways of the original plat shall be so indicated;
      (5)   Location and size of existing paved streets, railroads, sewers,
water mains, gravel pits, culverts, or other underground facilities within the
tract, and to a distance of 100 feet beyond the tract. Also such data as
grades, invert elevations, and location of catch basins, manholes, and
hydrants;
      (6)   Boundary lines of adjoining platted, or unplatted, land within 100
feet of the tract; and
      (7)   Complete topographic map with contour intervals not greater than
two feet, watercourses, marshes, rock outcrops, and other significant features;
all superimposed on at least one print of preliminary plat. United States
Geodetic Survey datum shall be used for all topographic mapping. High water
elevation, and date thereof if the parts of plat are wet, or have been wet. In
the case of a subdivision where no new street is involved, the required
topographic map may be waived if it is deemed unnecessary by the City Engineer
and the Planning and Zoning Commission.
   (D)   Proposed development design features. The following data regarding
proposed development design features of the preliminary plat shall be provided:
      (1)   Layout of proposed streets, showing right-of-way widths and
proposed names of streets. The name of any street similar to, or heretofore
used, in the city shall not be permitted unless the proposed street is an
extension of an already named street in which event the name shall be used. All
street names shall be subject to the approval of the Planning and Zoning
Commission;
      (2)   Locations and widths of alleys, pedestrian ways, and utility
easements;
      (3)   Proposed centerline grades of all new streets and alleys, if any,
and a complete set of profiles showing both existing, and proposed, grade
lines;
      (4)   Location, size, and approximate gradient of sewer lines;
      (5)   Layout, numbers, and approximate dimensions of lots, and the
number, or letter, of each block;
      (6)   Location and size of proposed parks, playgrounds, churches, or
school sites, or other special uses of land to be considered for dedication to
public use, or to be reserved by deed of covenant for the use of all property
owners in the subdivision, and any conditions of the dedication or reservation;
and
      (7)   Vicinity sketch, at a legible scale, to show the relation of the
plat to its surroundings, and surrounding zoning districts.
(Prior Code, § 12.03)
§ 155.08 DATA REQUIRED FOR FINAL PLATS.
   (A)   Filing. The owner, or subdivider, shall submit a final plat together
with any necessary supplementary information. The original, and four copies of
the final plat, shall be submitted; one of the four copies shall be on a
reproducible medium, and will be retained by the City Engineer.
   (B)   Final plat. The final plat shall contain the following:
      (1)   The final plat prepared for recording purposes shall be prepared in
accordance with provisions of state statutes, and applicable city and county
regulations;
      (2)   Names of subdivisions shall not duplicate, or too closely
approximate, the name of any existing subdivision;
      (3)   Location by section, township, range, county, and state, and
including descriptive boundaries of the subdivision, based on an accurate
traverse, giving angular and linear dimensions which must mathematically close.
The allowable error of closure on any portion of a final plat shall be one foot
in 7,500 feet;
      (4)   The location of monuments shall be shown, and described, on the
final plat. Locations of monuments shall be shown in reference to existing
official monuments, or the nearest established street lines, including true
angles and distances to reference points or monuments. Permanent markers shall
be placed at each corner of every block, or portion of a block, points of
curvature, and points of tangency on street lines, and at each angle point on
the boundary of the subdivision. A permanent marker shall be deemed to be a
steel rod or pipe, one-half inch or larger in diameter extending at least three
feet below the finished grade. In situations where conditions prohibit the
placing of markers in the locations prescribed above, offset markers will be
permitted. The exact location of all markers shall be shown on the final plat,
together with accurate interior angles, bearings, and distances. Permanent
monuments shall be placed at all quarter section points within the subdivision,
or on its perimeter;
      (5)   Locations of lots, streets, public highways, alleys, parks, and
other features with accurate dimensions in feet and decimals of feet, with the
length of radii and/or arcs of all curves, and with all other information
necessary to reproduce the plat on the ground. Dimensions shall be shown from
all angle points, and points of curve to lot lines;
      (6)   Boundary lines, and description of boundary lines, of any areas
other than streets and alleys which are to be dedicated, or reserved, for
public use;
      (7)   Lots shall be numbered clearly. If blocks are to be numbered or
lettered, these shall be shown clearly in the center of the block;
      (8)   Building setback lines on front and side streets with dimensions;
      (9)   Name and address of developer and surveyor making the plat;
      (10)   Scale of plat (the scale to be shown graphically, and in feet per
inch), date, and north point;
      (11)   Statement dedicating all easements as follows: “Easements for
installation and maintenance of utilities and drainage facilities are reserved
over, under and along the strips marked ‘
      (12)   Statement dedicating all streets, alleys, and other public areas
not previously dedicated as follows: “Streets, alleys, and other public areas
shown on this plat and not heretofore dedicated to public use are hereby so
dedicated”; and
      (13)   Statement establishing building setback lines as follows:
“Building setback lines are hereby established as shown on the accompanying
plat and no building or portion thereof shall be built between this line and
the street line”.
   (C)   Certifications required on final plats.
      (1)   Notarized certification by the owner, and by any mortgage holder of
record, of the adoption of the plat and the dedication of streets and other
public areas.
      (2)   Notarized certification by a registered land surveyor, to the
effect that the plat represents a survey made by him or her, and that monuments
and markers shown therein exist as located, and that all dimension, and
geodetic, details are correct.
      (3)   Certification showing that all taxes and special assessments due on
the property have been paid in full.
      (4)   Space for certificates of approval to be filled in by the
signatures of the Chairperson of the Planning and Zoning Commission, the Mayor,
City Clerk-Treasurer, and City Engineer.
   (D)   Supplementary documents and information.
      (1)   A complete set of street profiles showing grade lines as
constructed.
      (2)   Copies of any private restrictions affecting the subdivision, or
any part thereof.
(Prior Code, § 12.04)
§ 155.09 DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   Blocks.
      (1)   Block length. In general, intersecting streets determining block
lengths shall be provided at such intervals as to serve cross traffic
adequately, and to meet existing streets. Where no existing plats control, the
blocks in residential subdivisions shall normally not exceed 1,000 feet in
length, except where topography, or other conditions, justify a departure from
this maximum. In blocks longer than 800 feet, pedestrian ways, and/or
easements, through the block may be required. The width and location of
pedestrian ways shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer and the
Planning and Zoning Commission. Blocks for business, or industrial, use should
normally not exceed 600 feet in length.
      (2)   Block width. The width of the block shall normally be sufficient to
allow two tiers of lots of appropriate depth. Blocks intended for business, or
industrial, use shall be of such width as to be considered most suitable for
their respective use, including adequate space for off-street parking and
deliveries.
   (B)   Streets and alleys.
      (1)   Thoroughfares and collector streets. The arrangement of
thoroughfares and collector streets shall conform as nearly as possible to the
comprehensive plan. Except for cul-de-sacs, streets normally shall connect with
streets already dedicated in adjoining, or adjacent, subdivisions, or provide
for future connections to adjoining unsubdivided tracts, or shall be a
reasonable projection of streets in the nearest subdivided tracts. The
arrangement of thoroughfares and collector streets shall be considered in their
relation to the reasonable circulation of traffic, to topographic conditions,
to runoff of stormwater, to public convenience and safety, and in their
appropriate relation to the proposed use of the area to be served.
      (2)   Minor streets. Minor streets should be so planned as to discourage
their use by non-local traffic. Dead end streets are prohibited, but cul-de-
sacs will be permitted where topography, or other conditions, justify their
use. Cul-de-sacs shall normally not be longer than 500 feet, including a
terminal turn around which shall be provided at the closed end, with a right-
of-way radius of not less than 70 feet.
      (3)   Future street system. Where the plat to be submitted includes only
part of the tract owned, or intended, for development by the subdivider, a
tentative plan of a proposed future street system for the unsubdivided portion
shall be prepared, and submitted, by the subdivider.
      (4)   Arrangement of larger parcels. When a tract is subdivided into
larger than normal building lots or parcels, lots or parcels shall be so
arranged as to permit the logical location and openings of future streets and
appropriate resubdivision, with provision for adequate utility connections for
resubdivision.
      (5)   Intersection of streets. Under normal conditions, streets shall be
laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles, except where
topography, or other conditions, justify variations. The minimum angle of
intersection of streets shall be 80 degrees. Street intersection jogs with an
offset of less than 125 feet shall be avoided.
      (6)   U.S. or state highways. Wherever the proposed subdivision contains,
or is adjacent to, the right-of-way of a limited access U.S. or state highway,
or thoroughfare, provisions may be made for a marginal access street
approximately parallel, and adjacent, to the boundary of the right-of-way, or
for a street at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of land between the
street and right-of-way. The distance shall be determined with due
consideration of the minimum distance required for approach connections to
future grade separations, grade crossings, or for lot depths.
      (7)   Alleys. Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial
districts, except that this requirement may be waived where other definite, and
assured, provision is made for service access, such as off-street loading,
unloading, and parking consistent with, and adequate for, the uses proposed.
Except where justified by special conditions, such as the continuation of an
existing alley in the same block, alleys will not be approved in residential
districts. Alleys, where provided, shall not be less than 16 feet wide for
residential alleys, and not less than 25 feet for commercial and industrial
alleys. Dead end alleys shall not be permitted, except that this requirement
may be waived where an adequate turn around is provided.
      (8)   Half street dedications. Dedication of half streets will not be
approved, except where it is essential to the reasonable development of the
subdivision, and in conformity with the other requirements of these
regulations, where it is found that it will be practical to require the
dedication of the other half when the adjoining property is subdivided, or
where it becomes necessary to acquire the remaining half by condemnation so it
may be improved in the public interest.
      (9)   Minimum right-of-way widths.
         (a)   For all public ways hereafter dedicated and accepted, the
minimum right-of-way widths for streets and thoroughfares shall be as shown in
the comprehensive plan, and where not shown therein, the minimum right-of-way
width for streets, thoroughfares, alleys, or pedestrian ways included in any
subdivision shall not be less than the minimum dimensions for each
classification as follows:
Classification Width
Classification              Width
Collector street            75 feet
Industrial commercial alley 25 feet
Marginal access street      50 feet
Minor street                60 feet
Pedestrian way              10 feet
Residential alley           16 feet
Thoroughfare                80 feet
 
         (b)   Where existing, or anticipated, traffic on thoroughfares
warrants greater widths of the right-of-way, the measurements in the table
above shall be required.
      (10)   Street grades.
         (a)   The grades in all streets, thoroughfares, collector streets,
minor streets, and alleys in any subdivision shall not be greater than the
maximum grades for each classification as follows:
 
Classification   Grade Percent
Alley            8%
Collector street 5%
Minor street     8%
Thoroughfare     4%
 
         (b)   In addition, there shall be a minimum grade on all streets and
thoroughfares of not less than five-tenths of 1%.
      (11)   Street alignment.
         (a)   The horizontal and vertical alignment standards on all streets
shall be as follows (there shall be a tangent between all reversed curves of a
length in relation to the radii of the curves so as to provide for a smooth
flow of traffic):
 
Classification   Horizontal Radii of Centerline
Collector street 400 feet minimum
Minor street     150 feet minimum
Thoroughfare     500 feet minimum
 
         (b)   All changes in street grades shall be connected by vertical
parabolic curves of such length as follows:
 
Classification                   Vertical Parabolic Curves
Collector street or minor street 20 times the algebraic difference in the
                                 percent of grade of the two adjacent slopes
Thoroughfare                     30 times the algebraic difference in the
                                 percent of grade of the two adjacent slopes
 
      (12)   Dedication as public streets. All proposed streets shall be
offered for dedication as public streets. No private streets shall be
permitted, except as set forth in other provisions of the city code.
   (C)   Lots.
      (1)   Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area, width, and depth shall not
be less than established by
Chapter 156 of the city code, except that in districts where a minimum area
width, or depth, is not established, the lot area, width, and depth shall be
adequate to serve the purposes for which the lot is to be used.
      (2)   Corner lots. Corner lots for residential use shall have additional
width to permit appropriate building setback from both streets, as defined in
Chapter 156 of the city code.
      (3)   Side lines. Side lines of lots shall be approximately at right
angles to street lines, or radial to curved street lines.
      (4)   Double frontage lots. Double frontage lots shall be avoided, except
where lots back on a thoroughfare, or other arterial street, or where
topographic, or other conditions, render subdividing otherwise unreasonable.
The double frontage lots shall have an additional depth of at least 20 feet in
order to allow space for screen planting along the back lot line.
      (5)   Minimum required frontage. Every lot must have at least the minimum
required frontage on a public-dedicated street other than an alley.
   (D)   Easements.
      (1)   Length and width minimum. An easement for utilities, at least six
feet wide, shall be provided along each side of a side line of lots, and along
any other lot line as may be deemed necessary to form a continuous right-of-
way, at least 12 feet in width. If necessary for the extension of main water or
sewer lines, or similar utilities, easements of greater width may be required
along lot lines, or across lots.
      (2)   Connection with other easements. Utility easements shall connect
with easements established in adjoining properties. These easements, when
approved, shall not thereafter be changed without the approval of the Council,
by resolution, upon the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
      (3)   Additional easements. Additional easements for pole guys should be
provided at the outside of turns. Where possible, lot lines shall be arranged
to bisect the exterior angle so that pole guys will fall along side lot lines.
      (4)   Watercourses, drainage ways, channels, or streams. Where a
subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, channel, or stream, a
stormwater easement, drainage right-of-way, or park dedication, whichever the
Planning and Zoning Commission may deem the most adequate conforming
substantially with the lines of watercourses, shall be provided, together with
further width or construction, or both, as will be adequate for the stormwater
drainage of the area.
   (E)   Public sites and open spaces. In subdividing land or resubdividing an
existing plat, due consideration shall be given by the subdivider to the
dedication, or reservation, of suitable sites for schools, parks, playgrounds,
conservation areas, or other public, or semi-public, recreational areas or open
spaces. Areas so dedicated, or reserved, shall conform as nearly as possible to
the comprehensive plan. All areas to be reserved for, or dedicated to, public
use shall be indicated on the preliminary plat in order that it may be
determined when, and in what manner, such areas will be dedicated to, or
acquired by, the appropriate agency.
(Prior Code, § 12.05)
§ 155.10 BASIC IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   Approval.
         (a)   Before a final plat may be approved by the Council, the owner
shall execute, and submit to the Council, an agreement which shall be binding
on his or her (or their) heirs, personal representatives, and assigns, that he
or she shall cause no private construction on the land, except with approval of
the City Engineer, until all improvements required under this chapter have been
petitioned for, arranged for, or have been constructed.
         (b)   No final plat shall be approved by the Council without first
receiving a report from the City Engineer certifying that the improvements
described herein, together with the agreements and documents required herein,
will meet the minimum requirements of all applicable provisions of the city
code.
         (c)   A certified copy of the plat restrictions shall be filed with
the City Clerk-Treasurer and Register of Deeds (County Recorder), which shall
include a provision that, in all instruments of sale or conveyance given before
all street improvements have been made, the grantee shall agree to, and
approve, the improvements and the assessment of their cost.
      (2)   City financing. Upon recommendation of the City Engineer, and with
the approval of the Council, any, or all, of the required improvements may be
financed, and assessed, by the city pursuant to M.S. Chapter 429, as it may be
amended from time to time. Length of assessment period, and rate of interest,
shall be as determined by the Council.
      (3)   Financing by developer. If deemed advisable, and to be in the best
interests of the city, the Council may require the developer to finance, and
pay for, any, or all, improvements. Prior to the making of required
improvements, the owner, or subdivider, shall deposit with the City Clerk-
Treasurer an amount equal to the City Engineer’s estimated cost of any, or all,
improvements which are to be financed by the developer, either in cash or an
indemnity bond, with sureties to the satisfaction of the city, conditioned upon
the payment of all construction costs incurred by the city in the making of
improvements, and all expenses incurred by the city for engineering, and legal
fees and other expenses in connection with the making of improvements. All
improvements shall be contracted through the city.
   (B)   Improvements. The following improvements shall be constructed as
provided for in this section. Programming of improvements shall be approved by
the City Engineer.
      (1)   City obligation. The city will construct, furnish, and install, at
city expense, the following improvements according to city specifications.
Furnishing of these improvements shall be commensurate with available city
funds for the work, and according to programs and priorities as established by
the Council. If the developer would desire any of these improvements sooner
than the city would be able to furnish them, then the costs of the following
improvements shall be paid for by the developer:
         (a)   Storm sewer mains will be constructed by the city as funds are
available. Connection shall be made at the boundary of the subdivision, if
available, or to some other approved discharge outlet. The developer shall
secure, or provide, the necessary easements or discharge permits. This
requirement shall not prevent the city from acquiring necessary easements by
eminent domain. Any costs for easements shall be borne by the developer;
         (b)   Street lighting shall be constructed by the city, preferably
after curb and gutter have been installed. If additional, or other type, of
lighting is desired by the developer, he or she shall pay the increased cost
thereof; and
         (c)   Street name signs and traffic control signs shall be installed
by the city.
      (2)   Obligation of developer. The developer shall pay the proportionate
amount of the following improvements on, or for, his or her subdivision or
development. Financing shall be according to division (A) above:
         (a)   Necessary site grading shall be accomplished by the subdivider;
         (b)   Street grading for the full width of right-of-way shall be
accomplished by the subdivider. If no site grading is to be accomplished, the
street grading will be included with subsequent street improvements. Street
grading shall precede any underground work. Where street grading is not to be
immediately followed by street paving, the developer may be required to provide
permanent grade markers at the right-of-way line of all streets of a standard
approved by the City Engineer;
         (c)   Street improvements, including base, curb and gutter, boulevard
sodding, inlets and leads, and paving, according to standard city
specifications, or as approved by the City Engineer, shall be constructed. All
required underground work shall have preceded any permanent street
improvements. Any improvements on a county road shall be approved by the County
Engineer. Temporary construction may, at the discretion of the City Engineer,
be required for just cause on any street, streets, or portion thereof.
Reconstruction, or alteration, in any way of existing streets affected by the
plat, or improvements thereupon, shall be subject to the approval of the City
Engineer. All costs therein incurred for either temporary access or
reconstruction shall be borne by the owner or subdivider. Half streets, if
accepted, shall be improved as directed by the City Engineer;
         (d)   Where the city sewer is, or will be, available at the boundary
of the subdivision, it shall be constructed according to city specifications.
The cost of any required pumping stations, deemed necessary by the Engineer,
shall be assessed against the benefitting property. Where it is neither
practical nor economical for the city to extend the city sewer, private sewage
disposal facilities shall be constructed according to city and state
specifications. Consideration shall be given to future availability of the city
sewer in installations. The information shall be recorded on the plat, and in
each deed so affected;
         (e)   Where city water is, or will be, available at the boundary of
the subdivision, it shall be constructed according to city specifications. Main
sizing shall be by the City Engineer. All required hydrants and valves are to
be included in the construction. Where it is neither practical nor economical
for the city to extend city water, private water supplies shall be constructed
according to city and state specifications; and
         (f)    Boulevard trees, if desired, shall be installed by the owner,
or developer, in accordance with Park and Recreation Advisory Board standards.
         (g)   Sidewalks. The subdivider shall provide for the installation of
sidewalks along all newly created lots, including sidewalks on adjacent
existing streets. The sidewalks shall be built according to the standards and
specifications of the city. The subdivider shall indicate in the application
for approval of a preliminary or final plat those sidewalks that will be
constructed at the time of installation of public improvements, and those that
the subdivider would like the Council to defer until a later date. If the
Council agrees to defer construction of the sidewalks, sidewalks shall be
constructed at the time a principal structure is built upon the adjacent lot or
lots or within five years of plat approval, whichever is earlier.
Notwithstanding the above, the Council may require the sidewalk's construction
at the time adjacent roadway construction takes place or at any other time as
noted in the final plat approval. At the time sidewalk construction is required
as provided above, such construction shall be completed at the sole cost and
expense of the person or entity that owns the property or lot at the time of
construction.
(Prior Code, § 12.06) (Ord. 002, fourth series, passed 12-21-2021)
§ 155.11 REGISTERED LAND SURVEYS, AND CONVEYANCE BY METES AND BOUNDS.
   (A)   Registered land surveys. It is the intention of this chapter that all
registered land surveys under the jurisdiction of this chapter should be
presented to the Planning and Zoning Commission in the form of a preliminary
plat, in accordance with the standards set forth in this chapter for
preliminary plats, and that the Planning and Zoning Commission shall first
approve the arrangement, sizes, and relationship of proposed tracts in
registered land surveys, and that tracts to be used as easements, or roads,
should be so dedicated. Unless approvals have been obtained from the Planning
and Zoning Commission and Council in accordance with the standards set forth in
this chapter, building permits will be withheld for buildings on tracts which
have been so subdivided by registered land surveys, and the city may refuse to
take over tracts as streets or roads, or to improve, repair, or maintain any
tracts unless so approved.
   (B)   Conveyance by metes and bounds. No conveyance of one, or more, parcels
in which the land conveyed is described by metes and bounds, shall be made, or
recorded, if the parcels described in the conveyance are less than two and one-
half acres in area, and 150 feet in width, unless the parcel was a separate
parcel of record at the effective date of this chapter. Building permits will
be withheld for buildings on tracts which have been subdivided, and conveyed,
by this method, and the city may refuse to take over tracts as streets or
roads, or to improve, repair, or maintain any such tracts.
(Prior Code, § 12.07)
§ 155.12 VARIANCES.
   (A)   General conditions. The Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend a
variance from the provisions of this chapter when, in its opinion, undue
hardship may result from strict compliance. In granting any variance, the
Commission shall prescribe only conditions that it deems necessary to, or
desirable for, the public interest. In making its findings, as required herein
below, the Commission shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of
land and the existing use of land in the vicinity, the number of persons to
reside, or work, in the proposed subdivision, and the probable effect of the
proposed subdivision upon traffic conditions in the vicinity. No variance shall
be granted unless the Commission finds:
      (1)   There are special circumstances or conditions affecting the
property that the strict application of the provisions of this chapter would
deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his or her land;
      (2)   The variance is necessary for the preservation, and enjoyment, of a
substantial property right of the petitioner; and
      (3)   The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public
welfare, or injurious to other property in the territory in which the property
is situated.
   (B)   Applications required. Applications for any variance shall be
submitted, in writing, by the subdivider at the time when the preliminary plat
is filed for consideration by the Commission, stating fully, and clearly, all
facts relied upon by the petitioner, and shall be supplemented with maps,
plans, or other additional data which may aid the Commission in the analysis of
the proposed project. The plans for development shall include covenants,
restrictions, or other legal provisions necessary to guarantee the full
achievement of the plan.
(Prior Code, § 12.08)
§ 155.13 COMPLIANCE.
   No building permit shall be issued by the city with respect to the land, or
to any lot in a subdivision, as defined herein, until the plat thereof shall
have been recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds (County Recorder).
(Prior Code, § 12.09)
§ 155.14 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Sale of lots from unrecorded plats. It shall be unlawful to sell,
trade, or otherwise convey, or offer to sell, trade, or otherwise convey any
lot or parcel of land as a part of, or in conformity with, any plan, plat, or
replat of any subdivision under the jurisdiction of this chapter unless the
plan, plat, or replat shall have first been recorded in the office of the
Register of Deeds (County Recorder) of the county.
   (B)   Misrepresentations as to construction. It shall be unlawful for any
person, firm, or corporation owning an addition, or subdivision, of land within
the city to represent that any improvement upon any of the streets, alleys, or
avenues of the addition, or subdivision, or any sewer in the addition, or
subdivision, has been constructed according to the plans, and specifications,
approved by the Council, or has been supervised, or inspected, by the city,
when improvements have not been so constructed, supervised, or inspected.
(Prior Code, § 12.10) (Ord. 180, passed 5-6-2003) Penalty, see §
155.99
§ 155.99 PENALTY.
   Every person that violates a section, division, subchapter, or provision of
this chapter when he or she performs an act thereby prohibited, or declared
unlawful, or fails to act when the failure is thereby prohibited, or declared
unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor,
except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof.
(Prior Code, § 12.99) (Ord. 180, passed 5-6-2003)
CHAPTER 156: ZONING
Section
General Provisions
   
156.001   Scope, intent, and purpose
   
156.002   Rules and definitions
   
156.003   Interpretation
   
156.004   General provisions
   
156.005   Zoning districts and provisions
   
156.006   Floodplain management regulations
   
156.007   Schedule of fees
Performance Standards
   
156.020   Purpose
   
156.021   Day activity center design standards
   
156.022   Standards for the keeping of horses
   
156.023   Exceptions to height regulations
   
156.024   Permitted yard encroachments
   
156.025   Traffic control and sight distance
   
156.026   Nuisances
   
156.027   Refuse
   
156.028   Exterior storage
   
156.029   Bulk storage; liquid
   
156.030   Landscaping, screening, and fencing
   
156.031   Off-street loading and unloading areas
   
156.032   Access drives and access
   
156.033   Signs
   
156.034   Home occupations
   
156.035   Private on-site utilities
   
156.036   Auto service station/auto repair shop standards
   
156.037   Drive-in business standards
   
156.038   Telecommunication towers and antennae
Administration and Enforcement
   
156.050   Enforcing officer
   
156.051   Appeals and Board of Adjustment
   
156.052   Duties of the Planning and Zoning Commission in zoning administration
   
156.053   Zoning amendments
   
156.054   Special use permit
   
156.055   Variance
One- and Two-Family Residential District (R-1)
   
156.070   Purpose
   
156.071   Permitted uses
   
156.072   Permitted accessory uses
   
156.073   Special uses
   
156.074   Lot area, width, and minimum setback standards
   
156.075   Corner lot requirements
   
156.076   Additional requirements
Multiple Family Residential District (R-2)
   
156.090   Purpose
   
156.091   Permitted uses
   
156.092   Permitted accessory uses
   
156.093   Special uses
   
156.094   Lot area, width, and minimum setback standards
   
156.095   Additional requirements
Service Business District (B-2)
   
156.110   Purpose
   
156.111   Permitted uses
   
156.112   Permitted accessory uses
   
156.113   Special uses
   
156.114   Lot area, width, and minimum setback standards
   
156.115   Additional requirements
General Business District (B-3)
   
156.130   Purpose
   
156.131   Permitted uses
   
156.132   Permitted accessory uses
   
156.133   Special uses
   
156.134   Lot area, width, and minimum setback standards
   
156.135   Additional requirements
   
156.136   Signs permitted to project over public right-of-way
Highway Commercial Business District (B-4)
   
156.150   Purpose
   
156.151   Permitted uses
   
156.152   Permitted accessory uses
   
156.153   Special uses
   
156.154   Lot area, width, and minimum setback standards
   
156.155   Additional requirements
Planned Industrial District (I-1)
   
156.170   Purpose
   
156.171   Permitted uses
   
156.172   Permitted accessory uses
   
156.173   Special uses
   
156.174   Lot area, width, and minimum setback standards
   
156.175   Additional requirements
General Industrial District (I-2)
   
156.190   Purpose
   
156.191   Permitted uses
   
156.192   Permitted accessory uses
   
156.193   Special uses
   
156.194   Lot area, width, and minimum setback standards
   
156.195   Additional requirements
Shoreland Protection District (SP)
   
156.210   Statutory authorization and policy
   
156.211   General provisions
   
156.212   Definitions
   
156.213   Administration
   
156.214   Shoreland classification system and land use districts
   
156.215   Zoning and water supply, sanitary provisions
   
156.216   Non-conformities
   
156.217   Subdivision, platting provisions
 
   
156.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 156.001 SCOPE, INTENT, AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   Scope. This chapter is implemented for the regulation of the use of
land in the city, including the regulation of the location, size, use, and
height of buildings, the arrangement of buildings on lots, and the density of
population for the purpose of promoting the public health, safety, order,
convenience, and general welfare of the citizens of the city.
   (B)   Intent and purpose. This chapter is adopted for the purpose of:
      (1)   Implementing the goals and policies of the comprehensive plan of
the city by regulating land uses;
      (2)   Protecting the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, and
general welfare;
      (3)   Promoting orderly development of the residential, commercial,
industrial, recreational, and public areas;
      (4)   Conserving, and protecting, the natural resources in the city;
      (5)   Providing for the compatibility of different land uses, and the
most appropriate use of land throughout the city;
      (6)   Minimizing environment pollution; and
      (7)   Conserving energy, such as through the encouragement of solar and
earth sheltered structures for commercial, industrial, and residential areas.
(Prior Code, § 11.01)
§ 156.002 RULES AND DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Rules. The language set forth in the text of this chapter shall be
interpreted in accordance with the following terminology:
      (1)   The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the
singular;
      (2)   The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the
future, the present tense;
      (3)   The word “shall” is mandatory, and the word “may” is permissive;
      (4)   All measured distances expressed in feet shall be to the nearest
tenth of a foot; and
      (5)   In the event of conflicting provisions, the more restrictive
provisions shall apply.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a
different meaning.
      ACCESSORY BUILDING. A subordinate structure detached from, but located
on, the same lot as the principal structure, the use of which is incidental,
and accessory, to that of the principal structure, and is not authorized, nor
used, for living or sleeping by human occupants.
      ADMINISTRATOR. The duly appointed person charged with enforcement of this
chapter.
      AGRICULTURAL USE. The use of land for the growing, and/or production, of
field crops, including barley, soybeans, corn, hay, oats, potatoes, rye,
sorghum, and sunflowers.
      ALLEY. A public or private right-of-way less than 30 feet in width which
affords secondary means of access to abutting property.
      ANTIQUE SHOP. A place offering primarily antiques for sale. An ANTIQUE,
for the purpose of this chapter, shall be a work of art, piece of furniture,
decorative object, or the like, of, or belonging to, the past, at least 30
years old.
      APARTMENT BUILDING. A building containing three, or more, apartment
units.
      APARTMENTS. A room, or suite of rooms, designed for, intended for, or
used as a residence for one family or an individual, and equipped with cooking
facilities.
      ARTISAN PRODUCTION SHOP. A building, or portion thereof, used for the
creation of original handmade works of art, or craft items by less than six
artists or artisans, as either a principal or accessory use.
      AUTO CONVENIENCE MARKET. A place where gasoline, motor oil, lubricants,
or other minor accessories are retailed directly to the public on the premises
in combination with the retailing of items typically found in a convenience
market or supermarket.
      AUTO REPAIR SHOPS. A building designed, and used, for the storage, care,
repair, or refinishing of motor vehicles, including both minor and major
mechanical overhauling, paint, and body work.
      AUTO SALVAGE YARD (AUTO REDUCTION YARD). An open area where waste, used,
or secondhand materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed,
disassembled or handled, including, but not limited to, scrap iron and other
metals, paper, rags, rubber, tires, and bottles, not including recycling
centers or collection points. A junk yard includes an auto wrecking yard or
area where three, or more, unlicensed or inoperable vehicles remain for 30 days
or longer.
      AUTO SERVICE STATION. Any premises where gasoline, and other petroleum
products, are sold, and/or light maintenance activities, such as engine tune-
ups, lubrication, minor repairs, and carburetor cleaning, are conducted.
SERVICE STATIONS shall not include premises where heavy automobile maintenance
activities, such as engine overhauls, automobile painting, and body fender work
are conducted.
      BASEMENT. Any area of a structure, including crawl spaces, having its
floor, or base, subgrade (below ground level) on all four sides, regardless of
the depth of excavation below ground level.
      BILLBOARD (OFF-PREMISES SIGN). A surface whereon advertising matter is
set in view conspicuously, and which advertising does not apply to the
premises, or any use of the premises, where it is displayed or posted.
      BLOCK. A tract of land bounded by streets, or a combination of streets,
and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, shorelines, unsubdivided
acreage, or boundary lines of the corporate limits of the city.
      BOARDING HOUSE. Any dwelling, other than a hotel or a motel, where meals,
or lodging and meals for compensation, are provided for five, or more, persons
pursuant to previous arrangements, and not to anyone who may apply.
      BUFFER AREA. A landscaped area intended to separate, and partially
obstruct, the view of two adjacent land uses, or properties, from one another.
      BUILDING. Any structure having a roof which may provide shelter, or
enclosure, of persons, animals, chattel, or property of any kind, and when the
structures are divided by party walls without openings, each portion of the
BUILDING so separated shall be deemed a separate BUILDING.
      BUILDING LINE. A line parallel to the street right-of-way line at any
story level of a building, and representing the minimum distance which all, or
any, part of the building is set back from the right-of-way line.
      BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance from the average of the lowest,
and highest, point of the portion of the lot covered by the building to the
ceiling of the topmost story.
      BUILDING SETBACK. The minimum horizontal distance between the building
and a lot line, or the normal high water mark of a river, creek, or lake.
      BUSINESS. Any occupation, employment, or enterprise wherein merchandise
is exhibited, or sold, or where services are offered for compensation.
      CAR WASH. An area of land and/or structure with machine or hand operated
facilities used principally for the cleaning, washing, polishing, or waxing of
motor vehicles.
      CARPORT. An automobile shelter having one, or more, open sides.
      CEMETERY. Land used, or intended to be used, for the burial of the dead,
and dedicated for CEMETERY purpose, including columbariums, crematories,
mausoleums, and mortuaries when operated in conjunction with, and within, the
boundaries of a CEMETERY.
      CHURCH. A building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, where
persons regularly assemble for religious worship, and which building, together
with its accessory buildings and uses, is maintained, and controlled, by a
religious body organized to sustain public worship.
      CLINIC. A building designed, and used, for the diagnosis and treatment of
human patients that does not include overnight care facilities.
      CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT. A development design technique that concentrates
buildings in specific areas on a site to allow the remaining land to be used
for recreation, common open space, and preservation of environmentally
sensitive areas.
      COMMERCIAL USE. An occupation, employment, or enterprise that is carried
on for profit by the owner, lessee, or licensee.
      COMMUNITY CENTER. A place, structure, area, or other facility used for,
and providing, religious, fraternal, social, and/or recreational programs
generally open to the public, and designed to accommodate, and serve,
significant segments of the community.
      CONCRETE HOUSING. A residential facility for four, or more, elderly
persons (age 60 or older) within which living, and sleeping, facilities, meal
preparation, laundry services, and room cleaning are provided. The facilities
may also provide other services such as transportation for routine social, and
medical, appointments and counseling.
      CONDOMINIUM. A form of individual ownership involving a multi-family
building with joint responsibility for maintenance and repairs. In a
CONDOMINIUM, each apartment is owned outright by its occupant, and each
occupant owns a share of land and other common property of the building.
      COOPERATIVE. A multi-unit development operated for, and owned by, its
occupants. Individual occupants do not own their specific housing unit
outright, as in a condominium, but they own a share, or shares, in the
enterprise.
      COPY SHOP. A retail establishment that provides duplicating services
using photocopying, blueprint, and offset printing equipment, and may include
the collating, and binding, of booklets and reports.
      CUL-DE-SAC. A local street, one end of which is closed and consists of a
circular turn around.
      DAY ACTIVITY CENTER. A state licensed facility offering educational,
social, recreational, and vocational activities for mentally retarded, and
cerebral palsied, adults.
      DRIVE-IN. Any use where products, and/or services, are provided to the
customer under conditions where the customer does not have to leave the car, or
where fast service to the automobile occupants is a service offered regardless
of whether service is also provided within a building.
      DUPLEX. A dwelling designed for, or occupied by, two families only, with
separate housekeeping and cooking facilities for each.
      DWELLING. A building, or portion thereof, designed, or used,
predominantly for residential occupancy of a continued nature, including one-
family dwellings, two-family dwellings, and multiple family dwellings, but not
including hotels.
      DWELLING UNIT. A single residential accommodation which is arranged,
designed, used, or if vacant, intended for use exclusively as a domicile for
one family, but not including hotels, motels, or rooming houses. Where a
private garage is structurally attached, it shall be considered as part of the
building in which the dwelling unit is located.
      DWELLING, ATTACHED. A dwelling that is joined to another dwelling at one,
or more, sides by a party wall, or walls.
      DWELLING, EARTH SHELTERED. A detached dwelling unit of which 60%, or
more, of its outer surface is insulated by an earthen embankment or overburden,
or both, and which is architecturally designed, and landscaped, to harmonize
with its natural surroundings.
      DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY. A building, or portion thereof, used for
occupancy by three, or more, families living independently of each other, and
containing three, or more, dwelling units.
      EASEMENT. A grant by a property owner for the use of a strip of land for
the purpose of constructing, and maintaining, utilities, including, but not
limited to, sanitary sewers, water mains, electric lines, telephone lines,
storm sewer or storm drainage ways, and gas lines.
      ESSENTIAL SERVICES. Overhead, or underground electrical, gas, steam, or
water transmission or distribution systems, and structures or collection,
communication, supply, or disposal systems and structures used by public
utilities, or governmental departments or commissions, or as are required for
the protection of the public health, safety, or general welfare including
towers, poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire
alarm boxes, police call boxes, and accessories in connection therewith, but
not including buildings. For the purpose of this chapter, the word “building”
does not include “structures” for ESSENTIAL SERVICES.
      EXTERIOR STORAGE (OPEN STORAGE). The storage of goods, materials,
equipment, manufactured products, and similar items not fully enclosed by a
building.
      FAMILY.
         (a)   One, or more, persons related to the other by blood, marriage,
or adoption, or a group of not more than four persons not all so related,
maintaining a common household in a dwelling unit, and using common cooking and
kitchen facilities.
         (b)   A group, or foster care, of not more than six wards, or clients,
by an authorized person, or persons, related by blood, marriage, or adoption,
together with their domestic servants or gratuitous guests, all maintaining a
common household in a dwelling unit approved, and certified, by the appropriate
public agency.
      FENCE. Any partition, structure, wall, or gate erected as a divide
marker, barrier, or enclosure, and located along the boundary, or within the
required yard.
      FLOOR AREA. The sum of the gross horizontal areas of several floors of
the building, or portion thereof, devoted to a particular use, including
accessory storage areas located within selling, or working, space, and
including any basement floor area devoted to retailing activities, to the
production, or processing, of goods, or to business or professional offices.
      FLOOR AREA RATIO. The numerical value obtained through dividing the gross
floor area of a building, or buildings, by net area of the lot, or parcel of
land, on which the building, or buildings, are located.
      FRONTAGE. The boundary of a lot that abuts an existing, or dedicated,
public street. For the purposes of determining yard requirements on corner
lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets shall be considered FRONTAGE, and
yards shall be provided as indicated under YARDS in this section.
      FUNERAL HOME. A building, or part thereof, used for human funeral
services. The building may contain space and facilities for embalming, and the
performance of other services used in preparation of the dead for burial; the
performance of autopsies, and other surgical procedures; the storage of
caskets, funeral urns, and other related funeral supplies; and the storage of
funeral vehicles, but shall not include facilities for cremation. Where a
FUNERAL HOME is permitted, a funeral chapel shall also be permitted.
      GARAGE, PRIVATE. An accessory building, or accessory portion of the
principal building, that is intended for, and used, to store the private
passenger vehicles of the family, or families, resident upon the premises.
      GARAGE, PUBLIC. Any premises, except those defined as a private garage
used for storage, or care, of self-propelled vehicles, and/or where any such
vehicles are equipped for operation, repairs, or kept for remuneration, hire,
or sale.
      GOVERNING BODY. The City Council.
      GRADE. The average of the finished ground level at the center of all
walls of a building. In case walls are parallel to, and within, five feet of a
sidewalk, the ground level shall be measured at the sidewalk.
      GROUP CHILD CARE CENTER. A building, or structure, where care,
protection, and supervision are provided on a regular schedule.
      HARD SURFACE PARKING AREAS. Hard surfaced parking areas must be finished
with either bituminous material or concrete, or a combination of both, or as
determined by the Council. Crushed rock and gravel will not be allowed as a
finished HARD SURFACE PARKING AREAS.
      HOME OCCUPATION. Any gainful occupation, or profession, engaged in by the
occupant of a dwelling, and carried on by members of a family residing therein,
which use is clearly incidental, and secondary, to the use of the dwelling, and
does not change the character thereof, and does not possess any exterior
evidence of the secondary, or income producing, use, and which meets the
criteria listed in §§
156.110 through
156.115.
      HOTEL. A building containing more than five sleeping rooms, provides a
common entrance, lobby, halls, and stairway in which people are, for
compensation, lodged with, or without, meals, but has no cooking facilities in
individual sleeping rooms.
      INDUSTRIAL PARK. A planned, coordinated development of a tract of land
with two, or more, separate industrial buildings. The development is planned,
designed, constructed, and managed on an integrated, and coordinated, basis
with special attention given to on-site vehicular circulation, parking, utility
needs, building design, and orientation, and open space.
      JUNK YARD. See AUTO SALVAGE YARD.
      KENNEL. Any structure, or premises, on which four, or more, dogs over
four months of age are kept for sale, breeding, or profit.
      KENNEL, PRIVATE. Any accessory building arranged for the care, and
sheltering, of household pets belonging to the owner of the property on which
the PRIVATE KENNEL is located. This includes all fenced, whether or not
permanently affixed, structures intended for, or used for, the purposes herein
defined.
      LANDSCAPING. Planting, such as trees, grass, and shrubs, and use of
decorative stones on the lawn area.
      LOT. A parcel, or portion, of land in a subdivision or plat of land,
separate from other parcels, or portions, by description as on a subdivision,
or record of survey map, for the purpose of sale or lease, or separate use
thereof.
      LOT AREA. The area of a lot in a horizontal plane bounded by the lot
lines.
      LOT, CORNER. A lot situated at the junction of, and abutting on, two or
more intersecting streets, or a lot at the point of deflection in alignment of
a continuous street.
      LOT COVERAGE. Determined by dividing the area of a lot that is occupied,
or covered, by the total horizontal projected surface of all buildings,
including covered porches and accessory buildings, by the gross area of the
lot.
      LOT DEPTH. The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and
the rear lot line of a lot (for purposes of this definition, a corner lot’s
greater frontage shall be deemed its depth, and the lesser frontage its width).
      LOT LINE. The property line bounding a lot. This excludes any portion of
a lot that extends into the public right-of-way.
      LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE. An interior lot having frontage on two streets.
      LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner lot.
      LOT LINE, FRONT. The boundary of a lot that abuts an existing, or
dedicated, public street, and in the case of a corner lot, shall be the
shortest dimension on a public street.
      LOT LINE, REAR. The boundary of a lot that is opposite the front lot
line.
      LOT LINE, SIDE. Any boundary of a lot that is not a front lot line or a
rear lot line.
      LOT OF RECORD. Any lot which is one unit of a plat heretofore duly
approved and filed, or one unit of an auditor’s subdivision, or a registered
land survey that has been recorded in the office of the County Recorder prior
to the effective date of this chapter.
      LOT, SUBSTANDARD. A lot, or parcel of land, for which a deed has been
recorded in the office of the County Recorder upon, or prior, to the effective
date of this chapter which does not meet the minimum lot area, structure
setbacks, or other dimensional standards of this chapter.
      LOT, WIDTH. The maximum horizontal distance between the side lot lines of
a lot measured within the required setback line.
      MANUFACTURED HOUSING OR HOME. Single-family detached housing that is
built to the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards
Act of 1974, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 5401 et seq., and shall include structures
known as manufactured homes or mobile homes. (See also MOBILE HOMES.)
      MANUFACTURED HOUSING PARK. A parcel of land under single ownership that
has been planned, and improved, for the placement of manufactured housing for
dwelling purposes.
      METES AND BOUNDS. A method of property description in which lot
boundaries are described by their direction, and distance, from an easily
identifiable point.
      MIXED USE. Properties on which various uses, such as office, commercial,
institutional, and residential, are combined in a single building, or on a
single site, in an integrated development project with significant functional
interrelationships, and a coherent physical design. A single site may include
contiguous properties.
      MOBILE HOME. A transportable, factory-built home designed to be used as a
year round residential dwelling, and built prior to the enactment of the
Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974,
being 42 U.S.C. §§ 5401 et seq., which became effective June 15, 1976.
      MOTEL. A building, or group of detached, semi-detached, or attached
buildings, containing guest rooms or dwellings, with garage or parking space
conveniently located at each unit, and which is designed, used, or intended to
be used primarily for the accommodation of automobile transients.
      NON-CONFORMING BUILDING. Any building that does not meet the limitation
on building size and location on a lot, for the district in which the building
is located, for the use to which the building is being put.
      NON-CONFORMING LOT. A lot which lawfully existed prior to the adoption,
revision, or amendment of this chapter, but which fails, by reason of the
adoption, revision, or amendment to conform to the newly adopted district
standards in which it is located.
      NON-CONFORMING USE. A lawful use of land that does not comply with the
use regulations for its zoning district, but which complied with applicable
regulations at the time the use was established.
      NURSERY, LANDSCAPE. A business growing, and selling, trees, flowering,
and decorative plants and shrubs, and which may be conducted within a building,
or outdoors for the purpose of landscape construction.
      NURSING HOME. A building with facilities for the care of children, the
aged, infirmed, or place of rest for those suffering bodily disorder. The
NURSING HOME shall be licensed by the State Board of Health, as provided for in
M.S. § 144.50, as it may be amended from time to time.
      OCCUPANT. Any person (including the owner or operator) occupying any
structure, building, or part thereof.
      OFFICIAL MAP. The map established by the governing body, in accordance
with the Municipal Planning Act (M.S. § 462.359, as it may be amended from time
to time), showing streets, highways, parks, and drainage, both existing and
proposed.
      OFF-STREET LOADING SPACE. A space accessible from a street, alley, or
driveway for the use of trucks, or other vehicles, while loading, or unloading,
merchandise or materials. The space shall be of size as to accommodate one
vehicle of the type typically used in the particular business.
      OFFICE. A building, or portion of a building, wherein services are
performed involving predominantly administrative, professional, or clerical
operations.
      OPEN SALES LOT. Any land used, or occupied, for the purpose of buying,
and selling, any goods, materials, or merchandise, and for the storing of same
under the open sky prior to sale.
      OPEN SPACE. An area that is intended to provide light, and is designed
for either environmental, scenic, or recreational purposes. OPEN SPACE may
include, but is not limited to, lawns, decorative planting, walkways, active
and passive recreation areas, playgrounds, fountains, swimming pools, wooded
areas, and watercourses. OPEN SPACE shall not be deemed to include driveways,
parking lots, or other surfaces designed, or intended, for vehicular travel.
      OUTDOOR STORAGE. The keeping, in an unroofed area, of any goods, junk,
material, merchandise, or vehicles in the same place for more than 24 hours.
      PARCEL. A continuous quantity of land in the possession of, or owned by,
or recorded as the property of, the same person, or persons.
      PARK. Any public, or private, land available for recreational,
educational, cultural, or aesthetic use.
      PARKING LOT. An area not within a building where motor vehicles may be
stored for the purposes of temporary, daily, or overnight off-street parking.
      PARKING SPACE. A suitable surfaced, and permanently maintained, area on
privately-owned property either within, or outside, of a building of sufficient
size to store one standard automobile, or as specified in §§
156.110 through
156.115.
      PEDESTRIAN WAY. A public, or private, right-of-way across, or within, a
block, to be used by pedestrians.
      PERSON. An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association, or other legal entity.
      PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. A development whereby buildings are grouped, or
clustered, in, and around, common open space areas in accordance with a
prearranged site plan, and where the common open space is owned by the
homeowners, and usually maintained by a homeowners association.
      PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION. The Planning and Zoning Commission of the
city, unless otherwise designated.
      PREFABRICATED HOME. A non-mobile housing unit, the walls, floors, and
ceilings of which are constructed at a central factory, and transported to a
building site where final construction is completed, permanently affixing the
unit to the site.
      PREMISES. A lot, or plot, with the required front, side, and rear yards
for a dwelling, or other use, as allowed under this chapter.
      PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE OR USE. The predominant use as contrasted to the
accessory use or structure.
      PROPERTY LINE. The legal boundaries of a parcel of property that may also
coincide with a right-of-way line of road, cartway, and the like.
      PROTECTIVE COVENANT. A contract entered into between private parties that
constitutes a restriction of the use of a particular parcel of property.
      PUBLIC LAND. Land owned, or operated, by municipal, school district,
county, state, or other governmental units.
      RECREATION EQUIPMENT. Play apparatus, such as swing sets and slides,
sandboxes, poles for nets, picnic tables, lawn chairs, barbecue stands, and
similar equipment or structures, but not including tree houses, swimming pools,
playhouses exceeding 25 square feet of floor area, or sheds utilized for
storage of equipment.
      RECREATION, COMMERCIAL. Uses, such as bowling alleys, driving ranges, and
movie theatres that are privately-owned, and operated, with the intention of
earning a profit by providing entertainment for the public.
      RECREATION, PUBLIC. Uses, such as tennis courts, ball fields, picnic
areas, and the like that are commonly provided for the public at parks,
playgrounds, community centers, and other sites owned, and operated, by a unit
of government for the purpose of providing recreation.
      RECYCLING CENTER. A building in which used material is separated, and
processed, prior to shipment to others who will use those materials to
manufacture new products.
      RECYCLING COLLECTION POINT. An incidental use that serves as a
neighborhood dropoff point for temporary storage of recoverable resources. No
process of the items would be allowed. This facility would generally be located
in a shopping center parking lot, or in other public, or quasi-public, areas,
such as in churches or schools.
      REGISTERED LAND SURVEY. A survey map of registered land designed to
simplify a complicated metes and bounds description, designating the same into
a tract, or tracts, of a registered land survey number.
      RESTAURANT. An establishment that serves food and beverages primarily to
persons seated within the building. This includes cafs, tea rooms, and outdoor
cafs.
      RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN. An establishment that offers quick food service,
which is accomplished through a limited menu of items already prepared, and
held, for service; or prepared, fried, or griddled quickly, or heated in a
device such as a microwave oven. Orders are not generally taken at the
customer’s table, and food is generally served in disposable wrapping or
containers.
      RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land occupied, or intended to be occupied, by a
street, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline,
water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, shade trees, or other special use.
      ROAD. A public right-of-way affording primary access by pedestrians, or
vehicles, to abutting properties, whether designated as a street, highway,
thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, avenue, boulevard, land, place, or
however otherwise designated. Ingress and egress easements shall not be
considered a ROAD.
      ROOMING HOUSE. A building in which individual rooms are rented as
sleeping and living quarters, but without cooking facilities in the individual
rooms so rented, by the month or longer.
      SCHOOL. A facility that provides a curriculum of elementary, and
secondary, academic instruction, including kindergartens, elementary schools,
junior high schools, and high schools.
      SECONDHAND MERCHANDISE, RETAIL SALES. Retail sales of previously used
merchandise, such as clothing, household furnishings or appliances, and sports/
recreational equipment. This classification does not include secondhand motor
vehicles, parts, or accessories.
      SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY. A building consisting of individual,
small, self-contained units that are leased, or owned, for storage of business
and household goods, or contractors supplies.
      SETBACK. The required minimum horizontal distance between the building
line and the related front, side, or rear property line.
      SEWAGE. Any water carrying domestic waste, exclusive of footing and roof
drainage of any residence, industry, agriculture or commercial establishment,
whether treated or untreated, and including the liquid wastes produced by
bathing, laundry, and culinary operation, and from toilets and floor drains.
Raw sewage is SEWAGE that has not been subjected to any treatment process.
      SIGN. A name, identification, description, display, illustration, or
device that is affixed to, or represented directly, or indirectly, upon a
building, structure, or land in view of the general public, and which directs
attention to a product, place, activity, person, institution, or business.
      SIGN, ELECTRONIC MESSAGE. A sign whose message may be changed at
intervals by electronic process or remote control, and whose only movements is
the periodic changing of information having a constant light level.
      SIGN, FLASHING. Any illuminated sign on which illumination is not kept
stationary, or constant, in intensity and color at all times when the sign is
in use.
      SIGN, FREESTANDING. A sign that is attached to, erected on, or supported
by some structure (such as a pole, mast, frame, or other structure) that is not
itself an integral part of, or attached to, a building, or other structure,
having a principal function other than the support of a sign. A sign that
stands without supporting elements, such as a sandwich sign, is also a
FREESTANDING SIGN.
      SIGN, ILLUMINATED. Any sign which has characters, letters, figures,
designs, or outlines illuminated by electric lights, or luminous tubes, as a
part of the design.
      SIGN, MARQUEE, AWNING, AND CANOPY. Any message, or identification, which
is affixed to, or part of, a marquee, awning, or canopy.
      SIGN, NAMEPLATE. Any sign which states the name or address, or both, of
the business, or occupant, of the lot where the sign is placed.
      SIGN, NON-CONFORMING. A sign which lawfully existed at the time of the
adoption of this chapter, but does not conform to the requirements thereof.
      SIGN, OFF-PREMISES. A sign advertising a business, commodity, service, or
entertainment conducted, sold, or offered elsewhere other than upon the
premises where the sign is maintained.
      SIGN, ON-PREMISES. A sign which advertises the business, commodity,
service, or entertainment, offered upon the same premises on which the sign is
located.
      SIGN, PORTABLE. A sign constructed to be moveable from one location to
another, or not permanently attached to the ground, or to any permanent
structure.
      SIGN, PROJECTING. A sign, other than a wall sign, which projects from,
and is supported by, a building.
      SIGN, READER BOARD. A sign intended to display a message through the use
of manually changed letters, that is permanently attached to a ground sign, or
affixed to a wall. All other such signs shall be deemed temporary signs.
      SIGN, REAL ESTATE. A sign advertising the sale, rental, or development of
the premises upon which it stands, or directing attention to the opening, or
location, of a new residential development.
      SIGN, ROOF. A sign permanently affixed upon the roof of a building.
      SIGN, ROTATING. A sign which revolves, or rotates, on its axis by
mechanical means.
      SIGN, SURFACE AREA. The entire area within a single continuous perimeter
enclosing the extreme limits of the actual sign surface, not including any
structural elements outside the limits of the sign, and not forming an integral
part of the display. Only one face of a double faced, or V-type, sign shall be
considered in determining the display SURFACE AREA.
      SIGN, TEMPORARY. Any sign, banner, pennant, poster, or advertising
display which is intended to be displayed for a limited period of time, and is
not permanently affixed to the ground, or a structure. Signs not meeting this
definition shall be considered permanent signs, and must meet the standards
contained herein.
      SIGN, WALL. A sign affixed on a part of the exterior wall of a building,
and flush against it.
      STORY. The portion of a building between the surface of any floor and the
surface of the next floor above it, or, if there is no floor above it, the
space between the floor and ceiling next above it.
      STORY, HALF. A story with at least two opposite exterior sides meeting a
sloping roof not more than two feet above the floor of the story.
      STREET. A public right-of-way that affords primary means of access to
abutting property, and shall also include avenue, highway, road, or way.
      STREET, COLLECTOR. A street that serves, or is designed to serve, as a
traffic-way for a neighborhood, or as a feeder to a major road.
      STREET, LOCAL. A street intended to serve primarily as an access to
abutting properties.
      STREET PAVEMENT. The wearing, or exposed, surface of the roadway used by
vehicular traffic.
      STREET WIDTH. The width of the right-of-way measured at right angles to
the centerline of the street.
      STRUCTURE. Anything constructed, or erected, the use of which requires
location on the ground, or attachment to something having a location on the
ground.
      STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. Any change, or addition, to the supporting members
of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, girders, or foundations.
      SUBDIVISION. The division, or redivision, of a lot, tract, or parcel of
land into two, or more, lots either by plat, or by metes and bounds,
description.
      TAVERN. A building, or part thereof, where, in consideration of payment
therefor, liquor, beer, or wine, or any combination thereof, are served for
consumption on the premises, with or without food.
      TOWER. A structure situated on a nonresidential site that is intended for
transmitting, or receiving, television, radio, or telephone communications,
excluding those used exclusively for dispatch communications.
      TOWNHOUSE. A single-family building attached by party walls with other
single-family buildings, and oriented so that all exits open to the outside.
      USE. The purpose, or activity, for which the land, or building thereon,
is designated, arranged for, intended for, or for which it is occupied,
utilized, or maintained.
      USE, ACCESSORY. A use subordinate to, and serving, the principal use, or
structure, on the same lot, and customarily incidental thereto.
      USE, PERMITTED. A public, or private, use which conforms with the
purposes, objectives, requirements, regulations, and performance standards of a
particular district.
      USE, PRINCIPAL. The main use of land or buildings, as distinguished from
subordinate or accessory, uses. A PRINCIPAL USE may be either permitted or
special.
      USE, SPECIAL. A use that, owing to some special circumstances pertaining
to its location or operation, may be permitted in a district subject to
approval by the Council, and may be subject to conditions placed upon the use
by the Planning and Zoning Commission, and approved by the Council.
      VARIANCE. A modification, or variation, of the provisions of this chapter
where it is determined that, by reason of special, and unusual, circumstances
relating to a specific lot, the strict application of this chapter would cause
an undue, or unnecessary, hardship, or that strict conformity with the
provisions of this chapter would be unreasonable, impractical, or unfeasible
under the circumstances.
      VIDEO RENTAL STORE. An establishment primarily engaged in the retail
rental, or lease, of video tapes, films, CD-ROMs, laser discs, electronic
games, cassettes, or other electronic media. Sales of film, video tapes, laser
discs, CD-ROMs, and electronic merchandise associated with VCRs, video cameras,
and electronic games are permitted accessory uses.
      YARD. A required open space on a lot that is unoccupied, and
unobstructed, by a structure, except as permitted in this chapter. The YARD
extends along the lot line at right angles to the lot line to a depth, or
width, specified in the setback regulations, or the zoning district in which
the lot is located.
      YARD, FRONT. The area extending across the full width of the lot, and
lying between the front lot line and the front building line.
      YARD, REAR. A yard extending across the width of the lot, and lying
between the rear lot line and the nearest line of the principal building.
      YARD, SIDE. A yard extending from the front lot line to the rear lot
line, and lying between the side lot line and the nearest line of a building.
      ZERO LOT LINE. The location of a building on a lot in a manner that one,
or more, of the building’s sides rest directly on a lot line.
      ZONING AMENDMENT. A change authorized by the city either as a zoning text
change, or as a change in the boundaries of a district.
      ZONING DISTRICT. An area, or areas, within the limits of the city of
which the regulations, and requirements, governing use are uniform.
(Prior Code, § 11.02) (Ord. 30, third series, passed 10-15-2013)
§ 156.003 INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   Jurisdiction. The jurisdiction of this chapter shall apply to all of
the area located inside the incorporated limits of the city.
   (B)   Scope. From, and after, the effective date of this chapter, the use of
all land and every building, or portion of a building, erected, altered in
respect to height and area, added to, or relocated, and every use within a
building, or use accessory thereto, in the city shall be in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter. Any existing building, or structure, and any
existing use of properties not in conformity with the regulations herein
prescribed, shall be regarded as non-conforming, but may be continued,
extended, or changed, subject to the special regulations herein provided, with
respect to non-conforming properties or uses.
   (C)   Interpretation of this chapter.
      (1)   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this
chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the
public health, safety, morals, and welfare.
      (2)   Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this chapter are
either more restrictive, or less restrictive, than comparable conditions
imposed by any other law, city code provision, statute, resolution, or
regulation of any kind, the regulations that are most restrictive, or that
impose higher standards or requirements, shall prevail.
      (3)   Except as specifically provided in this chapter, no structure shall
be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, or altered, and no structure,
or land, shall be used for any purpose, nor in any manner that is not in
conformity with this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 11.03)
§ 156.004 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Substandard, or existing, lots and their use.
      (1)   Consideration of separate parcels of land. If, in a group of
contiguous platted lots under a single ownership, any individual lot does not
meet the minimum requirements of this chapter, the individual lots cannot be
considered as a separate parcel of land for purposes of sale or development,
but must be combined with adjacent lots under the same ownership so that the
combination of lots will equal one, or more, parcels of land, each meeting the
full minimum requirements of this chapter.
      (2)   Single-family detached dwelling. If a single lot, or parcel of
land, in a residential district exists, and is recorded as a separate lot, or
parcel, in the County Recorder’s office, or Registrar of Titles, on, or before,
the date of the city’s legally adopted in this chapter in existence at the
time, the lot may be used for single-family detached dwelling purposes;
provided, the area, and width thereof, are within 60% of the minimum
requirements of this chapter; and, provided, it can be demonstrated that safe,
and adequate, sewage treatment systems can be installed to serve the permanent
dwelling.
   (B)   Non-conforming use and structures. Any structure, or use, existing
upon the effective date of this section, and which does not conform to the
provisions herein, may be continued subject to the following conditions:
      (1)   Substandard structures. No building which has been damaged by fire,
explosion, act of God, or public enemy, to the extent of more than 50% of its
estimated market value, shall be restored, except in conformity with this
chapter. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the strengthening, or
restoration, of a wall or structural member in a building maintained for non-
conforming use when action is taken pursuant to a building permit;
      (2)   Residential structures. Alterations may be made to a residential
building containing non-conforming units when such alterations improve the
livability of the unit(s); provided, that the number of units in the building
are not increased;
      (3)   Alteration of non-conforming use to increase non-conformity. No
non-conforming use shall be expanded, changed, enlarged, or altered in a way
that increases its non-conformity. A non-conforming use may be changed to a
conforming use, but shall not thereafter be changed back to its non-conforming
use;
      (4)   Abandonment. A non-conforming use of a building that has been
discontinued for a period of 12 months shall not be reestablished, and any
future use shall be in conformity with the regulations of this chapter;
      (5)   Relocation. A non-conforming use shall not be moved to any other
part of the parcel of land upon which the same was conducted at the time of the
passage of this chapter; and
      (6)   Inspection. The enforcing officer may make an annual inspection of
all non-conforming uses, and report to the Council, within 60 days. He or she
may enter upon, or in, the premises at reasonable hours for inspection
purposes.
   (C)   Established building lines or front yard reduction. Where more than
50% of the linear frontage along the same side of a street within the same
block contains existing buildings having setbacks from the street less than the
required minimum specified by the zoning district in which the buildings are
located, any new building may be setback a distance equal to the average
setback of the existing buildings. However, in no instances shall any building
be required to be located more than the minimum setback specified by the zoning
district.
   (D)   Dwelling unit restrictions.
      (1)   Prohibited dwelling units. No cellar, garage, tent, trailer,
recreational vehicles, or accessory building shall be used as a permanent
dwelling. The basement portion of a finished home, or apartment, may be used
for normal eating and sleeping purposes; provided, it is properly damp-proofed,
has suitable fire protection and exits, and is otherwise approved by the local
Building Official.
      (2)   Minimum dwelling unit dimensions. No dwelling unit shall be less
than 20 feet in width at its narrowest side in any district. Single-family
dwelling units shall contain a minimum floor area of 960 square feet. All
dwelling units shall be placed upon a permanent foundation constructed in
conformance to the State Building Code and, other than an approved earth
sheltered home, shall have a pitched roof covered with shingles or tiles, and
have eaves of not less than six inches. These provisions shall not apply to
dwelling units that are in an approved, manufactured housing park.
      (3)   Water and sewer. All structures will be required to connect to
water and sewer, if available.
   (E)   Temporary uses permitted. Temporary buildings that are used in
conjunction with construction work, including trailers and manufactured/mobile
homes used as offices and for tool storage, may be permitted in any district
during the period that construction is taking place, but the temporary
buildings shall be removed within 30 days after completion of construction
work.
   (F)   Accessory buildings and structures.
      (1)   Accessory buildings on internal lot. No accessory buildings on an
internal lot may be located within five feet of the side or rear lot lines, or
from the designated setback on a corner lot.
      (2)   Detached accessory building height. The height of detached
accessory buildings shall not exceed 18 feet.
      (3)   Garages. The area of an attached garage shall not exceed the total
ground floor living area of the principal structure, and shall be incorporated
in the building’s total design. No private, unattached garage used, or
intended, for the storage of passenger automobiles or motor vehicles,
recreation vehicles, boats, and the like, shall exceed 1,000 square feet of
gross area, nor shall any access door, or other opening, exceed the height of
12 feet.
      (4)   Accessory buildings and rear yards. Accessory buildings shall not
occupy more than 50% of the rear yard.
      (5)   Principal building. Accessory buildings, including garages, shall
not be constructed prior to, or in lieu of, the principal building.
      (6)   Human habitation. No accessory building may be used for human
habitation.
      (7)   Private kennel. Private kennels in residential zoning districts
shall not be allowed in the required front or side yards. Kennels may be
located in the rear yard setback; provided, all portions of the kennel are
located at least five feet from any property line.
      (8)   Defining finish materials for accessory buildings. Accessory
buildings, for the purposes of this section, are buildings that can be either a
slab on grade, or frost protected footings with a concrete, asphalt, sand,
gravel, crushed rock, or natural earth floor. Garden sheds with self-contained
floors must be placed on gravel, crushed rock, concrete, or asphalt surface,
and protected from rodents. Exterior materials and finish must match, or
complement, the exterior finish of the principal structure in material, color,
and texture. The accessory use, or structure, shall not be injurious to the
use, and enjoyment, of surrounding properties.
   (G)   Uses not provided for within zoning districts (prohibited uses).
Whenever, in any zoning district, a use is neither specifically permitted nor
denied, the use shall be considered prohibited. In such cases, the Council,
Planning and Zoning Commission, or property owner may request a study by the
city to determine if the use is acceptable and, if so, what zoning would be
most appropriate, and the determination as to conditions, and standards,
relating to development of the use. The Planning and Zoning Commission, upon
receipt of the staff study, may initiate an amendment to this chapter to
provide for the particular use under consideration, or may find that the use is
not compatible for development within the district, or the city.
(Prior Code, § 11.04) (Ord. 165, second series, passed 7-5-2000; Ord. 30, third
series, passed 10-15-2013; Ord. 47, third series, passed 8-4-2020)
§ 156.005 ZONING DISTRICTS AND PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Purpose. The zoning districts carry out, and are based on, the intents
and purposes of the comprehensive plan, which also has the purpose of
protecting the public health, safety, and convenience, and general welfare.
   (B)   Establishments of zoning districts. For the purposes of this chapter,
the city is hereby divided into the following zoning districts:
      (1)   R-1: One- and Two-Family Residential District;
      (2)   R-2: Multiple Family Residential District;
      (3)   B-2: Service Business District;
      (4)   B-3: General Business District;
      (5)   B-4: Highway Commercial Business District;
      (6)   I-1: Planned Industrial District; and
      (7)   I-2: General Industrial District.
   (C)   Establishment of overlay districts. For the purposes of this chapter,
the city hereby establishes the following overlay districts for the purpose of
applying special protective provisions to unique areas of the city, or to
provide flexibility in the application of this chapter:
      (1)   FP: Floodplain Overlay District; and
      (2)   SP: Shoreland Protection Overlay District.
   (D)   Official maps. The location and boundaries of the districts
established by this chapter are set forth on the official zoning map, which is
hereby incorporated as part of this chapter, and which is on file in City Hall.
District boundary lines recorded on the zoning map are intended to follow lot
lines, the centerlines of streets, alleys, or railroad rights-of-way, the
center of watercourses, or the corporate limit lines as they exist at the time
of the enactment of this chapter. It shall be the responsibility of the Zoning
Administrator to maintain, and update, this map, and the amendments to the map
shall be recorded on this map within 30 days after official adoption of the
zoning amendments. Other official maps include the shoreland overlay map and
the floodplain map, both of which are incorporated as part of this chapter.
   (F)   Annexations. No annexations of land to the city shall be completed
until a public hearing is held by the Planning and Zoning Commission for the
purpose of determining which zoning district is most appropriate for the land
being annexed into the city should be. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall
make a recommendation to the Council for this zoning designation. No building
permit shall be issued until the Council has approved, and assigned, a zoning
designation to the annexed land.
(Prior Code, § 11.10) (Ord. 165, second series, passed 7-5-2000)
§ 156.006 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Statement of purpose. It has been determined that within the corporate
limits of the city there are certain flood hazard areas. In order to protect
the residents of the community from flood hazards, and to enable local
residents to participate in the National Flood Insurance Program, the city
shall adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses.
   (B)   Floodplain management regulations adopted. The document entitled “City
of St. James Floodplain Management Regulations”, dated October 17, 2023, is
hereby adopted in its entirety, by reference, as though repeated verbatim
herein. Three copies of the regulations shall be marked “CITY OF ST. JAMES -
OFFICIAL COPY”, and kept on file in the office of the City Clerk-Treasurer, and
open to inspection and use by the public.
(Prior Code, § 11.50) (Ord. 165, second series, passed 7-5-2000; Ord. 013,
fourth series, passed 11-7-2023)
§ 156.007 SCHEDULE OF FEES.
   All fees for rezoning, variances, and special use permits shall be fixed,
and determined, by the Council, adopted by resolution, and uniformly enforced.
The fees may, from time to time, be amended by the Council by resolution. A
copy of the resolution setting forth currently effective fees shall be kept on
file in the city administrative offices, and open to inspection during regular
hours.
(Prior Code, § 11.90) (Ord. 165, second series, passed 7-5-2000)
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
§ 156.020 PURPOSE.
   The performance standards established in this section are designed to
encourage a high standard of development, and to prevent, and eliminate, those
conditions that cause blight. All future development in all districts shall be
required to meet these standards. The standards shall also apply to existing
development where so stated. Before any zoning permit is approved, the Zoning
Administrator shall determine whether the proposed use will conform to the
performance standards. The developer, or land owners, shall supply data
necessary to demonstrate the conformance.
(Prior Code, § 11.70)
§ 156.021 DAY ACTIVITY CENTER DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   This use shall be limited to a maximum of 28 students.
   (B)   The external appearance of the structure housing this use shall be
reasonably similar to a single-family home. It shall not have a flat roof.
   (C)   The ground floor area shall not exceed 3,200 square feet.
   (D)   The facility shall contain a minimum of 35 square feet of activity
space per student.
   (E)   The lot size shall be no less than 9,000 square feet, nor more than
17,000 square feet.
   (F)   This use shall have a minimum of five off-street parking spaces,
except when located in the R-1 District. The off-street parking requirement for
this use in the R-1 District shall have a minimum of two spaces, the same as
for a single-family residential use.
   (G)   This use shall have one loading space meeting the criteria specified
in §
156.031.
(Prior Code, § 11.70)
§ 156.022 STANDARDS FOR THE KEEPING OF HORSES.
   When a person submits an application for the keeping of a horse(s), he or
she must conform to the following standards:
   (A)   This special use permit is issued to the person owning the parcel. It
does not run with the land itself;
   (B)   The keeping of horses is for recreational purposes only. The parcel on
which the horses are to be kept must be a minimum of five acres in size, the
density of horses per parcel cannot be more than one horse per one and one-half
acres. No boarding of horses is permitted;
   (C)   The parcel on which horses are kept must be fenced to provide adequate
protection for public health and safety, including prevention of entering, or
polluting, of public waters; and
   (D)   The management of manure shall be in a way to prevent accumulation,
odor, and runoff into public waters, and general problems of health and safety.
(Prior Code, § 11.70)
§ 156.023 EXCEPTIONS TO HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   Chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, monuments,
stacks, scenery lofts, tanks, water towers, ornamental towers, spires, wireless
or broadcasting towers, masts or aerials, and necessary mechanical
appurtenances are hereby exempt from the height regulations of this chapter,
and may be erected in accordance with other regulations, or city code
provisions.
(Prior Code, § 11.70)
§ 156.024 PERMITTED YARD ENCROACHMENTS.
   The following shall be considered as permitted encroachments on setback
requirements, except as provided elsewhere in this chapter:
   (A)   In any yard. Posts, off-street open parking spaces, flues, leaders,
sills, pilasters, lintels, cornices, eaves, gutters, awnings, open terraces,
open canopies, steps, chimneys, flag poles, ornamental features, open fire
escapes, sidewalks and fences, and all other similar devices incidental to the
principal structure, except as hereinafter amended; and
   (B)   In front yards. A deck, or unenclosed porch, may extend up to six feet
into the front yard setback area.
(Prior Code, § 11.70)
§ 156.025 TRAFFIC CONTROL AND SIGHT DISTANCE.
   (A)   Intersection with traffic controls. On any corner lot at a street
intersection which has some form of traffic control (stop or yield signs),
there shall be no obstruction to traffic visibility within the clear sight
triangle, which is formed by the intersection of the centerline of two
intersection streets and a straight line joining the two centerlines at points
55 feet distance from their point of intersection.
   (B)   Intersections without traffic controls. On any corner lot, in all
districts, at a street intersection which does not have any form of traffic
control, there shall be no obstruction to the traffic visibility within the
clear sight triangle, which is formed by the intersection of the centerline of
the two intersecting streets, and a straight line joining the two centerlines
at points a given number of feet distant from their points of intersection. The
distances from the points of intersection are specified in the following table
for various speeds in miles per of enforced speed limit:
 
Miles per Hour Distance Measurement
30             88 feet
40             120 feet
50             156 feet
55             174 feet
 
(Prior Code, § 11.70)
§ 156.026 NUISANCES.
   (A)   No noise, odors, vibration, smoke, air pollution, liquid or solid
wastes, heat glare, dust, or other adverse influences, shall be permitted in
any district that will, in any way, have an objectionable effect upon adjacent,
or nearby, property. All wastes in all districts shall be disposed of in a
manner that is not dangerous to the public health and safety, nor will damage
public waste transmission or disposal facilities.
   (B)   The following standards apply.
      (1)   Noise prohibited. It shall be unlawful to make, continue, or cause
to be made, or continued, any noise in excess of the noise levels set forth,
unless noise is reasonably to the preservation of life, health, safety, or
property.
      (2)   Measure of noise. Any activity not expressly exempted by this
section which creates, or produces, sound regardless of frequency exceeding the
ambient noise levels at the property lines of any property by more than six
decibels above the ambient noise levels, as designated in the following table,
at the time, and place, and for the duration then mentioned, shall be deemed to
be a violation of this chapter.
         (a)   Residential District standards:
 
Duration of Sound        From 9:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
Less than ten minutes    40 db
Ten minutes to two hours 45 db
Two hours or more        40 db
 
 
         (b)   Industrial District standards:
Frequency Band Cycles per Second Maximum Permitted Sound Level
Frequency Band Cycles per Second Maximum Permitted Sound Level
20 to 75                         72 db
75 to 150                        67 db
150 to 300                       59 db
300 to 600                       52 db
600 to 1,200                     46 db
1,200 to 2,400                   40 db
2,400 to 4,800                   34 db
4,800 or higher                  32 db
 
   (C)   Odors. In an industrial district, no odors shall be detectable beyond
the limits of the property.
   (D)   Vibration. In an industrial district, no vibration shall be
discernible at any property line to the human sense of feeling for an
accumulated total of three, or more, minutes during any hour.
   (E)   Toxic, or noxious, matter. Any use shall be so operated so as not to
discharge across the boundaries of any lot, or through percolation into the
atmosphere of the subsoil beyond the boundaries of the lot wherein the use is
located, toxic, or noxious, matter in such concentration as to be detrimental
to, or endanger, the public health, safety, comfort, or welfare, or cause
injury, or damage, to the property or business. All MPCA regulations relating
to toxic, or noxious, matter shall be followed.
   (F)   Air pollution. Any use shall be so operated as to control the emission
of smoke or particulate matter to the degree that it is not detrimental to, or
shall endanger, the public health, safety, comfort, or general welfare of the
public. For the purpose of this chapter, the regulations and standards adopted
by the State Pollution Control Agency shall be employed.
   (G)   Glare. In all districts, any lighting used to illuminate an off-street
parking area, sign, or other structure, shall be arranged so as to deflect
light away from any adjoining residential zone, or from the public streets.
Direct, or sky-reflected, glare, whether from flood lights or from high
temperature processes, such as combustion or welding, shall be hooded, or
controlled in some manner, so as not to light adjacent property. Bare
incandescent light bulbs shall not be permitted in view of adjacent property,
or public right-of-way. Any light, or combination of lights, which cast light
on a public street shall not exceed one foot-candle (meter reading), as
measured from the centerline of the street. Any light, or combination of
lights, which cast light on a residential property shall not exceed 0.4 foot-
candles (meter reading) as measured from the property.
   (H)   Miscellaneous nuisances.
      (1)   Inoperative passenger vehicles and trucks. Passenger vehicles and
trucks in an inoperative state shall not be parked in residential districts for
a period exceeding 14 days, unless they are completely enclosed within a
building.
      (2)   Junkyard. No person may create, or maintain, a junkyard, or a
vehicle dismantling yard, except as provided in this chapter.
      (3)   Nuisances affecting public health or safety. The following are
declared to be nuisances affecting public health or safety:
         (a)   The effluence from any cesspool, septic tank, drainfield, or
human sewage disposal system discharging upon the surface of the ground, or
dumping the contents thereof at any place except as authorized;
         (b)   The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream or lake, or
body of water by sewage, industrial waste, or other substances; and
         (c)   The ownership, possession, or control of any unused
refrigerator, or other container, with doors which fasten automatically when
closed, or sufficient size to retain any person, to be exposed and accessible
to the public without providing locks to prevent access by the public.
(Prior Code, § 11.70) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.027 REFUSE.
   In all districts, all waste material, debris, refuse, or garbage shall be
kept enclosed within a building, or properly contained in a closed container
designed for such purposes, with the exception of crop residue. The owner of
vacant land shall be responsible for keeping the land free of refuse. All
exterior storage material not included with a permitted use, accessory use, or
special use, or otherwise permitted by provisions of this chapter, shall be
considered refuse.
(Prior Code, § 11.70)
§ 156.028 EXTERIOR STORAGE.
   In all districts, all materials and equipment shall be stored within a
building, or be fully screened so as not to be visible from adjoining
properties, except for the following in good order: laundry, drying, and
recreational equipment; construction and landscaping materials, and equipment
currently being used on the premises; agricultural equipment and materials, if
these are used, or intended for use, on the premises; off-street parking of
passenger automobiles and pickup trucks; and fire wood. Boats and unoccupied
campers, so long as they do not encroach on any dedicated public rights-of-way,
plated rights-of-way, public easements, or utility easements, are permissible.
If located within the front yard, they must comply with parking, as identified
in §
151.27, and other applicable codes sections. In all districts, the city may
require a special use permit for any exterior storage if it is demonstrated
that the storage is a hazard to the public health and safety, or has a
depreciating effect upon nearby property values, or impairs scenic views, or
constitutes a threat to living amenities.
(Ord. 5, third series, passed 10-7-2008)
§ 156.029 BULK STORAGE; LIQUID.
   All uses associated with the bulk storage of oil, gasoline, liquid
fertilizer, chemicals, and similar liquids shall require a special use permit
in order that the Council may have assurance that fire, explosion, or water or
soil contamination hazards are not present (that would be detrimental to the
public health, safety, and general welfare). The Council may require the
development of diking around the tanks. Diking shall be suitably sealed, and
shall hold a leakage capacity equal to 115% of the tank capacity. Any existing
storage tank that, in the opinion of the Council, constitutes a hazard to the
public safety shall discontinue operations within one year following the
effective date of this chapter. All diking and bulk storage must be in
compliance with the appropriate MPCA regulations.
(Prior Code, § 11.70)
§ 156.030 LANDSCAPING, SCREENING, AND FENCING.
   (A)   Obstruction of views. On any corner lot, no wall, fence, structure, or
vegetation shall be erected, or maintained, at a height that will obstruct
motorists’ sightlines along intersecting streets or roadways.
   (B)   Fencing or screening requirements for business or industrial uses.
      (1)   Where any business, or industrial, use is adjacent to property
zoned R-1 or R-2, that business, or industry, shall provide screening of its
exterior activities along the property line abutting the residential property.
This screening requirement will not apply in those cases where the business, or
industrial, site is located across the street from a residential site, but will
apply if separated by only an alley. The screening requirement will not apply
if the view of the business from the residential property consists solely of
the building itself.
      (2)   If the screening used consists of a solid fence, or wall, the
material shall block, or obscure, a minimum of 50% of the view of the business,
or industrial, site from the residential site. If fences, or walls, are used,
they shall be no less than five feet, or more than eight feet in height, unless
otherwise directed by the Planning and Zoning Commission, or the Council.
      (3)   Fences, or walls, shall extend no closer than 15 feet to any street
or driveway opening onto a street, unless regulated elsewhere.
      (4)   Fences, or walls, when used as the screening material, shall be
placed along the property lines, or when located along a street, be setback at
least 15 feet from the street right-of-way, unless regulated elsewhere, with
landscaping of property between the fence, or wall, and the street pavement.
      (5)   If berms are used as the screening material, they shall be
constructed with a slope not to exceed 3:1, and shall be covered with sod, or
other landscape material, sufficient to prevent erosion of the berm.
      (6)   If trees, hedges, or other vegetative materials are used, the
vegetation must provide a minimum view coverage of 50% throughout the year of
the business, or industrial, site from the residential site.
   (C)   Height and setback regulations for fencing and/or vegetative screening
for residential uses.
      (1)   Fences and vegetative screening in the residential district can be
located anywhere in the front yard setback area, as long as they do not
interfere with street intersection sightlines, and are limited to a maximum of
four feet in height.
      (2)   Fences, or vegetative screening (hedges, for example), located in
the side yard, or rear yard, area may be a maximum of six feet in height, as
long as they do not interfere with street intersection sightlines, and are
setback at least two feet from the property lines. Fences, or vegetative
screening materials, may be constructed, or planted, on the property lines, but
only with the permission of the adjacent property owner.
   (D)   Maintenance requirements.
      (1)   The yard area in front of fences and walls shall be trimmed, and
maintained, in a neat, and attractive, manner.
      (2)   Fences and walls must be maintained, and kept, in a sightly manner.
Repairs to damaged areas of walls or fences shall be made within 30 days of
sustaining the damage.
      (3)   Areas left in a natural state and vegetative screening areas shall
be properly maintained in a sightly, and well kept, condition.
      (4)   Diseased, dying, or dead vegetative screening elements shall be
removed and then replaced, at a minimum, with healthy plants of the same size
required when first planted.
      (5)   If requested by an adjacent property owner, or upon notification by
a representative of the city, a property owner must trim any part of a tree,
bush, or shrub that hangs over, or encroaches, beyond the property owner’s
property line, or interferes with traffic, or pedestrian, sightlines.
   (E)   Landscaping regulations.
      (1)   Landscaping of yards fronting a state or county road is required.
      (2)   When a development site plan is submitted to the Planning and
Zoning Commission and the Council for review and comment, it must contain
information regarding the type of landscaping treatment the developer intends
for the front yard, and, if required, side yards.
      (3)   The plan shall include the location of all intended fences, tie
walls, retaining walls, berms, landscaped islands, and planting beds with the
plant materials identified.
      (4)   The plan shall include the location, and appropriate detail, of all
required screening showing the relationship of the screening to the development
site and adjacent property.
      (5)   The plan shall show the details of sodding and seeding, including
the delineation of area and square footage.
      (6)   Trees shall be planted with sufficient setbacks so that the
diameter of its expected mature foliage will not extend beyond the owner’s
property line.
(Prior Code, § 11.70)
§ 156.031 OFF-STREET LOADING AND UNLOADING AREAS.
   (A)   General. Whenever the normal operation of any development requires
that goods, merchandise, or equipment be routinely delivered to, or shipped
from, that development, a sufficient off-street loading, and unloading, area
must be provided in accordance with this section to accommodate the delivery,
or shipment, operations in a safe and convenient manner.
   (B)   Location. All required loading berths shall be off-street, and shall
be located on the same lot as the building for use to be served. A loading
berth shall be located at least 25 feet from the intersection of two street
rights-of-way, and at least 50 feet from a residential district, unless the
space is located within a building. Loading berths shall not occupy the
required front yard space.
   (C)   Number of spaces. The loading, and unloading, area must be of
sufficient size to accommodate the numbers, and types, of vehicles that are
likely to use this area, given the nature of the development in question. The
following table indicates the number of spaces based upon the size of use that
will satisfy this requirement. However, the Planning and Zoning Commission or
the Council may require more, or fewer, loading spaces if reasonably necessary
to satisfy this section’s need.
 
Gross Leasable Area of Building Number of Spaces*
1,000 to 19,999                 1
20,000 to 79,999                2
80,000 to 127,000               3
Notes to Table:
*   Plus one space for each additional 72,000 square feet, or fraction
thereof.
 
   (D)   Size. Unless otherwise specified in this section, a required loading
berth shall not be less than 12 feet in width, 50 feet in length, and 14 feet
in height, exclusive of aisle and maneuvering space.
   (E)   Access. Each required loading berth shall be located with appropriate
means of vehicular access to a street, or public alley, in a manner which will
least interfere with traffic.
   (F)   Surfacing. All loading berths and accessways shall be improved with a
durable material to control the dust and drainage.
   (G)   Accessory use. Any space allocated as a loading berth or maneuvering
area, so as to comply with the terms of this chapter, shall not be used for the
storage of goods, inoperable vehicles, or be included as a part of the space
requirements necessary to meet the off-street parking area.
   (H)   Noise. Where noise from loading or unloading activity is audible in a
residential district, the activity shall terminate between the hours of 9:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m., except for the loading and unloading of grain.
(Prior Code, § 11.70)
§ 156.032 ACCESS DRIVES AND ACCESS.
   (A)   Access drives shall be setback a minimum of five feet from adjacent
lots’ side and rear lot lines. The number, and types, of access drives onto
major streets may be controlled, and limited, by the Council in the interests
of public safety and efficient traffic flow.
   (B)   Access drives onto county roads shall require a review and approval by
the County Engineer. The County Engineer shall determine the appropriate
location, size, and design of the access drives, and may limit the number of
access drives in the interest of public safety and efficient traffic flow.
   (C)   Access drives to principal structures which traverse wooded, or open,
field areas shall be constructed, and maintained, to a width and base material
depth sufficient to support access by emergency vehicles. All driveways shall
have a minimum width of ten feet with a road strength capable of supporting
emergency, and fire, vehicles.
   (D)   All lots, or parcels, shall have direct, adequate physical access for
emergency vehicles along the frontage of the lot, or parcel, from either an
existing dedicated public roadway, or an existing private roadway approved by
the Council.
(Prior Code, § 11.70)
§ 156.033 SIGNS.
   (A)   Signs excluded from regulation. The following signs are exempt from
regulation under this section:
      (1)   Sign sizes. Signs not exceeding four square feet in area that are
customarily associated with a residential use, and are not of a commercial
nature, such as:
         (a)   Signs giving property identification names or numbers, or names
of occupants;
         (b)   Signs on mailboxes, or newspaper tubes; and
         (c)   Signs posted on private property relating to private parking, or
warning the public against trespassing, and are not of a commercial nature.
      (2)   Legal notices, and other signs authorized by a governmental body.
Signs erected by, or authorized by, a governmental body, including legal
notices, identification and informational signs, and traffic, directional, or
regulatory signs;
      (3)   Identification and informational. Signs erected by service
organizations, including identification and informational signs, and are not of
a commercial nature. Signs may not exceed 16 square feet;
      (4)   Public utilities. Official signs of a non-commercial nature erected
by public utilities;
      (5)   Governmental, or nonprofit, signs. Flags, pennants, or insignia of
any governmental, or nonprofit, organization when not displayed in connection
with a commercial promotion, or as an advertising device;
      (6)   Directional, traffic signs. Signs directing, and guiding, traffic
on private property that do not exceed four square feet each, and that bear no
advertising matter;
      (7)   Church signs. Church bulletin boards, church identification signs,
and church directional sign but do not exceed one per abutting street, do not
exceed 25 square feet in area, and may be internally illuminated; and
      (8)   Non-commercial messages. Signs proclaiming religious, political, or
other non-commercial messages (unless specifically regulated elsewhere), not
exceeding one per abutting street, do not exceed 16 square feet in area, and
are not internally illuminated.
   (B)   Temporary signs; permit exemptions and regulations. The following
temporary signs are permitted without a sign permit. The signs shall conform to
the requirements set forth below, as well as all other applicable requirements
of this section:
      (1)   Real estate for sale, lease, or for rent signs (including
buildings). The signs may not exceed 16 square feet in area, and shall be
removed immediately after sale, lease, or rental. A single sign on each street
frontage is permitted;
      (2)   Construction site identification signs that identify the project,
owner, or developer, and the like (may contain information relating to sale,
lease, or rent). Not more than one such sign may be erected per site, and it
may not exceed 32 square feet in area. The sign shall be removed when
construction, and landscaping, activities are completed;
      (3)   Signs erected in connection with elections or political campaigns.
Such signs shall be permitted 30 days prior to the election, and must be
removed within ten days following the election, or conclusion of the campaign.
No such sign may exceed 16 square feet in surface area; and
      (4)   Signs indicating a special event (grand opening, fair, carnival,
circus, festival, and the like) to take place on lot where the sign is located.
The signs may be erected no sooner than two weeks before the event, and must be
removed no later than three days after the event.
      (5)   Other temporary signs. Temporary signs not covered in the foregoing
categories, so long as the signs meet the following restrictions:
         (a)   No more than one such sign may be located on any lot;
         (b)   The signs are not tacked, posted, painted, or otherwise affixed
to walls of buildings, trees, fences, or poles;
         (c)   No such sign may exceed four square feet in surface area, unless
otherwise stated; and
         (d)   The signs may not be displayed for longer than three consecutive
days, nor more than ten days out of any 365 day period, unless otherwise
stated.
   (C)   Permit required for signs. A permit shall be required to erect any
sign in the city, unless exempted above. No sign shall be erected by any person
until the plan for the proposed sign has been received by the Planning and
Zoning Commission, and approved by the Council. Permit fees shall be determined
by the Council. If a person begins work on any sign for which a permit is
required without having secured the necessary permits therefor, either previous
to or on the date of commencement of such work, they shall, when subsequently
securing the permit, pay double the fee provided for such permit or shall be
subject to the penalty provisions of this code.
   (D)   Determining the number of signs. A two sided, or multi-sided, sign
shall be regarded as one sign so long as:
      (1)   V-type signs. With respect to a V-type sign, the two sides are, at
no point, separated by a distance that exceeds five feet;
      (2)   Double-faced signs. With respect to double faced (back to back)
signs, the distance between the backs of each face of the sign does not exceed
three feet; and
      (3)   Sides of double-faced signs. Each side of a double faced sign shall
count towards the overall sign surface threshold calculation.
   (E)   Total sign surface area (on-premises signage).
      (1)   Total surface area; exceeding limitations. Unless otherwise
provided in this section, the total surface area devoted to all signs on any
lot shall not exceed the limitations set forth in this section, and all signs,
except temporary signs, shall be included in this calculation.
      (2)   Maximum sign surface area; residential districts. Unless otherwise
provided in this section, the maximum sign surface area permitted on any lot in
any residential district is four square feet.
      (3)   Maximum sign surface area; business districts. Subject to the other
provisions of this section, the maximum on-premises sign surface area permitted
on any lot in any business district shall be determined as follows:
         (a)   The total sign surface area allowed shall be two square feet per
linear foot of lot street frontage, or 10% of the building frontage area, or 75
square feet in area, whichever is greater. Only one face of a double faced, or
V-type, sign shall be considered in determining the display surface area;
         (b)   For uses on corner lots, the frontage measurement to be used in
the signage area calculation shall be the smallest dimension. In this case, the
business owner shall be permitted to have two equivalent signs, one facing each
street, subject to other regulations contained herein; and
         (c)   The maximum on-premises sign surface area on any lot in any
business district shall be 200 square feet, unless specified differently in
other sections.
      (4)   Maximum sign surface area; industrial districts. Subject to other
provisions of this section, the maximum sign surface area on any lot in any
industrial district shall be determined by multiplying the number of linear
feet of street frontage of the lot by three feet, or 20% of the building
frontage, or 300 square feet, whichever is greater.
      (5)   Sign surface area; wall of structure. The sign surface area of any
sign located on a wall of a structure may not exceed 50% of the total surface
area of the wall on which the sign is located.
   (F)   Number of freestanding signs (on-premises).
      (1)   Number of freestanding signs. Except as authorized below, no
development may have more than one freestanding sign.
      (2)   Development on corner lot. If a development is located on a corner
lot that has at least 100 feet of frontage on each of the two intersecting
public streets, then the development may have no more than one freestanding
sign along each side of the development bordered by such streets.
      (3)   Development bordered by two public streets. If a development is
located on a lot that is bordered by two public streets that do not intersect
at the lot’s boundaries, then the development may have no more than one
freestanding sign on each side of the development bordered by such streets.
   (G)   Location and height requirement; freestanding signs.
      (1)   Setback requirements. Freestanding signs shall observe the setback
requirements set forth within each district, and shall not encroach upon any
road right-of-way.
      (2)   Anchoring of freestanding signs. Freestanding signs shall be
securely fastened to the ground, or to some other substantial supportive
structure, so that there is virtually no danger that either the sign, or the
supportive structure, may be moved by the wind or other forces of nature, and
cause injury to persons, or property.
      (3)   Height in business districts. No part of a freestanding sign may
exceed a height, measured from ground level, of 32 feet in the B-2 and B-
3 Business Districts, and both industrial districts, no more than 45 feet in
the B-4 Highway Commercial Business District, and no more than 15 feet in
residential districts.
      (4)   Roofs and parapets. No sign may extend above any parapet, or be
placed upon any roof surface.
      (5)   Building walls. No sign attached to a building may project more
than 12 inches from the building wall.
   (H)   Off-premises sign regulations.
      (1)   Permit; Highway Commercial Business District. This type of signage
may only be established in the B-4 Highway Commercial Business District through
the issuance of a special use permit.
      (2)   Total sign area. The total area of any off-premises sign shall not
exceed 700 square feet, computed on the basis of one side of any double-faced
sign.
      (3)   Total sign height. The sign, and its supporting structure, shall
not exceed 45 feet in height.
      (4)   Residential zoning districts. Off-premises signs shall not be
located within 100 feet of a residential zoning district park, playground, or
school.
      (5)   Separation. Signs on the same side of a street, or highway, shall
have a separation of 400 lineal feet.
      (6)   Setback standards. Signs shall be required to meet all setback
standards of the zoning district.
      (7)   Illumination. The source of light for the purpose of illumination
may be indirect, or direct, and shall not be directed in any way except onto
the advertising copy.
      (8)   Color of exposed uprights. The exposed uprights, or superstructure,
shall be painted a neutral color.
      (9)   Ground supports. All ground supports shall meet appropriate
building codes.
      (10)   Roof tops. Off-premises signs shall not be permitted on roof tops.
      (11)   Wall-mounted signs. Wall-mounted off-premises signs shall be on a
separate frame, shall not extend beyond 12 inches from the wall surface, and
shall not exceed 50% of the square footage of the wall it occupies, or 700
square feet, whichever is less.
   (I)   Subdivision development entrance signs. At any entrance to a
residential subdivision development, there may be no more than two signs
identifying the subdivision, or development. A single side of any such sign may
not exceed 16 square feet, nor may the total surface area of all such signs
located at a single entrance exceed 32 square feet.
   (J)   Sign illumination and signs containing lights.
      (1)   General. Unless otherwise prohibited by this section, signs may be
illuminated if the illumination is in accordance with this section.
      (2)   Lighting. Lighting directed toward a sign shall be shielded so that
it illuminates only the face of the sign, and does not shine directly into a
public right-of-way or residential premises.
      (3)   Illuminated tubings, or strings of light. Illuminated tubings, or
strings of lights, that outline property lines, sales areas, roof lines, doors,
windows, or similar areas are prohibited.
      (4)   Flashing lights. No sign may contain, or be illuminated, by
flashing or intermittent lights, or lights of changing degrees of intensity,
except signs indicating the time, date, or weather conditions.
   (K)   Signage prohibitions.
      (1)   Streets. No sign may be located so that it substantially interferes
with the view necessary for motorists to proceed safely through intersections,
or to enter onto, or exit from, public streets or private roads for a distance
of 500 feet.
      (2)   Signs that revolve are prohibited. Without limiting the foregoing,
banners, streamers, animated display boards, pennants, and propellers are
prohibited, but signs that only move occasionally because of wind are not
prohibited if their movement:
         (a)   Is not a primary design feature of the sign;
         (b)   Is not intended to attract attention to the sign; and
         (c)   Is not specifically excluded elsewhere in this section.
      (3)   Confusion with signs erected by governmental agencies. No sign may
be erected so that by its location, color, size, shape, nature, or message it
would tend to obstruct the view of, or be confused with, official traffic
signs, or other signs erected by governmental agencies.
      (4)   Affixation of signs. No sign may be affixed, or painted, on rocks,
trees, or other perennial plants, or on any public utility pole.
      (5)   Rotating beams, light. No sign may contain a rotating beam, or beam
of light, resembling an emergency vehicle.
      (6)   Simulation of state, county, municipality, or other governmental
sign. No sign may simulate any official, directional, or warning sign that is
typically erected, or maintained, by the state, county, municipality, or other
governmental subdivision, nor may any sign be erected which incorporates, or
makes use of, light simulating, or resembling, traffic signals or control
signs.
      (7)   Distracting signs. No sign may be erected which casts a
distracting, or confusing, ray of light onto, or visible from, the public
roadway.
      (8)   Interference. No sign may interfere with public facilities, or the
maintenance thereof.
      (9)   Obstructions. No sign may obstruct any window, door, fire escape,
stairway, or opening essential to the provision of light, air, ingress, or
egress from any building.
      (10)   Multiple surface areas. No sign may contain more than two surface
areas or facings.
      (11)   Rights-of-way. No sign is permitted within the right-of-way of any
public road, except as erected by an official unit of government for the
direction of traffic, or necessary public information.
      (12)   Motion signs. Motion signs and flashing signs are prohibited,
except time and temperature signs depicting a constant message as contrasted to
a moving message.
      (13)   Private signs. No private sign shall be erected that resembles any
official marker, or sign, erected of a governmental agency, or shall display
such words as “Stop” or “Danger” unless so specified by this chapter, or the
city code.
      (14)   Projecting signs. Projecting signs are prohibited.
      (15)   Roof signs. Roof signs are prohibited.
      (16)   Expired business signs. Signs which advertise an activity,
business, product, or service no longer produced, or conducted, on the premises
upon which the sign is located shall be removed immediately upon termination of
use. Where the owner, or lessor, of the premises is seeking a new tenant, such
signs may remain in place for not more than 30 days from the date of vacancy.
      (17)   Advertising or business signs. The signs on, or attached to,
equipment, such as semi-truck trailers, where signing is a principal use of the
equipment on either a temporary, or permanent, basis is prohibited.
   (L)   Maintenance of signs.
      (1)   State of repair. All signs, and all components thereof, including,
without limitation supports, braces, and anchors, shall be kept in a state of
good repair. With respect to freestanding signs, components not bearing a
message shall be constructed of materials that blend with the natural
environment, or shall be painted a neutral color to blend with the natural
environment.
      (2)   Abandoned signs. If a sign, other than a billboard, advertises a
business, service, commodity, accommodation, attraction, or other enterprise or
activity that is no longer operating, or being offered or conducted, that sign
shall be considered abandoned and shall, within 60 days after the abandonment,
be removed by the sign owner, owner of the property where the sign is located,
or other party having control over such sign.
      (3)   Message of a sign. If the message portion of a sign is removed,
leaving only the supporting “shell” of a sign, or the supporting braces,
anchors, or similar components, the owner of the sign, or the owner of the
property where the sign is located, or other person having control over the
sign shall, within 180 days of the removal of the message portion of the sign,
either replace the entire message portion of the sign, or remove the remaining
components of the sign.
      (4)   Debris around sign. The area within ten feet in all directions of
any part of a freestanding sign shall be kept clear of all debris and all
undergrowth more than six inches in height.
   (M)   Non-conforming signs.
      (1)   Increasing extent of non-conformity. No person may engage in any
activity that causes an increase in the extent of non-conformity of a non-
conforming sign. No non-conforming sign may be enlarged, or altered, in a
manner as to aggravate the non-conforming condition, nor may illumination be
added to any non-conforming sign.
      (2)   Moved or replaced. A non-conforming sign may not be moved, or
replaced, except to bring the sign into conformity with this section.
      (3)   Destroyed or damaged. If a non-conforming sign is destroyed, or
damaged, more than 50% of its value, it may not be repaired, reconstructed, or
replaced except in conformity with all provisions of this section, and the
remnants of the former sign structure shall be cleared from the land.
      (4)   Message of non-conforming sign. The message of a non-conforming
sign may be changed so long as this does not create any new non-conformities.
      (5)   Repaired or renovated. Subject to other provisions of this section,
non-conforming signs may be repaired, and renovated, so long as the cost of the
work does not exceed 50% of the sign’s value within any 12-month period.
      (6)   Advertising. If a non-conforming sign, other than a billboard,
advertises a business, service, commodity, accommodation, attraction, or other
enterprise, or activity, that is no longer operating or being offered, or
conducted, that sign shall be considered abandoned, and shall be removed within
60 days after such abandonment by the sign owner, owner of the property where
the sign is located, or other party having control over such sign.
   (N)   Monument signs.
      (1)   Definition. A freestanding sign, in which the entire base of the
sign structure is in contact with the ground, providing a solid, and
continuous, background for the sign face that is the same width as the sign
from the ground to the top of the sign. The base of the sign shall be
constructed of a permanent material, such as concrete block or stone, shall be
considered a MONUMENT SIGN.
      (2)   Metal shroud. A piece of metal which is used to conceal, and
screen, the support structure of a monument sign.
      (3)   Monument sign area. The advertising area of a monument sign.
      (4)   Prohibited signs. The following signs are prohibited by this
section:
         (a)   Signs that resemble any official marker erected by a government
agency by reason of position, shape, or color, which interferes with the proper
function of a traffic sign, signal, or be misleading to vehicular traffic;
         (b)   Signs within a public right-of-way or easement, except for signs
installed by governmental entities;
         (c)   Signs attached to rocks, trees, fences, or utility poles. Signs
on fences denoting safety hazards will be allowed;
         (d)   Signs of a rotating beam or flashing illumination;
         (e)   Signs advertising by letters, words, or figures painted upon any
sidewalk within the city;
         (f)   Advertising signs painted on any exterior building surface;
         (g)   Rotating signs;
         (h)   Signs painted, or attached, to vehicles where the vehicle is
parked on a property, and not intended to be moved for a period of 48 hours, or
more. At all times, vehicles containing advertising and/or signage shall not be
parked along the property frontage;
         (i)   Roof signs;
         (j)   Temporary signs which advertise a business, product, or service
which is not produced, or conducted, on the zoning lot upon which the sign is
located; and
         (k)   Signs which project over the public right-of-way.
      (5)   Construction of monument signs. Monument signs shall be constructed
with the entire bottom of the sign structure in contact with the ground. The
bottom two feet of the sign shall either be Kasota stone, precast concrete,
brick, or landscaping masonry blocks that are earth tone colors, unless
otherwise provided for. A solid, continuous background area should be provided
from the ground to the top of the sign via a combination of either Kasota
stone, precise concrete, brick, stone, landscaping blocks, or metal shroud
which matches the appearance, and color, of the principal building.
      (6)   Ground area. The ground area around the base, or base of the sign,
of the monument in ground/pylon sign shall be landscaped with shrubs and ground
cover equal to the area of 50% of the sign base. The landscaping shall consist
of shrubs and ground covers that can withstand the environmental conditions of
the site, and will provide season interest.
      (7)   Business and industrial districts. Monument signs will be permitted
in business and industrial districts within the city when in compliance with
all other zoning provisions and regulations. The maximum total signage area of
all signs and franchise architecture should not exceed more than two times the
front lineal footage of the lot.
      (8)   Dimensions, placement of monument signs.
         (a)   Monument signs greater than eight feet in height shall be
constructed with the entire bottom of the sign structure in contact with the
ground. The bottom two feet of such signs shall be Kasota stone, precast
concrete, brick, or landscaping masonry blocks that are earth tone colors. A
solid continuous background area should be provided from the ground to the top
of the sign either in combination of Kasota stone, precise concrete, brick,
stone, landscaping blocks, or metal shroud which matches the appearance, and
color, of the principal building.
         (b)   Monument sign height may be 10% of the front lineal frontage of
a lot with not less than ten feet required, or more than 15 feet permitted.
         (c)   No more than one monument sign shall be permitted per zoning lot
except through lots.
         (d)   The square foot area of the sign shall not exceed the front
lineal frontage of the zoning lot.
         (e)   The sign face shall occupy at least 50% of the monument sign.
         (f)   A landscaping area shall be provided around the base of the sign
in accordance with this section.
         (g)   The sign shall not encroach upon any road right-of-way, and
monument signs shall observe the setback regulations set forth within each
zoning district.
         (h)   Multi-tenant business centers will be allowed to have one joint
identification monument sign.
   (O)   Sign material standards in Business Districts.
      (1)   Applicability. This division applies to all permanent signs in the
B-2, B-3, and B-4 Business Districts. It does not apply to temporary signs as
defined in division (B) of this section, monument signs subject to division
(N), or signs specifically exempt under division (A).
      (2)   Permitted materials. Permanent signs in the business districts must
be constructed from high-quality, durable materials that are weather-resistant
and suitable for long-term outdoor use, including but not limited to:
         (a)   Painted or sealed wood;
         (b)   Aluminum, steel, or other corrosion-resistant metals:
         (c)   High-density urethane (HDU) or other durable synthetic materials
designed for sign construction;
         (d)   Glass, acrylic, or similar rigid materials;
         (e)   Fabricated composite panels; or
         (f)   Approved metal shrouds and architectural elements that match
building design.
      (3)   Prohibited materials. The following materials shall not be used for
permanent signs in business districts:
         (a)   Cardboard, paper, foam board, or similar temporary substrates;
         (b)   Plywood or raw wood not sealed or painted;
         (c)   Vinyl banners used in place of a permanent sign;
         (d)   Plastic that is prone to fading, yellowing, warping, or
cracking;
         (e)   Any material that poses a safety hazard due to poor structural
integrity.
      (4)   Existing signs. Existing permanent signs constructed from materials
not listed in division (O)(2) shall be allowed to remain until they are
replaced, reconstructed, or become non-conforming under division (M) above.
      (5)   Administrative discretion. The Planning and Zoning Commission may
approve alternative materials upon determination that the material is of equal
or greater durability, weather resistance, and visual quality to those listed
above.
(Prior Code, § 11.70) (Ord. 165, second series, passed 7-5-2000; Ord. 207,
second series, passed 9-4-2007; Ord. 26, third series, passed 9-18-2012; Ord.
024, fourth series, passed 5-21-2024; Ord. 031, fourth series, passed 8-19-
2025)
§ 156.034 HOME OCCUPATIONS.
   When allowed, home occupations shall be subject to the following additional
regulations.
   (A)   Family on premises. Family members residing on the premises shall be
engaged in the home occupation.
   (B)   Hours. Customers may visit the site only during the hours of 7:00 a.m.
to 9:00 p.m. This does not apply to licensed child day care facilities.
   (C)   Residence. The home occupation shall be clearly incidental to the
primary use as a residence. The home occupation shall not exceed 25% of the
floor area of the livable portion of the dwelling (does not apply to licensed
child care facilities). Exterior modifications to the dwelling to accommodate
the home occupation shall be prohibited, which might include construction of
parking lots, paving of required yard setbacks, or adding commercial exterior
lighting effects.
   (D)   Use of accessory buildings. The use of an accessory building for the
home occupation is limited to just storage. This type of use is further limited
to 25% of the enclosed area within the accessory building, or a total of 250
square feet, whichever is less.
   (E)   Display of goods. No display of goods, products, or services shall be
visible from off-site.
   (F)   Traffic and parking. Traffic and parking associated with the use shall
not be detrimental to the neighborhood, or create congestion on the street
where the home occupation is located. Truck deliveries or pick ups at the home
are permitted to occur between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Vehicles
used for delivery and pick up are limited to those normally servicing
residential neighborhoods.
   (G)   Sold at retail, wholesale. No goods, products, or commodities bought,
or secured, for the express purpose of resale shall be sold at retail, or
wholesale, on the premises.
   (H)   Machinery. No machinery that causes noise, or interference with radio,
television, or other electronic home devices, shall be permitted.
   (I)   Equipment. No equipment, or process, shall be used in connection with
the home occupation which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or
electrical interference with is detectable off site.
   (J)   Commercially-licensed vehicles. Only one commercially-licensed vehicle
shall be allowed in connection with the home occupation.
(Prior Code, § 11.70)
§ 156.035 PRIVATE ON-SITE UTILITIES.
   No private on-site utilities are permitted within the utility service area
of the city. If the utility service area of the city is expanded to an area not
previously served, all uses shall be required to connect to city utility
services within one year of the extension. If a use is permitted to locate
within an area of the city not served by utilities, the sewage treatment,
system must conform to the State Pollution Control Agency’s Rules, Chapter
7080, or as amended, and the private well must conform to the State Department
of Health Rules that govern the construction, and location, of private wells.
(Prior Code, § 11.70)
§ 156.036 AUTO SERVICE STATION/AUTO REPAIR SHOP STANDARDS.
   (A)   Lot size. A service station, or repair shop, site shall be a minimum
of 10,000 square feet in size.
   (B)   Setbacks. The building, or buildings, shall be back at least 35 feet
from the street right-of-way. Adjacent to residential districts, the service
station, or repair shop, buildings, signs, and pumps shall be setback a minimum
of 25 feet from adjoining property. In commercial areas, the structures shall
be setback at least ten feet from adjoining property.
   (C)   Curb and gutters. Concrete curb and gutters shall be installed on all
streets giving access to the station. There shall be a six-inch curb along all
interior driveways.
   (D)   Fencing and screening. When adjacent to residential property, there
shall be some type of screening provided.
   (E)   Vehicles. No vehicles shall be parked on the premises other than those
utilized by employees, or awaiting service. No vehicle shall be parked, or be
waiting service, longer than 15 days.
   (F)   Exterior storage. Exterior storage, besides vehicles, shall be limited
to service equipment and items offered for sale, and those items listed in
division (I) below. Exterior storage of items offered for sale shall be located
in containers, such as the racks, metal trays, and similar structures designed
to display merchandise.
   (G)   Screening. All areas utilized for the storage, or disposal, of trash,
debris, discarded parts, and similar items, shall be fully screened. All
structures and grounds shall be maintained in an orderly, clean, and safe
manner.
   (H)   Architecture. The station, and other buildings, shall be of a design
that is compatible with the surroundings.
   (I)   Outdoor displays. The storage of used tires, batteries, and other
items for sale outside the building shall be controlled; the items shall be
displayed in specially-designated containers, and be limited to one or two
areas well back from the street right-of-way line. Junk cars, empty cans, and
other unsightly materials will not be permitted in an area subject to public
view.
   (J)   Lighting. Lights shall be designed and placed in a manner as to direct
the light away from residential areas.
   (K)   Other activities. Business activities not listed in the definition of
service stations or repair shops, and not incidental to these types of
businesses, are not permitted on the premises unless a special use permit is
obtained specifically for the business. These additional activities include,
but are not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Automatic car and truck wash;
      (2)   Rental of vehicles, equipment, or trailers; and
      (3)   General retail sales.
   (L)   Gas pumps. Gas pumps located at, and a part of, other types of
business establishments shall require a special use permit.
(Prior Code, § 11.70)
§ 156.037 DRIVE-IN BUSINESS STANDARDS.
   (A)   Design standards. The following standards shall apply to drive-in
businesses in all districts:
      (1)   The entire area of any drive-in business shall have a drainage
system approved by the City Engineer;
      (2)   The entire area, other than that occupied by structures or
planting, shall be surfaced with a surface material which will control dust and
drainage; and
      (3)   A fence, or screen, of acceptable design not over six feet in
height, or less than four feet, shall be constructed along the property line
abutting a residential district, and the fence, or screen, shall be adequately
maintained.
   (B)   General requirements.
      (1)   Any drive-in business serving goods or beverages may also provide,
in addition to vehicular service areas, indoor food and beverage service
seating area.
      (2)   The hours of operation shall be set forth as a condition of any
permit issued for drive-in businesses.
      (3)   Each drive-in business serving food may have outside seating.
      (4)   Each food or beverage drive-in business shall replace receptacles
at all exits, as well as one refuse receptacle per ten vehicle parking spaces
within the parking area.
      (5)   Electronic devices, such as loudspeakers, automobile service order
devices, and other similar instruments, shall not be located within 200 feet of
any residential dwelling unit.
      (6)   No service shall be rendered, deliveries made, or sales conducted
within the required front yard. Customers served in vehicles shall be parked to
the sides, and/or rear, of the principal structure.
   (C)   Locational requirements.
      (1)   No drive-in business shall be located within 200 feet of a public,
or parochial, school.
      (2)   No drive-in business shall be located such that it may increase
traffic volumes on nearby residential streets.
      (3)   No drive-in shall be located on any street other than a
thoroughfare or business service road, as designated on the city map.
   (D)   Site plan information.
      (1)   The site plan shall clearly indicate suitable storage containers
for all waste material. All commercial refuse containers shall be screened.
      (2)   A landscaping plan shall be included, and shall set forth complete
specifications for plants, and other features.
      (3)   Adequate area shall be designated for snow storage so that clear
visibility shall be maintained from the property to any public street.
      (4)   The design of any structure shall be compatible with other
structures in the surrounding area.
(Prior Code, § 11.70)
§ 156.038 TELECOMMUNICATION TOWERS AND ANTENNAE.
   (A)   Purpose. To accommodate the communication needs of residents and
businesses while protecting the public health, safety, and general welfare of
the community, the city finds that these regulations are necessary in order to:
      (1)   Facilitate the provision of wireless telecommunication services to
the residents, and businesses, of the city;
      (2)   Minimize adverse visual effects of towers through careful design
and siting standards;
      (3)   Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure
through structural standards and setback requirements; and
      (4)   Maximize the use of existing, and approved, towers and buildings to
accommodate new wireless telecommunication antennas in order to reduce the
number of towers needed to serve the community.
   (B)   Required permits. Prior to any construction activities, the following
permits must be secured from the city:
      (1)   A building permit; and
      (2)   A special use permit, as required by §
156.054, and as required by the special use permit application.
   (C)   Zoning district use. Telecommunication towers and antennae will be
allowed in any zoning district in the city upon the approval of the two permits
required in division (B) above. The special use permit is required regardless
of the underlying zoning district.
   (D)   Area, setback, and height restrictions.
      (1)   The minimum lot area requirements are determined by the zoning
district in which the tower development site is located, and as determined by
any additional area needed to meet all setback requirements of this chapter.
      (2)   The minimum setback from all property lines and public rights-of-
way for telecommunications towers shall be equal to its height, except for
towers that are designed to collapse in upon themselves. For these latter type
of towers, the minimum setbacks are one-half the tower height for all yard
setbacks.
      (3)   The maximum height for telecommunications towers, including
antennae, is 200 feet.
   (E)   Co-location requirements.
      (1)   A proposal for a new commercial wireless telecommunication service
tower shall not be approved unless it can be documented by the applicant, by a
qualified, and licensed, engineer, that the telecommunication equipment planned
for the proposed tower cannot be accommodated on an existing, or approved,
tower, commercial building, or public structure within a one-mile radius of the
proposed tower site due to one, or more, of the following reasons:
         (a)   The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of
the existing, or approved, tower or commercial building, and the existing, or
approved, tower cannot be reinforced, modified, or replaced to accommodate
planned, or equivalent, equipment at a reasonable cost;
         (b)   The planned equipment would cause interference materially
impacting the usability of other existing, or planned, equipment at the tower,
or building, and interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost;
         (c)   Existing, or approved, towers and buildings within the search
radius (one mile) cannot accommodate the planned equipment at a height
necessary to reasonably function; and/or
         (d)   The applicant must demonstrate that a good faith effort to co-
locate equipment on existing towers, or structures, within the one-mile radius,
but an agreement could not be reached.
      (2)   Predominantly economic reasons for not pursuing co-location sites
shall not be accepted, and would generally be grounds for rejection of the
application, and/or denial of the special use permit.
      (3)   Any proposed commercial wireless telecommunication service tower
shall be designed to accommodate both the applicant’s antennae and comparable
antennae for at least two additional users. Towers must be designed to allow
for future rearrangement of antennae upon the tower, and to accept antennae
mounted at varying heights.
   (F)   Tower design requirements. Proposed, or modified, towers and antennae
shall meet the following design requirements:
      (1)   Towers and antennae shall be designed to blend into the surrounding
environment through the use of color and camouflaging architectural treatment,
except in instances where the color is dictated by federal, or state,
authorities; and
      (2)   Commercial wireless telecommunication service towers shall be of a
monopole design, unless the Council determines that an alternative design would
better blend in to the surrounding environment. Towers must be self-supporting
without the use of wires, cables, beams, or other means.
   (G)   Construction requirements.
      (1)   All antennae, towers, and accessory structures shall comply with
all applicable provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   Towers shall be certified by a qualified, and licensed,
professional engineer to conform to the latest structural standards, and wind
loading requirements, of the Uniform Building Code and the Electronics Industry
Association.
      (3)   No part of any antenna, or tower, nor any lines, cable, equipment,
wires, or braces in connection with either shall, at any time, extend across,
or over, any part of the right-of-way, public street, highway, sidewalk, or
property line.
      (4)   Towers and associated antennae shall be designed to conform with
accepted electrical engineering methods and practices, and to comply with the
provisions of the National Electrical Code.
      (5)   All signal and remote control conductors of low energy extending
substantially horizontally above the ground between a tower, or antenna, and a
structure, or between towers, shall be at least eight feet above the ground at
all points, unless buried underground.
      (6)   Every tower affixed to the ground shall be protected by a security
fence to discourage climbing of the tower, unless waived by the city.
      (7)   Tower locations should provide the maximum amount of screening
possible for off-site views of the facility. Existing on-site vegetation shall
be preserved to the maximum extent practicable. The area around the base of the
tower, and any accessory structures, shall be landscaped, and/or screened.
   (H)   Lights and other attachments.
      (1)   No antenna, or tower, shall have affixed, or attached, to it in any
way, except during time of repair or installation, any lights, reflectors,
flashers, or other illuminating device, except as required by the Federal
Aviation Agency (FAA) or the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), nor shall
any tower have constructed on, or attached to, in any way, any platform,
catwalk, crow’s nest, or like structure, except during periods of construction
or repair.
      (2)   The use of any portion of a tower for signs, other than warning or
equipment information signs, is prohibited.
   (I)   Accessory utility building. All utility buildings and structures
accessory to a tower shall be architecturally designed to blend in with the
surrounding environment, and shall meet the minimum setback requirements of the
zoning district in which the tower site is located. Ground mounted equipment
shall be screened from view by suitable vegetation, except where a design of
non-vegetative screening better reflects, and complements, the architectural
character of the surrounding neighborhood.
   (J)   Screening standards.
      (1)   When used, walls, or fences, must provide for full visual screening
of accessory buildings or storage areas, as viewed from residential areas and
state, and county, roads.
      (2)   The materials used for constructing the wall, or fence, shall be
specified in the site plan, and shall be subject to approval by the Planning
and Zoning Commission and Council.
      (3)   Berms, if used, shall be constructed with a slope not to exceed 3:
1, and shall be covered with sod, or other landscape material, sufficient to
prevent erosion of the berm.
      (4)   Trees, hedges, or other vegetative materials, when used, must
provide at least 75% capacity throughout the year. The screening must also
conform to all vegetative setback requirements of this chapter.
   (K)   Maintenance requirements.
      (1)   The yard area in front of fences, and walls, shall be trimmed, and
maintained, in a neat and attractive manner.
      (2)   Repairs to damaged areas of walls, or fences, shall be made within
30 days of sustaining the damage.
      (3)   Areas left in a natural state, and vegetative screening area, shall
be properly maintained in a sightly, and well-kept, condition.
      (4)   Diseased, dying, or dead vegetative screening elements shall be
removed and then replaced, at a minimum, with healthy plants of the same size
required when first planted.
   (L)   Abandoned, or unused towers, or portions of towers.
      (1)   All abandoned, or unused, towers, and associated facilities, shall
be removed within six months of the cessation of operations at the site, unless
a time extension is approved by the Council. A copy of the relevant portions of
a signed lease, which requires the applicant to remove the tower, and any
associated facilities, upon the cessation of their operations, shall be
submitted at the time of application. In the event that a tower is not removed
within six months of cessation of operations at a site, the tower, and
associated facilities, may be removed by the city, and the cost of removal
assessed against the property.
      (2)   Unused portions of towers above manufactured connection shall be
removed within six months of the time of antenna relocations. The replacement
of portions of a tower previously removed requires the issuance of a new
building/special use permit.
   (M)   Antennae mounted on roofs, walls, and existing towers. The placement
of wireless telecommunication antennae on roofs, walls, and existing towers may
be approved by the Council; provided, the antennae meets the requirements of
this chapter, after submittal of:
      (1)   A site and building plan; and
      (2)   A report prepared by a qualified, and licensed, professional
engineer indicating the existing structure’s, or tower’s, suitability to accept
the antenna, and the proposed method of affixing the antenna to the structure.
A complete detailing of all fixtures and couplings needed, and the precise
point of attachment, shall be indicated.
   (N)   Additional submittal requirements. In addition to the information
required elsewhere in this chapter, applications for towers shall include the
following supplemental information:
      (1)   Documentation of the area to be served by the tower, including a
narrative describing why the site chosen is the most appropriate site for the
tower location, the results of any environmental review conducted on the chosen
site, and a discussion of why existing structures within the search area would
not be suitable as locations, or co-locations, for the purpose of the antennae;
      (2)   A copy of an agreement between the applicant and property owner
that the site, and tower, will be designed for not less than three users. The
agreement shall also include a statement that any unused, or obsolete, tower
shall be removed by the property owner, or applicant. This agreement shall be
signed by the applicant and property owner, and shall be attached to, and
become part of, the permit;
      (3)   A report from a qualified, and licensed, professional engineer
which:
         (a)   Describes the tower height and design, including a cross section
and elevation;
         (b)   Documents the height above grade for all potential mounting
positions for co-locating antennae, and the minimum separation distances
between antennae;
         (c)   Describes the tower capacity, including the number, and type, of
antennae it can accommodate;
         (d)   Documents what steps the applicant will take to avoid
interference with established public safety telecommunications;
         (e)   Includes an engineer’s stamp and registration number; and
         (f)   Includes other information necessary to evaluate the request.
      (4)   Before the issuance of a building permit, the following
supplemental information shall be submitted:
         (a)   Proof that the proposed tower complies with regulations
administered by the FAA; and
         (b)   A report from a qualified, and licensed, professional engineer
which demonstrates the tower’s compliance with the aforementioned structural,
and electrical, standards.
      (5)   Additional liability insurance equivalent to the minimum city
requirements, and proof of insurance shall be provided with all other
information contained with the submittal materials.
(Prior Code, § 11.70)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 156.050 ENFORCING OFFICER.
   (A)   The City Council shall appoint, or contract for the services of, a
Zoning Administrator whose term of office shall terminate at the pleasure of
the governing body.
   (B)   The Zoning Administrator shall enforce this chapter, and shall perform
the following duties;
         (1)   Issue building, and other, permits, and make, and maintain,
records thereof;
         (2)   Conduct inspections of locations of buildings and use of land to
determine compliance with the terms of this chapter;
         (3)   Maintain permanent, and current, records of this chapter,
including, but not limited to, all maps, amendments and special uses,
variances, appeals, and applications therefor;
         (4)   Receive, file, and forward all applications for appeals,
variances, special uses, or other matters to the designated official bodies;
         (5)   Institute, in the name of the city, any appropriate actions, or
proceedings, against a violator as provided for; and
         (6)   The power to enter private, or public, property for the purpose
of inspecting, and investigating, conditions relating to the enforcement of
this chapter at reasonable times.
(Prior Code, § 11.80)
§ 156.051 APPEALS AND BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   (A)   The Council shall serve as the Board of Adjustment.
   (B)   The Board of Adjustment shall act upon all questions as they may arise
in the administration of this chapter, including the interpretation of zoning
maps, and it shall hear, and decide, appeals from, and review any order,
requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official
charged with enforcing this chapter. The appeal may be taken by any person,
firm, or corporation aggrieved, or by any officer, department, board, or bureau
of a town, municipality, county, or state.
   (C)   The Board of Adjustment shall also have the power to grant variance to
provisions of this chapter under certain conditions. The criteria to be applied
to a variance application are stated in §
156.055. No use variance (a land use other than what is permitted in the
district, either outright or special) shall be issued by the Board of
Adjustment.
   (D)   Hearings by the Board of Adjustment shall be held within the time, and
upon the notice to interested parties, as is provided in its adopted rules for
the transaction of its business. The Board shall, within a reasonable time,
make its order deciding the matter, and shall serve a copy of the order upon
the appellant, or petitioner, by mail. Any party may appear at the hearing in
person, or by agent or attorney.
(Prior Code, § 11.80)
§ 156.052 DUTIES OF THE PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION IN ZONING
ADMINISTRATION.
   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall provide assistance to the Council
and Zoning Administrator in the administration of this chapter, and the
recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be advisory in
nature. Specifically, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall review, hold
public hearings, and make recommendations to the Council on all applications
for zoning amendments, special use permits, and variances using the criteria
contained herein.
(Prior Code, § 11.80)
§ 156.053 ZONING AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Criteria for granting zoning amendments. The Council may adopt
amendments to the this chapter, and the zoning map in relation both to land
uses within a particular district, or to the location of the district line. The
amendments shall not be issued indiscriminately, but shall only be used as a
means to reflect changes in the goals, and policies, of the city as specified
in the comprehensive plan, or due to changed conditions within the city.
   (B)   Kinds of amendments.
      (1)   A change in a district’s boundary (rezoning).
      (2)   A change in the this chapter.
      (3)   A change in any other provision of this chapter.
   (C)   Initiation of proceedings. Proceedings for amending this chapter shall
be initiated by at least one of the following three methods:
      (1)   By petition of any owner, or owners, of property that is proposed
to be rezoned, or for which zoning, or district regulation, changes are
proposed;
      (2)   By recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission; or
      (3)   By action of the Council.
   (E)   Required exhibits for rezoning, or district regulation changes,
initiated by property owners.
      (1)   A preliminary building and site development plan (the Council may
also require a boundary survey of the property).
      (2)   Evidence of ownership, or enforceable option, on the property.
   (F)   Procedure. The procedure for a property owner to initiate rezoning, or
district regulation change, applying to the property is as follows:
      (1)   The property owner, or his or her agent, shall meet with the Zoning
Administrator to explain his or her situation, learn the procedures, and obtain
an application form;
      (2)   The applicant shall file the completed application form, together
with the required exhibits, with the Zoning Administrator, and shall pay a
filing fee as established by the Council. If the application and submittals are
complete, this date shall be the official submission date. If the application
or submittals are not complete, the Zoning Administrator will notify the
applicant of the deficiencies within ten days. The official submission date
will be the day that the petitioner has submitted a complete application, and
supplied all required exhibits;
      (3)   The Zoning Administrator shall transmit the application, and
required exhibits, to the Planning and Zoning Commission, and shall notify all
property owners within 350 feet of the outer boundaries of the property in
question. However, failure of any property owner to receive the notification
shall not invalidate the proceedings;
      (4)   The Zoning Administrator shall set the date for a public hearing,
and shall have notices of the hearing published in the legal newspaper at least
once, not less than ten days, and not more than 30 days, prior to the hearing.
The Council may waive the mailed notice requirements for a city-wide amendment
to this chapter initiated by the Planning and Zoning Commission or the Council;
      (5)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold the public hearing,
and then shall recommend one of three actions (approval, denial, or approval
with special conditions) to the Council within 30 to 40 days of the official
submission date;
      (6)   The Council shall act upon the application within 20 to 30 days of
receiving the recommendations by the Planning and Zoning Commission, or,
ultimately, within 60 days of the official submission date;
      (7)   If an applicant requests that a special meeting be scheduled, the
applicant shall bear the full cost for the special meeting. The fee for special
meetings shall be set by the Council; and
      (8)   No application of a property owner for an amendment to the text of
this chapter, or the zoning map, shall be considered by the Planning and Zoning
Commission within a one-year period following a denial of the request, except
the Planning and Zoning Commission may permit a new application if, in the
opinion of the Planning and Zoning Commission, new evidence, or a change of
circumstances, warrants it.
(Prior Code, § 11.80)
§ 156.054 SPECIAL USE PERMIT.
   (A)   Criteria for granting special use permits. In granting a special use
permit, the Council shall consider the advice, and recommendations, of the
Planning and Zoning Commission, and the effect of the proposed use on the
comprehensive plan, and upon the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of
occupants of the surrounding area. Among other things, the Council shall make
the following findings, where applicable:
      (1)   The use will not create an excessive burden on existing parks,
schools, streets, and other public facilities and utilities that serve, or are
proposed to serve, the area;
      (2)   The use will be sufficiently compatible, or separated by distance
or screening, from adjacent residentially zoned, or used, land so that existing
homes will not be depreciated in value, nor will the use deter development of
vacant land;
      (3)   The structure and site have an appearance that will not have an
adverse effect upon adjacent residential properties;
      (4)   The use is reasonably related to the overall needs of the city, and
to the existing land use;
      (5)   The use is consistent with the purposes of the zoning code, and the
purposes of the zoning district in which the applicant intends to locate the
proposed use;
      (6)   The use is not in conflict with policies of the city;
      (7)   The use will not cause traffic hazards or congestion;
      (8)   The use will not cause air, noise, water, or visual pollution; and
      (9)   Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage, and necessary
facilities have been, or will be, provided.
   (B)   Additional conditions. In addition to the standards and requirements
expressly specified in this chapter, the Council may impose additional
conditions which it considers necessary to protect the surrounding area, and/or
the community as a whole. These conditions may include, but are not limited to,
the following:
      (1)   Increasing the required lot size or yard dimension;
      (2)   Limiting the height, size, or location of buildings;
      (3)   Controlling the location, and number, of vehicle access points;
      (4)   Increasing the street width;
      (5)   Increasing the number of required off-street parking spaces;
      (6)   Limiting the number, size, location, or lighting of signs;
      (7)   Requiring diking, fencing, screening, landscaping, or other
facilities to protect adjacent, or nearby, property;
      (8)   Designating sites for open space;
      (9)   Imposing time limitations on the use;
      (10)   Modifications of waste treatment and water supply facilities;
      (11)   Limitations on period of use, occupancy, and operation;
      (12)   Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed
restrictions;
      (13)   Requirements for construction of channel modifications,
compensatory storage, dikes, levees, and other protective measures; and
      (14)   Flood proofing measures, in accordance with the State Building
Code and this chapter. The applicant shall submit a plan, or document,
certified by a registered, professional engineer, or architect, that the flood
proofing measures are consistent with the regulatory flood protection
elevation, and associated flood factors for the particular area.
   (C)   Procedure. The procedure for obtaining a special use permit is as
follows:
      (1)   The property owner, or his or her agent, shall meet with the Zoning
Administrator to explain the situation, learn the procedures, and obtain an
application form;
      (2)   The applicant shall file the completed application form, together
with the required exhibits, with the Zoning Administrator, and shall pay a
filing fee as established by the Council. If the application and submittals are
complete, this date shall be the official submission date. If the application,
or submittals, are not complete, the Zoning Administrator will notify the
applicant of the deficiencies within ten days;
      (3)   The Zoning Administrator shall transmit the application to the
Planning and Zoning Commission, and shall notify all property owners within 350
feet of the outer boundaries of the property in question. However, failure of
any property owner to receive the notification shall not invalidate the
proceedings;
      (4)   The Zoning Administrator shall set the date for a public hearing,
and shall have notice of the hearing published at least once in the legal
newspaper, not less than ten days, and not more than 30 days, prior to the
hearing;
      (5)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold the public hearing,
and then shall study the application to determine possible adverse effects of
the proposed special use, and to determine what additional requirements may be
necessary (approval, denial, or approval with special conditions) to the
Council within 30 to 40 days of the official submission date;
      (6)   The Council shall take appropriate action on the request for a
special use permit within 20 to 30 days of receiving the recommendations by the
Planning and Zoning Commission, or, ultimately, within 60 days of the official
submission date. If it grants the special use permit, the Council may impose
conditions (including time limits) it considers necessary to protect the public
health, safety, and welfare, and the conditions may include a time limit for
the use to exist, or operate;
      (7)   Where a special use permit has been issued pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter, the permit shall become null and void without
further action by the Planning and Zoning Commission, or the Council, unless
work thereon commences within one year of the date of granting the special use.
The special use permit shall not be assignable. A special use permit shall be
deemed to authorize one particular use, and shall expire if the use is
discontinued for more than six consecutive months;
      (8)   In the event that the applicant violates any of the conditions set
forth in this permit, the Council shall have the authority to revoke the
special use permit;
      (9)   If an applicant requests that a special meeting be scheduled, the
applicant shall bear the full cost for the special meeting. The fee for special
meetings shall be set by the Council; and
      (10)   No application of a property owner for a special use shall be
considered by the Planning and Zoning Commission within a one-year period
following a denial for such a request, except the Planning and Zoning
Commission may permit a new application if, in its opinion, new evidence, or a
change in circumstances, warrants it.
(Prior Code, § 11.80)
§ 156.055 VARIANCE.
   (A)   Criteria for granting variances.
      (1)   A variance to the provisions of this chapter may be issued to
provide relief to the land owner in those zones where this chapter imposes
undue hardship or practical difficulties to the property owner in the use of
the land. No use variances may be issued.
      (2)   A variance may be granted only in the event that the following
circumstances exist:
         (a)   Exceptional, or extraordinary, circumstances apply to the
property that do not apply generally to other properties in the same zone, or
vicinity, and result from lot size or shape, topography, or other circumstances
over which the owners of property have had no control;
         (b)   The literal interpretation of this chapter would deprive the
applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same district
under the terms of this chapter;
         (c)   The special conditions, or circumstances, do not result from the
actions of the applicant;
         (d)   The variance requested will not confer on the applicant any
special privilege that is denied by this chapter to owners of other lands,
structures, or buildings in the same district;
         (e)   The variance requested is the minimum change needed to alleviate
the hardship;
         (f)   The variance would not be materially detrimental to the purposes
of this chapter, or to property in the same zone; and
         (g)   A proposed home, or building, improvement may be allowed without
a variance; provided, it meets the following additional criteria:
            1.   It does not intrude on any setback to a degree greater than
the building line of the existing principal structure; and
            2.   It is not located within a floodplain area.
   (B)   Required exhibits for variances.
      (1)   A preliminary building and site development plan will be required.
The Council may also require a boundary survey of the property.
      (2)   Evidence of ownership or enforceable option on the property will
also be required.
   (C)   Procedure. The procedures for obtaining a variance from the
regulations of this chapter are as follows:
      (1)   The property owner, or his or her agent, shall meet with the Zoning
Administrator to explain the situation, learn the procedures, and obtain an
application form;
      (2)   The applicant shall file the completed application form, together
with the required exhibits, with the Zoning Administrator, and shall pay a
filing fee as established by the Council. If the application, and submittals,
are complete, this date shall be the official submission date. If the
application, or submittals, are not complete, the Zoning Administrator will
notify the applicant of the deficiencies within ten days;
      (3)   The Zoning Administrator shall transmit the application to the
Planning and Zoning Commission for review, and shall notify all property owners
within 350 feet of the outer boundaries of the property in question. However,
failure of any property owner to receive the notification shall not invalidate
the proceedings;
      (4)   The Zoning Administrator shall set the date for a public hearing,
and shall have notice of the hearing published at least once in the legal
newspaper, not less than ten days, nor more than 30 days, prior to the hearing;
      (5)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing on
the proposed variance, and shall provide a recommendation to the Board of
Adjustment within 30 to 40 days of the official submission date. The
recommendation shall be one of three actions: approval; denial; or approval
with special conditions;
      (6)   The Board of Adjustment shall take appropriate action on the
variance request within 20 to 30 days of receiving the recommendations by the
Planning and Zoning Commission, or, ultimately, within 60 days of the official
submission date. If it approves the variance, the Board of Adjustment may
impose conditions (including time limits) it considers necessary to protect the
public health, safety, and welfare, and the conditions may include a time limit
for the use to exist or operate;
      (7)   If an applicant requests that a special meeting be scheduled, the
applicant shall bear the full cost for the special meeting. The fee for special
meetings shall be set by the Council; and
      (8)   No application by a property owner for a variance shall be
submitted to the city within a six-month period following a denial of such a
request, except the Board may permit a new application, if in the opinion of
the Board, new evidence of change, or circumstances, warrants it.
(Prior Code, § 11.80) (Ord. 165, second series, passed 7-5-2000)
ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-1)
§ 156.070 PURPOSE.
   The R-1 (One- and Two-Family Residential) District is intended for low
density residential development in those areas where the development fits the
land use plan and its policies, and where municipal utilities are available.
(Prior Code, § 11.20)
§ 156.071 PERMITTED USES.
   The following are permitted uses in the R-1 District:
   (A)   One- and two-family dwellings; and
   (B)   Parks or public recreation areas.
(Prior Code, § 11.20)
§ 156.072 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
   The following are permitted accessory uses in the R-1 District:
   (A)   Garages;
   (B)   Gardening and horticultural uses, but no sales structure;
   (C)   Private swimming pools enclosed within a chain link, or similar, fence
at least five feet in height;
   (D)   Boarding, or rental, of rooms to four, or fewer, persons within the
principal structure;
   (E)   Parking of one recreational vehicle when used by the resident occupant
so long as the vehicle does not encroach on any dedicated public rights-of-way,
platted rights-of-way, public easements, or utility easements. The vehicle, in
its entirety, must be located on the driveway, and parked in compliance with §
151.27, and all other applicable code sections; and
   (F)   Accessory buildings and structures, including private kennels,
excluding conex and truck boxes.
(Prior Code, § 11.20) (Ord. 5, third series, passed 10-7-2008; Ord. 30, third
series, passed 10-15-2013)
§ 156.073 SPECIAL USES.
   The following are special uses in the R-1 District:
   (A)   Public buildings, including administration buildings, police and fire
stations, libraries, post offices, municipal utility buildings, and structures,
such as reservoirs, wells, elevated tanks, and similar essential public utility
and service structures;
   (B)   Schools;
   (C)   Churches;
   (D)   Golf courses, clubhouses, public swimming pools, and private swimming
pools serving more than one family;
   (E)   Home occupations meeting the criteria in §
156.034;
   (F)   Cemetery or memorial garden;
   (G)   Apartment building containing no more than four units;
   (H)   Boarding, or rental, of rooms for between five and eight persons
within the principal structure;
   (I)   Day activity center meeting the criteria in §
156.021; and
   (J)   Keeping of horses meeting the criteria in §
156.022.
(Prior Code, § 11.20)
§ 156.074 LOT AREA, WIDTH, AND MINIMUM SETBACK STANDARDS.
Setback, Lot Size Size Standard
Setback, Lot Size  Size Standard
Front yard         25 feet
Height regulations 30 feet
Lot coverage       35% maximum lot coverage by any impervious surface
Minimum lot area   9,000 feet
Minimum lot width  75 feet
Rear yard          20 feet*
Side yard          8 feet**
Notes to Table:
*   Rear yard setback for a garage accessed from an alley is five feet
**   Side yard setback for a garage accessed from an alley is five feet
 
(Prior Code, § 11.20) (Ord. 007, fourth series, passed 11-24-2022; Ord. 027,
fourth series, passed 5-6-2025)
§ 156.075 CORNER LOT REQUIREMENTS.
   The front yard setback standard shall be applied to all street side areas of
a lot. Exceptions shall apply to legally-created lots of record that are too
narrow to conform to this requirement. In this instance, the side yard shall be
reduced to 15 feet. The front of the lot will be defined as that portion of a
lot bounded by a dedicated public street, and in the case of a corner lot, the
shortest dimension of the lot on a public street. Or, if the property owner
disputes this definition, the city may consider the front of a lot as the
portion of the lot that is defined as the delivery address by the U.S. Postal
Service.
(Prior Code, § 11.20)
§ 156.076 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   Development occurring in this district shall meet applicable criteria as
found in §§
71.20,
156.004, and
156.020 through
156.038.
(Prior Code, § 11.20)
MULTIPLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-2)
§ 156.090 PURPOSE.
   The R-2 (Multiple Family Residential) District is intended for a variety of
higher density housing options, including apartments, multiple family
dwellings, townhouses, and condominiums in those areas where the development
fits the land use plan, where properly related to other land uses and
thoroughfares, and where adequate municipal utilities are available.
(Prior Code, § 11.21)
§ 156.091 PERMITTED USES.
   The following are permitted uses in the R-2 District:
   (A)   Any use permitted in the R-1 District;
   (B)   Multiple family dwellings, apartment buildings, townhouses, and
condominiums;
   (C)   Board houses;
   (D)   Hospitals, convalescent homes, and nursing homes;
   (E)   Religious, educational, charitable, or philanthropic institutions; and
   (F)   Private clubs and lodges, except those whose service is customarily
carried on as a commercial business.
(Prior Code, § 11.21)
§ 156.092 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
   The following are permitted accessory uses in the R-2 District:
   (A)   Garages;
   (B)   Storage buildings customarily incidental to the permitted uses; and
   (C)   Accessory buildings and structures, including private kennels.
(Prior Code, § 11.21) (Ord. 30, third series, passed 10-15-2013)
§ 156.093 SPECIAL USES.
   The following are special uses in the R-2 District:
   (A)   Any special use specified in the R-1 District; and
   (B)   Manufactured housing developments meeting the criteria in the city
code.
(Prior Code, § 11.21)
§ 156.094 LOT AREA, WIDTH, AND MINIMUM SETBACK STANDARDS.
Setback, Lot Size Size Standard
Setback,    Size Standard
Lot Size
Front yard  25 feet*
Height      45 feet
regulations
Lot         35% maximum lot coverage by any impervious surface
coverage
Minimum lot 10,000 square feet for structures containing up to four units, thereafter add
area        2,000 square feet per unit
Minimum lot 80 feet
width
Rear yard   30 feet
            1.   One- and two-family structures: 8 foot side yards
Side yard   2.   Multiple family structures 30 feet in height or less: 15 foot side yards
            3.   Multiple family structures more than 30 feet in height: 15 side yard*
Notes to Table:
*   Plus one foot for each foot in height the building exceeds 30 feet.
 
(Prior Code, § 11.21) (Ord. 027, fourth series, passed 5-6-2025)
§ 156.095 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   Development occurring in this district shall meet applicable criteria as
found in §§
71.20,
156.004, and
156.020 through
156.038.
(Prior Code, § 11.21) (Ord. 165, second series, passed 7-5-2000; Ord. 30, third
series, passed 10-15-2013)
SERVICE BUSINESS DISTRICT (B-2)
§ 156.110 PURPOSE.
   The B-2 (Service Business) District is intended for commercial activities
which might be incompatible with uses in other business districts by reason of
traffic considerations, marketing characteristics, area requirements, and other
characteristics inherent in these uses.
(Prior Code, § 11.30)
§ 156.111 PERMITTED USES.
   The following are permitted uses in the B-2 District:
   (A)   Restaurants or taverns;
   (B)   Indoor recreational or leisure activities, such as bowling, pool
halls, skating rinks, or other similar kinds of uses;
   (C)   Retail sales of groceries, meats, vegetables, fruit, or other food
products, frozen food storage locker establishments, and variety stores;
   (D)   Retail sales, including service and repair of household appliances,
including computers, audio equipment, televisions, washers, dryers,
dishwashers, air conditioners, and other similar household items;
   (E)   Secondhand merchandise retail sales;
   (F)   Cabinet maker, carpentry shop, furniture or upholstering repair shops,
and artisan production shop;
   (G)   Dry cleaning establishments, and self service laundromats;
   (H)   Plumbers, heating system contractors shops, sales, and showrooms, and
general contractors’ shops;
   (I)   Copy shops;
   (J)   Bakeries;
   (K)   Funeral homes;
   (L)   Motels or hotels;
   (M)   Newspaper distribution centers;
   (N)   Convention halls, or civic centers;
   (O)   Municipal and government buildings, or public utility structures; and
   (P)   Other business activities of a similar character.
(Prior Code, § 11.30)
§ 156.112 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
   The following are permitted accessory uses in the B-2 District: Uses
customarily incidental to the permitted uses including outside vending
machines, telephone booths, and screened storage areas.
(Prior Code, § 11.30)
§ 156.113 SPECIAL USES.
   The following are special uses in the B-2 District:
   (A)   Drive-in restaurants;
   (B)   Lumber yards;
   (C)   Greenhouses, landscape nurseries, and garden stores;
   (D)   Miniature golf courses, golf driving ranges, and archery ranges;
   (E)   Marine and boat sales, and servicing businesses;
   (F)   New, or used, automobile and truck sales and service, and storage
lots;
   (G)   Auto service stations, auto convenience markets, car wash business,
and auto repair shops;
   (H)   Animal hospitals, veterinary clinics, and kennels;
   (I)   Self service storage facilities; and
   (J)   Other business activities of a similar character.
(Prior Code, § 11.30)
§ 156.114 LOT AREA, WIDTH, AND MINIMUM SETBACK STANDARDS.
Setback, Lot Size Size Standard
Setback, Lot Size  Size Standard
Front yard setback No front yard setback required
Height regulations 45 feet
Lot coverage       50% maximum lot coverage by buildings
Minimum lot area   No minimum lot size required in this district
Minimum lot width  No minimum lot width required in this district
Rear yard setback  20 feet
Side yard setback  No side yard setback required*
Notes to Table:
*   Except on lots abutting lots zoned residential, then the side yard
standard that applies to that residential lot shall apply.
 
(Prior Code, § 11.30)
§ 156.115 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   Developments occurring in this district shall meet applicable criteria as
found in §§
71.20, 156.020 through 156.038, such as signage regulations, parking standards,
screening requirements, landscaping standards, or others as appropriate.
(Prior Code, § 11.30)
GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT (B-3)
§ 156.130 PURPOSE.
   The B-3 (General Business) District is intended for retail stores and office
space which are mutually compatible, and can benefit from, and contribute to, a
compact shopping area serving the city or region. No off-street parking
standards are required in this district.
(Prior Code, § 11.31) (Ord. 165, second series, passed 7-5-2000)
§ 156.131 PERMITTED USES.
   The following are permitted uses in the B-3 District:
   (A)   Retail stores, including antique shops, gift or jewelry stores,
clothing stores, department stores, shoe sales, drug stores, video rental
stores, book and stationary stores, hardware stores, sporting goods stores,
bicycle sales and service, furniture sales and other household furnishing
sales, hobby stores, appliance stores, paint and wallpaper sales, and other
retail sales uses similar in nature;
   (B)   Bakeries, grocery stores, or other retail food sales, excluding drive-
in service;
   (C)   Personal services, including banks and loan associations, barber and
beauty shops, dry cleaners, tailor shops and leather repair shops, small
appliance repair shops, and other similar service types conducted with a
building;
   (D)   Professional services including lawyer offices, accountants,
employment agencies, and other business offices of a similar nature;
   (E)   Restaurants, cafes, taverns, and liquor stores; provided, they are not
a drive-in style service;
   (F)   Clinics or medical services for people only, and dentist offices;
   (G)   Business or trade schools;
   (H)   Theaters, museums, art gallery, or sales;
   (I)   Health clubs or gyms;
   (J)   Post office, municipal offices, or other governmental office uses, or
community centers; and
   (K)   Other retail sales, on-site food service, personal, or professional,
services, and business offices that would be of a similar nature to those
listed above, and are not excluded by other sections of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 11.31) (Ord. 211, second series, passed 1-15-2008)
§ 156.132 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
   The following are permitted accessory uses in the B-3 District: Any use that
is clearly incidental to the primary use, and conforms to applicable
performance standards listed elsewhere in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 11.31)
§ 156.133 SPECIAL USES.
   The following are special uses in the B-3 District: retail stores including
antique shops, gift or jewelry stores, clothing stores, department stores, shoe
sales, drug stores, video rental stores, book and stationery stores, hardware
stores, sporting goods stores, bicycle sales and service, furniture sales and
other furnishing sales, hobby stores, appliance stores, paint and wallpaper
sales, secondhand merchandise, and other retail sales uses similar in nature.
(Prior Code, § 11.31) (Ord. 211, second series, passed 1-15-2008)
§ 156.134 LOT AREA, WIDTH, AND MINIMUM SETBACK STANDARDS.
   The following are the lot area, width, and minimum setback standards in the
B-3 District:
   (A)   No setback requirements, no minimum lot size requirement, no minimum
lot width requirement, and no lot coverage restrictions; and
   (B)   Height regulations: 45 feet.
(Prior Code, § 11.31)
§ 156.135 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   No off-street parking standards are required in this district. Developments
in this district are subject to performance standards regarding signage,
screening of storage areas, loading spaces, and other requirements as detailed
in §§
71.20,
156.020 through
156.038.
(Prior Code, § 11.31) (Ord. 165, second series, passed 7-5-2000)
§ 156.136 SIGNS PERMITTED TO PROJECT OVER PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   An awning, canopy, sign, or marquee suspended from a building may extend
over the public right-of-way eight feet, and not closer than four feet of the
curb line extended. The structure shall not be less than eight feet from the
sidewalk or ground grade line.
(Prior Code, § 11.31) (Ord. 168, second series, passed 1-2-2001)
HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL BUSINESS DISTRICT (B-4)
§ 156.150 PURPOSE.
   The B-4 (Highway Commercial Business) District is intended to provide
suitable locations for uses oriented to serving the traveling public, and uses
requiring large areas of highway frontages oriented closely to urban areas and
major transportation routes. The standards applied to this District’s uses will
ensure that there is no impairment to the traffic carrying capabilities of
abutting roads and highways, nor result in strip commercial development.
(Prior Code, § 11.32)
§ 156.151 PERMITTED USES.
   The following are permitted uses in the B-4 District:
   (A)   Retail uses, such as gasoline service stations, which may include
repair services, car wash facilities, and on-site restaurant services; and
   (B)   Other services, such as motels or hotels, and government buildings.
(Prior Code, § 11.32)
§ 156.152 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
   The following are permitted accessory uses in the B-4 District: Any use that
is clearly incidental to the primary use, and conforms to applicable
performance standards listed elsewhere in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 11.32)
§ 156.153 SPECIAL USES.
   The following are special uses in the B-4 District:
   (A)   Parking in required yard areas;
   (B)   Off-premises signage (billboards); and
   (C)   Self service storage facilities.
(Prior Code, § 11.32)
§ 156.154 LOT AREA, WIDTH, AND MINIMUM SETBACK STANDARDS.
Setback, Lot Size Setback Standard
Setback, Lot Size  Setback Standard
Front yard         45 feet
Height regulations 45 feet
Lot coverage       50% maximum lot coverage by buildings, or other structures
Minimum lot area   10,000 feet
Minimum lot width  60 feet
Rear yard          20 feet
Side yard          20 feet
 
(Prior Code, § 11.32)
§ 156.155 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   Development occurring in this district shall meet applicable criteria as
found in §§
71.20,
156.020 through
156.038.
(Prior Code, § 11.32) (Ord. 165, second series, passed 7-5-2000)
PLANNED INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (I-1)
§ 156.170 PURPOSE.
   The I-1 (Planned Industrial) District is intended for administrative,
wholesaling, manufacturing, and related uses which can maintain high standards
of appearance, including open spaces and landscaping, and limit external
effects such as noise, odors, smoke, and vibration.
(Prior Code, § 11.40)
§ 156.171 PERMITTED USES.
   The following are permitted uses in the I-1 District:
   (A)   Airports, truck transport facilities, express package facilities, and
railroad rights-of-way;
   (B)   Storage and warehousing facilities, and wholesale business and office
establishments;
   (C)   Bottling establishments;
   (D)   Building materials sales;
   (E)   Broadcast stations and towers;
   (F)   Electric power generating stations;
   (G)   Printing, publishing, or bookbinding establishments;
   (H)   Dry cleaning or laundering facilities for industrial, or commercial,
clientele;
   (I)   Electrical and electronic manufacturing, and electrical service shops;
   (J)   Medical, dental, and optical manufacturing;
   (K)   Public utility structures and governmental buildings; and
   (L)   Other manufacturing, or industrial, uses whose operations are enclosed
within buildings, and whose operations would not involve impacts beyond their
building, or grounds on which the building is located, including noise, odors,
smoke, or vibrations, and would be of a similar nature to those listed above,
and are not excluded by other sections of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 11.40)
§ 156.172 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
   The following are permitted accessory uses in the I-1 District: Any use that
is clearly incidental to the primary use, and conforms to applicable
performance standards listed elsewhere in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 11.40)
§ 156.173 SPECIAL USES.
   The following are special uses in the I-1 District:
   (A)   Retail or service establishments that provide goods and services
primarily for the use of persons employed in this District; and
   (B)   Any use listed in §
156.021.
(Prior Code, § 11.40)
§ 156.174 LOT AREA, WIDTH, AND MINIMUM SETBACK STANDARDS.
Setback, Lot Size Setback Standard
Setback, Lot Size  Setback Standard
Front yard         30 feet
Height regulations 45 feet
Lot coverage       50% maximum lot coverage by buildings
Minimum district   10 acres*
area
Minimum lot area   20,000 feet
Rear yard          30 feet
Side yard          15 feet
Notes to Table:
*   The minimum for establishment of a new I-1 District, in single ownership,
or some unified control. Expansion of an existing I-1 District will not
require a district area size requirement.
 
(Prior Code, § 11.40)
§ 156.175 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   Developments occurring in this District shall meet applicable criteria as
found in §§
71.20,
156.020 through
156.038.
(Prior Code, § 11.40)
GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (I-2)
§ 156.190 PURPOSE.
   The I-2 (General Industrial) District is intended for general industrial
uses, which, due to their size and nature, would not be appropriate elsewhere.
(Prior Code, § 11.41)
§ 156.191 PERMITTED USES.
   The following are permitted uses in the I-2 District:
   (A)   Any use listed in §
156.171;
   (B)   Welding shops;
   (C)   Canning factories, creameries, and other food product processing
facilities;
   (D)   Contractor’s offices and storage yards, storage areas for plumbing,
heating, and ventilating, or air conditioning contractors, roofing contractors,
lumber yards, masonry manufacturing and storage, electrical contractor, or
refrigeration contractor;
   (E)   Freight terminals;
   (F)   Bulk fuel sales and storage facilities;
   (G)   Vehicle repair shops and storage facilities;
   (H)   Highway maintenance shops and storage yards;
   (I)   Public service structures, including power substations, gas regulator
stations, sewage disposal plants, telephone exchanges, police or fire stations,
elevated storage tanks, and waterworks; and
   (J)   Other manufacturing, or industrial, uses whose operations are
inappropriate for any other district, but could be located within this District
without causing harm to neighboring uses when complying with the District’s
standards.
(Prior Code, § 11.41)
§ 156.192 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
   The following are permitted accessory uses in the I-2 District: Any use that
is clearly incidental to the primary use, and conforms to applicable
performance standards listed elsewhere in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 11.41)
§ 156.193 SPECIAL USES.
   The following are special uses in the I-2 District:
   (A)   The extraction, processing, or storage of sand, gravel, stone, or
other like materials;
   (B)   Retail and service establishments essential to the operation of this
District; and
   (C)   Auto salvage yards.
(Prior Code, § 11.41)
§ 156.194 LOT AREA, WIDTH, AND MINIMUM SETBACK STANDARDS.
 
Setback, Lot Size                     Setback Standard
Front, side, and rear yard            25 feet from any residential district lot
                                      line
Height regulations                    75 feet
Lot coverage                          No maximum
Minimum lot area or width requirement None
 
(Prior Code, § 11.41)
§ 156.195 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   Development occurring in this District shall meet applicable criteria as
found in §§
71.20,
156.020 through
156.038.
(Prior Code, § 11.41) (Ord. 165, second series, passed 7-5-2000)
SHORELAND PROTECTION DISTRICT (SP)
§ 156.210 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION AND POLICY.
   (A)   Statutory authorization. This section is adopted pursuant to the
authorization, and policies, contained in M.S. Chapter 103F, as it may be
amended from time to time, Minn. Regs. parts 6120.2500 through 6120.3900, and
the planning and zoning enabling legislation in M.S. Chapter 462, as it may be
amended from time to time.
   (B)   Policy. The uncontrolled use of shorelands of the city affects the
public health, safety, and general welfare not only by contributing to
pollution of public waters, but also by impairing the local tax base.
Therefore, it is in the best interests of the public health, safety, and
welfare to provide for the wise subdivision use, and development, of shorelands
of public waters. The legislature of the state has delegated responsibility to
local governments of the state to regulate the subdivision, use, and
development of shorelands of public waters, and thus preserve and enhance the
quality of surface waters, conserve the economic and natural environmental
values of shorelands, and provide for the wise use of waters and related land
resources. This responsibility is hereby recognized by the city.
(Prior Code, § 11.60)
§ 156.211 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Jurisdiction. The provisions of this section shall apply to the
shorelands of public water bodies, as classified herein. Pursuant to Minn.
Regs. parts 6120.2500 through 6120.3900, no lake, pond, or flowage less than
ten acres in size need be regulated by a municipal government’s shoreland
regulations.
   (B)   Compliance. The use of any shoreland of public waters; the size and
shape of lots; the use, size, type, and location of structures on lots; the
installation, and maintenance, of water supply and waste treatment systems, the
grading and filling of any shoreland area; the cutting of shoreland vegetation;
and the subdivision of land shall be in full compliance with the terms of this
subchapter, and other applicable regulations.
   (C)   Enforcement. The city is responsible for the administration, and
enforcement, of this subchapter. It is unlawful to violate any provision of
this subchapter, or fail to comply with any of its requirements (including
violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants
or variances, or conditional uses). Violations of this subchapter can occur
regardless of whether or not a permit is required for a regulated activity,
pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 11.60) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.212 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE or FACILITY. A building or improvement subordinate to a
principal use which, because of the nature of its use, can reasonably be
located at, or greater than, normal structure setbacks.
   BOATHOUSE. A structure designed, and used, solely for the storage of boats,
or boating equipment.
   BUILDING LINE. A line parallel to a lot line, or the ordinary high water
level at the required setback beyond which a structure may not exceed.
   COMMERCIAL USE. The principal use of land, or buildings, for the sale,
lease, rental, or trade of products, goods, and services.
   COMMISSIONER. The Commissioner of the Department of National Resources.
   DECK. A horizontal, unenclosed platform with, or without, attached railings,
seats, trellises, or other features, attached, or functionally related, to a
principal use or site, and at any point extending more than three feet above
the ground.
   DUPLEX, TRIPLEX, AND QUAD. A dwelling structure on a single lot, having two,
three, and four units, respectively, being attached by common walls, and each
unit is equipped with separate sleeping, cooking, eating, living, and
sanitation facilities.
   DWELLING SITE. A designated location for residential use by one, or more,
persons using temporary, or movable, shelter, including camping and
recreational vehicle sites.
   DWELLING UNIT. Any structure, or portion of a structure, or other shelter
designed as short-term, or long-term, living quarters for one, or more,
persons, including rental or time-share accommodations, such as motels, hotels,
and resort rooms and cabins.
   EXTRACTIVE USE. The use of land for surface, or subsurface, removal of sand,
gravel, rock, industrial minerals, other non-metallic minerals, and peat not
regulated under M.S. §§ 93.44 through 93.51, as they may be amended from time
to time.
   GUEST COTTAGE. A structure used as a dwelling unit that may contain sleeping
spaces, and kitchen and bathroom facilities, in addition to those provided in
the primary dwelling unit on a lot.
   HARDSHIP. When used in connection with the granting of a variance, means the
property in question cannot be put to a reasonable use if used under conditions
allowed by the official controls. The plight of the landowner is due to
circumstances unique to the property not created by the landowner, and the
variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the locality.
Economic considerations alone shall not constitute an undue hardship if
reasonable use for the property exists under the terms of this subchapter.
   HEIGHT OF BUILDING. The vertical distance between the highest adjoining
ground level at the building, or ten feet above the lowest ground level,
whichever is lower, and the highest point of a flat roof, or average height of
the highest gable of a pitched, or hipped, roof.
   INDUSTRIAL USE. The use of land or building for the production, manufacture,
warehousing, storage, or transfer of goods, products, commodities, or other
wholesale items.
   INTENSIVE VEGETATION CLEARING. The complete removal of trees or shrubs in a
contiguous patch, strip, row, or block.
   LOT. A parcel of land designated by plat, metes and bounds, registered land
survey, auditor’s plot, or other accepted means, and separated from other
parcels, or portions, by the description for the purpose of sale, lease, or
separation.
   NON-RIPARIAN LOT. A lot with no frontage on a waterbody.
   RIPARIAN LOT. A lot with frontage on a waterbody.
   LOT WIDTH. The shortest distance between lot lines measured at the midpoint
of the building lot line.
   NON-CONFORMITY. Any legal use, structure, or parcel of land already in
existence, recorded, or authorized before the effective date of this
subchapter, or amendments thereto, that would not have been permitted to become
established under the terms of this subchapter if the section of the subchapter
had been in effect prior to the date it was established, recorded, or
authorized.
   ORDINARY HIGH WATER LEVEL. The boundary of public waters and wetlands, and
shall be an elevation delineating the highest water level which has been
maintained for a sufficient period of time to leave evidence upon the
landscape, commonly that point where the natural vegetation changes from
predominantly aquatic to predominantly terrestrial. For watercourses, the
ORDINARY HIGH WATER LEVEL is the elevation of the top of the bank of the
channel. For reservoirs and flowages, the ORDINARY HIGH WATER LEVEL is the
operating elevation of the normal summer pool.
   PUBLIC WATERS. Any waters as defined in M.S. § 103G.005, subd. 15, as it may
be amended from time to time.
   SEMI-PUBLIC USE. The use of land by a private, nonprofit organization to
provide a public service that is ordinarily open to some persons outside the
regular constituency of the organization.
   SENSITIVE RESOURCE MANAGEMENT. The preservation and management of areas
unsuitable for development in their natural state due to constraints, such as
shallow soils over groundwater or bedrock, highly erosive, or expansive, soils,
steep slopes, susceptibility to flooding, or occurrence of flora or fauna in
need of special protection.
   SETBACK. The minimum horizontal distance between a structure, sewage
treatment system, or other facility, and an ordinary high water level, sewage
treatment system, road, highway, property line, or other facility.
   SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEM. A septic tank and soil absorption system, or other
individual or cluster type sewage treatment system, as described, and
regulated, herein.
   SEWER SYSTEM. Pipelines or conduits, pumping stations, force main, and all
other construction, devices, appliances, or appurtenances used for conducting
sewage or industrial waste, or other wastes, to a point of ultimate disposal.
   SHORE IMPACT ZONE. Land located between the ordinary high water level of a
public water level of a public water, and a line parallel to it at a setback of
50% of the structure setback.
   SHORELAND. Land located within the following distances from public waters:
1,000 feet from the ordinary high water level of a lake, pond, or flowage; 300
feet from a river or stream; or the landward extent of a floodplain designated
by ordinance on a river or stream, whichever is greater. The limits of
SHORELANDS may be reduced whenever the waters involved are bounded by
topographic divides that extend landward from the waters for lesser distances,
and when approved by the Commissioner.
   SIGNIFICANT HISTORIC SITE. Any archaeological site, standing structure, or
other property that meets the criteria for eligibility to the national Register
of Historic Places, or is listed in the State Register of Historic Sites, or is
determined to be unplatted cemetery that falls under the provisions of M.S. §
307.08, as it may be amended from time to time. A HISTORICAL SITE meets these
criteria if it is presently listed on either register, or if it is determined
to meet the qualifications for listing after review by the state archaeologist,
or the director of the State Historical Society. All unplatted cemeteries are
automatically considered to be SIGNIFICANT HISTORICAL SITES.
   SPECIAL USE. A land use, or development, that would not be appropriate
generally, but may be allowed with appropriate restrictions, as provided by
official controls upon a finding that certain conditions, as detailed in the
zoning provisions, exist, the use or development conforms to the comprehensive
land use plan of the city, and the use is compatible with the existing
neighborhood.
   STEEP SLOPE. Land where agricultural activity or development is either not
recommended, or described as poorly suited due to slope steepness and the
site’s soil characteristics, as mapped, and described, in available county soil
surveys, or other technical reports, unless appropriate design, and
construction, techniques, and farming practices, are used in accordance with
the provisions of this subchapter. Where specific information is not available,
STEEP SLOPES are lands having average slopes over 12%, as measured over
horizontal distances of 50 feet or more, that are not bluffs.
   STRUCTURE. A building or appurtenance, including decks, except aerial, or
underground, utility lines, such as sewer, electric, telephone, telegraph, gas
lines, tower, poles, and other supporting facilities.
   SUBDIVISION. Land that is divided for the purpose of sale, rent, or lease.
   SURFACE WATER ORIENTED COMMERCIAL USE. The use of land for commercial
purposes, where access to, and use of, a surface water feature is an integral
part of the normal conductance of business. Marinas, resorts, and restaurants
with transient docking facilities are examples of the use.
   VARIANCE. A provision for varying the literal provisions of the zoning
provisions in instances where their strict enforcement would cause undue
hardship because of circumstances unique to the individual property under
consideration; and to grant such VARIANCES only when it is demonstrated that
the actions will be in keeping with the spirit, and intent, of the zoning
provisions.
   WATER ORIENTED ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR FACILITY. A small, above ground
building, or other improvement, except stairways, fences, docks, and retaining
walls, which, because of the relationship of its use to a surface water
feature, reasonably needs to be located closer to public waters than the normal
structure setback. Examples of such structures and facilities include
boathouses, gazebos, screen houses, fish houses, pump houses, and detached
decks.
(Prior Code, § 11.60)
§ 156.213 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   Permit required.
      (1)   A permit is required for the construction of buildings, or building
additions (and including such related activities as construction of decks and
signs), the installation, and/or alteration, of sewage treatment systems, and
those grading, and filling, activities not exempted by this subchapter.
Application for a permit shall be made to the Zoning Administrator on the forms
provided. The application shall include the necessary information so that the
Zoning Administrator can determine the site’s suitability for the intended use,
and that a compliant sewage treatment system will be provided.
      (2)   A permit authorizing an addition to an existing structure shall
stipulate that an identifying, non-conforming sewage treatment system shall be
reconstructed, or replaced, in accordance with the provisions of this
subchapter.
   (B)   Variances.
      (1)   Variances may only be granted in accordance with M.S. Chapter 462,
as it may be amended from time to time. A variance may not circumvent the
general purposes, and intent, of this subchapter. VARIANCE means a provision
for varying the literal provisions of this subchapter in instances where its
strict enforcement would cause undue hardship because of circumstances unique
to the individual property under consideration, and to grant the VARIANCE only
when it is demonstrated that the actions will be in keeping with the spirit,
and intent, of this subchapter. No VARIANCE may be granted that would allow any
use that is prohibited in the zoning district in which the subject property is
located. Conditions may be imposed in the granting of a VARIANCE to ensure
compliance, and to protect adjacent properties and the public interest. In
considering a VARIANCE request, the Board of Adjustment must also consider
whether the property owner has reasonable use of the land without the variance,
whether the property is used seasonally or year round, or whether the variance
is being requested solely on the basis of economic considerations, and the
characteristics of development on adjacent properties.
      (2)   The Board of Adjustment shall hear, and decide, requests for
variances in accordance with the rules that is has adopted for the conduct of
business. When a variance is approved after the Department of Natural Resources
has formally recommended denial in the hearing record, the notification of the
approved variance required herein shall also include the Board of Adjustment’s
summary of the public record/testimony, and the findings of facts and
conclusions that supported the issuance of variances.
      (3)   For existing developments, the application for variance must
clearly demonstrate whether a conforming sewage treatment system is present for
the intended use of the property. The variance, if issued, must require
reconstruction of a non-conforming sewage treatment system.
   (C)   Notifications to the Department of Natural Resources.
      (1)   Copies of all notices of any public hearings to consider variances,
amendments, or special uses under local shoreland management controls must be
sent to the Commissioner, or the Commissioner’s designated representatives, and
postmarked at least ten days before the hearings. Notices of hearings to
consider proposed subdivisions/plats must include copies of the subdivision/
plat.
      (2)   A copy of approved amendments and subdivisions/plats, and final
decisions granting variances, or special uses, under local shoreland management
controls, must be sent to the Commissioner, or the Commissioner’s designated
representative, and postmarked within ten days of final action.
   (D)   Fee schedule. A copy of the fee schedule shall be available in the
office of the Zoning Administrator.
(Prior Code, § 11.60)
§ 156.214 SHORELAND CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM AND LAND USE DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Shoreland classification system. The public waters of the county and
the city have been classified by the Commissioner, and have been supported by
appropriate data. The classification of St. James Lake and St. James Creek has
been classified consistent with the criteria found in Minn. Regs. parts
6120.2500 through 6120.3900, and the Protected Waters Inventory Map for the
county. The Commissioner may reclassify any public water as the need arises.
Also, official representatives of the city may submit a resolution, and
supporting data, requesting a change in any shoreland management classification
of waters within its jurisdiction to the Commissioner for consideration.
      (1)   Shoreland area. The shoreland area for the waterbodies listed in
divisions (A)(2) and (A)(3) below shall be as defined herein, and as shown on
the official zoning map.
      (2)   Lakes.
 
Recreational Development Lakes Protected Waters Inventory I.D. Number
St. James Lake                 83-43P
 
      (3)   Rivers and streams.
         (a)   Tributary streams in the city: St. James Creek.
         (b)   All protected watercourses in the city shown on the Protected
Waters Inventory Map for the county, a copy of which is hereby adopted by
reference, not given a classification shall be considered tributary.
   (B)   Land use district descriptions. The underlying zoning districts
designate the uses allowed on the land over which the following standards
apply. The most restrictive standards apply to the use. See the zoning map for
the proper zoning district, and the accompanying shoreland designation map,
both of which are on file at the City Hall.
(Prior Code, § 11.60)
§ 156.215 ZONING AND WATER SUPPLY, SANITARY PROVISIONS.
   (A)   General. All uses established within shoreland areas are required to
be developed with the provision of city sewer and water utilities.
   (B)   Lot area and width standards for residential uses applying to
shoreland areas. The lot area (in square feet) and lot width standards (in
feet) for single-family homes, duplexes, and for additional units created after
the effective date of this subchapter for the lake and stream classifications
follow (for St. James Lake specifically):
      (1)   Riparian lots.
 
Structure Type    Area               Width
Additional units* 15,000 square feet 60 feet
Duplex            35,000 square feet 135 feet
Single            20,000 square feet 100 feet
Notes to Table:
*   For each additional unit, add the area amount and the width amount found in
the table to the standards for single-family homes or duplexes.
 
      (2)   Non-riparian lots.
 
Structure Type    Area               Width
Additional units* 12,000 square feet 55 feet
Duplex            26,000 square feet 135 feet
Single            15,000 square feet 75 feet
Notes to Table:
*   For each additional unit, add the area amount and the width amount found in
the table to the standards for single-family homes or duplexes.
 
   (C)   St. James Creek area lot width standards. There are no minimum lot
size requirements for streams in the shoreland overlay district. Minimum lot
sizes of the underlying zoning districts will apply. The lot width standards
for single-family homes, duplexes, and additional units developed within the
creek area are as follows:
 
Structure Type Sewered
Additional     35 feet
units*
Duplex         115 feet
Single         75 feet
Notes to Table:
*   For each additional unit, add the sewered amount found in the table to the
standards for single-family homes or duplexes.
 
   (D)   Additional special provisions. Lots intended as controlled accesses to
public waters, or as recreation areas for use by owners of non-riparian lots
within subdivisions, are permissible and must meet, or exceed, the following
standards:
      (1)   Size and width. Lots must meet the width and size requirements for
residential lots, and be suitable for the intended uses of controlled access
lots;
      (2)   Docking, mooring, water storage. If docking, mooring, or over water
storage of more than six watercraft is to be allowed at a controlled access
lot, then the width of the lot (keeping the same lot depth) must be increased
by the percent of the requirements for riparian residential lots for each
watercraft beyond six, consistent with the following table for controlled
access lot frontage requirements:
 
Ratio of Lake Size to Shore Length  Required Increase in Frontage (percent)
(acres/mile)
100 to 200                          20%
201 to 300                          15%
301 to 400                          10%
Greater than 400                    0.05%
Less than 100                       25%
 
      (3)   Property ownership. Lots must be jointly owned by all purchasers of
lots in the subdivision, or by all purchasers of non-riparian lots in the
subdivision who are provided riparian access rights on the access lot; and
      (4)   Covenants. Covenants, or other equally effective legal instruments,
must be developed that specify which lot owners have authority to use the
access lot, and what activities are allowed. The activities may include
watercraft launching, loading, storage, beaching, mooring, or docking. They
must also include other outdoor recreational activities that do not
significantly conflict with general public use of the public water, or the
enjoyment of normal property rights by adjacent property owners. Examples of
the non-significant conflict activities include swimming, sunbathing, or
picnicking. The covenants must limit the total number of vehicles allowed to be
parked on the total number of watercraft allowed to be continuously moored,
docked, or stored over water, and must require centralization of all common
facilities and activities in the most suitable locations on the lot to minimize
topographic and vegetation alterations. They must also require all parking
areas, storage buildings, and other facilities to be screened by vegetation or
topography as much as practical from view from the public water, assuming
summer leaf-on conditions.
   (E)   Placement, design, and height of structures.
      (1)   Placement of structures on lots. When more than one setback applies
to a site, structures and facilities must be located to meet all setbacks.
Where structures exist on the adjoining lots on both sides of a proposed
building site, structure setbacks may be altered without a variance to conform
to the adjoining setbacks from the ordinary high water level; provided, the
proposed building site is not located in a shore impact zone. Structures shall
be located as follows:
         (a)   Structure and on-site sewage system setback (in feet) from
ordinary high water level requirements are listed below:
 
Class of Public Waters Unsewered   Sewered Sewage Treatment System
St. James Creek        Not allowed 50      Not allowed
St. James Lake         Not allowed 75      Not allowed
Notes to Table:
One water-oriented accessory structure designed, in accordance with division
(E)(1)(b) below, may be set back a minimum distance of ten feet from the
ordinary high water level.
 
         (b)   The following additional structure setbacks apply, regardless of
the classification of the waterbody:
 
Setback From                                                  Setback (in feet)
Right-of-way line of city road, public street, or other roads 25 feet
or streets not classified
Right-of-way line of federal, state, or county highway        50 feet
Unplatted cemetery                                            50 feet
 
            1.   The structure, or facility, must not exceed ten feet in
height, exclusive of safety rails, and cannot occupy an area greater than 250
square feet. Detached decks must not exceed eight feet above grade at any
point;
            2.   The setback of the structure, or facility, from the ordinary
high water level must be at lest ten feet;
            3.   The structure, or facility, must be treated to reduce
visibility as viewed from public waters and adjacent shorelands by vegetation,
topography, increased setbacks, or color, assuming summer leaf-on conditions;
            4.   The roof may be used as a deck with safety rails, but must not
be enclosed, or used as a storage area;
            5.   The structure, or facility, must not be designed, or used, for
human habitation, and must not contain water supply, or sewage, treatment
facilities; and
            6.   Water-oriented accessory structures used solely for watercraft
storage, including storage of related boating and water oriented sporting
equipment, may occupy an area up to 400 square feet; provided, the maximum
width of the structure is 20 feet, as measured parallel to the configuration of
the shoreline.
         (c)   Stairways and lifts are the preferred alternative to major
topographic alterations for achieving access up, and down, steep slopes to
shore areas. Stairways and lifts must meet the following design requirements:
            1.   Stairways and lifts must not exceed four feet in width on
residential lots. Wider stairways may be used for commercial properties, or
public open space recreational properties;
            2.   Landings for stairways and lifts on residential lots must not
exceed 32 square feet in area. Landings larger than 32 square feet may be used
for commercial properties, or public open space recreational properties;
            3.   Canopies or roofs are not allowed on stairways, lifts, or
landings;
            4.   Stairways, lifts, and landings may be either constructed above
the ground on posts or pilings, or placed into the ground; provided, they are
designed, and built, in a manner that ensures control of soil erosion;
            5.   Stairways, lifts, and landings must be located in the most
visually inconspicuous portions of lots, as viewed from the surface of the
public water, assuming summer leaf-on conditions, whenever practical; and
            6.   Facilities, such as ramps, lifts, or mobility paths for
physically challenged persons are also allowed for achieving access to shore
areas; provided, that the dimensional, and performance, standards, provided for
herein, are complied with, in addition to the requirements of Minn. Regs.
Chapter 1340.
         (d)   No structure may be placed on a significant historic site in a
manner that affects the values of the site, unless adequate information about
the site has been removed, and documented, in a public repository; and
         (e)   The Zoning Administrator must evaluate possible soil erosion
impacts, and development visibility, from public waters before issuing a permit
for construction of sewage treatment systems, roads, driveways, structures, or
other improvements on steep slopes. When determined necessary, conditions must
be attached to issued permits to prevent erosion, and to preserve existing
vegetation screening of structures, vehicles, and other facilities as viewed
from the surface of public waters, assuming summer leaf-on vegetation.
      (2)   Height of structures. All structures in residential districts,
except churches and nonresidential agricultural structures, must not exceed 25
feet in height.
   (F)   Shoreland alterations. Alterations of vegetation and topography will
be regulated to prevent erosion into public waters, fix nutrients, preserve
shoreland aesthetics, preserve historic values, prevent bank slumping, and
protect fish and wildlife habitat.
      (1)   Vegetation alterations.
         (a)   Vegetation alteration necessary for the construction of
structures and sewage treatment systems, and the construction of roads and
parking areas regulated by this subchapter, are exempt from the vegetation
standards that follow.
         (b)   Removal, or alteration, of vegetation, except for agricultural
uses as regulated herein, is allowed, subject to the following standards:
            1.   Intensive vegetation clearing within the Shore Impact Zone,
and on steep slopes, is not allowed; and
            2.   In the Shore Impact Zone, and on steep slopes, limited
clearing of trees is allowed to provide a view to the water from the principal
dwelling site, and to accommodate the placement of stairways and landings,
picnic areas, access paths, livestock watering areas, beach and watercraft
access areas, and permitted water-oriented accessory structures or facilities;
provided, that:
               a.   The screening of structures, vehicles, or other facilities,
as viewed from the water, assuming summer leaf-on conditions, is not
substantially reduced;
               b.   Along rivers, existing shading of water surfaces is
preserved; and
               c.   The above provisions are not applicable to the removal of
trees, limbs, or branches that are dead, diseased, or pose safety hazards.
      (2)   Topographic alterations/grading and filling.
         (a)   Grading and filling, and excavations necessary for the
construction of structures, sewage treatment systems, and driveways, under
validly issued construction permits for these facilities, do not require the
issuance of a separate grading and filling permit. However, the grading and
filling standards in this division (F)(2) must be incorporated into the
issuance of permits for construction of structures, sewage treatment systems,
and driveways.
         (b)   Notwithstanding division (F)(2)(a) above, a grading and filling
permit will be required for:
            1.   The movement of more than ten cubic yards of material on steep
slopes, or within the Shore Impact Zone; and
            2.   The movement of more than 50 cubic yards of material outside
of steep slopes and the Shore Impact Zone.
         (c)   The following considerations and conditions must be adhered to
during the issuance of construction permits, grading and filling permits,
special use permits, variances, and subdivision approvals:
            1.   Grading, or filling, in any type 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, or 8
wetland must be evaluated to determine how extensively the proposed activity
would affect the following functional qualities of the wetland (this evaluation
must also include a determination of whether the wetland alteration being
proposed requires permits, reviews, or approvals by other local, state, or
federal agencies, such as a watershed district, the State Department of Natural
Resources, or the United States Army Corps of Engineers. The applicant will be
so advised):
               a.   Sediment and pollutant trapping and retention;
               b.   Storage of surface runoff to prevent, or reduce, flood
damage;
               c.   Fish and wildlife habitat;
               d.   Recreational use;
               e.   Shoreline, or bank, stabilization; and
               f.   Noteworthiness, including special qualities, such as
historic significance, critical habitat for endangered plants and animals, or
others.
            2.   Alterations must be designed, and conducted, in a manner that
ensures only the smallest amount of bare ground is exposed for the shortest
time possible;
            3.   Mulches, or similar materials, must be used where necessary
for temporary bare soil coverage, and a permanent vegetation cover must be
established as soon as possible;
            4.   Methods to minimize soil erosion, and to trap sediments before
they reach any surface water feature, must be used;
            5.   Altered areas must be stabilized to acceptable erosion control
standards consistent with the field office technical guides of the local soil
and water conservation districts, and the United States Soil Conservation
Service;
            6.   Fill, or excavated material, must not be placed in a manner
that creates an unstable slope;
            7.   Plans to place fill, or excavated material, on steep slopes
must be reviewed by qualified professionals for continued slope stability, and
must not create finished slopes of 30% or greater;
            8.   Any alterations below the ordinary high water level of public
waters must first be authorized by the Commissioner under M.S. § 103G.245, as
it may be amended from time to time;
            9.   Alterations of topography must only be allowed if they are
accessory, or special, uses, and do not adversely affect adjacent, or nearby,
properties; and
            10.   Placement of natural rock riprap, including associated
grading of the shoreline and placement of a filter blanket, is permitted if the
finished slope does not exceed three feet horizontal to the one-foot vertical;
the landward extent of the riprap is within ten feet of the ordinary high water
level; and the height of the riprap above the ordinary high water level does
not exceed three feet.
         (d)   Excavations, where the intended purpose is connection to a
public water, such as boat slips, canals, lagoons, and harbors, must be
controlled by local shoreland controls. Permission for excavations may be given
only after the Commissioner has approved the proposed connection to public
waters.
   (G)   Placement and design of roads, driveways, and parking areas.
      (1)   Public and private roads, parking areas design. Public and private
roads, and parking areas, must be designed to take advantage of natural
vegetation and topography to achieve maximum screening from view from public
waters. Documentation must be provided by a qualified individual that all
roads, and parking areas, are designed, and constructed, to minimize, and
control, erosion to public waters consistent with the field office technical
guides of the local soil and water conservation district, or other applicable
technical materials.
      (2)   Structure setbacks. Roads, driveways, and parking areas must meet
structure setbacks, and must not be placed within the Shore Impact Zone when
other reasonable, and feasible, placement alternatives exist. If no
alternatives exist, they may be placed within these areas, and must be designed
to minimize adverse impacts.
      (3)   Public, and private, watercraft access. Public, and private,
watercraft access ramps, approach roads, and access-related parking areas may
be placed within shore impact zones; provided, the vegetative screening and
erosion control conditions of this provision are met. For private facilities,
the grading and filling provisions provided for herein must be met.
   (H)   Stormwater management. The following general, and specific, standards
shall apply:
      (1)   General standards.
         (a)   When possible, existing natural drainage ways, wetlands, and
vegetated soil surfaces must be used to convey, store, filter, and retain
stormwater runoff before discharge to public waters;
         (b)   Development must be planned, and conducted, in a manner that
will minimize the extent of disturbed areas, runoff velocities, erosion
potential, and reduce, and delay, runoff volumes. Disturbed areas must be
stabilized, and protected, as soon as possible, and facilities, or methods
used, to retain sediment on the site; and
         (c)   When development density, topographic features, and soil, and
vegetation, conditions are not sufficient to adequately handle stormwater
runoff using natural features and vegetation, various types of constructed
facilities, such as diversions, settling basins, skimming devices, dikes,
waterways, and ponds may be used. Preference must be given to designs using
surface drainage, vegetation, and infiltration rather than buried pipes, and
human-made materials and facilities.
      (2)   Specific standards.
         (a)   Impervious surface coverage of lots must not exceed 25% of the
lot area;
         (b)   When constructed facilities are used for stormwater management,
documentation must be provided by a qualified individual that they are
designed, and installed, consistent with the field office technical guide of
the local soil and water conservation districts; and
         (c)   New constructed stormwater outfalls to public waters must
provide for filtering, or settling, of suspended solids, and skimming of
surface debris before discharge.
   (I)   Specific provisions for commercial, industrial, public/semi-public,
agricultural, forestry, and extractive uses, and mining of metallic minerals
and peat.
      (1)   Standards for commercial, industrial, public, and semi-public uses
         (a)   Surface water-oriented commercial uses and industrial, public,
or semi-public uses with similar needs to have access to, and use of, public
waters may be located on parcels, or lots, with frontage on public waters.
Those uses with water-oriented needs must meet the following standards:
            1.   In addition to meeting impervious coverage limits, setbacks,
and other zoning standards in this section, the uses must be designed to
incorporate topographic, and vegetative, screening of parking areas and
structures;
            2.   Uses that require short-term watercraft mooring for patrons
must centralize these facilities and design them to avoid obstructions of
navigation, and to be the minimum size necessary to meet the need; and
            3.   Uses that depend on patrons arriving by watercraft may use
signs and lighting to convey needed information to the public, subject to the
following general standards:
               a.   No advertising signs, or supporting facilities for signs,
may be placed in, or upon, public waters. Signs conveying information, or
safety messages, may be placed in, or on, public waters by a public authority,
or under a permit issued by the County Sheriff;
               b.   Signs may be placed, when necessary, within the Shore
Impact Zone if they are designed, and sized, to be the minimum necessary to
convey needed information. They must only convey the location, and name, of the
establishment, and the general types of goods or services available;
               c.   Signs must not contain other detailed information, such as
product brands and prices, must not be located higher than ten feet above the
ground, and must not exceed 32 square feet in size. If illuminated by
artificial lights, the lights must be shielded, or directed, to prevent
illumination out across public waters; and
               d.   Other outside lighting may be located within the Shore
Impact Zone, or over public waters, if it is used primarily to illuminate
potential safety hazards, and is shielded, or otherwise directed, to prevent
direct illumination out across public waters. This does not preclude use of
navigational lights.
         (b)   Uses without water-oriented needs must be located on lots, or
parcels, without public waters frontage, or, if located on lots, or parcels,
with public waters frontage, must either be set back double the normal ordinary
high water level setback, or be substantially screened from view from the water
by vegetation or topography, assuming summer leaf-on conditions.
      (2)   Agriculture use standards.
         (a)   General cultivation, farming, grazing, nurseries, horticulture,
truck farming, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting are permitted uses of
steep slopes and shores, and impact zones are maintained in permanent
vegetation, or operated under an approved conservation plan (resource
management systems) consistent with the field office technical guides of the
local soil and water conservation districts, or the United States Soil
Conservation Service, as provided by a qualified individual or agency. The
Shore Impact Zone for parcels with permitted agricultural land uses is equal to
a line parallel to, and 50 feet from, the ordinary high water level.
         (b)   Use of fertilizer, pesticides, or animal wastes within
shorelands must be done in such a way as to minimize any impact upon the Shore
Impact Zone, or public waters, by proper application, as per provisions in the
Water Quality in Agriculture “Best Management Practices in Minnesota”, or by
the use of earth or vegetation.
         (c)   Animal feedlots must meet the following standards:
            1.   New feedlots must not be located in the shoreland of
watercourses, and must meet a minimum setback of 300 feet from the ordinary
high water level of all public water basins;
            2.   Modifications, or expansions, to existing feedlots that are
located within 300 feet of the ordinary high water level are allowed if they do
not further encroach into the existing ordinary high water level setback; and
            3.   A certificate of compliance, interim permit, or animal feedlot
permit, when required, must be obtained by the owner, or operator, of an animal
feedlot.
      (3)   Extractive use standards.
         (a)   An extractive use site development, and restoration, plan must
be developed, approved, and followed over the course of operation of the site.
The plan must address dust, noise, possible pollutant discharges, hours and
duration of operation, and anticipated vegetation and topographic alterations.
It must also identify actions to be taken during operation to mitigate adverse
environmental impacts, particularly erosion, and must clearly explain how the
site will be rehabilitated after extractive activities end.
         (b)   Processing machinery must be located consistent with setback
standards for structures from ordinary high water levels of public waters.
   (J)   Special uses. Special uses allowable within shoreland areas shall be
subject to the review and approval procedures, and criteria and conditions for
review of special uses established in this chapter. The following additional
evaluation criteria and special conditions apply within shoreland areas:
      (1)   Evaluation criteria. A thorough evaluation of the waterbody and the
topographic, vegetation, and soils conditions on the site must be made to
ensure:
         (a)   The prevention of soil erosion, or other possible pollution of
public waters, both during, and after, construction;
         (b)   The visibility of structures, and other facilities, as viewed
from public waters is limited;
         (c)   The site is adequate for water supply and on-site sewage
treatment; and
         (d)   The types, uses, and numbers of watercraft that the project will
generate are compatible in relation to the suitability of public waters to
safety accommodate these watercraft.
      (2)   Conditions attached to special use permits. The Planning and Zoning
Commission, or Council, upon consideration of the criteria listed above, and
the purposes of this section, shall attach the conditions to the issuance of
the special use permits as it deems necessary to fulfill the purposes of this
subchapter. The conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following:
         (a)   Increased setbacks from the ordinary high water level;
         (b)   Limitations on the natural vegetation to be removed, or the
requirement that additional vegetation be planted; and
         (c)   Special provisions for the location, design, and use of
structures, sewage treatment systems, watercraft launching and docking areas,
and vehicle parking areas.
   (K)   Water supply and sewage treatment.
      (1)   Water supply. Any use proposed within the shoreland area must be
served by a public water supply for domestic purposes meeting, or exceeding,
standards for water quality of the State Department of Health and the State
Pollution Control Agency.
      (2)   Sewage treatment. Any premises used for human occupancy must be
provided with an adequate method of sewage treatment, as follows:
         (a)   Publicly-owned sewer systems must be used where available; and
         (b)   Existing, and non-conforming, sewage treatment systems shall be
eliminated from use within two years of the effective date of this subchapter,
and the use will be connected to city sewer services.
(Prior Code, § 11.60)
§ 156.216 NON-CONFORMITIES.
   (A)   All legally established non-conformities on the effective date of this
subchapter may continue, but they will be managed according to the applicable
state statutes, and other regulations of the city for the subjects of
alterations and additions, repair after damage, discontinuance of use, and
intensification of use.
   (B)   The following standards will also apply in shoreland areas:
      (1)   Construction on non-conforming lots of record.
         (a)   Lots of record in the office of the County Recorder on the
effective date of local shoreland controls that do not meet the requirements of
this subchapter may be allowed as building sites without variances from lot
size requirements; provided, the use is permitted in the zoning district, the
lot has been in separate ownership from abutting lands at all times since it
became substandard, was created compliant with official controls in effect at
the time, and sewage treatment and setback requirements of this subchapter are
met;
         (b)   A variance from setback requirements must be obtained before any
use, sewage treatment system, or building permit is issued for a lot. In
evaluating the variance, the Board of Adjustment shall consider sewage
treatment and water supply capabilities, or constraints, of the lot, and shall
deny the variance if adequate facilities cannot be provided; and
         (c)   If, in a group of two, or more, contiguous lots under the same
ownership, any individual lot does not meet the requirements of this
subchapter, the lot must not be considered as a separate parcel of land for the
purposes of sale or development. The lot must be combined with the one, or
more, contiguous lots so they equal one, or more, parcels of land, each meeting
the requirements of this subchapter as much as possible.
      (2)   Additions/expansions to non-conforming structures.
         (a)   All additions, or expansions, to the outside dimensions of an
existing, non-conforming structure must meet the setback, height, and other
requirements of this subchapter. Any deviation from these requirements must be
authorized by a variance, as provided for herein;
         (b)   Deck additions may be allowed without a variance to a structure
not meeting the required setback from the ordinary high water level if all of
the following criteria and standards are met:
            1.   The structure existed on the date the structure setbacks were
established;
            2.   A thorough evaluation of the property and structure reveals no
reasonable location for a deck meeting, or exceeding, the existing ordinary
high water level setback of the structure;
            3.   The deck encroachment toward the ordinary high water level
does not exceed 15% of the existing setback of the structure from the ordinary
high water level, or does not encroach closer than 30 feet, whichever is more
restrictive; and
            4.   The deck is constructed primarily of wood, and is not roofed
or screened.
      (3)   Non-conforming sewage treatment systems.
         (a)   A sewage treatment system not meeting the requirements of this
subchapter must be upgraded, at a minimum, at any time a permit, or variance,
of any type is required for any improvement on, or use of, the property. For
the purposes of this provision, a sewage treatment system shall not be
considered non-conforming if the only deficiency is the sewage treatment
system’s improper setback from the ordinary high water level; and
         (b)   The Council has, by formal resolution, notified the Commissioner
of its program to identify non-conforming sewage treatment systems. Upon
adoption of this subchapter, the Building Official will conduct a systematic
on-site inspection program to identify current septic systems located within
the shoreland area. Once identified, a determination will be made as to whether
the septic system conforms to Minn. Rules Chapter 7080. Following the initial
inspection, the Building Official will conduct yearly inspections of all septic
systems to determine whether the systems conform to the rules established. The
city will require upgrading, or replacement, of any non-conforming system
identified by this program within a reasonable period of time, which will not
exceed two years, or preferably, connection to city sewer services. If the non-
conforming system is located within the city, the property owner will be
required to hook up to the city sewage system. Sewage systems installed
according to all applicable local shoreland management standards adopted under
M.S. § 103F.211, as it may be amended from time to time, in effect at the time
of installation may be considered as conforming, unless they are determined to
be failing, except that systems using cesspools, leaching pits, seepage pits,
or other deep disposal methods, or systems, with less soil treatment area
separation above groundwater than required by the State Pollution Agency’s
Chapter 7080 for design of on-site sewage treatment systems, shall be
considered non-conforming.
(Prior Code, § 11.60)
§ 156.217 SUBDIVISION, PLATTING PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Land suitability. Each lot created through subdivision must be
suitable in its natural state for the proposed use with minimal alteration.
Suitability analysis by the city shall consider susceptibility to flooding,
existence of wetlands, soil and rock formations with severe limitations for
development, severe erosion potential, steep topography, inadequate water
supply, or sewage treatment capabilities, near shore aquatic conditions
unsuitable for water-based recreation, important fish and wildlife habitat,
presence of significant historic sites, or any other feature of the natural
land likely to be harmful to the health, safety, or welfare of future residents
of the proposed subdivision, or of the city.
   (B)   Consistency with other controls. Subdivisions must conform to all
official controls of the city. A subdivision will not be approved where a later
variance from one, or more, standards in official controls would be needed to
use the lots for their intended purpose. In areas not served by publicly-owned
sewer and water systems, a subdivision will not be approved unless domestic
water supply is available, and a sewage treatment system consistent with the
provisions of this subchapter can be provided for every lot. Each lot shall
meet the minimum lot size and dimensional requirements herein, including at
least a minimum contiguous lawn area that is free of limiting factors
sufficient for the construction of two standard soil treatment systems. Lots
that would require use of holding tanks must not be approved.
   (C)   Information requirements. Sufficient information must be submitted by
the applicant for the city to make a determination of land suitability. The
information shall include at least the following:
      (1)   Topographic contours at ten-foot intervals, or less, from the
United States Geological Survey maps, or more accurate sources, showing
limiting site characteristics;
      (2)   The surface water features required in M.S. § 505.21, as it may be
amended from time to time, to be shown on plats obtained from the United States
Geological Survey quadrangle topographic maps, or more accurate sources;
      (3)   Adequate soils information to determine suitability for building
and on-site sewage treatment capabilities for every lot from the most current
existing sources, or from field investigations, such as soil borings,
percolation tests, or other methods;
      (4)   Information regarding adequacy of domestic water supply, extent of
anticipated vegetation and topographic alterations near shore aquatic
conditions, including depths, types of bottom sediments, and aquatic
vegetation, and proposed methods for controlling stormwater runoff and erosion,
both during, and after, construction activities;
      (5)   Location of 100-year floodplain areas and floodway districts from
existing adopted maps or data; and
      (6)   A line, or contour, representing the ordinary high water level, and
the minimum building setback distances from the lake or stream.
   (D)   Dedications. When a land, or easement, dedication is a condition of
subdivision approval, the approval must provide easements over natural
drainage, or ponding, areas for management of stormwater and significant
wetlands.
   (E)   Platting. All subdivisions that create five, or more, lots or parcels
that are two and one-half acres, or less, in size shall be processed as a plat,
in accordance with M.S. Chapter 505, as it may be amended from time to time. No
permit for construction of buildings, or sewage treatment systems, shall be
issued for lots created after these official controls were enacted, unless the
lot was approved as part of a formal subdivision.
   (F)   Controlled access or recreational lots. Lots intended as controlled
accesses to public waters, or for recreational use areas, for use by non-
riparian lots within a subdivision must meet, or exceed, the sizing criteria
provided for herein.
(Prior Code, § 11.60) (Ord. 165, second series, passed 7-5-2000)
§ 156.999 PENALTY.
   It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator to cause the provisions of
this chapter to be properly enforced through the proper legal channels. Any
person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be charged with
a misdemeanor and, if found guilty, shall be subject to a fine, and/or
imprisonment, as determined by state law. In addition, each day that a
violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 11.99) (Ord. 165, second series, passed 7-5-2000)
CHAPTER 157: LOT DIVISION
Section
   
157.01   Purpose
   
157.02   Jurisdiction
   
157.03   Application
   
157.04   Definitions
   
157.05   Procedure
   
157.06   Data required for lot division
   
157.07   Compliance
   
157.08   Violations
 
   
157.99   Penalty
§ 157.01 PURPOSE.
   It is the intent and purpose of this chapter:
   (A)   To protect and promote the public health, safety and general welfare;
   (B)   To provide for the orderly, economic and safe development of land;
   (C)   To promote affordable housing to persons and families of all income
levels;
   (D)   To provide adequate public services and facilities;
   (E)   To provide for the protection and conservation of floodplains, steep
slopes, soils and other geologic and ecological features;
   (F)   To provide for the protection and conservation of solar access;
   (G)   To provide for the administration of this chapter including procedures
and standards;
   (H)   To provide for variances from the strict interpretation of this
chapter; and
   (I)   To provide for penalties for violations of this chapter.
(Ord. 006, fourth series, passed 10-18-2022)
§ 157.02 JURISDICTION.
   The regulations herein governing the division of lots shall apply within the
corporate limits of the city, and the unincorporated area within two miles of
its limits; provided, that where a municipality lies less than four miles from
the limits of the city, these regulations shall apply only to a line
equidistant from the city and the municipality; and, provided further, that the
governing body, or bodies, of unincorporated areas adjacent to the city have
not adopted ordinances for the regulation of division of land, or platting.
(Ord. 006, fourth series, passed 10-18-2022)
§ 157.03 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Any lot, hereafter made, or each part thereof, lying within the
jurisdiction of this chapter, shall be prepared, presented for approval, and
recorded as herein prescribed. The regulations contained herein shall apply to
the division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two, or more, lots,
tracts, or other division of land. A lot division shall not result in the
creation of more than three lots.
   (B)   Lot splits and adjustments of common boundaries are permitted,
provided the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The lot or lots have frontage on an existing improved street and
access to municipal services;
      (2)   The lot or lots to be divided are previously platted land;
      (3)   The lot or lots meet the minimum standards for lot width and area
for the zoning district in which they are located;
      (4)   The division of the lots shall not cause a remaining part of a lot
to become a separately described tract which does not meet the minimum
standards of the zoning district in which it is located or which does not have
street frontage and access to municipal services;
      (5)   The division does not result in a split zoning classification on a
single lot; and
      (6)   The division does not result in the creation of a nonconforming
structure or use.
(Ord. 006, fourth series, passed 10-18-2022)
§ 157.04 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   LOT. The smallest unit of a subdivision individually numbered or designated
on the plat for purposes of description, recording, conveyance, development and
taxation.
   LOT SPLITS. The division of one or more lots which creates no more than
three lots.
   SPLIT ZONING. A single lot or parcel containing two or more different zoning
classifications.
(Ord. 006, fourth series, passed 10-18-2022)
§ 157.05 PROCEDURE.
   The procedure for a property owner to initiate lot division, not excluded in
§
157.03, applying to the property is as follows:
   (A)   The property owner, or his or her agent, shall meet with the Zoning
Administrator to explain his or her situation, learn the procedures, and obtain
an application form;
   (B)   The applicant shall file the completed application form, together with
the required exhibits, with the Zoning Administrator, and shall pay a filing
fee as established by the Council. If the application and submittals are
complete, this date shall be the official submission date. If the application
or submittals are not complete, the Zoning Administrator will notify the
applicant of the deficiencies within ten days. The official submission date
will be the day that the petitioner has submitted a complete application, and
supplied all required exhibits;
   (C)   The Zoning Administrator shall transmit the application, and required
exhibits, to the Planning and Zoning Commission, and shall notify all property
owners within 350 feet of the outer boundaries of the property in question.
However, failure of any property owner to receive the notification shall not
invalidate the proceedings;
   (D)   The Zoning Administrator shall set the date for a public hearing, and
shall have notices of the hearing published in the legal newspaper at least
once, not less than ten days, and not more than 30 days, prior to the hearing;
   (E)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold the public hearing, and
then shall recommend one of three actions (approval, denial, or approval with
special conditions) to the Council within 30 to 40 days of the official
submission date;
   (F)   The Council shall act upon the application within 20 to 30 days of
receiving the recommendations by the Planning and Zoning Commission, or,
ultimately, within 60 days of the official submission date;
   (G)   If an applicant requests that a special meeting be scheduled, the
applicant shall bear the full cost for the special meeting. The fee for special
meetings shall be set by the Council; and
   (H)   No application of a property owner for an amendment to the text of
this chapter, or the zoning map, shall be considered by the Planning and Zoning
Commission within a one-year period following a denial of the request, except
the Planning and Zoning Commission may permit a new application if, in the
opinion of the Planning and Zoning Commission, new evidence, or a change of
circumstances, warrants it.
(Ord. 006, fourth series, passed 10-18-2022)
§ 157.06 DATA REQUIRED FOR LOT DIVISION.
   (A)   Filing. The owner shall submit a final survey together with any
necessary supplementary information. The original, and four copies of the final
survey, shall be submitted; one of the four copies shall be on a reproducible
medium, and will be retained by the Zoning Administrator.
   (B)   Data required.
      (1)   The final survey prepared for recording purposes shall be prepared
in accordance with provisions of state statutes, and applicable city and county
regulations;
      (2)   Location by section, township, range, county, and state, and
including descriptive boundaries, based on an accurate traverse, giving angular
and linear dimensions which must mathematically close. The allowable error of
closure on any portion of a final plat shall be one foot in 7,500 feet;
      (3)   The location of monuments shall be shown, and described, on the
final survey. Locations of monuments shall be shown in reference to existing
official monuments, or the nearest established street lines, including true
angles and distances to reference points or monuments. Permanent markers shall
be placed at each corner of every block, or portion of a block, points of
curvature, and points of tangency on street lines, and at each angle point on
the boundary of the subdivision. A permanent marker shall be deemed to be a
steel rod or pipe, one-half inch or larger in diameter extending at least three
feet below the finished grade. In situations where conditions prohibit the
placing of markers in the locations prescribed above, offset markers will be
permitted. The exact location of all markers shall be shown on the final plat,
together with accurate interior angles, bearings, and distances. Permanent
monuments shall be placed at all quarter section points within the subdivision,
or on its perimeter;
      (4)   Locations of lots, streets, public highways, alleys, parks, and
other features with accurate dimensions in feet and decimals of feet, with the
length of radii and/or arcs of all curves, and with all other information
necessary to reproduce the plat on the ground. Dimensions shall be shown from
all angle points, and points of curve to lot lines;
      (5)   Boundary lines, and description of boundary lines, of any areas
other than streets and alleys which are to be dedicated, or reserved, for
public use;
      (6)   Lots shall be numbered clearly. If blocks are to be numbered or
lettered, these shall be shown clearly in the center of the block;
      (7)   Building setback lines on front and side streets with dimensions;
      (8)   Name and address of developer and surveyor making the plat;
      (9)   Scale of plat (the scale to be shown graphically, and in feet per
inch), date, and north point;
      (10)   Statement dedicating all easements as follows: “Easements for
installation and maintenance of utilities and drainage facilities are reserved
over, under and along the strips marked 'utility easements'”;
      (11)   Statement establishing building setback lines as follows:
“Building setback lines are hereby established as shown on the accompanying
plat and no building or portion thereof shall be built between this line and
the street line”; and
      (12)   Statement disclosing the use of the parcel. The use of the parcel
must follow the city code describing the permitted uses for the appropriate
zoning district.
   (C)   Certifications required on final applications.
      (1)   Notarized certification by a registered land surveyor, to the
effect that the lot represents a survey made by him or her, and that monuments
and markers shown therein exist as located, and that all dimension, and
geodetic, details are correct.
      (2)   Certification showing that all taxes and special assessments due on
the property have been paid in full.
(Ord. 006, fourth series, passed 10-18-2022)
§ 157.07 COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   No building permit shall be issued by the city with respect to the
land, or to any lot, as defined herein, until the plat thereof shall have been
recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds (County Recorder).
   (B)   If any proposed division will necessitate a variance from zoning
requirements, an application for such a variance may be processed concurrently
with the application for simple lot division.
(Ord. 006, fourth series, passed 10-18-2022)
§ 157.08 VIOLATIONS.
   Sale of lots from unrecorded plats. It shall be unlawful to sell, trade, or
otherwise convey, or offer to sell, trade, or otherwise convey any lot or
parcel of land as a part of, or in conformity with, any plan, plat, or replat
of any lot under the jurisdiction of this chapter unless the plan, plat, or
replat shall have first been recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds
(County Recorder) of the county.
(Ord. 006, fourth series, passed 10-18-2022)
§ 157.99 PENALTY.
   Every person that violates a section, division, subchapter, or provision of
this chapter when he or she performs an act thereby prohibited, or declared
unlawful, or fails to act when the failure is thereby prohibited, or declared
unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor,
except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof.
(Ord. 006, fourth series, passed 10-18-2022)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   FRANCHISES AND AGREEMENTS
      
II.   LAND VACATIONS
      
III.   STREETS AND ALLEYS; NUMBERING HOUSES
      
IV.   ZONING MAP CHANGES
      
V.   MORATORIUMS
      
VI.   CITY CHARTER AMENDMENTS, ADOPTIONS; CODIFICATION
      
VII.   GRANTS AND PURCHASES
      
VIII.   ANNEXATIONS
TABLE I: FRANCHISES AND AGREEMENTS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord.   Date   Description
No.    Passed
16,    4-6-
second 1979   Minnesota Gas Company (gas franchise; contract length of 25 years).
series
            (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
49,    4-19-  DOWSAT of Minnesota, Inc. (cable communication franchise; contract length of 15
second 1983   years).
series
            (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
80,    3-3-   Amending subdivision 2 of Ord. 49, second series, transferring, and assigning,
second 1987   the cable communication franchise to Dowden Cable Partners, L.P.
series
            (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
93,    7-5-
second 1988   Transferring cable communications franchise to Triax Midwest Associates, L.P.
series
            (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
151,   8-4-
second 1998   Summary of cable television regulation ordinance with Triax Cablevision.
series
            (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
152,   8-4-   Triax Midwest Associates, L.P. (cable television franchise; contract length of
second 1998   15 years).
series
            (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
160,   11-10- Dakota Telecom, Inc. (“DTI”) (cable television franchise; contract length of 15
second 1998   years).
series
            (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
172,   3-4-
second 2002   Reliant Energy Minnegasco (gas franchise; contract length of 20 years).
series
            (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
005,   4-5-
fourth 2022   Centerpoint Energy Resources Corp. (gas franchise; contract length of 20 years).
series
             
 
TABLE II: LAND VACATIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord.   Date   Description
No.    Passed
169,   10-16- Vacated an alley in Block 28, Armstrong subdivision, of Blocks A, B,
second 2001   C, and D of Armstrong Park.
series
            (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
170,   11-6-  Vacated a portion of an alley in Block 3 of the Original City of St.
second 2001   James.
series
            (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
182,   3-2-
second 2004   Vacated a portion of Second Avenue North, in the city.
series
            (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
184,   7-6-   Vacated a platted alley in Block 17, Armstrong subdivision, of Blocks
second 2004   A, B, C, and D of Armstrong Park.
series
            (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
194,   5-2-   Vacated a portion of Second Street, Lot 1, Block 2, Sorenson’s fifth
second 2006   addition.
series
            (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
202,   4-17-
second 2007   Vacated an alley in Block 12 of Close’s addition in the city.
series
            (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
34,    4-5-   Vacated a certain easement located between Lots 1 and 2, Block 2,
third  2016   industrial park number 3.
series
42,    9-18-  Vacated a certain easement located between Lot 1, Block 4, Mayberry
third  2018   Hills’ sixth addition; and Lot 2, Block 4, Mayberry Hills’ fifth
series        addition.
43,    10-2-  Vacated a certain alley located in Block 6, Schutz’s subdivision of
third  2018   the west part of Lots 10 to 16, inclusive of Bartholet’s subdivision
series        of Government Lot 13, Section 18-106N-31W.   
001,   11-16- Vacated Second Avenue South, which adjoins Blocks 1 and 2 of the St.
fourth 2021   James Industrial Park.
series
032,   10-21-
fourth 2025   Vacating a portion of 9th Street South.
series
             
 
TABLE III: STREETS AND ALLEYS; NUMBERING HOUSES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord.   Date   Description
No.    Passed
3      11-19- Regulated the numbering of houses and lots in the city.
       1920
            (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
2      6-21-  Designated, and fixed, names of several streets to bear the suffix “North”
       1929   and “South”.
            (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
129    9-17-  Changed names of streets and avenues in Schutz’s subdivision.
       1956
            (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
79,    7-15-
second 1986   Changed names of streets and avenues in Schutz’s subdivision.
series
            (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
185,   11-16- Named the platted alley located directly north of Block 7 of the Original
second 2004   City of St. James as “Railroad Avenue”.
series
            (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
025,   11-19- Renamed 6th Avenue West in Schwingler’s Subdivision to “6th Avenue Court
fourth 2024   South”.
series
029,   5-20-
fourth 2025   Renamed 6th Avenue Court South of Schwingler’s Subdivision to “Lake Lane”.
series
             
 
TABLE IV: ZONING MAP CHANGES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No.           Date Passed Description
-                  - -         Zoning map change.
                             (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
3, second series   - -         Zoning map change.
                             (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
4, second series   - -         Zoning map change.
                             (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
10, second series  - -         Zoning map change.
                             (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
39, second series  6-7-1982    Zoning map change.
                             (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
41, second series  8-2-1982    Zoning map change.
                             (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
43, second series  9-7-1982    Zoning map change.
                             (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
48, second series  3-15-1983   Zoning map change.
                             (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
64, second series  4-23-1985   Zoning map change.
                             (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
106, second series 3-19-1991   Zoning map change.
                             (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
111, second series 4-20-1992   Zoning map change.
                             (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
112, second series 5-19-1992   Zoning map change.
                             (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
113, second series 8-18-1992   Zoning map change.
                             (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
124, second series 5-18-1993   Zoning map change.
                             (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
126, second series 6-15-1993   Zoning map change.
                             (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
135, second series 10-18-1994  Zoning map change.
                             (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
166, second series 8-1-2000    Zoning map change.
                             (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
173                3-19-2002   Zoning map change.
                             (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
178, second series 3-4-2003    Zoning map change.
                             (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
179, second series 4-15-2003   Zoning map change.
                             (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
179                4-15-2003   Zoning map change.
                             (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
181                10-21-2003  Zoning map change.
                             (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
188, second series 5-3-2005    Zoning map change.
                             (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
191                10-18-2005  Zoning map change.
                             (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
198                8-2-2006    Zoning map change.
                             (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
211                1-15-2008   Zoning map change.
                             (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
214                - -         Zoning map change.
                             (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
216                - -         Zoning map change, relating to Blocks 77, 78,
                               85, and 86 of first addition.
                             (Prior Code, Chapter 20
217                - -         Zoning map change.
                             (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
222                - -         Zoning map change.
                             (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
223                - -         Zoning map change.
                             (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
224                - -         Zoning map change.
                             (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
229                - -         Zoning map change.
                             (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
                               Rezoning a property from R-1, One- and Two-
3, third series    7-15-2008   Family Residential District to B-2, Service
                               Business District.
                               Rezoning property from B-2, Service Business
18, third series   5-17-2011   District to R-2, Multiple Family Residential
                               District.
                               Rezoning property from B-4, Highway Commercial
015, fourth series 12-19-2023  Business District, to R-2, Multiple Family
                               Residential District.
                               Rezoning property from R-1, One- and Two-Family
033, fourth series 12-16-2025  Residential District, to B-4, Highway Commercial
                               Business District.
                               Establishing the zoning designation for annexed
034, fourth series 12-16-2025  property as R-1, One- and Two-Family Residential
                               District.
                              
 
TABLE V: MORATORIUMS
 
Ord. No.           Date Passed Description
161, second series 6-14-1999   Moratorium on all advertising signs in the B-
                               2 and B-3 Business District zones of the city.
                             (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
                               Extended the moratorium declared by Ord. 161,
                               second series, on all advertising signs in the
166, second series 5-16-2000   B-2 and B-3 Business District zones of the city
                               for six months from the passage date of the
                               ordinance.
                             (Prior Code, Chapter 20)   
                              
 
TABLE VI: CITY CHARTER AMENDMENTS, ADOPTIONS; CODIFICATION
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord.   Date   Description
No.    Passed
196    7-6-   Amended §§ 9, 16, 19, 42, and 57 of the City Charter.
       1971
            (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
1,     9-20-
second 1976   Adoption of a codification of the ordinances of the city.
series
            (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
24,    7-6-   Amended Chapter V, § 41 of the City Charter to create the office of City
second 1981   Manager.
series
            (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
149,   2-3-
second 1998   Approved the amended City Charter, adopted and published 4-3-1998.
series
            (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
             
 
TABLE VII: GRANTS AND PURCHASES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     Purchase authorized for expenditure of sum not exceeding
69       3-16-1925   $7,500 for purchase of fire truck, or combined fire truck
                     and chemical apparatus.
                   (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
                     Grant authorized for construction of an elevated water
109      10-18-1935  storage tank and tower, and issuance of bonds for payment
                     of the same.
                   (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
                     Grants, from the United States of America, an irrevocable
112      4-23-1937   license, and permission to construct, and maintain, at its
                     own expense, for its exclusive use, a six- inch sanitary
                     sewer.
                   (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
                    
 
TABLE VIII: ANNEXATIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord.   Date   Description
No.    Passed
35     8-26-  Land abutting the city.
       1909
            (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
108    6- -   Schutz’s Subdivision of west part of Lots 10 to 16 of Bertholet’s Subdivision of
       1949   Government Lot 13, 18-106-31.
            (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
122    5-16-  A parcel of land 160 feet north and south and 150 feet east and west, and
       1955   abutting the south limits of the city.
            (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
125    8-19-  Tracts of land in the SW 1/4 of NE 1/4 of Section 24-106-32 lying east of center
       1955   line of Armstrong Boulevard South.
            (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
126    6-4-   A tract of land owned by Robert G. Slusar and Miriam L. Slusar in Section 24-106-
       1956   32.
            (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
127    6-18-  A tract of land in the west ten acres of SW 1/4 of NE 1/4 of 24-106-32.
       1956
            (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
128    7-2-   A tract of land owned by Henry C. Erickson and Naemi Erickson in SW 1/4 of NE 1/
       1956   4 of 24-106-32.
            (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
       5-6-   South 7.5 feet of north 160 feet of west 150 feet of east 190 feet of that part
131    1957   of SW 1/4 of NE 1/4, 24-106-32, lying west of center line of Armstrong Boulevard
              South.
            (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
132    5-6-   A tract of land owned by Ed G. Mutsch and Flora L. Mutsch in SW 1/4 of NE 1/4 of
       1957   24-106-32.
            (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
138    7-6-   A tract of land owned by Ed G. Mutsch and Flora L. Mutsch in SW 1/4 of NE 1/4 of
       1959   24-106-32.
            (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
145    6-20-  A tract of land owned by Ed G. Mutsch and Flora L. Mutsch in SW 1/4 of NE 1/4 of
       1960   24-106-32.
            (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
147    11-21- Tracts of land in SW 1/4 of NE 1/4 of 24-106-32, lying west of center line of
       1960   Armstrong Boulevard South.
            (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
149    6-5-   A tract of land owned by Marvin L. Sorenson and Lenore L. Sorenson in 24-106-32.
       1961
            (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
158    7-16-  A tract of land owned by the Pleasant View Nursing Home, lying westerly of
       1962   Sorensen’s Second Addition.
            (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
179    3-12-  Floradale Addition No. 4 to city.
       1968
            (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
       9-8-   All of Government Lots 11 and 14 of Section 18-106-31, except that part of
188    1970   Government Lot 11 owned by Church of St. James, and a tract of land in Lots 5, 6,
              7 and 8 of Bertholet’s Subdivision of Lot 12 of Section 18-108-31.
            (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
       11-16- All that part of Sections 23 and 24, 104-32, lying northerly of Trunk Highway
190    1970   #60, easterly of Willow Vue Subdivision, southerly of southerly shore of St.
              James Lake and westerly of westerly city limits.
            (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
192    4-16-  All public roads or rights-of-way, railroad rights-of-way or waterways within,
       1971   adjacent or abutting land annexed by Ordinance No. 188.
            (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
              Tracts of land in Government Lot 6, Section 18-106-31; Government Lot 5, Section
193    4-12-  18-106-31; Lots 1, 2, 3, and 4 of Bertholet’s Subdivision of Government Lot 12,
       1971   Section 18-106-31; together with all public and railroad rights-of-way, roads, or
              waterways within, adjacent or abutting said land.
            (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
       6-15-  All that part of Sections 23 and 24, 106-32, lying northerly of Trunk Highway
195    1971   #60, easterly of Willow Vue Subdivision, southerly of St. James Lake and westerly
              of westerly city limits.
            (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
202    10-19- Certain unplatted property in Government Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7 in Section
       1971   18-106-31.
            (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
203    10-19- Tracts of land in Government Lots 2 and 3, Section 19-106-31.
       1971
            (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
215    11-21- A tract of land in Lots 3 and 4, 19-106-31, and tract of land in Government Lot
       1972   4, 19-106-31.
            (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
219    6-19-  Tracts of land located in 23-106-32.
       1973
            (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
221    7-10-  Tracts of land located in 24-106-32.
       1973
            (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
225    10-2-  A tract of land in 23-106-32. (amends 221)
       1973
            (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
231    1-20-  A tract of land in SW 1/4 of SE 1/4 of 12-106-32.
       1975
            (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
              South 33-1/2 feet of Lots 1, 2, 3, and 4 in Block 2 of Schwingler’s Subdivision
              of Lot 6 in 23-106-32, and part of SE 1/4 of 14-106-32; part of Block 3,
232    1-20-  Schwingler’s Subdivision of Lot 6, 23-106-32, and part of SE 1/4 of 14-106-32;
       1975   and, part of vacated alley between Lots 1, 2, 3, and 4 in Block 2, and part of
              Block 3 of Schwingler’s Subdivision of Lot 6 in 23-106-32, and part of SE 1/4 of
              14-106-32.
            (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
233    1-20-  A tract of land lying between Willow Vue Subdivision and St. James Lake.
       1975
            (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
7      6-21-  A tract in SW 1/4 of SE 1/4, 12-106-32.
       1977
            (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
9      3-21-  North 467.38 feet of south 542.38 feet of west 506.00 feet of Government Lot 15,
       1978   18-106-31.
            (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
13,    2-9-
second 1979   A tract in the SW 1/4 of SE 1/4, Section 12, abutting Mayberry Hills.
series
            (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
17,    5-22-
second 1979   A tract in the SE 1/4 of SE 1/4, 12-106-32.
series
            (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
25,    7-31-
second 1981   Tract in SE 1/4 of NE 1/4, 24-106-32.
series
            (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
85,    11-6-  Part of SE 1/4 of 12-106-32 including part of Mayberry Hills Third Addition not
second 1987   previously platted.
series
            (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
98,    6-8-
second 1990   East 329.42 feet of west 658.84 feet of NW 1/4 of SW 1/4 of NE 1/4, 24-106-32.
series
            (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
99A,   6-9-   Northerly 200 feet of SE 1/4 of NE 1/4, 24-106-32, east of Somerset South
second 1990   Subdivision.
series
            (Prior Code, Chapter 20)
             
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Minnesota Statutes
References to Prior Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO MINNESOTA STATUTES
M.S. Section Code Section
M.S. Section           Code Section
12.25                  34.15;
                       34.18
12.37                  34.20
13.82                  132.22
Chapter 14             111.034
15.73, subd. 3         94.03
Chapter 18.00          90.023
Chapter 18G            90.036
18G.13                 90.035
65A.50                 36.07
65B.48, subd. 5        72.37
84.81 through 84.90    72.51
89.51 et seq.          153.03
93.44 through 93.51    156.212
Chapter 103F           156.210
103F.211               156.216
103G.005, subd. 15     156.212
103G.245               156.215
103G.291               51.09
Chapter 115            52.01
116.06                 90.001
Chapter 123            94.03
144.50                 156.002
144.382, subd. 4       51.09
144.391                113.01
                       90.001;
Chapter 145A           132.02;
                       132.26;
                       132.30
145A.02, subd. 17      132.02
145A.04                132.23
145A.04, subd. 8(b)    132.23
145A.04, subd. 8(c)    132.27
145A.04, subd. 10      90.005;
                       90.007
145A.08                90.005;
                       132.27
151.72                 122.01;
                       122.02
151.72, subd. 3        122.07
152.02                 90.001;
                       132.02
152.0275               90.001
152.0275, subd. 2(g)   90.005
152.0275, subd. 2(h)   90.005
152.22, subd. 6        122.02
152.23                 122.08
                       70.01;
Chapter 168            95.01;
                       118.12
Chapter 168A           118.08
Chapter 169            70.01;
                       95.01
169.14                 Ch. 73, Schd. I
169.999                10.98
Chapter 171            70.01
204B.01 et seq.        30.01
216B.02                94.03
216B.02, subd. 4       94.03
216B.02, subd. 6       94.03
Chapter 216D           94.06;
                       94.16
216D.01 - 216D.09      94.16;
                       94.25
216D.04, subd. 3       94.03
237.086                94.01
237.16                 94.01
                       94.01;
237.162                94.03;
                       94.18
237.162, subd. 4       94.03
                       94.01;
237.163                94.03;
                       94.18
237.163, subd. 2(b)    94.02
237.163, subd. 6       94.30
Chapter 238            94.03
239.79                 94.01
237.81                 94.01
245.462, subd. 23      124.02
Chapter 278            122.05
297F.01, subd. 3       113.02
300.06                 94.07
304A.801               111.117
307.08                 156.212
Chapter 308A           94.03
Chapter 326B           150.01
326B.082, subd. 16     150.01
326B.121, subd. 1      150.04
326B.121, subd. 2(d)   150.01
326B.133, subd. 1      150.01
326B.148               150.01
Chapter 327            92.01
Chapter 336            118.08
Chapter 340A           111.115
340A.24                111.121
340A.26                111.119
340A.28                111.120
340A.101, subd. 10     122.02;
                       122.05
340A.285               111.120;
                       111.121
340A.301, subd. 6(j)   111.119
340A.301, subd. 6(I)   111.119
340A.301, subd. 6(d)   111.119;
                       111.121
                       111.119;
340A.504               111.120;
                       111.121
340A.81                111.117
Chapter 342            124.01 -
                       124.03
342.01                 124.02
342.01, subd. 50       124.02
342.13                 124.03
342.17                 124.02
342.22                 124.03
342.22, subd. 4(b)     124.03
342.22, subd. 5(e)     124.03
342.24                 124.03
343.22                 91.21;
                       91.22
343.29                 91.21;
                       91.22
347.31, subd. 2        91.01
347.50 through 347.565 91.35
347.51                 91.43
347.52                 91.43
347.52(a)              91.38;
                       91.43
347.52(c)              91.38;
                       91.43
347.515                91.43
Chapter 349            116.01;
                       116.02
364.01 through 364.10  110.07
364.01, subd. 3        114.05
364.06                 31.02
                       90.006;
Chapter 429            94.23;
                       153.07;
                       155.10
429.011                152.06
                       90.024;
429.101                90.041;
                       153.07
444.075, subd. 3e      50.28
Chapter 453            94.03
Chapter 453A           94.03
                       94.23;
Chapter 462            156.210;
                       156.213
462.357, subd. 1(e)    124.04
462.359                156.002
Chapter 463            90.005;
                       90.010
466.02                 132.04
469.190                35.02;
                       35.12
Chapter 505            156.217
505.21                 156.217
609.205(4)             91.46
609.226, subd. 1       91.46
609.487, subd. 2a      90.001
626.5572, subd.1       90.001
626.862                10.20
631.48                 10.99
                       
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code Section 2021 Code Section
Prior Code Section 2021 Code Section
2.02               30.03
2.03               30.04
2.04               31.01
2.05               36.01
2.06               36.02
2.07               36.03
2.08               36.04
                   34.01;
2.09               34.02;
                   34.03
2.10               30.05
2.12               36.05
2.13               30.06
2.20               32.01
2.21               33.01
2.22               33.02
2.23               32.02
2.24               32.03
2.25               33.03
2.26               32.04
2.27               32.05
2.40               32.20
2.41               32.21
2.42               32.22
2.50               32.22
2.52               31.02
2.60               36.06
2.62               121.01 -
                   121.05
2.63               121.20 -
                   121.24
2.64               36.07
2.70               31.03
3.01               50.01
3.02               50.03
3.03               50.02
3.04               50.06
3.05               50.20 -
                   50.30
3.20               53.01 -
                   53.13
                   51.01 -
3.30               51.05;
                   51.07 -
                   51.09
                   52.01 -
3.40               52.13;
                   52.99
4.03               150.03
4.05               150.04
4.09               150.05
4.10               150.06
4.11               150.01
4.20               151.01
4.21               151.15 -
                   151.38
                   151.02;
4.30               151.50 -
                   151.63
4.99               151.99
5.01               111.030
5.02               111.031 -
                   111.036
5.03               111.037
5.05               111.039
5.06               111.040
5.07               111.041
5.08               111.042
5.09               111.043
5.10               111.044
5.12               111.045
5.13               111.046
5.14               111.047
5.15               111.048
5.16               111.001
5.17               111.002
5.18               111.049
5.20               111.065
5.22               111.066;
                   111.067
5.23               111.068
5.24               111.069
5.40               111.080
5.41               111.081
5.42               111.082
5.43               111.083
5.44               111.084
5.45               111.085
5.60               111.015 -
                   111.017
5.70               111.086
5.71               111.100;
                   111.101
5.72               111.038
5.75               111.003
5.76               111.051
5.86               133.15
5.90               111.004
5.99               111.999
6.01               110.01
6.02               110.02
6.03               110.03
6.04               110.04
6.05               110.05
6.06               110.06
6.07               110.07
6.08               110.08
6.09               110.09
6.10               110.10
6.20               112.15;
                   112.16
6.22               114.01 -
                   114.03
6.23               115.01 -
                   115.10
6.24               120.30 -
                   120.37
6.25               120.01;
                   120.02
6.26               114.07
6.28               120.15;
                   120.16
6.29               116.01 -
                   116.04
6.30               117.01 -
                   117.03
6.31               118.01 -
                   118.14
6.32               92.01 -
                   92.08
6.42               112.01 -
                   112.04
7.01               152.01
7.02               152.02
7.03               152.03
7.04               152.04
7.05               152.05
7.06               152.06
7.07               152.07
7.08               152.08
7.09               152.09
7.10               152.10
7.11               152.11
7.12               152.12
7.13               152.13
7.14               152.14
7.15               152.15
7.99               152.99
8.01               70.01
8.02               70.02
8.03               72.01 -
                   72.08
8.04               72.20 -
                   72.22
8.09               72.59
8.10               70.03
8.11               70.04
8.12               70.05;
                   70.99
8.13               72.35 -
                   72.37
8.20               72.50 -
                   72.59
8.21               70.06
8.99               70.99
9.01               71.01
9.02               71.02
9.03               71.03
9.04               71.04
9.05               71.05
9.06               71.06
9.07               71.07
9.08               71.08
9.09               71.09
9.11               71.10
9.12               71.11
9.13               71.12
9.14               71.13
9.15               71.14
9.16               71.15
9.17               71.16
9.18               71.17
9.19               71.18
9.20               71.19;
                   71.99
9.99               71.99
10.06              131.02
                   91.16 -
10.21              91.22;
                   91.24;
                   91.99
10.22              91.03
10.23              131.01
10.27              91.02
10.42              131.03
10.44              133.01
10.45              131.35 -
                   131.37
10.46              131.38
10.50              153.01 -
                   153.13
10.51              150.02
10.60              131.04
                   132.01 -
10.62              132.05;
                   132.20 -
                   132.30
11.01              156.001
11.02              156.002
11.03              156.003
11.04              156.004
11.10              156.005
11.20              156.070 -
                   156.076
11.21              156.090 -
                   156.095
11.30              156.110 -
                   156.115
11.31              156.130 -
                   156.136
11.32              156.150 -
                   156.155
11.40              156.170 -
                   156.175
11.41              156.190 -
                   156.195
11.50              156.006
11.60              156.210 -
                   156.217
                   71.20;
                   119.01 -
11.70              119.21;
                   156.020 -
                   156.037
11.80              156.050 -
                   156.055
11.90              156.007
11.99              156.999
12.01              155.01 -
                   155.05
12.02              155.06
12.03              155.07
12.04              155.08
12.05              155.09
12.06              155.10
12.07              155.11
12.08              155.12
12.09              155.13
12.10              155.14
12.99              155.99
13.01              154.01 -
                   154.11
13.99              154.99
14.01              35.01
                   35.02 -
14.02              35.14;
                   35.99
                   TSO Tables
Chapter 20         I -
                   VIII
                   
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
 
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
06-10-03 6-1-2010    52.14
                    
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No.           Date Passed Code Section
–                - -         TSO Table IV
3, second series   - -         TSO Table IV
4, second series   - -         TSO Table IV
10, second series  - -         TSO Table IV
229                - -         TSO Table IV
224                - -         TSO Table IV
223                - -         TSO Table IV
222                - -         TSO Table IV
217                - -         TSO Table IV
216                - -         TSO Table IV
214                - -         TSO Table IV
35                 8-26-1909   TSO Table VIII
3                  11-19-1920  TSO Table III
69                 3-16-1925   TSO Table VII
2                  6-21-1929   TSO Table III
109                10-18-1935  TSO Table VII
112                4-23-1937   TSO Table VII
108                6- -1949    TSO Table VIII
122                5-16-1955   TSO Table VIII
125                8-19-1955   TSO Table VIII
126                6-4-1956    TSO Table VIII
127                6-18-1956   TSO Table VIII
128                7-2-1956    TSO Table VIII
129                9-17-1956   TSO Table III
131                5-6-1957    TSO Table VIII
132                5-6-1957    TSO Table VIII
138                7-6-1959    TSO Table VIII
145                6-20-1960   TSO Table VIII
147                11-21-1960  TSO Table VIII
149                6-5-1961    TSO Table VIII
158                7-16-1962   TSO Table VIII
179                3-12-1968   TSO Table VIII
188                9-8-1970    TSO Table VIII
190                11-16-1970  TSO Table VIII
193                4-12-1971   TSO Table VIII
192                4-16-1971   TSO Table VIII
195                6-15-1971   TSO Table VIII
196                7-6-1971    TSO Table VI
202                10-19-1971  TSO Table VIII
203                10-19-1971  TSO Table VIII
215                11-21-1972  TSO Table VIII
219                6-19-1973   TSO Table VIII
221                7-10-1973   TSO Table VIII
225                10-2-1973   TSO Table VIII
231                1-20-1975   TSO Table VIII
232                1-20-1975   TSO Table VIII
233                1-20-1975   TSO Table VIII
1, second series   9-20-1976   TSO Table VI
7                  6-21-1977   TSO Table VIII
9                  3-21-1978   TSO Table VIII
13, second series  2-9-1979    TSO Table VIII
16, second series  4-6-1979    TSO Table I
17, second series  5-22-1979   TSO Table VIII
24, second series  7-6-1981    TSO Table VI
25, second series  7-31-1981   TSO Table VIII
                               30.05;
                               32.01;
                               32.05;
                               32.20;
27, second series  12-21-1981  34.02;
                               36.01;
                               36.03;
                               36.05;
                               36.06
28, second series  12-21-1981  50.28
                               111.034;
                               111.039;
                               111.043;
30, second series  12-21-1981  111.044;
                               111.084;
                               111.101;
                               133.15
31, second series  12-21-1981  110.03;
                               110.10
                               152.03;
                               152.07;
                               152.08;
32, second series  12-21-1981  152.11;
                               152.13;
                               152.14;
                               152.15
34, second series  12-21-1981  71.02;
                               71.12
                               91.03 ;
35, second series  12-21-1981  91.18;
                               91.20
29, second series  12-21-1981  150.03
39, second series  6-7-1982    TSO Table IV
41, second series  8-2-1982    TSO Table IV
43, second series  9-7-1982    TSO Table IV
44, second series  10-18-1982  112.03
48, second series  3-15-1983   TSO Table IV
49, second series  4-19-1983   TSO Table I
51                 12-6-1983   120.02
                               111.045;
                               111.046;
52, second series  11-6-1984   111.051;
                               111.069;
                               111.084
54, second series  11-20-1984  31.03
57, second series  11-20-1984  112.04;
                               120.02
59, second series  11-20-1984  71.17
60, second series  11-20-1984  91.03 ;
                               150.02
64, second series  4-23-1985   TSO Table IV
                               111.003;
                               111.030;
                               111.034;
                               111.046;
70, second series  3-18-1986   111.047;
                               111.048;
                               111.066;
                               111.067;
                               111.081;
                               111.085
72, second series  3-18-1986   91.03
73, second series  3-18-1986   71.18
79, second series  7-15-1986   TSO Table III
80, second series  3-3-1987    TSO Table I
                               111.003;
                               111.047;
83, second series  4-7-1987    111.067;
                               111.084;
                               111.101
84, second series  4-7-1987    72.36
146, second series 8-19-1987   92.08
85, second series  11-6-1987   TSO Table VIII
87, second series  7-5-1988    50.20
88, second series  7-5-1988    151.01
89, second series  7-5-1988    111.001
90, second series  7-5-1988    72.37
91, second series  7-5-1988    71.10
93, second series  7-5-1988    TSO Table I
94, second series  8-16-1988   116.01;
                               116.04
95, second series  12-6-1988   71.19
96, second series  9-19-1989   50.29
97                 10-3-1989   120.02
99B, second series 10-17-1989  30.03;
                               30.06
100, second series 4-17-1990   150.06
101, second series 4-17-1990   111.049
102, second series 4-17-1990   120.16
104, second series 4-17-1990   71.04
                               52.01;
105, second series 5-15-1990   52.11;
                               52.13
98, second series  6-8-1990    TSO Table VIII
99A, second series 6-9-1990    TSO Table VIII
106, second series 3-19-1991   TSO Table IV
108, second series 11-5-1991   50.26
111, second series 4-20-1992   TSO Table IV
112, second series 5-19-1992   TSO Table IV
113, second series 8-18-1992   TSO Table IV
115, second series 11-3-1992   116.02
117                1-19-1993   151.02
141, second series 4-16-1993   111.030
                               32.22;
119                4-20-1993   154.11;
                               154.99
                               111.002;
119, second series 4-20-1993   111.030;
                               111.068
120, second series 4-20-1993   117.03
122, second series 4-20-1993   131.03
124, second series 5-18-1993   TSO Table IV
126, second series 6-15-1993   TSO Table IV
130, second series 12-7-1993   53.13
131, second series 12-7-1993   120.37
133, second series 12-21-1993  91.03
135, second series 10-18-1994  TSO Table IV
138, second series 11-7-1995   111.038
139, second series 11-21-1995  72.54;
                               72.57
144, second series 2-18-1997   133.01
145, second series 8-5-1997    150.03
147, second series 11-4-1997   Ch. 73, Schd. I
149, second series 2-3-1998    TSO Table VI
151, second series 8-4-1998    TSO Table I
152, second series 8-4-1998    TSO Table I
153, second series 10-20-1998  121.24
154, second series 10-20-1998  36.06
                               111.030;
                               111.034;
                               111.040;
156, second series 10-20-1998  111.046;
                               111.047;
                               111.083;
                               111.100;
                               119.21
157, second series 10-20-1998  118.14
159, second series 10-20-1998  91.22
160, second series 11-10-1998  TSO Table I
161, second series 6-14-1999   TSO Table V
162, second series 8-17-1999   70.99
166, second series 5-16-2000   TSO Table V
                               156.004 -
                               156.007;
                               156.033;
                               156.055;
                               156.095;
165, second series 7-5-2000    156.130;
                               156.135;
                               156.155;
                               156.195;
                               156.217;
                               156.999
166, second series 8-1-2000    TSO Table IV
167, second series 12-5-2000   150.06
168, second series 1-2-2001    156.136
169, second series 10-16-2001  TSO Table II
170, second series 11-6-2001   TSO Table II
172, second series 3-4-2002    TSO Table I
173                3-19-2002   TSO Table IV
177, second series 1-7-2003    52.01;
                               52.12
178, second series 3-4-2003    TSO Table IV
179                4-15-2003   TSO Table IV
179, second series 4-15-2003   TSO Table IV
180                5-6-2003    155.14;
                               155.99
181                10-21-2003  TSO Table IV
182, second series 3-2-2004    TSO Table II
183, second series 6-15-2004   92.02
184, second series 7-6-2004    TSO Table II
185, second series 11-16-2004  TSO Table III
186, second series 12-21-2004  111.004
188, second series 5-3-2005    TSO Table IV
190, second series 10-18-2005  131.38
191                10-18-2005  131.37;
                               TSO Table IV
192, second series 1-3-2006    51.01;
                               51.08
194, second series 5-2-2006    TSO Table II
195, second series 5-2-2006    111.044 
197, second series 7-5-2006    72.22
198                8-2-2006    TSO Table IV
198, second series 8-2-2006    35.14
199, second series 8-15-2006   51.02
200, second series 1-2-2007    72.56
                               115.02;
201, second series 4-3-2007    115.06;
                               115.10
202, second series 4-17-2007   TSO Table II
204, second series 7-17-2007   31.02
205, second series 8-7-2007    150.01;
                               150.04
206, second series 8-7-2007    70.06
207, second series 9-4-2007    156.033
209, second series 10-2-2007   33.03
210, second series 10-2-2007   70.01
211                1-15-2008   TSO Table IV
211, second series 1-15-2008   156.131;
                               156.133
212, second series 1-15-2008   152.06
001, third series  4-15-2008   50.28
3, third series    7-15-2008   TSO Table IV
4, third series    8-5-2008    53.09
5, third series    10-7-2008   156.028;
                               156.072
7, third series    5-5-2009    50.04;
                               50.05
10, third series   10-6-2009   92.20 -
                               92.26
11, third series   1-19-2010   92.02
12, third series   4-6-2010    152.04
14, third series   6-1-2010    150.07
15, third series   9-21-2010   111.046
16, third series   11-3-2010   111.004
17, third series   12-21-2010  92.02
18, third series   5-17-2011   TSO Table IV
                               91.01 -
19, third series   6-21-2011   91.46;
                               91.99
                               131.15 -
21, third series   6-21-2011   131.21;
                               131.99
22, third series   7-5-2011    91.02
23, third series   9-20-2011   151.03
24, third series   9-20-2011   152.16
25, third series   3-20-2012   30.02
26, third series   9-18-2012   156.034
27, third series   4-2-2013    111.004
28, third series   5-7-2013    111.004
29, third series   5-7-2013    111.101
                               156.002;
                               156.004;
30, third series   10-15-2013  156.072;
                               156.092;
                               156.095
32, third series   4-15-2014   111.050
33, third series   5-6-2014    111.065
34, third series   4-5-2016    TSO Table II
35, third series   6-21-2016   30.01
37, third series   7-5-2016    51.06
38, third series   7-5-2016    51.09
41, third series   8-1-2017    111.004
42, third series   9-18-2018   TSO Table II
43, third series   10-2-2018   TSO Table II
                               113.01 -
44, third series   10-15-2019  113.13;
                               113.99
45, third series   3-18-2020   71.09
47, third series   8-4-2020    156.004
48, third series   8-4-2020    150.01
49, third series   1-19-2021   111.115 -
                               111.123
50, third series   4-20-2021   93.01;
                               93.99
001, fourth series 11-16-2021  TSO Table II
002, fourth series 12-21-2021  155.10
003, fourth series 3-15-2022   30.02
004, fourth series 3-15-2022   71.99
005, fourth series 4-5-2022    TSO Table I
                               157.01 -
006, fourth series 10-18-2022  157.08;
                               157.99
007, fourth series 11-24-2022  156.074
008, fourth series 12-22-2022  91.01
- -                1-3-2023    71.19
010, fourth series 2-21-2023   91.04
                               122.01 -
012, fourth series 9-19-2023   122.11;
                               122.99
013, fourth series 11-7-2023   156.006
014, fourth series 11-7-2023   71.21
015, fourth series 12-19-2023  TSO Table IV
016, fourth series 12-19-2023  35.02
017, fourth series 1-2-2024    151.26
                               123.01 -
018, fourth series 3-20-2024   123.11;
                               123.99
019, fourth series 3-20-2024   114.01 -
                               114.13
                               90.001 -
                               90.010;
                               90.020 -
                               90.025;
                               90.035 -
                               90.047;
020, fourth series 5-21-2024   90.060 -
                               90.062;
                               90.070 -
                               90.075;
                               90.085 -
                               90.091;
                               90.999
                               95.01 -
021, fourth series 5-21-2024   95.08;
                               95.15 -
                               95.18
022, fourth series 5-21-2024   96.01;
                               96.02
023, fourth series 5-21-2024   97.01 -
                               97.08
024, fourth series 5-21-2024   156.033
025, fourth series 11-19-2024  TSO Table III
026, fourth series 3-4-2025    90.006
027, fourth series 5-6-2025    156.074;
                               156.094
                               124.01 -
028, fourth series 5-20-2025   124.08;
                               124.99
029, fourth series 5-20-2025   TSO Table III
030, fourth series 7-15-2025   91.04
031, fourth series 8-19-2025   156.033
032, fourth series 10-21-2025  TSO Table II
033, fourth series 12-16-2025  TSO Table IV
034, fourth series 12-16-2025  TSO Table IV
                              
 
