WYANDOTTE, MICHIGAN
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-5 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 1552, passed 3-24-2025
 
Published by:
AMERICAN LEGAL PUBLISHING
525 Vine Street Suite 310 Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 www.amlegal.com
OFFICIALS PAGE
June 2025
Mayor                       Robert A. DeSana
                            
City Council                Robert Alderman
                           Chris Calvin
                           Adriana Cerulla
                           Todd Hanna
                           Kelly M. Stec
                           Patrick J. Sutka
                            
City Clerk                  Lawrence S. Stec
City Treasurer              Todd M. Browning
City Assessor               Theodore H. Galeski
27th District Court Judge   Elizabeth L. DiSanto
Department of Legal Affairs William R. Look, P.C.
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
NOTICE OF ADOPTION
First & Final Reading #1518
The City of Wyandotte Ordinance has been amended as follows:
First & Final Reading #1518
AN ORDINANCE ENTITLED
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF WYANDOTTE, MICHIGAN,
REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, RECODIFYING, CODIFYING, AND COMPILING CERTAIN
EXISTING GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF WYANDOTTE DEALING WITH SUBJECTS
EMBRACED IN SUCH CODE OF ORDINANCES, AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY
The City of Wyandotte Ordains:
WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of the City of Wyandotte
are in need of restatement, reorganization, codification and recodification for
the complete preservation of the public peace, health, safety and general
welfare of municipality and for the proper conduct of its affairs; and
WHEREAS, the Acts of Legislature of the State of Michigan empower and authorize
the City of Wyandotte to revise, amend, restate, codify, recodify and compile
any existing ordinances and all new ordinances not heretofore adopted or
published and to incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance in book form;
and
WHEREAS, the Legislative Authority of the City of Wyandotte has authorized a
general restatement, compilation, revision, codification, and recodification of
the ordinances of the City of Wyandotte of a general and permanent nature and
publication of such ordinance in book form; and
WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take effect
at an early date.
Section 1. The general ordinances of the City of Wyandotte as revised, amended,
restated, codified, recodified, and compiled in book form are hereby adopted as
and shall constitute the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Wyandotte,
Michigan."
Section 2. Such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall consist of the
following Titles:
WYANDOTTE, MICHIGAN
CODE OF ORDINANCES
   TABLE OF CONTENTS
   CHARTER
   TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      10.   Rules of Construction; General Penalty
      11.   Municipal Civil Infractions
   TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
      30.   Organizations
      31.   Officials and Employees
      32.   Retirement System
      33.   Law Enforcement
      34.   Finance and Revenue; Taxation
   TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
      50.   Electricity
      51.   Garbage and Trash
      52.   Water and Sewers
      53.   Cable Television
   TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
      70.   General Provisions
      71.   Traffic Regulations
      72.   Parking and Stopping Rules
      73.   Recreational Vehicles
      74.   Motor Carriers
   TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
      90.   Downriver Central Animal Control
      91.   Fire Prevention and Protection
      92.   Hazardous and Toxic Materials
      93.   Fireworks
      94.   Health and Safety; Nuisances
      95.   Marine Safety
      96.   Special City Events
      97.   Parks, Recreation and City-Owned Property
      98.   Unmanned Aircraft
      99.   Alarm Systems
      100.   Weights and Measures
   TITLE XI: GENERAL BUSINESS REGULATIONS
      110.   Auctions; Garage Sales
      111.   Peddlers and Solicitors
      112.   Advertisements
      113.   Film Production
      114.   Gasoline Service Stations
      115.   Telecommunications
      116.   Food and Drink Establishments
      117.   Alcoholic Beverages
      118.   Marijuana Businesses
   TITLE XIII: BUSINESS REGISTRATION AND LICENSING
      130.   Registration and Licensing
      131.   Junk Dealers, Junkyards and Pawnbrokers
      132.   Leisure; Amusements and Entertainment
      133.   Tattoo Parlors and Tattooing
      134.   Used Car Dealers
   TITLE XV: GENERAL OFFENSES
      150.   General Provisions
      151.   Offenses Against Persons
      152.   Offenses Against Property
      153.   Offenses Against Public Peace
      154.   Weapons and Harmful Devices
      155.   Controlled Substances and Other Drugs
      156.   Inmate Reimbursement
   TITLE XVII: LAND USAGE
      170.   Building Regulations; Construction
      171.   Housing Code
      172.   Electric Code and Inspections
      173.   Mobile Homes and Mobile Home Courts
      174.   Streets and Sidewalks
      175.   Trees and Vegetation
      176.   Grading and Soil Erosion Control
      177.   Planning and Development
      178.   Urban Renewal
      179.   Swimming Pools
      180.   Geothermal Systems
      181.   Rental Dwellings and Units
   TITLE XIX: ZONING
      190.   Zoning
   TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   PARALLEL REFERENCES
   References to Michigan Compiled Laws Annotated
   References to Prior Code
   References to Ordinances
   INDEX
Section 3. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in such Code
of Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of
this ordinance except as they are included and reordained in whole or in part
in such Code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense committed or
penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of this
ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of ordinances levying
taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory, establishing
franchises, or granting special rights to certain persons, authorizing public
improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing of money,
authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property, granting or
accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to public use, vacating or
setting the boundaries of streets or other public places; nor shall such repeal
affect any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature or pertaining to
subjects not contained in or covered by the Code.
Section 4. Such Code shall be deemed published as of the day of its adoption
and approval by the City Council and the Clerk of the City of Wyandotte is
hereby authorized and ordered to file a copy of such Code of Ordinances in the
Office of the Clerk.
Section 5. Such Code shall be in full force and effect as provided in Section
6, and such Code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and places of the
ordinance and all provisions, sections, penalties, and regulations therein
contained and of the date of passage, and that the same is properly signed,
attested, recorded, and approved and that any public hearings and notices
thereof as required by law have been given.
Section 6. This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary for
the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety, and general welfare of
the people of this municipality and providing for the usual daily operation of
all city departments, and shall take effect at the earliest date provided by
law.
Section 7. Repeal. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herein are
hereby repealed, only to the extent necessary to give this ordinance full force
and effect.
Section 8. Effective Date. This ordinance shall take immediate effect. This
ordinance is deemed necessary for the immediate preservation of the public
peace, property, health, safety and for providing for the usual daily operation
of the City of Wyandotte. This Ordinance or a summary thereof shall be
published in a newspaper generally circulated in the City of Wyandotte within
ten (10) days of its passage. A copy of this Ordinance may be inspected or
obtained at the City of Wyandotte Clerk's Office, 3200 Biddle Avenue,
Wyandotte, Michigan.
Motion unanimously carried.
CERTIFICATION
      We, the undersigned Robert A. DeSana and Lawrence S. Stec, respectively,
the Mayor and City Clerk of the City of Wyandotte, do hereby certify that the
foregoing Ordinance was duly passed by the City Council of the City of
Wyandotte, at a regular session on Monday, October 18, 2021.
                                                      Robert A. DeSana, Mayor
                                                      Lawrence S. Stec, City
Clerk
The effective date of this Ordinance is October 18, 2021. A copy of this
Ordinance may be purchased or inspected at the City of Wyandotte Clerk's
Office, 3200 Biddle Avenue, Wyandotte, Michigan, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.
and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday.
Publication Date: October 27, 2021
CHARTER
Editor’s note:
   This part contains the Charter of the City of Wyandotte, Michigan, approved
by the electors on 3-2-1926, and filed with the Secretary of State and in
effect on 3-5-1926, as amended.
    In this compilation an original copy of the Charter has been relied upon
together with subsequent amendments. It was impossible to use the Charter as
contained in the city’s prior code of Ordinances as it rearranged, renumbered
and combined sections; however due to     the accidental destruction of older
records it has been impossible to ascertain whether certain Charter amendments
were approved by the electorate. In such situations, the language in the
Charter as compiled in the city’s prior code has been accepted as authoritative
and editorial notes of such reliance have been inserted. The Charter is printed
as enacted and amended; except that, catchlines have been editorially supplied
to facilitate its use.
    Additionally, obvious spelling typographical errors have been corrected and
a uniform system of capitalization has been instituted. Any other changes or
additions are encased in brackets [ ].
State Constitution reference:
   Power to adopt and amend charter, Michigan Const. 1963, Art. VII, § 22
Statutory reference:
   Home rule act, see M.C.L.A. §§ 117.1 et seq.
We, the people of the City of Wyandotte, County of Wayne, State of Michigan,
pursuant to the authority granted by the constitution and statutes of the State
of Michigan, do hereby ordain and establish this charter.
CHAPTER I. INCORPORATION AND POWERS
Incorporation and name.
1.   Section 1. The corporation heretofore created and now known as the “City
of Wyandotte” shall be and continue a body politic under the name and style of
“City of Wyandotte.”
General corporate powers.
2.   Section 2. The “City of Wyandotte” by such name may sue and be sued, plead
and be impleaded, complain and defend in any court of competent jurisdiction,
contract and be contracted with, acquire, appropriate, hold, control, lease,
encumber, convey, and dispose of real and personal property, for the use or
benefit of said municipal corporation, have a common seal and change the same
at pleasure and may have, possess, enjoy and exercise all the powers in this
charter conferred, together with those which now or hereafter may be conferred
upon or reserved to cities under the constitution and laws of the state as
fully and completely as though said powers were specifically enumerated herein,
and together with such implied and incidental powers as are possessed by
municipal corporations in this state, and no enumeration of particular powers
in this charter shall be held as exclusive or in any-wise a limitation on the
city to legislate on other subjects. The City of Wyandotte may do any act to
advance the interest of the city, the safety, order, good government, general
welfare and prosperity of the municipality and its inhabitants; and may make
all laws, ordinances and resolutions relating to municipal concerns and those
which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into execution the foregoing
powers.
General power to tax, issue bonds, etc.
3.   Section 3. The city may acquire, construct, own, lease, operate and
regulate public utilities; may assess, levy and collect taxes for general and
special purposes on all the subjects and objects which the city may lawfully
tax; may provide for the issuance of bonds of said city for the purpose of
providing the first cost of installation and connection of sewers and water
works on and to property when such installation and connection shall have been
ordered by the proper health authorities and to provide for a lien on such
property for the money so used; may borrow money on the faith and credit of the
city by the issue and sale of bonds of the city; may appropriate the money of
the city for any and all lawful purposes; may create, provide for, construct,
regulate and maintain all things in the nature of public works and
improvements; may levy and collect assessments for local improvements,
including water main extension and boulevard lighting systems; may provide for
the election or appointment of and fix the salaries and compensation of all
officers and employees except as herein otherwise provided; may provide for
taking a census of the city; may regulate and control the use for whatever
purpose of the streets, alleys and other public places; may establish and
maintain a police force for the good government of the city and for the
protection of the persons and property of the inhabitants thereof, may enact
ordinances and resolutions and establish and enforce regulations to guard
against the occurrence of fire and to protect the property and persons of the
inhabitants against damage and accident resulting therefrom and for this
purpose may establish and maintain a fire department including officers,
employees, equipment, apparatus and buildings necessary therefor; may
construct, maintain and regulate fountains and public drinking places,
including watering troughs; may do any and all things needful, necessary and
proper to furnish, supply, control and regulate water supply, sewage, sewage
disposal, sanitation and sanitary control within or without the boundaries of
the city, upon such terms and conditions as the council shall decide; may build
and equip or acquire by purchase, gift, devise, bequest or agreement city
hospitals and provide for the management, operation an [and] maintenance of the
same; may take all needful and necessary steps for the care and relief of the
poor and indigent, delinquent and juvenile offenders, those mentally or
physically deficient, and the removal and remedying of the causes thereof, and
may regulate, control and prohibit the bringing to the city from any other
place of any pauper or other person likely to become a charge upon the city.
Power to zone, plan, regulate businesses, etc.
4.   Section 4. The city may adopt a city plan; may provide a plan of streets
and alleys for the distance of three (3) miles beyond the city limits and
require that all streets and alleys in said district, dedicated to the public,
shall conform therewith; may provide for the restriction or exclusion of
business from certain districts of the city; may regulate, restrict and limit
the number and location of oil and gasoline stations; may prescribe the limits
of districts in the city within which wooden buildings and structures shall not
be erected, placed, enlarged or repaired and may direct the manner of
constructing buildings within such districts with respect to protection against
fire and to the materials of which the walls, floors, partitions and roofs
shall be constructed; may establish the building line of houses with relation
to streets, the width and depth of lots and the amount of all space around
houses; may regulate and control the construction and size of partition fences;
may enact a building and house code and may require building permits for all
buildings and structures erected in the city; may regulate the planting and
setting of trees, shrubs, flowers and plants and the care thereof and may
exercise jurisdiction over and may abate all diseased or noxious trees, shrubs
and plants in the city; may regulate the construction and the materials used in
all buildings and the maintenance thereof; may regulate, license or prohibit
the construction, locality, size, height and the materials used in all bill-
boards and the maintenance and use of the same; may regulate and control the
construction of cellars and basements insofar as the same, in any manner,
affects the public health; may regulate and enforce local police and sanitary
regulations, may provide for the approval of all plats of land subject to such
terms and conditions as may be deemed best; may regulate and control the
disposition and handling of garbage, ashes, dead animals and any other article
or thing detrimental to public health or good sanitation; may regulate and
control food supplies and food products; may maintain, operate, license, own
and control public fuel supplies and markets of every kind; may regulate,
control or prohibit the exhibition of fireworks, and the storing handling,
disposition and sale of explosives of every character, including fireworks,
firecrackers and firearms; may provide for the inspection, selling and
regulation and control of all weights and measures and the use thereof; may
regulate, license, control or prohibit transient traders, auctioneers, the sale
at auction of live or domestic animals in the streets, alleys and public places
of the city, auctions and sale at auctions, peddlers, hawkers and pawnbrokers;
may regulate, license and control cab drivers, draymen, teamsters, taxicabs,
jitneys, street cars and other forms of public conveyances, hotels, rooming
houses, boarding houses, restaurants, candy and soft drink manufacturers and
distributors, either wholesale or retail and other business and occupations;
may license dogs and other animals; may regulate the location of and license
telegraph, telephone and electric light poles within the city; may license and
impose a license fee on street cars, telephones, gas meters, electric meters,
water meters or any other device for measuring service, also telephone,
telegraph, electric light and power poles, provided that all of said license
fees shall be exclusive of and in addition to other lawful taxes upon such
property or the holder thereof.
General police powers.
5.   Section 5. The city may define, prohibit, abate, suppress, regulate or
prevent all things detrimental to the health, morals, comfort, safety,
convenience and welfare of the inhabitants of the city and all nuisances and
causes thereof and may pass such ordinances and adopt such resolutions as may
be expedient or necessary to maintain and promote the peace, good government
and welfare of the city and for the performance of the functions thereof.
Other powers.
6.   Section 6. The city shall have power to provide for and change the
location and grade of all street crossings of any railroad track; and to compel
any railroad company or street railway company to raise or lower their railroad
tracks to conform to street grades which may be established by the city from
time to time; and to construct street crossings in such manner, and with such
protection to persons crossing thereat as the city may require, and to keep
them in repair; also to require and compel railroad companies to keep flagmen
or watchmen at railroad crossings; to regulate and prescribe the speed of all
locomotives and railroad trains and street railway cars within the city; and
regulate the obstructing of crossings by trains, engines, cars or otherwise.
Extraterritorial powers.
7.   Section 7. All the powers possessed by said city may be exercised beyond
the boundaries of the city so far as the laws of the state will permit.
Judicial notice of organization.
8.   Section 8. Judicial notice shall be taken in all courts and proceedings in
the state of the existence of the City of Wyandotte incorporated or made
subject to the provisions of this charter, and of the change of organization of
said city from its former organization to its incorporation under the
provisions of this charter, and all changes at any time made in the corporate
limits of said city, by the annexation of territory thereto or otherwise, and
from the time of such incorporation or change of organization the provisions of
this charter shall be applicable to said city, and all laws in conflict
therewith shall be no longer applicable.
Ordinances and resolutions to remain in force.
9.   Section 9. All ordinances, by-laws and resolutions, in force in said city
when it shall be incorporated under this charter, and not inconsistent
herewith, shall continue in full force and effect until repealed or amended by
the council.
Rights and property transferred to new city.
10.   Section 10. All rights and property of any kind and description which
were vested in the City of Wyandotte under its former organization shall, upon
the taking effect of this charter, be deemed and held to be vested in the new
corporation and no rights or liabilities, either in favor of or against such
former corporation, existing at the time of the taking effect of this charter,
and no suit or prosecution of any kind shall be in any manner affected by such
change, but the same shall stand or progress as if no such change had been
made, and all debts and liabilities of the former corporation shall be deemed
to be the debts and liabilities of the new corporation, and all taxes levied
and uncollected at the time of such change shall be collected the same as if
such change had not been made: Provided, that when a different remedy is given
in this charter, which can be made applicable to any rights existing at the
time of the taking effect of this charter, the same shall be deemed cumulative
to the remedies before provided, and may be used accordingly.
CHAPTER II. BOUNDARIES, WARDS AND ELECTION PRECINCTS
Boundaries.
11.   Section 1. The boundaries of the City of Wyandotte shall be and remain as
now fixed and established and are described as follows: Commencing at the
intersection of the east line of the highway or road known as Fort Street which
runs on the north and south half section lines of Sections nineteen, thirty and
thirty-one in Township three south, Range eleven east, County of Wayne and
State of Michigan, with the north line of the highway or road which runs on the
line between the Townships of Ecorse and Monguagon in said county known as
Pennsylvania Avenue; thence northerly along the east line of said Fort Street,
so-called, to its intersection with the center line of the highway or road
known as Goddard Road, the center line of said Goddard Road being also the
southerly boundary line of the City of Lincoln Park in said county; thence
easterly along the center line of said Goddard Road to its intersection with
the highway or road known as Gohl Road which runs on the line between Sections
nineteen and twenty, Township three south, Range eleven east, thence northerly
along the center line of said Gohl Road extended to its intersection with the
center line of the south branch of the Ecorse River or Creek; thence easterly
along the center line of the south branch of said Ecorse River or Creek, which
is also the present south-easterly boundary line of said City of Lincoln Park,
to its intersection with the north and south half section line of said Section
twenty; thence along the center line of the south branch of said Ecorse River
or Creek north forty-two degrees, forty-nine minutes east five hundred thirty-
nine and thirty-four one hundredths feet to the center line of the middle
branch of said Ecorse River or Creek; thence along the center line of the
middle branch of said Ecorse River or Creek south eighty-nine degrees, two
minutes, ten seconds east four hundred and twenty-eight one hundredths feet;
thence continuing along the center line of the middle branch of said Ecorse
River or Creek north seventy-six degrees, eight minutes, ten seconds east four
hundred ten feet; thence continuing along the center line of the middle branch
of said Ecorse River or Creek south sixty-seven degrees, thirty-eight minutes,
twenty seconds east five hundred twenty-nine and eighty-nine one hundredths
feet; thence continuing along the center line of the middle branch of said
Ecorse River or Creek north seventy-six degrees fifty-three minutes, twenty
seconds east four hundred forty-two and sixty-three one hundredths feet to the
center line of the main branch of said Ecorse River or Creek; thence easterly
along the center line of the main branch of said Ecorse River or Creek to the
harbor line of the Detroit River; thence in a southerly direction along the
harbor line of said Detroit River to its intersection with the southerly line
of said Section twenty extended, said point of intersection being the south-
east corner of the former Village of Ford; thence easterly along the southerly
line of said Section twenty extended to a point where the national boundary
line in said Detroit River intersects the section line between sections number
twenty-one and twenty-eight in said Town three south; thence southerly along
the said national boundary line to its intersection with the half section line
of Section thirty-two, Town three south, Range eleven east; thence westerly
along the half section line of said section thirty-two to its intersection with
the westerly channel bank of said Detroit River; thence southerly along the
westerly channel bank of said Detroit River to a point where said channel bank
intersects the township line dividing the said Townships of Ecorse and
Monguagon; thence westerly along the line dividing the said Townships of Ecorse
and Monguagon to the westerly line of the right of way of the Lake Shore and
Michigan Southern Railroad; thence northerly on a line, at right angles to the
line dividing said Townships of Ecorse and Monguagon, to the northerly line of
the highway or road running along the line between said Townships of Ecorse and
Monguagon, and known as Pennsylvania Avenue; thence westerly along the
northerly line of said Pennsylvania Avenue, so-called, to the point of
beginning.
Wards.
12.   Section 2. The City of Wyandotte shall consist of one ward.
Statutory reference:
   Mandatory that charter provide for the establishment of one or more wards,
see M.C.L.A. § 117.3(e)
Election precincts.
13.   Section 3. The election precincts of the city as existing at the time of
the adoption of this charter shall continue as election precincts of the city
hereunder, with such alterations as shall from time to time be made by the
council as herein provided. The council may, by ordinance, increase or decrease
the number of said election precincts or change the boundaries thereof. The
council, when there shall be more than six hundred (600) electors in any voting
precinct of the city, according to the poll list of the last preceding
election, shall cause such precinct to be divided into two (2) or more voting
districts. The manner of making such division, the creation of election
inspectors, and all matters pertaining to such division and the holding of
election in such districts, not covered by the provisions of this charter,
shall be provided for by the council.
Statutory reference:
   Election precincts, see M.C.L.A. §§ 168.654 et seq.
CHAPTER III. ELECTORS, REGISTRATION, NOMINATION AND ELECTION*
Editor’s note:
   Many of the provisions in this chapter are expressly superseded by state
law; a given provision should be considered carefully in light of the state law
reference given.
Statutory reference:
   Mandatory that charter provide for the time, manner and place of holding
elections, see M.C.L.A. § 117.3(c)
   Michigan Election Law, see M.C.L.A. §§ 168.1 et seq.
Persons eligible to vote.
14.   Section 1. The inhabitants of the City of Wyandotte having the
qualifications of electors under the constitution of the state, and no others,
shall be electors therein, and every elector shall vote in the election
district where he shall have resided during the twenty (20) days next preceding
the day of election. The residence of any elector, not being a householder,
shall be deemed to be in the election district in which is located his regular
place of lodging. All qualified electors of the city shall be qualified to vote
at all primary, general and special elections held under the provisions of this
charter.
Editor’s note:
   Res. 2016-243, based on M.C.L.A. § 168.642, eliminated the February primary.
Statutory reference:
   Qualifications of electors, see M.C.L.A. § 168.492
Voter registration.
15.   Section 2. The registration and re-registration of the qualified electors
of the city shall be conducted and the duties of the various officers connected
therewith shall be performed in accordance with the provisions of the general
laws of the state and this charter.
Statutory reference:
   Voter registration, see M.C.L. §§ 168.493a et seq.
Nominations and primary election generally.
16.   Section 3. Candidates to be voted for at all municipal elections shall be
nominated by a primary election and no other names shall be placed upon the
general ballot, except those selected in the manner hereinafter prescribed. On
and after February 22, 2005 the primary election for such nomination shell be
held on the fourth Tuesday of February 2005 and on the fourth Tuesday in
February every four (4) years thereafter. The primary election shall be held in
the same place, so far as possible, and the polls will be opened and closed at
the same hours as are required by the general election laws of the State of
Michigan.
(Res. of 2-10-97, § 1(a); Res. of 10-18-04; Res. of 9-22-08, § 1)
Editor’s note:
   At the direction of the city, §
3 has been amended to its original condition.
   Per M.C.L.A. § 168.322, the candidate filing deadline or certification
deadline is 4:00 p.m. on the fifteenth Tuesday before the May election.
   Res. 2016-243, based on M.C.L.A. § 168.642, eliminated the February primary.
   The above paragraph appears as amended by the electorate on 4-3-1993, 4-3-
1950 and 4-7-1997. The above paragraph was additionally amended by resolution
on 10-18-2004, as a result of Public Act 298 of 2005.
Statutory reference:
   Odd year primary elections, see M.C.L.A. §§ 168.644b et seq.
   Primary elections, see M.C.L.A. §§ 168.531 et seq.
Filing for candidacy for city office.
17.   Section 4. A person desiring to become a candidate for any elective city
office, shall, at least ten (10) days prior to said primary election, file with
the city clerk a statement of such candidacy, in substantially the following
form:
 
DECLARATION OF CANDIDACY
   COUNTY OF WAYNE, )
   STATE OF MICHIGAN, ) ss.
   I,                                , being duly sworn, say that I am a qualified elector of the City of Wyandotte, County of Wayne, State of Michigan, and reside at No.                                                           Street, in said city; and on the date of the next
general city election I will have been a resident thereof for one year; that I am a candidate for nomination to the office of                                                   to be voted upon at the primary election to be held on the fourth Tuesday of February, 20         , and I
hereby request that my name be printed upon the official primary ballot for nomination at such primary election for such office.
                     /s/                                               
                           (Signed)
   Subscribed and sworn to (or affirmed) before me by                                       on this                   day of                       , 20         .
                                                                                                                                             /s/                                               
                           (Signed)
 
   The city clerk shall not receive any declaration of candidacy after 4:00
p.m., Eastern Standard Time, on the last day for the filing of the same.
(Res. passed 9-22-2008, § 1)
Editor’s note:
   At the direction of the city, §
 4 has been amended to its original condition.
   It has been determined that property ownership within a jurisdiction cannot
be imposed as a prerequisite to seeking office in the jurisdiction, i.e., a
city charter cannot require a person who wishes to seek office in the city to
own property in the city. See the following
    Appeals Court cases: Kramer v. Union Free School District, 6-16-1969; Evans
v. Cornman, 6-16-1970; and Williams v. Lansing Board of Education, 6-24-1976.
   Per M.C.L.A. § 168.322, the candidate filing deadline or certification
deadline is 4:00 p.m. on the fifteenth Tuesday before the May election.
   Res. 2016-243, based on M.C.L.A. § 168.642, eliminated the February primary.
Statutory reference:
   Nomination time, see M.C.L.A. § 168.644f
Nominating petitions or candidate fee.
18.   Section 5. Any person desiring to become a candidate for any elective
city office shall file with the city clerk, with his declaration of candidacy,
either a candidate fee of One Hundred ($100.00) Dollars or a petition
containing the signatures of duly qualified electors equal in number to not
less than one (1) per cent or more than two (2) per cent of the total number of
registered voters within the city at the date of the last general city
election. Such nominating petition shall request that the name of such person
be placed on the primary ballot as a candidate for the office named therein.
Such petition shall be in substantially the following form:
 
NOMINATING PETITION
   The undersigned, duly qualified electors of the City of Wyandotte, and residing at the places set opposite our respective names hereto, do hereby request that the name of                                                            be placed on the ballot as a candidate for
nomination for                                            at the primary election to be held in such city on the fourth Tuesday of February, 20       . We further state that we know him or her to be a qualified elector of said city and a person of good moral character and
qualified in our judgment for the duties of such office.
   Names of qualified electors                   Street
                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                           
 
                                                            
   It shall be unlawful for any person to sign more than one (1) such
nominating petition for the same office unless there are two (2) or more
candidates to be elected to fill said office, in which case he may sign as many
petitions as there are candidates to be elected to fill said office. The
signatures on all nominating petitions, of any person violating the provisions
of this section shall be void.
(Res. passed 11-5-1996; Res. passed 9-22-2008, § 1)
Editor’s note:
   At the direction of the city, §
5 has been amended to its original condition.
   Per M.C.L.A. § 168.322, the candidate filing deadline or certification
deadline is 4:00 p.m. on the fifteenth Tuesday before the May election.
   Res. 2016-243, based on M.C.L.A. § 168.642, eliminated the February primary.
Statutory reference:
   Nominating petitions generally, see M.C.L.A. § 168.644f
   Non-partisan nominating petitions, see M.C.L.A. § 168.544a
Examination of nominating petitions by city clerk.
19.   Section 6.The clerk shall examine said petitions and ascertain whether
they are signed by the requisite number of qualified electors, and execute a
certificate stating the result of his examination, and immediately upon the
expiration of the time of filing the statements and petitions for candidacies
the clerk shall cause to be published in proper form, the names of the persons
for whom proper petitions have been filed designating the office for which they
are candidates in one issue of a newspaper published in said city, and the
clerk shall thereupon cause the primary ballots to be printed.
Editor’s note:
   Per M.C.L.A. § 168.322, the candidate filing deadline or certification
deadline is 4:00 p.m. on the fifteenth Tuesday before the May election.
   Res. 2016-243, based on M.C.L.A. § 168.642, eliminated the February primary.
Primary ballots.
20.   Section 7.Primary ballots shall have no party designation, emblem or
mark, shall be numbered in accordance with the requirements of the general
election laws of title state and shall be printed upon plain, substantial white
paper and shall be substantially in the following form:
 
OFFICIAL PRIMARY BALLOT
CANDIDATES FOR NOMINATION AT THE PRIMARY ELECTION
OF THE CITY OF WYANDOTTE, 20            .
(Place a cross in the square preceding the name of the parties you favor as
candidates for the respective offices.)
FOR MAYOR (Vote for one)
[ ] Name of candidate
[ ]                               
FOR COUNCIL MEMBERS (Vote for-designate the number of Councilmen to be elected)
[ ] Name of candidate
[ ]                               
FOR CITY ASSESSOR (Vote of one)
[ ] Name of candidate
[ ]                                  
FOR CITY CLERK (Vote for one)
[ ] Name of candidate
[ ]                               
FOR CITY TREASURER (Vote for one)
[ ] Name of candidate
[ ]                               
 
(Res. passed 9-22-2008, § 1)
Editor’s note:
   Res. 2016-243, based on M.C.L.A. § 168.642, eliminated the February primary.
   The city, pursuant to M.C.L.A. § 117.32, has abolished constables.
Statutory reference:
   Arrangement of ballot, see M.C.L.A. § 168.706
   Justices of the peace have been abolished, see M.C.L.A. § 600.9921
   Mandatory that charter provide for nomination of elective officers by
partisan or non-partisan primary or by petition, see M.C.L.A. § 117.3(b)
Printing of ballots; rotation of names.
21.   Section 8. The names of candidates shall be printed on the ballot in the
following manner: The forms shall be set up with the names of the candidates
arranged alphabetically according to surnames. In printing each set of ballots
for the several election precincts, the relative positions of the different
names printed in each division shall be changed as many times as there are
candidates in that division having the most names. As nearly as possible an
equal number of tickets shall be printed for each change. In making the changes
of position, the printers shall take the line of type at the head of each
office division and place it as the bottom of the division and shove up the
column so that the name that before was second shall be first after the change.
After the ballots are printed and before they are trimmed they shall be kept in
separate piles, one pile for each change in position, and shall then be piled
by taking one ballot from each pile and placing it upon the pile to be trimmed
in such manner that each alternative ballot shall have the names in a different
relative position. Thereupon, the ballots shall be numbered consecutively on
the upper right hand corner upon the front of the ballot with a perforated line
across said corner and underneath said number so that said corner with a number
thereon may be torn off.
Statutory reference:
   Arrangement of ballots, see M.C.L.A. § 168.706
Filing fee.
22.   Section 9. No candidate shall have his name printed upon said primary
election ballot unless he shall have paid to the city clerk, at the time of
filing his statement of candidacy, a fee of five dollars ($5.00).
Editor’s note:
   Res. 2016-243, based on M.C.L.A. § 168.642, eliminated the February primary.
Statutory reference:
   Filing fees generally, see M.C.L.A. § 168.551
Number of ballots to be supplied to polling places.
23.   Section 10. After the printing of the ballots, the clerk shall supply
each polling place with a sufficient number of ballots, not less than twenty-
five (25) per centum more than the number of the registered voters in the
precinct.
Primaries generally.
24.   Section 11. Primary elections, except as herein otherwise provided, shall
be conducted as nearly as may be in the manner provided for the holding of
elections under this charter.
Editor’s note:
   Res. 2016-243, based on M.C.L.A. § 168.642, eliminated the February primary.
Counting of ballots.
25.   Section 12. The inspectors of election shall, immediately upon the
closing of the polls, count the ballots and ascertain the number of votes cast
in such precinct for each of the candidates, and make return thereof to the
city clerk upon proper blanks to be furnished by said clerk, not later than 1:
00 p.m. Central [Eastern] Standard Time of the following day. On the second day
following the said primary election, at the hour of 7:00 p.m. Central [Eastern]
Standard Time, at the council chamber, the council shall canvass said returns
so received from all the polling precincts and shall ascertain and cause to be
published in one of the newspapers of said city, at least once, the result
thereof. Said canvass by the council shall be publicly made.
Editor’s note:
   Res. 2016-243, based on M.C.L.A. § 168.642, eliminated the February primary.
Statutory reference:
   Canvassing of ballots, see M.C.L.A. §§ 168.581 et seq.
Determination of persons for runoff election.
26.   Section 13. When only one person is to be elected to any office then the
two (2) candidates receiving the highest number of votes for that office shall
be the candidates and the only candidates whose names shall be placed on the
ballots for that office at the next succeeding election. When two (2) or more
persons are to be elected to any office, then the names of the persons
receiving at the primary election the highest number of votes for said office
up to a number equal to twice the number of such persons to be elected to said
office at said election, shall be placed upon the ballot as candidates and the
only candidates for that office. In case of a tie vote or if a recount of the
votes cast at a primary election is desired, the same proceedings shall be had
as provided for such case in this chapter relative to elections.
Editor’s note:
   Res. 2016-243, based on M.C.L.A. § 168.642, eliminated the February primary.
Statutory reference:
   Determination of election by lot, see M.C.L.A. § 168.851
   Recounts, see M.C.L.A. § 168.861
Waiver of primary.
27.   Section 14. If at the expiration of the time as herein provided for the
filing of nomination petitions or a candidate fee, the number of candidates for
a particular office shall not exceed the number of candidates to be nominated
for such office as herein provided, then no primary election shall be held for
the nomination of candidates for that office, but the persons who have filed
such petitions and nominating statements or who have paid said candidate fees
shall be nominated. The names of such candidates shall be printed upon the
ballot to be voted at the next regular annual city election in the same manner
as though such candidates had been nominated at a regularly held primary
election as herein provided.
(Res. passed 11-5-1996)
Editor’s note:
   Resolution 2016-243, based on M.C.L.A. § 168.642, eliminated the February
primary.
Statutory reference:
   Board of canvassers, see M.C.L.A. §§ 168.841 et seq.
General election generally.
28.   Section 15. A regular city election for the election of city officers, as
in this charter provided, shall be held on May 3, 2005 and on the first Tuesday
after the first Monday in May every four (4) years thereafter, at such place in
each election precinct of the city as the council shall by resolution
designate. At such general city election, the ballots for the election of city
officers shall be separate from any other ballot, shall be without party
insignia, emblem or designation, and shall be printed in the same manner and be
in the same general form as the ballots for the primary elections herein
provided for, so far as applicable. Below the names of the candidates for each
city office on the general election ballot there shall be printed as many blank
lines as there are offices to be filled, for the purpose of allowing the
elector, if he so desires, to write in the names of any person for whom he may
desire to vote, whose names are not printed on the ballot.
(Res. passed 2-10-1997, § 1(b); Res. passed 9-22-2008, § 1)
Editor’s note:
   At the direction of the city, §
15 has been amended to its original condition.
   Res. 2016-243, based on M.C.L.A. § 168.642, eliminated the February primary.
   The above paragraph appears as amended by the electorate on 4-3-1950 and 4-
7-1997.
Statutory reference:
   Odd year elections, see M.C.L.A. §§ 168.644e et seq.
Ballots.
29.   Section 16. In all city elections the electors shall vote by ballot. Such
ballots shall be prepared and furnished by the city clerk acting as election
commissioner, as provided by the general election laws of the state and the
provisions of this charter, and shall contain the names of all officers to be
voted for, and all questions or propositions submitted to be voted upon, shall
be placed upon one ballot separate from the ballot for city officers, and all
matters touching the form and contents of the ballot shall be governed by the
general election laws of the state, when not inconsistent with the provisions
of this charter.
Statutory reference:
   Arrangement of ballot, see M.C.L.A. § 168.706
Special elections generally.
30.   Section 17. Special elections not otherwise provided for in this charter
may be appointed by resolution of the council, and held in and for the city, at
such times and place or places as the council shall designate; the purpose and
object of which shall be fully set forth in the resolution appointing such
election, but not more than two (2) special elections shall be held in any
year, unless permitted by the general laws of this state, as hereafter amended.
Statutory reference:
   Only two special elections permitted per year, see M.C.L.A. § 117.5
   Special primaries and elections, see M.C.L.A. §§ 168.631 et seq.
Notice and conduct of special elections.
31.   Section 18. Whenever a special election is to be held the council shall
cause to be delivered to the inspectors of election in the voting precincts
where the same is to be held, a notice signed by the city clerk, specifying the
officer or officers to be chosen, and the question or proposition, if any, to
be submitted to the vote of the electors, and the day and place at which such
election is to be held, and the proceedings and manner of holding the election
shall be the same as at the regular city elections.
Notice of time and place of election.
32.   Section 19. Notice of the time and place or places of holding any
election, and of the officers to be elected, and the questions to be voted
upon, shall except as herein otherwise provided, be given by the city clerk, at
least ten (10) days before such election, by posting such notices in three (3)
public places in each voting precinct, in which the election is to be held, and
by pubhshing a copy thereof in one or more newspapers published in the city,
the same length of time before the election, and in case of a special election
the notice shall set forth the purpose and object of the election as fully as
the same are required to be set forth in the resolution appointing such
election.
Statutory reference:
   Notice of election, see M.C.L.A. §§ 168.648 et seq.
Opening and closing of polls.
33.   Section 20. On the day of election held by virtue of this charter the
polls shall be open in each voting precinct at 6:00 in the morning and shall be
kept open until 7:00 in the afternoon, Central [Eastern] Standard Time.
Statutory reference:
   Opening and closing of polls, see M.C.L.A. §§ 168.720 et seq.
Application of state law.
34.   Section 21. At all elections held under this charter, the provisions of
the general election laws of this state with respect to the appointment of
election inspectors, clerks, and gatekeepers, the filling of vacancies among
inspectors, the fixing of places for holding elections, the providing and
keeping of ballot boxes, the method of conducting elections, canvassing the
votes and announcing the results, the duties and powers of election inspectors,
the appointment, rights and privileges of challengers, recounting of votes and
all other matters pertaining to elections shall apply, insofar as the same are
applicable and not inconsistent with the provisions of this charter.
Statutory reference:
   Michigan Election Law, see M.C.L.A. §§ 168.1 et seq.
Coordination with state elections.
35.   Section 22. When county or state elections are held on the same day as a
city election, the inspectors of elections appointed for the city election
shall also be inspectors of such county or state elections in their respective
voting districts.
Statutory reference:
   Election inspectors, see M.C.L.A. §§ 168.672 et seq.
Determination of winners; notice thereof.
36.   Section 23. The council shall convene on Thursday next succeeding each
election at the hour of 7:00 p.m. Central [Eastern] Standard Time at their
usual place of meeting and determine the result of the election upon each
question and proposition voted upon, and what persons are duly elected at the
said election to the several offices respectively; and thereupon, the city
clerk shall make duplicate certificates, under the corporate seal of the city,
of such determination, showing the result of the election upon any question or
proposition voted upon, and what persons are declared elected to the several
offices respectively; one of which certificates he shall file in the office of
the county clerk, in the county in which the city is located, and the other
shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. It shall be the duty of the
city clerk, within five (5) days after such determination, to notify each
person elected in writing of his election.
Winner to have plurality.
37.   Section 24. The person or persons receiving the greatest number of votes
for any office in the city shall be deemed to have been duly elected to such
office; and if there shall be no choice for any office by reason of two (2) or
more candidates having received an equal number of votes, the council shall, at
the meeting mentioned in the preceding section, determine by lot between such
persons which shall be considered elected to such office.
Statutory reference:
   Determination of election by lot, see M.C.L.A. §§ 168.851 et seq.
Recall of elective officers.
38.   Section 25. Any holder of an elective office may be recalled and removed
therefrom by the qualified electors of the city, in the manner provided by the
constitution and general laws of this state.
State constitution reference:
   Recall, see Michigan Const. 1963, Art. II, § 8
Statutory reference:
   Charter may provide for recall of officials, see M.C.L.A. § 117.4i(6)
   Recall, see M.C.L.A. §§ 168.951 et seq.
Editor’s note:
   There is no paragraph 39.
CHAPTER IV. ELECTIVE OFFICERS
Designated.
40.   Section 1. The elective officers of the city shall be a mayor, six (6)
councilmen, a city clerk, a city treasurer, and a city assessor, all of whom
shall be elected at large, and shall be electors of the city.
(Res. passed 9-22-2008, § 1)
Editor’s note:
   At the direction of the city §
1 has been amended to its original condition.
   Ord. 658, § 1, enacted 7-21-1980, provides that “the authority and office of
constable as set forth in the charter of the City of Wyandotte is hereby
abolished”.
Statutory reference:
   Abolishing constables, see M.C.L.A. § 117.32
   Election of certain officers mandatory, see M.C.L.A. § 117.3(a)
   Justices of the peace have been abolished, see M.C.L.A. § 600.9921
Terms and lengths of office.
41.   Section 2. Commencing with the May 3, 2005, General Election and on the
first Tuesday after the first Monday in May in every fourth year thereafter,
all of the officers mentioned in section 44, shall be elected for a term of
four years. Commencing with the April 1997 General Election, the mayor and any
councilpersons shall be prohibited from seeking more than three (3) consecutive
four (4) year terms of office for the same office, but this prohibition shall
not apply to the City Clerk, the City Treasurer, or the City Assessor. The term
of all elective officers, shall commence at twelve o’clock noon, eastern
standard time, on the first Monday following the election.
(Res. passed 9-22-2008, § 1)
Editor’s note:
   At the direction of the city, §
2 has been amended to its original condition.
   The above paragraph appears as amended by the electorate on 4-3-1950 and 4-
7-1997.
Filling vacancies.
42.   Section 3. If a vacancy occurs in any elective office the mayor, with the
approval of the council as provided in section 3 of chapter VII of this
charter, shall appoint an eligible person to fill such vacancy until the office
is filled by election at the next general city election; provided that nothing
in this section shall contravene the provisions of the state laws relating to
the recall of elective officers.
Qualifications of elected officers.
43.   Section 4. No person shall hold an elective office under this charter
unless he shall be a qualified elector of the City of Wyandotte, and a resident
of the city or territory annexed by the city for at least one year prior to his
election.
(Res. passed 9-22-2008, § 1)
Statutory reference:
   Mandatory that charter provide for qualifications of its officers, see
M.C.L.A. § 117.3(a)
Compensation of elected officers.
44.   Section 5. The elective officers of the city shall be entitled to receive
as full compensation for their services the following annual salaries:
   The mayor shall receive the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00).
   Each councilman shall receive the sum of two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00).
   The city clerk, the city treasurer and the city assessor shall receive such
compensation as the council shall by ordinance determine.
(Res. passed 9-22-2008, § 1)
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 658, § 1, enacted 7-21-1980, provides that “the authority and office of
constable as set forth in the charter of the City of Wyandotte is hereby
abolished”.
   The salaries for the mayor and each councilman appear as amended by the
electorate on 5-3-2005.
Statutory reference:
   Mandatory that charter provide for compensation of officers, see M.C.L.A. §
117.3(d)
   Justices of the peace have been abolished, see M.C.L. § 600.9921
   Abolishing constables, see M.C.L.A. § 117.32
CHAPTER V. DUTIES OF ELECTIVE OFFICERS
Statutory reference:
   Mandatory that charter provide for the duties of city officers, see M.C.L.A.
§ 117.3(d)
Mayor generally.
45.   Section 1. The mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the city. He
shall preside at the meetings of the council and shall from time to time give
the council information concerning the affairs of the corporation and recommend
such measures as he may deem expedient. It shall be his duty to exercise
supervision over the several departments of the city government and to see that
the laws relating to the city and the ordinances and regulations of the council
are enforced. The mayor shall be ex officio a member of all the commissions
established by this charter, without the right to vote.
Editor’s note:
   The above section appears as amended by the electorate on 4-3-1950 by a vote
of 4,618 to 3,528.
Conservators of the peace.
46.   Section 2. The mayor shall be a conservator of the peace, and may
exercise within the city the powers conferred upon sheriffs to suppress
disorder; and shall have authority to command the assistance of all able-bodied
citizens to aid in the enforcement of the ordinances of the city, and to
suppress riot and disorderly conduct. The councilmen shall also be conservators
of the peace, and as such they shall aid in maintaining quiet and good order in
the city, and in securing the faithful performance of duty by officers of the
city.
Power of mayor to suspend appointive officers.
47.   Section 3. The mayor may suspend any appointive officer of the city,
except as herein otherwise provided, for neglect of duty, misconduct or other
sufficient cause: Provided, that a written complaint under oath shall be
preferred against said officer and filed with the city clerk, within three (3)
days after such suspension. The complaint shall be reasonably certain as to
time, place and the offense, or offenses, charged therein, and a copy thereof
served personally on such person or left with a person of suitable age at the
last known place of residence of such suspended person, within three (3) days
after such suspension. The suspended officer shall have the privilege of filing
answer to the complaint within five (5) days after service of such copy as
above provided. The council shall hear such complaint and defense thereto, if
any, at the next regular meeting thereof: Provided, Said regular meeting shall
occur within a time not less than ten (10) and not more than fifteen (15) days
after the date of filing of the complaint, otherwise a special meeting shall be
called for the purpose of such hearing, and within the time herein limited.
Should no complaint be riled within the time herein provided, or be not
sustained at the hearing thereof, said officer may resume the duties of his
office as if such suspension had never been made.
Other powers of mayor.
48.   Section 4. The mayor shall at all times have authority to examine and
inspect the books, records and papers of any agent, employee or officer of the
corporation, and shall perform generally all such duties as are or may be
prescribed by the ordinances of the city.
Mayor pro tempore.
49.   Section 5. In the absence or disability of the mayor, or in case of any
vacancy in his office, the chairman pro tempore of the council shall perform
the duties of mayor during such absence, disability or vacancy. In the absence
or disability of both the mayor and the chairman pro tempore of the council,
the council shall appoint some other councilman to act as mayor for the time
being.
City clerk generally.
50.   Section 6. The city clerk shall keep the corporate seal, and all the
documents, official bonds, papers, riles and records of the city not by this
charter or the ordinances of the city entrusted to some other officer. He shall
be clerk of the council, shall attend its meetings, and keep a full record of
all its proceedings, ordinances and resolutions. In the absence of the clerk or
his deputy, the council shall appoint one of their number to perform the duties
of clerk for the time being. The clerk shall countersign and register all
licenses granted. He shall, when required, make and certify under the seal of
the city copies of the papers and records filed and kept in his office; and
such copies shall be in evidence in all places of the matters therein
contained, to the same extent as the original would be. He shall possess and
exercise the powers of a township clerk, so far as the same are required to be
performed within the city, and he shall have authority to administer oaths and
affirmations. He shall report the name of any person elected or appointed to
any office or employment who shall have neglected to file his official bond and
oath of office as required by this charter, to the council at its next meeting
after such default. He may, subject to the approval, of the council, appoint a
deputy or deputies who shall possess all the powers and authority of the city
clerk and shall exercise all the duties thereof subject to the control of the
city clerk. The deputy city clerks shall receive such compensation as the
council shall prescribe. The city clerk shall be responsible for all the acts
and defaults of such deputies and he may remove such deputies at his pleasure.
The city clerk shall perform such other duties pertaining to his office as the
council may require.
City clerk as general accountant.
51.   Section 7. The clerk shall be the general accountant of the city; and all
claims against the corporation, except as herein otherwise provided, shall be
filed with him for adjustment, and, after examination thereof, he shall report
the same, with all accompanying vouchers and counter claims of the city, and
the true balance as found by him, to the council for allowance, and when
allowed shall draw his warrant upon the treasurer for the payment thereof,
designating thereon the fund from which payment is to be made, and take proper
receipts therefor, but no warrant shall be drawn upon any fund after the same
has been exhausted. When any tax or money shall be levied, raised, or
apportioned, the clerk shall report the amount thereof to the treasurer,
stating the objects and funds for which it is levied, raised or apportioned,
and the amounts thereof to be credited to each fund. He shall exercise a
general supervision over all officers charged in any manner with the receipt,
collection and disbursement of the city revenues and over all the properties
and assets of the city. He shall have charge of all books, vouchers and
documents relating to the accounts, contracts, debts and revenues of the
corporation, except as herein otherwise provided. He shall countersign and
register all bonds issued and keep a list of all property and effects belonging
to the city and all of its debts and liabilities. He shall keep a complete set
of books exhibiting the financial condition of the corporation and all its
departments, funds, resources and liabilities with a proper classification
thereof and showing the purpose for which each fund was raised. He shall also
keep an account with the treasurer in which he shall charge him with moneys
received for each of the several funds of the city and credit him with all the
warrants drawn thereon, keeping a separate account for each fund. When any fund
has been exhausted, the clerk shall immediately advise the council thereof. He
shall report to the council whenever required, a detailed statement of the
receipts, expenditures and financial condition of the city; of the debts to be
paid and moneys so required to meet the estimated expenses of the corporation.
Municipal accounting.
52.   Section 8. The system of municipal accounting shall conform to any
uniform system required by law.
Statutory reference:
   Mandatory that charter provide for keeping of a system of accounts, see
M.C.L.A. § 117.3(m)
Audits.
53.   Section 9. At the end of each year, or oftener if necessary, the council
shall cause a full and complete examination of all the books and accounts of
the city to be made by competent accountants, and shall publish the result of
such examination in such manner as the council shall determine.
City clerk as purchasing agent.
54.   Section 10. Unless the council shall by ordinance provide for and appoint
a purchasing agent, the city clerk shall, under the direction of the council,
act as purchasing agent of the city, and shall have the powers and perform the
duties of purchasing agent as herein prescribed.
Clerk to turn over money to city treasurer.
55.   Section 11. The city clerk shall once each month, and oftener if required
by the council, turn over to the city treasurer such moneys as he shall
collect.
City treasurer generally.
56.   Section 12. The city treasurer shall be the collector of all state,
county and city taxes and assessments within the city and shall perform such
duties as are prescribed by the general laws of the state and this charter,
together with such other duties as the council may prescribe. He shall give a
bond in such amount and with such sureties as the council shall require. The
premium on such bond shall be paid by the city. He shall also give to the
treasurer of the county of Wayne such further bond as is or shall be required
by law. For the purpose of collection and return of taxes and the return of
property delinquent for the non-payment of taxes and for the purpose of suit
for the collection of taxes, the treasurer shall perform the same duties and
have the same powers as township treasurers, except as herein otherwise
provided. The treasurer, subject to the direction of the council, shall have
the custody of all moneys, bonds, mortgages, notes, leases or other evidences
of value belonging to the city. He shall receive all moneys belonging to and
receivable by the city and keep account of all receipts and expenditures
thereof. He shall pay no money out of the treasury, except in pursuance of and
by authority of law and as directed by the council, except as herein otherwise
provided. He shall keep an account of and be charged with all taxes and moneys
appropriated, raised or received for each fund of the city, and shall keep a
separate account of each fund and shall credit thereto all moneys raised, paid
in or appropriated therefor, and shall pay every warrant out of the particular
fund constituted or raised for the purpose for which the warrant was issued and
have the name of such fund endorsed thereon by the clerk.
Depositories.
57.   Section 13. The council may designate one or more depositories in the
city in which the treasurer shall deposit all the money, bonds, mortgages,
notes, leases and other evidences of value belonging to the city, to be drawn
therefrom only in such manner as the council shall direct, and every such
depository shall furnish such bond as the council may require and approve for
the safe keeping and accounting of all such moneys and property thus coming
into its possession. The council may at any time change any depository or
depositories.
Deputy city treasurer.
58.   Section 14. The treasurer may, subject to the approval of the council,
appoint a deputy, who shall possess all the powers and authority of the
treasurer, subject to the control of the treasurer, and may be removed at the
will of the treasurer. The treasurer and his bondsman shall be liable for the
acts and defaults of such deputy. Such deputy shall receive such compensation
for his services as the council shall prescribe.
Reports by treasurer to council.
59.   Section 15. The treasurer shall render to the council at the first
meeting of each month, and oftener if required by the council or the city
clerk, a report of the amounts received and credited by him to each fund and on
what account received, and the amounts paid out by him for each fund during the
preceding month and the amount of money remaining in each fund on the day of
his report, and the council may at any time, when they shall deem it advisable,
cause such report to be verified by a personal examination of the books,
warrants, vouchers and city moneys in the possession of the treasurer. He shall
also exhibit to the council annually on the first Monday in October and as
often and for such periods as the council shall require a full and detailed
account of the receipts and disbursements of the treasury since the date of his
last annual report, classifying them therein by the funds to which such
receipts are credited and out of which such disbursements are made, and the
balances remaining in each fund; which account shall be filed in the office of
the clerk and shall be published in one or more newspapers of the city.
Treasurer to exhibit to council receipts and vouchers for money paid.
60.   Section 16. The said treasurer shall take receipts and vouchers for all
moneys paid from the treasury, showing the amount and fund from which payment
was made, and he shall exhibit to the council such receipts or vouchers on the
first Monday of October in each year, or as often as the council shall require,
as provided in the next preceding section.
61.   Section 17.
Editor’s note:
   The above paragraph, dealing with the City Treasurer serving as Treasurer of
the School District, was repealed by the electorate by a vote of 3,448 to 2,480
on 4-4-1955.
Treasurer to keep city funds separately from own.
62.   Section 18. The city treasurer shall keep all moneys in his hands
belonging to the city separate and distinct from his own moneys; and he is
hereby prohibited from using, either directly or indirectly, the corporation
moneys, warrants or evidence of debt, or any of the library funds in his
custody, or keeping for his own use or benefit or that of any other person; any
violation of this section shall subject him to immediate removal from office by
the council, and the council is hereby authorized to declare the office vacant
and to appoint his successor for the remainder of his term.
Editor’s note:
   The above paragraph appears as amended by an amendment approved by the
electorate on 4-4-1955 by a vote of 3,448 to 2,480.
63.   Section 19. [Deleted]
Editor’s note:
   The above paragraph, dealing with justices of the peace (now abolished by
M.C.L.A. § 600.9921 and constables (abolished by city pursuant to M.C.L.A. §
117.32) has been deleted as obsolete.
City assessor.
64.   Section 20. The city assessor shall perform such duties as are prescribed
in Section 8 of Chapter VII of this charter and are required of him by general
law.
CHAPTER VI. CITY COUNCIL
Generally.
65.   Section 1. The legislative authority of the city shall be vested in a
council of the mayor and six (6) councilmen.
Mayor to preside; power to vote.
66.   Section 2. The mayor shall preside at the meetings of the council, but
shall have no vote therein, except in case of a tie. A tie shall be deemed to
exist, giving the mayor the right to vote, whenever there are three (3) votes
for or against a question before the council, regardless of the number of the
contrary votes.
Editor’s note:
   The above section appears as amended by the electorate on 4-3-1950 by a vote
of 5,139 to 2,949.
Statutory reference:
   Mandatory that charter provide for election of a body vested with
legislative power, see M.C.L.A. § 117.3(a)
Chairman pro tempore.
67.   Section 3. At the meeting of the council on the second Monday of April in
each year, or as soon thereafter as may be, the council shall appoint one of
its number chairman pro tempore of the council, who in the absence of the mayor
shall preside at the meetings thereof and exercise the powers and duties of
mayor. In the absence of the mayor and chairman pro tempore, the council shall
appoint one of its number to preside with the powers and duties of presiding
officer.
Judge of qualifications of members.
68.   Section 4. The council shall be judge of the election and qualifications
of its own members, subject only to review by the courts in cases of contest.
Regular meetings; special meetings; meetings to be public.
69.   Section 5. The council shall meet in regular session, at the council
chambers in the city hall, at least two (2) times each month at times and dates
to be determined by city council for the purpose of receiving communications,
complaints, petitions and reports, holding public hearings and discussing
pending matters, and deliberating toward and rendering decisions on all public
policy. The mayor or any three (3) members of the council may call special
meetings thereof, notice of which, in writing, shall be given to each member of
the council, or left at his place of residence, at least eighteen (18) hours
before the meeting. All meetings of the council or any committee shall be
public and in compliance with the open meetings act.
Editor’s note:
   The above paragraph appears as amended by the electorate on 8-7-2018 by a
vote of 3,758 to 1,400.
Statutory reference:
   Mandatory that charter provide for public meetings, see M.C.L.A. § 117.3(l)
Quorum, two-thirds vote required for certain purposes.
70.   Section 6. A majority of the council elect, exclusive of the mayor, shall
constitute a quorum for the transaction of business; but a less number may
adjourn from time to time and all pending business and business noticed and set
down for hearing at such meeting shall be taken up and heard at such adjourned
meeting without further notice, and the members present may compel the
attendance of absent members in such manner as shall be prescribed by rules or
ordinance. But no office shall be created or abolished, nor any tax or
assessment be imposed, street, alley, or public ground be vacated, real estate
or any interest therein purchased, leased, sold or disposed of, or private
property be taken for public use, unless by a concurring yea and nay vote of
two-thirds of the council elect, exclusive of the mayor, nor shall any vote of
the council be reconsidered or rescinded at a special meeting, unless there be
present as many councilmen as were present when such vote was taken. No money
shall be appropriated except by ordinance or resolution of the council; nor
shall any resolution be passed or adopted except by the vote of a majority of
the council elect, except as otherwise herein provided.
Record of meetings, all actions to be by written resolution or ordinance.
71.   Section 7. The council shall prescribe the rules of its own proceedings
and keep a record or journal thereof in the English language; provided,
however, that the rules of procedure of the preceding council shall be followed
until changed. All votes shall be taken by yeas and nays, and be so entered
upon the journal as to show the names of those voting in the affirmative and
those in the negative, and with ten (10) days after any meeting of the council,
all the proceedings and votes taken thereat shall be published online on the
City’s web page or posting the same in 3 public places within the City unless
another manner of publication is required by law. All proceedings of the
Council shall be by resolution except where, by the provisions of this charter,
an ordinance must or may be passed. Every resolution or ordinance shall be
reduced to writing and read before a vote is taken thereon.
Editor’s note:
   The above section appears as amended by a proposition approved by the voters
on 11-8-2016, by a vote of 6,810 to 3,183.
Statutory reference:
   Mandatory that charter provide for keeping of a journal of each session, see
M.C.L.A. § 117.3(m)
Power of council to compel attendance of members, punish members for disorderly
conduct, etc.
72.   Section 8. The council may compel the attendance of its members and other
officers of the city at its meetings in such manner, and may enforce such fines
for nonattendance, as may by ordinance be prescribed; and may by ordinance
prescribe punishment for any misbehavior, contemptuous or disorderly conduct by
any member or any person present at any session of the council.
Participation and attendance by elective or appointive officers.
73.   Section 9. Any elective or appointive officer of the city may take part
in all proceedings and deliberations of the council on all subjects relating to
their respective departments, subject to such rules as the council shall from
time to time prescribe, but without the right to vote. Said officers may be
required to attend the meetings of the council in the same manner as members.
Control of finances and property.
74.   Section 10. The council shall have control of the finances and of all
property of the city, except as may be otherwise provided by this charter or by
law.
Auditing and allowing accounts.
75.   Section 11. The council shall audit and allow all accounts chargeable
against the city, except as herein otherwise provided, but no account or claim
or contract shall be received for audit or allowance unless it shall be
accompanied with a certificate of an officer of the corporation, or an
affidavit of the person rendering it, to the effect that he verily believes
that the services therein charged have been actually performed or the property
delivered for the city, that the sums charged therefor are reasonable and just,
and that to the best of his knowledge and belief, no sets-offs exist, nor
payment has been made on account thereof, except such as are endorsed or
referred to in such account or claim, and every such account shall exhibit in
detail all the items making up the amount claimed, and the true date of each.
It shall be a sufficient defense in any court, to any action or proceeding for
the collection of any demand or claim against the city for personal injuries or
otherwise, that it has never been presented, certified to or verified as
aforesaid, to the council for allowance; or if such claim is founded on
contract that the same was presented without the affidavit or certificate as
aforesaid, and rejected for that reason; or, that the action or proceeding was
brought before the council had a reasonable time to investigate and pass upon
it.
CHAPTER VII. ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS-APPOINTIVE OFFICERS
GENERALLY
Departments created.
76.   Section 1. There are hereby created for the purpose of administering the
affairs of the city, aside from the powers and duties of the elective officers
of the city, the following departments, to-wit: Department of Legal Affairs,
Department of Valuation and Assessment, Department of Health and Sanitation,
Department of Municipal Service, Department of Engineering and Building,
Department of Police and Fire, Department of Public Welfare, Department of
Purchases and Supplies.
Powers of council over departments.
77.   Section 2. In addition to the powers and duties herein prescribed, the
council may, when not inconsistent with the provisions of this charter assign
additional and different duties to the several administrative departments of
the city, prescribe additional powers and duties of officers and employees, may
assign particular officers or employees to one or more of the departments and
may require an officer or employee to perform duties in two (2) or more
departments and may make such other rules and regulations as may be necessary
or proper for the efficient and economical conduct of the affairs of the city.
The council shall have power from time to time to create by ordinance or
resolution such departments and employments and hire and discharge such
employees, except as herein otherwise provided, as in its best judgment may be
necessary and proper to carry on the business of the city. The mayor, subject
to confirmation of the council, shall appoint such other officers and employees
as shall be required by law or the ordinances of the city.
Selection of appointive officers.
78.   Section 3. All the appointive officers of the city shall be appointed by
the mayor subject to confirmation by the council.
Notification of appointment of officers; time of taking office; extension of
terms of office.
79.   Section 4.The city clerk, within three (3) days after the appointment of
a person to a city office, shall notify such person, in writing, of his
appointment. All appointive officers shall enter upon their duties of office
within five (5) days after their appointment. All appointive officers, after
their several terms have expired, shall continue to hold office until their
successors are appointed, qualify and enter upon the duties of their offices.
Compensation of appointive officers.
80.   Section 5. All the appointive officers of the city shall receive such
compensation as the council shall by ordinance prescribe, except as herein
otherwise provided.
Filling vacancies in appointive offices.
81.   Section 6. All vacancies in appointive offices shall be filled by the
mayor, subject to confirmation by the council.
Department of legal affairs.
82.   Section 7. The department of legal affairs shall be in charge of the city
attorney who shall be a member of the bar of the State of Michigan and an
elector of the city. On the third Monday of April, 1926, and on the third
Monday of April in every second year thereafter a city attorney shall be
appointed for a term of two (2) years. The city attorney, in addition to the
other duties prescribed in this charter, shall be the legal advisor of the
council and of all of the officers of the city, and shall act as the attorney
for the corporation in all legal proceedings in which the corporation is
interested. He shall prosecute all offenses against the ordinances of the city.
Department of valuation and assessment.
83.   Section 8. The department of valuation and assessment shall be in charge
of the city assessor who shall be an elective officer of the city and who shall
be elected as in this charter provided. The city assessor shall perform such
duties in relation to assessing property and levying taxes in the city as are
prescribed by this charter. He is hereby authorized and required to perform the
same duties that supervisors of townships under the general laws of the state
are required to perform in relation to assessing the property and levying taxes
for state, county and school purposes. He shall perform such other duties as
are prescribed by law of assessors in cities, or are now or hereafter may be
prescribed by ordinance or resolution of the council and shall make such
reports as are required by the council.
Department of health.
84.   Section 9. The department of health shall be in charge of the
commissioner of health and sanitation who shall be the health officer of the
city. On the third Monday of April, 1959, and on the third Monday of April in
every second year thereafter a commissioner of health and sanitation shall be
appointed for a term of two (2) years. He shall be a physician, licensed by the
state of Michigan to practice medicine. He shall be the advisor of the council
upon all matters affecting the health and sanitation of the city. He shall have
all the powers and authority conferred upon boards of health or other boards or
persons by the general health laws of this state, as the same now or hereafter
may exist and insofar as such laws may be applicable to the city. He may, by
and with the consent of the council appoint all agents and employees necessary
to the preservation and protection of the life and health of the inhabitants of
the city and necessary to the care and treatment of sick and diseased persons
who are a charge upon the city or who are subject to public care, as the
council and the health officer shall seem proper. He shall investigate all
complaints made concerning conditions in the city endangering health, and
report the same to the council. He shall prosecute violations, within the city,
of the health laws of the state or of the health regulations of the city. He
shall perform such duties as are prescribed by law or this charter, or are now
or hereafter may be prescribed by ordinance or resolution of the council
relating to his office or department; and shall make such reports as are
required by law or by the council.
Editor’s note:
   The above section appears as amended by a proposition approved by the
electorate on 4-6-1959, by a vote of 5,272 to 1,875.
85.   Section 10.
Editor’s note:
   This paragraph dealt with the city’s representation on the Board of
Supervisors; it has been deleted as it is totally superseded by M.C.L.A. §§
46.51 et seq., previously, it had been amended by the electorate on 4-4-1955 by
a vote of 3,585 to 2,135.
DEPARTMENT OF MUNICIPAL SERVICE
State constitution reference:
   Mandates relative to public utilities, see Michigan Const. 1963, Art. VII,
§§ 24, 25
Municipal service commission.
86.   Section 11. The department of municipal service is charged and entrusted
with the construction, management, supervision and control of the water works
which are or shall be owned by the city, and the construction, management,
supervision and control of the electric or other lighting plants which are or
shall be owned by the city. The department of municipal service shall be in
charge of a board of five (5) commissioners to be known as the municipal
service commission. The members of the commission shall be freeholders and
electors of the city and shall serve without compensation. The members of the
first commission existing hereunder shall be appointed on the third Monday of
April, 1926, and shall be appointed for the term of one year, two (2) years,
three (3) years, four (4) years and five (5) years, respectively. On the third
Monday of April, 1927, and on the third Monday of April in each year
thereafter, one member of the commission shall be appointed for the term of
five (5) years.
   Cable television, internet operations and other telecommunication systems
owned by the city are subject to the control of the department of municipal
services with these activities being subject to charter sections regarding
rates, the handling of funds, and the furnishing of reports; substituting the
term “resident” for “freeholder” in describing the members of the municipal
service commission; and changing from “April” to “May” the starting date for
the five-year term of a member of the municipal service commission.
(Amendment passed 11-7-2006)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to operate utilities, see M.C.L.A. §§ 117.4c, 117.4f
Officers and employees.
87.   Section 12. The municipal service commission shall elect from its number
a president and vice-president thereof. The commission shall appoint a
secretary and a superintendent and such other persons as shall be necessary.
The commission shall prescribe the duties of its appointees and shall fix their
compensation, provided that the compensation of the secretary and
superintendent shall be approved by the council before becoming effective. All
persons appointed by the commission may be removed by the commission on its own
motion.
Editor’s note:
   The Superintendent is currently known as the General Manager.
Group life insurance for employees.
87-a.   Section 12-a.   The municipal service commission may provide group life
insurance for its appointees and employees.
Editor’s note:
   The above section was added by an amendment approved by the electorate on 4-
5-1943 by a vote of 3,150 to 2,014.
Retirement system for employees.
87-b.   Section 12-b.   The municipal service commission may adopt and put into
effect a retirement system for the purpose of providing retirement allowances
for the appointees and employees of the commission. Any retirement system
adopted by the commission shall be on an actual basis.
Editor’s note:
   The above section was added by an amendment approved by the electorate on 4-
5-1943 by a vote of 2,486 to 2,300.
Meetings.
88.   Section 13. The municipal service commission shall hold meetings
regularly at least once every two (2) weeks and shall designate the time and
place thereof, shall adopt its own rules of procedure and shall keep a record
of its proceedings, a certified copy of which shall be filed with the city
clerk within five (5) days after approval by the commission. Proper accounts of
the receipts and expenditures of money shall be kept. All meetings, records and
accounts of the commission shall be public. Three (3) members shall constitute
a quorum for the transaction of business. No action may be taken by the
commission without the affirmative vote of three (3) members thereof.
Editor’s note:
   The above section appears as amended by the electorate on 4-3-1950 by a vote
of 4,373 to 3,330.
Construction of public works.
89.   Section 14. Whenever the expense of constructing or repairing any public
work placed under the control of the municipal service commission shall not
exceed the sum of 0.1% of the City’s annual general operating fund
appropriation (which will be determined by the Council at the start of each
fiscal year), the work shall be done by the commission in such manner as it may
deem proper. Whenever the expense shall exceed the sum of 0.1% of the City’s
annual general operating fund appropriation, the commission shall submit the
plans, diagrams, profiles and estimates thereof to the council for its approval
and when so approved, the commission shall, subject to the approval of the
council, cause such work to be done by contract or otherwise in such manner as
it may deem proper, provided that if the expense shall exceed the sum of 0.1%
of the City’s annual general operating fund appropriation, the commission shall
advertise for sealed proposals and shall give such notice as the council shall
direct and shall let the contract to the lowest responsible bidder who shall be
deemed competent to do the work and give adequate security for the performance
thereof.
(Res. passed 1-7-1991, § 1)
Editor’s note:
   The above section appears as amended by a proposition approved by the voters
on 11-8-2016, by a vote of 6,782 to 2,813.
Purchasing of supplies.
90.   Section 15.The municipal service commission, through the purchasing
department of the city, shall purchase all engines, machinery tools and other
appliances and all materials and supplies necessary for the purpose of the
department, provided that no purchase exceeding five thousand dollars
($5,000.00) in amount shall be made without the consent of the council.
(Res. passed 1-7-1991, § 1)
Rates and charges; fixing, collection, etc.
91.   Section 16.The municipal service commission shall, from time to time, fix
and cause to be assessed the water rates to be paid by the owner or occupant of
each house or building having the use of water, against any person or persons
using water, upon such basis as shall be equitable and such water rates shall
become and be until paid, a lien upon such house or other building and upon the
lot or lots upon which such house or building shall be situated. The commission
shall also from time to time fix the rates to be paid for electric current
furnished and sold by the city. The commission may make, subject to the
approval of the council, and enforce all necessary rules and regulations for
the collection of water rates, electric light and electric power rates. All
such rates shall be promptly collected by and paid to the commission and all
moneys so received shall be turned over when and as collected, to the city
treasurer on daily balances and the city treasurer shall give duplicate
receipts therefor; one of which shall be filed with the city clerk. All
necessary adjustments in the collection of such rates shall be made by the
commission. Whenever any person or persons using water, or electricity for
lighting or power, shall fail to pay the rates fixed by the commission, the
water or electric current as the case may be, may be shut off and suit may be
instituted by the city for the collection of the same in any court of competent
jurisdiction, or in the case of water rates, the same may be reported to the
city assessor to be spread by him on the next general city tax rolls, as a
special tax or assessment upon the lot or premises on which said unpaid water
rates have become a lien. In case such unpaid water rates are so spread by the
city assessor, they shall be collected in the same manner as other city taxes.
No attempt to collect any water rates by any process herein provided shall
invalidate the lien upon the lot or premises.
Disposition of funds.
92.   Section 17.All moneys paid in the city treasury by the municipal service
commission shall apply exclusively on the payment of expenses incurred by it,
including the interest or principal on all bonds issued on account of the water
system and electric or other lighting plants of the city. The water, electric
light or power rates determined by the commission shall be sufficient to pay
operating and maintenance expenses of the water works and electric or other
lighting plants of the city; fixed charges and a sufficient per centum per
annum to provide a sinking fund to pay the principal at their maturity of any
bonds issued for the purpose of providing funds for such water works and
electric or other lighting plants. On or before the second Monday of May of
each year the commission shall transmit to the council its estimate in
duplicate of the amount of money required for its purposes for the next fiscal
year, which amounts shall include the amounts to be charged the city at large
for hydrant service, water furnished public institutions and public swimming
pools, street lighting and all services for which the city should have to pay
if it were purchasing water or current from a privately owned public service
corporation.
Accounts and reports.
93.   Section 18.The municipal service commission shall cause to be kept an
accurate list of all assessments for water rates and an accurate account of all
moneys due for electricity sold by the city, which shall be subject to
inspection at all times. The commission shall make quarterly reports to the
council, which reports shall embrace an itemized statement of the revenues and
expenditures relating to or connected with each of the works under its control,
keeping a separate account of each fund and a statement of the condition,
progress and operation of said works. This statement shall be certified by the
commission, entered of record by the city clerk and published in such manner as
the council may direct. The commission shall also make such other reports as
the council may from time to time require. The council shall cause all the
accounts and records of the commission to be audited at least once a year and
at such other times as it shall see fit.
Payment of claims and accounts.
94.   Section 19.The municipal service commission may issue vouchers in payment
of all claims and accounts incurred by it in the operation and management of
the department, which vouchers, when approved by the mayor and city clerk shall
be authority to the city treasurer to pay such claims and accounts and to
charge the proper funds therewith.
DEPARTMENT OF ENGINEERING AND BUILDING
Generally.
95.   Section 20.The department of engineering and building shall be in charge
of the city engineer who shall be a graduate civil engineer licensed to
practice engineering by the State of Michigan. On the third Monday of April,
1959, and on the third Monday of April of every second year thereafter a city
engineer shall be appointed to hold office for the term of two (2) years. The
city engineer shall receive such compensation as the council shall determine.
He shall with the consent and approval of the council appoint a sanitary
inspector and such other assistants and employees as may be necessary. The
compensation of such assistants and employees shall be determined by the
council.
Editor’s note:
   The above section appears as amended by a proposition submitted to the
electors on 4-6-1959, dealing with the term and qualifications of the City
Engineer. The Charter compilation contained in the city’s 1956 Code has been
relied upon for the exact rewording and for the fact that the amendment was
approved by the electors.
Accounts and records.
96.   Section 21.The city engineer shall cause to be kept proper accounts and a
record of the proceedings of the department and all such accounts, records and
proceedings shall be public. Such records shall be the property of the city.
General powers and duties.
97.   Section 22.The powers and duties of the city engineer, which shall be
exercised and performed as herein provided, subject to the direction of the
council and in accordance with the ordinances of the city, shall be as follows:
   (a)   He shall have and exercise within the city the like powers and duties
as are conferred by law upon county surveyors, and the like effect and validity
shall be given to his official acts, surveys and plats, as are given by law to
the acts and surveys of county surveyors. He shall make all necessary plats,
maps, surveys, diagrams and estimates, plans and specifications required by the
council or officers of the city, relating to the public improvement, buildings,
grounds, and streets of the city, and all plats, maps, surveys and diagrams
made by him as such surveyor shall be the property of the city and shall be
delivered by him to his successor in office. He shall subject to the approval
of the council establish grades for all streets, alleys and other public
places. He shall perform such services for the other administrative departments
of the city, as the council shall direct.
   (b)   He shall manage and have charge of sewers, drains, parks, the
collection and disposal of garbage, reduction plants and all public work,
except public work under the department of municipal service, in or upon the
streets, alleys, public places and parks.
   (c)   He shall issue all permits for buildings, removal of buildings,
excavations and other structural works. He shall enforce the provisions of the
building code, and shall have charge of the inspection and regulation of all
plumbing and drainage; provided that nothing herein contained shall be deemed
to conflict with the powers or rules of the department of health and sanitation
in relation to housing and plumbing.
   (d)   He shall have the supervision and control of gas inspections and the
construction and installation of all elevators, steam and hot water boilers,
boiler furnaces, smokestacks, pressure tanks, jacketed kettles and any form of
apparatus dangerous to life and property.
   (e)   He shall perform such other duties as are prescribed by law or this
charter, or are now or hereafter may be prescribed by ordinance or resolution
of the council relating to his office or department and shall make such reports
as are required by the council.
DEPARTMENT OF POLICE AND FIRE
Editor’s note:
   The validity of material in this captioned part, insofar as it applies to
the Fire Department, should be considered in light of paragraphs captioned
101.1 through 101.9.
Statutory reference:
   Charter may provide for civil service system, see M.C.L.A. § 117.4i(7)
Police and fire commission.
98.   Section 23.The department of police and fire shall be in charge of the
police and fire commission which shall consist of three (3) members, who shall
be electors of the city and who shall serve without compensation. The members
of the first commission existing hereunder shall be appointed on the third
Monday of April, 1926, and shall be appointed for the term of one year, two (2)
years, and three (3) years, respectively. On the third Monday of April, 1927,
and on the third Monday of April in each year thereafter one member of the
commission shall be appointed for the term of three (3) years.
(Res. passed 9-22-2008, § 1)
Officers and employees.
99.   Section 24.The police and fire commission shall elect from its number a
president, vice-president and secretary, each of whom shall hold office for the
term of one year and until their successors shall be duly elected and enter
upon the duties of their office. The commission shall appoint a chief of police
and such number of police officers, patrolmen and other officers and employees
of the police department as the council shall by ordinance or resolution
direct. The chief of police shall be harbor master and sealer of weights and
measures. The commission shall appoint a chief of the fire department and such
number of firemen and other officers and employees of the fire department as
the council shall by ordinance or resolution direct. The commission shall
prescribe the duties and, subject to the approval of the council, fix the
compensation of the members of the police and fire departments.
Meetings, records, quorum.
100.   Section 25.The police and fire commission shall hold meetings,
regularly, at least one every two (2) weeks, and shall designate the time and
place thereof, shall adopt its own rules of procedure and shall keep a record
of its proceedings. Two (2) members shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business. Proper accounts of the receipts and expenditures of
money shall be kept. Such part of records, proceedings and accounts of the
commission as the public welfare may require shall be public; provided that all
such records, proceedings and accounts shall be open to the inspection of the
mayor, and to the inspection of the council when the council shall by
resolution determine upon the same. All claims against the department of police
and fire shall be audited by the council and no disbursements shall be made for
salaries or other charge except at the direction of the council. The commission
shall have no authority to obligate the city by contract or otherwise.
General powers and duties.
101.   Section 26.The powers and duties of the police and fire commission and
the members of the police and fire departments, which shall be exercised and
performed as herein provided and in accordance with the laws of the state and
the ordinances of the city, shall be as follows:
   a.   The commission shall assume and exercise supervision over the police
and fire departments and make all proper rules for the government and
discipline thereof.
   b.   The commission shall have the custody and control of all property,
books, records and equipment belonging to the police and fire departments.
   c.   The commission shall recommend to the council the purchase of all
needed supplies, tools, implements, equipment, vehicles and apparatus of all
kinds for the police and fire departments.
   d.   The commission shall recommend to the council the purchase of sites for
police stations and engine houses and the construction of buildings needed for
the proper administration of the police and fire departments.
   e.   The commission shall preserve the public peace and prevent crime,
arrest offenders and protect the rights of persons and property, guard the
public health, preserve order and enforce the laws of the state and the
ordinances of the city.
   f.   The commission and all members of the police department shall have the
same powers and duties as sheriffs and constables in the serving of civil and
criminal process, and in the making of arrests, both within and without the
city, but within the state. They shall have the power to arrest, without
[without] process, all persons who in the presence of the officer shall be
engaged in the violation of any law, and to detain such persons until complaint
can be made and process issued for their arrest, which complaint shall be made
as speedily as possible after such arrest.
   g.   The commission may, whenever it deems it necessary for the preservation
of peace and good order in the city, appoint and place on duty such number of
temporary policemen as in its judgment the emergencies of the case require; but
such appointments, unless made in accordance with some ordinance or resolution
of the council shall not continue longer than seven (7) days.
   h.   The commission and the chief of the fire department shall be vested
with all of the powers of state fire wardens.
   i.   The commission may discipline, suspend temporarily and discharge
permanently any member of the police or fire department for any cause which the
commission, in the exercise of their discretion, deem sufficient, provided,
however, that a statement in writing of the cause or causes of his suspension
or removal be served upon him and that he be given a hearing before the
commission. The decision of the commission shall be final.
Editor’s note:
   The above subsection appears as amended by an amendment approved on 4-1-1935
by a vote of 3,643 to 1,210.
   j.   The commission and the members of the departments under its control
shall have such other powers and perform such other duties as the council shall
by ordinance or resolution prescribe.
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 658, § 1, enacted 7-21-1980, provides that “the authority and office of
constable as set forth in the charter of the City of “Wyandotte is hereby
abolished”.
CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION
Editor’s note:
   Act 78 of 1935, as amended, was approved by Charter amendment on 4-1-1957,
by a vote of 4,373 to 3,495 to apply to firefighter only. Any portion of 101.1
et seq. inconsistent with said charter amendment was repealed by said
amendment.
   This caption has been editorially supplied. The paragraphs contained in this
part (101.1-101.19) are a charter amendment approved by the electors on 4-6-
1936 by a vote of 5,459 to 1,790.
    Such amendment purported to amend “paragraphs 98 to 101 of sections 24 to
26, inclusive” of the charter insofar as they affected the fire department;
however no charter sections had been designated for them, the sections being
consecutively numbered “1 through 19”. The editor has added numbering in a
manner consistent with the apparent numbering system of the charter, making all
paragraphs a derivation of paragraph 101 and all sections a derivation of
section 26.
Statutory reference:
   Charter may provide for civil service system, see M.C.L.A. § 117.4i(7)
Created; members generally.
101.1.   Section 26.1.   That there is hereby created a civil service
commission. This civil service commission shall consist of three (3) members,
two (2) of whom shall be appointed by the person or group of persons who,
acting singly or in conjunction, as a mayor, city manager, council, common
council, or otherwise, is or are vested by law with power and authority to
select, appoint, or employ the chief of a fire department in the City of
Wyandotte; and they shall serve, one for a period of six (6) years from the
date of his appointment; one for a period of two (2) years from the date of his
appointment, the other member of the commission shall be selected by the paid
members of the fire department and he shall serve for a period of four (4)
years from the date of his appointment; a majority vote of the members of the
fire department shall be necessary to select such member. Thereafter all
appointments shall be made for a period of six (6) years each; each
commissioner to serve until his successor is appointed and qualified by the
appointing power hereinbefore designated.
   Said appointments to be made on the third Monday in April of 1936 and on the
third Monday of April in each second year thereafter.
Statutory reference:
   Members of civil service commission, see M.C.L.A. § 38.502
Qualification of members.
101.2.   Section 26.2.   No person shall be appointed a member of said
commission who is not a citizen of the United States, and who has not been a
resident of the City of Wyandotte for a period of one year, and an elector of
said county for a period of at least three (3) years immediately preceding such
appointment. No commissioner shall hold any other office under the United
States, State of Michigan, or of any city, or county, or other political
subdivisions thereof; nor shall any commissioner serve on any political
committee, or take active part in the management of any political campaign. Not
more than two (2) of said commissioners, at any one time, shall be adherents of
the same political party.
Statutory reference:
   Qualifications of members of commission, see M.C.L.A. § 38.503
Vacancies in membership; removal of members.
101.3.   Section 26.3.   In event that any commissioner of said civil service
commission shall cease to be a member thereof by virtue of death, removal or
other cause, a new commissioner shall be appointed to fill out the unexpired
term of said commissioner within ten (10) days after said commissioner shall
have ceased to be a member of said commission. Such appointment shall be made
by the officer or body who in the first instance appointed the commissioner who
is no longer a member of the commission. The mayor or principal executive
officer, may at any time remove any commissioner for incompetency, dereliction
of duty, malfeasance in office or any other good cause, which shall be stated
in writing and made a part of the records of the commission. Provided, however,
that once the mayor has to remove any commissioner, such removal shall be
temporary only and shall be in effect for a period often (10) days, if at the
end of said period of ten (10) days the circuit court of the county in which
said village, city or municipality is located, is in term or session. Within
said ten (10) days period the mayor shall file in the office of the clerk of
the circuit court of said county a petition setting forth in full the reason
for said removal and praying for the confirmation by said circuit court of the
action of the mayor in so removing the said commissioner. A copy of said
petition, in writing, shall be served upon the commissioner so removed,
simultaneously with its filing in the office of the clerk of the circuit court
and shall have precedence on the docket of the said court and shall be heard by
said court as soon as the removed commissioner shall demand. All rights hereby
vested in said circuit court may be exercised by the judge thereof during a
vacation. In the event that no term of court is being held at the time of
filing of said petition, and the judge thereof cannot be reached in the county
wherein the petition was filed, said petition shall be heard at the next
succeeding term of said circuit court, whether regular or special, and the
commissioner so suspended shall remain suspended until a hearing is had upon
the petition of the mayor. The court, or the judge, thereof, in vacation, shall
hear and decide upon said petition. The contestant, against whom the decision
of the court or judge thereof, in vacation, shall be rendered, shall have the
right of appearing in person and by counsel and presenting his defense and to
petition the supreme court for a review of the decision of the circuit court as
hereinbefore provided, within ten (10) days after the removal of said
commissioner, such commissioner shall immediately resume his position as a
member of the civil service commission.
Statutory reference:
   Vacancies and removal of members, see M.C.L.A. §§ 5.3354 and 38.504
Clerk.
101.4.   Section 26.4.   The city clerk shall “ex officio” be clerk of the
civil service commission and shall supply to the commission without extra
compensation all necessary clerical and stenographic services for the work of
the civil service commission.
Statutory reference:
   Clerk, see M.C.L.A. § 38.505
Adoption and induction of incumbents into civil service.
101.5.   Section 26.5.   For the benefit of the public service and to prevent
delay, injury, or interruption therein by reason of the enactment of this
charter amendment, all persons holding a position in the fire department,
including the chief thereof, when this Charter amendment takes effect, who
shall have served in such position for a period of at least six (6) months last
past continuously, are hereby declared eligible for permanent appointment under
this Charter amendment to the office, place, position or employment which they
shall then hold, respectively, without examination or other act on their part,
and not on probation; and every such person is hereby automatically adopted and
inducted permanently into civil service, into such office, place, position or
employment which such person then holds as completely and effectually to all
intents and purposes as if such person had been permanently appointed thereto
under civil service after examination and investigation.
Statutory reference:
   “Grandfathering” of incumbents, see M.C.L.A. § 38.506
Persons subject to civil service and manner of appointment, promotion, etc.
101.6.   Section 26.6.   On and after the date of this charter amendment takes
effect, appointments to and promotions in the fire department of this city
shall be made only according to qualifications and fitness to be ascertained by
examinations, which shall be competitive, and no person shall be appointed, re-
instated, promoted or discharged as a paid member of said department regardless
of rank or position, in any manner or by any means other than those prescribed
in this charter amendment.
Statutory reference:
   Scope of civil service act, see M.C.L.A. § 38.507
Rooms, Accommodations and supplies.
101.7.   Section 26.7.   It shall be the duty of the mayor and heads of
departments to aid the civil service commission in all proper ways in carrying
out the provisions of the charter amendment, and to allow the reasonable use of
public buildings and to cause suitable and convenient rooms and accommodations
to be assigned and provided, and to be furnished, heated and lighted for
carrying on the work and examinations of the civil service commission, and in
all proper ways to facilitate the same. The civil service commission may order
from the proper authorities the necessary stationery, postage stamps, official
seal, and other articles to be supplied, and the necessary printing to be done,
for its official use.
Statutory reference:
   Rooms, accommodations and supplies for Civil Service Commission, see
M.C.L.A. § 38.508
Powers and duties.
101.8.   Section 26.8.   The commission shall, within a reasonable time from
the beginning of their term of office.
      First: Rules and regulations. Prescribe and enforce rules and regulations
for carrying into effect the provisions of this charter amendment. All rules so
prepared may, from time to time, be added to, amended or rescinded.
      Second: Records. Keep minutes of its own proceedings and records of its
examinations and other official actions. All recommendations of applicants for
office, received by the said commission or by any officer having authority to
make appointments to office, shall be kept and preserved for a period of ten
(10) years, and all such records, recommendations of former employees,
excepted, and all written causes of removal, filed with it, shall, subject to
reasonable regulations, be open for public inspection. It shall keep a roster
of the members of the fire department, together with a record of service,
military or naval experience, file statements on all matters relative to the
character and quality of the work done and the attitude of the individual to
his work, and such other matters as may have a bearing on promotion, transfer
or discharge.
      Third: Investigation and enforcement. Make investigations, either sitting
in a body or through a single commissioner, concerning all matters touching the
enforcement and effect of the provisions of this charter amendment, and the
rules and regulations prescribed thereunder, concerning the action of any
examiner or subordinate of the commission, or any person in the public service
in respect to the execution of this charter amendment; and, in the course of
such investigations, each commissioner shall have the power to administer oaths
and affirmations, and to take testimony.
      Fourth: Production of evidence, fees. Have power to subpoena and require
the attendance of witnesses, and the production thereby of books and papers
pertinent to the investigations and inquiries hereby authorized, and to examine
them and such public records as it shall require in relation to any matter
which it has the authority to investigate. The fees of such witnesses for
attendance and travel shall be the same as for witnesses before the circuit
courts, and shall be paid from the appropriations for the incidental expenses
of the commission. All officers in the public service, and their deputies,
clerks, subordinates and employees shall attend and testify when required to do
so by said commission. Any disobedience to or neglect of, any subpoena issued
by the said commissioners or any one of them, to any person, shall be held a
contempt of court, and shall be punished by the circuit court, within the
county in which the said subpoena has been issued. Any judge of any said courts
shall, upon the application of any one of said commissioners, in such cases
cause the process of said court to issue to compel such person or persons
disobeying or neglecting any such subpoena, to appear and to give testimony
before the said commissioners; and any one of them, shall have power to punish
any such contempt.
      Fifth: Annual report. Make an annual report to the mayor or principal
executive officer showing its own action, and rules and regulations, and all
exceptions thereto in force, and the practical effects thereof, and any
suggestions it may approve for the effectual accomplishments of the purpose of
this charter amendment, such reports shall be available for public inspection
five (5) days after the same shall have been delivered to the mayor.
Statutory reference:
   Powers and duties of Civil Service Commission, see M.C.L.A. § 38.509
Applications and physical examinations.
101.9.   Section 26.9.
   (a)   The commission shall require persons applying for admission to any
examination provided for under this charter amendment or under the rules and
regulations of the said commission, to file in its office, within a reasonable
time prior to the proposed examination, a formal application in which the
applicant shall state under oath or affirmation.
   First: His full name, residence and post office address.
   Second: His citizenship, age and the place and date of his birth.
   Third: His health, and his physical capacity for public service.
   Fourth: His business and employments and residence for at least three (3)
years previous; he must have been a resident of this city for at least one year
immediately preceding his application.
   Fifth: Such other information as may reasonably be required, touching the
applicant’s qualifications and fitness for public service.
   (b)   Blank forms. Blank forms for such applications shall be furnished by
the commission, without charge, to all persons requesting same. The commission
may require in connection with such application, such certificate of citizens,
physicians or others, having knowledge of the applicant as the good of the
service may require. The said commission may refuse to examine an applicant, or
after examination, to certify as eligible, one who is found to lack any of the
established preliminary requirements for the examination of position or
employment for which he applies; or who is physically so disabled as to be
rendered unfit for the performance of the duties of the position to which he
seeks appointment; or who is addicted to the habitual use of intoxicating
liquors or drugs; or who may have been guilty of any crime, or infamous or
notoriously disgraceful conduct; or who has been dismissed from the public
service for delinquency or misconduct; or who has made a false statement of any
material fact, or practiced or attempted to practice any deception or fraud in
his application, in his examination, or in securing his eligibility; or who
refuses to comply with the rules or regulations of the commission. If any
applicant feels himself aggrieved by the action of the commission in refusing
to examine him, or after an examination, to certify him as an eligible, as
provided in this section, the commission shall, at the request of such
applicant, appoint a time and place for a public hearing; at which time such
applicant may appear by himself or counsel, or both, and the commission shall
then review its refusal to make such examination or certifications, and
testimony shall be taken. The commission shall subpoena, at the expense of the
applicant, any competent witnesses requested by him. After such review, the
commission shall file the testimony so taken in its records, and shall again
make a decision, which decision shall be final.
   (c)   Physical examinations. All applicants for any position in the fire
department shall undergo a physical examination which shall be conducted under
the supervision of a medical committee composed of two (2) doctors of medicine
appointed for the commission by the mayor. Said medical committee shall certify
that an applicant is free from any bodily or mental defects, deformity or
disease which might incapacitate him from the performance of the duties of the
position desired before said applicant shall be permitted to take further
examinations. No applications will be received if the person applying is less
than twenty-one (21) years of age or more than thirty-five (35) years of age at
the date of his application. Provided, however, that in event any applicant has
formerly served upon the fire department of this city for a period of more than
six (6) months, and has resigned from the department at a time when there were
no charges of misconduct or other misfeasance pending against such applicant,
within a period of two (2) years next preceding the date of his application,
and is still a resident of this city, then such person shall be eligible for
reinstatement in the discretion of the commission, even though such applicant
shall be over the age of thirty-five (35) years. Such applicant, provided his
former term of service so justifies, may be reappointed to the fire department
without examination other than a physical examination; if such person shall be
reinstated to the fire department, he shall be the lowest in rank in the
department next above the probationers of the department.
Statutory reference:
   Applications and physical examinations, see M.C.L.A. § 38.510
101.10 Section 26.10.
   (a)   Appointment: Rules and Regulations. The commission shall make rules
and regulations providing for examinations for positions in the fire
department, and for appointments to and promotions therein, and for such other
matters as are necessary to carry out the purpose of this charter amendment.
Due notice of the contents of such rules and regulations and of any
modifications thereof shall be given by mail in due season to appointing
officers effected thereby, and said rules and regulations and modifications
thereof shall also be printed for public distribution. All original
appointments to any position in the fire department within the terms of this
charter amendment shall be for a probationary term, the conduct or capacity of
the probationer has not been satisfactory to the appointing officer, the
probationer shall be notified, in writing, that he will not receive permanent
appointment, whereupon his employment shall cease; otherwise, his retention in
the service shall be equivalent to his final appointment.
   (b)   Appointments: Regular. Every position, unless filled by promotion,
reinstatement, or reduction, shall be filled only in the following manner. The
appointing officer shall notify the commission of any vacancy in the service
which he desires to fill, and shall request the certification of eligibles. The
commission shall forthwith certify, from the eligible list, the names of the
person who received the highest average at preceding examinations held under
the provisions of this charter amendment within a period of three (3) years
next preceding the date of such appointment. The appointing officer shall,
thereupon, with sole reference to the relative merit and fitness of the
candidate, make the appointment so certified. As each subsequent vacancy
occurs, in the same or another position, precisely the same procedure shall be
followed. When an appointment is made under the provisions of this section, it
shall be in the first instance for the probationary period of six (6) months,
as provided in this charter amendment. The term “appointing officer” as used in
this charter amendment will be construed to mean the municipal officer in whom
the power of appointment of members of the fire department is vested by the
charter of this city.
   (c)   Appointments: Temporary. Whenever there are urgent reasons for filling
a vacancy in any position in the fire department, and there is no list of
persons eligible for appointment after a competitive examination, the
appointing officer may nominate a person to the civil service commission for a
noncompetitive examination; and if such nominee shall be certified by the said
commission as qualified, after such noncompetitive examination, he may be
appointed provisionally, to fill such vacancy until a selection and appointment
can be made after a competitive examination, and in the manner prescribed in
this charter amendment, but such provisional appointments shall not continue
for a longer period than three (3) months, nor shall successive provisional
appointments be made to the same position, under this provision.
   (d)   Appointments: Special. In event any position as an electrician or
mechanic is to be filled, then the examination to be given to applicants for
either the position of electrician or mechanic shall be so drawn as to test
only the qualification of such applicant in regard to his ability as
electrician or mechanic, such examinations to be special examinations.
Statutory reference:
   Appointment, see M.C.L.A. § 38.511
Examinations, promotions, notices.
101.11. Section 26.11. All examinations for positions or promotions shall be
practical in their character and shall relate to such matters, and include such
inquiries, as will fairly and fully test the comparative merit and fitness of
the persons examined to discharge the duties of the employment sought by them.
All examinations shall be open to all applicants who have fulfilled the
preliminary requirement, stated on other sections of this charter amendment.
Notice of the time and place and purpose of every examination shall be given by
the commission by publication for two (2) weeks preceding such examination in
the official paper of this city, and such notice shall be posted by the
commission in a conspicuous place in the office and on the bulletin boards of
this city for two (2) weeks before such examination. Such further notice of
examinations may be given as the commission shall prescribe. The commission
shall adopt reasonable regulations for permitting the presence of
representatives of the press at the examination. The commission shall post in a
public place at its office the eligible list containing the names and grades of
those who have passed examinations for positions or promotions in the fire
department, and shall indicate thereon such appointments as may be made from
said list. No question in any form of application or in any examination shall
be so framed as to elicit information concerning the political or religious
opinions or affiliations of any applicant; nor shall inquiries be made
concerning such opinions or affiliation; and all disclosures thereof shall be
discountenanced. No discrimination shall be exercised, threatened, or promised
by any person in the fire department against, or in favor of an applicant,
eligible or employee in fire department under this charter amendment because of
his political or religious opinions or affiliations.
   Vacancies in positions in the fire department shall be filled so far as
practical by promotions from among persons holding position in the next lower
grade in the department. Promotions shall be based upon merit to be ascertained
by tests to be provided by the commission, and upon the superior qualifications
of the person promoted as shown by his previous service and experience;
provided however, that no person shall be eligible for promotion from the lower
grade to the next higher grade until such person shall have completed at least
two (2) years service in the next lower grade in the department. Whenever a
position becomes vacant for which examinations are held, the appointing power
shall make requisitions upon the commission for the name of the person eligible
for appointment thereto. The commission shall certify the name of the person
highest on the eligible list for the class to which the vacant position has
been allocated, who is willing to accept employment. If more than one vacancy
is to be filled an additional name shall be certified for each additional
vacancy.
   The appointing power shall forthwith appoint such person to such position.
To enable the appointing power to exercise a choice in the filling of positions
or promotions in the fire service, no promotion shall be deemed complete until
after the expiration of six (6) months probationary service, during which the
appointing power may terminate the employment of the person certified to him or
it, if during the performance test thus afforded, upon observation or
consideration of the performance of duty, the appointing power deems him unfit
or unsatisfactory for such promotion in the department. Whereupon the
appointing power shall designate the person, certified as standing next highest
on any such list and such person shall likewise enter upon such duties and so
on until a person is found who is deemed fit for appointment, whereupon the
appointment or promotion shall be deemed complete. The commission shall have
the power to determine in each instance whether an increase in salary
constitutes a promotion.
Statutory reference:
   Examinations, etc., see M.C.L.A. § 38.512
Reductions in pay, layoffs, suspensions.
101.12.   Section 26.12.   No person shall be reduced in pay or position, laid
off, suspended, discharged or otherwise discriminated against by any appointing
officer for religious or political reasons or affiliations. In all cases of
reductions, layoff or suspension of an employee or subordinate whether
appointed for a definite term or otherwise, the appointing authority shall
furnish such employee or subordinate with a copy of reasons for layoff,
reduction or suspension, and his reasons for the same, and give such employee
or subordinate a reasonable time in which to make and file an explanation. Such
order, together with the explanation, if any, of the subordinate shall be filed
with the commission. Nothing in this charter amendment shall limit the power of
an appointing officer to suspend without pay, for the purpose of discipline, an
employee or subordinate for a reasonable period, not exceeding thirty (30)
days; provided, however, that successive suspensions shall not be allowed, and
provided, further, that the provisions of this charter amendment shall not
apply to the temporary and exceptional appointments made under the authority of
this charter amendment.
Powers and duties.
   Reductions, layoffs, etc., see M.C.L.A. §§ 38.513
Tenure of office and removals.
101.13.   Section 26.13.   The tenure of everyone holding an office, place,
position, or employment under the provisions of this charter amendment shall be
only during good behavior and efficient service; and any person may be removed
or discharged, suspended without pay, deprived of vacation privileges or other
special privileges for incompetency, inefficiency, dishonesty, drunkenness,
immoral conduct, insubordination, discourteous treatment of the public, neglect
of duty, violation of the provisions of this charter amendment or the rules of
the commission, or any other failure of good behavior, or any other acts of
misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance in office. Provided, however, no member
of the fire department within the terms of this charter amendment shall be
removed, discharged or reduced in rank or pay except for cause, and in no event
until he shall have been furnished with a written statement of the reason for
such actions. In every case of such removal of reduction a copy of the
statement of reasons therefor and answer thereto, if the person sought to be
removed desires to file such written answer, shall be furnished to the
commission and entered upon its records. If the person sought to be removed or
reduced shall demand it, the commission shall grant him a public hearing, which
hearing shall be held within a period of ten (10) days from the filing of the
charges in writing and a written answer thereto. At such hearing the burden
shall be upon the removing officer to justify his action. In event that the
commission fails to justify the action of the removing officer, then the person
sought to be removed shall be reinstated, with full pay for the entire period
during which he may have been prevented from performing his usual employment,
and no charges shall be officially recorded against his record. The written
record of all testimony taken at such hearing shall be kept and preserved by
the commission, which record shall be sealed and not be available for public
inspection, in event that no appeal shall be taken from the action of the
commission. In event that the commission shall sustain the action of the
removing officer the person removed shall have immediate right of appeal to the
circuit court of Wayne County. Said appeal shall be taken within ninety (90)
days from the entry by the commission of its final order; upon such an appeal
being taken and docketed with the clerk of the circuit court of said county,
the circuit court shall proceed to hear the appeal upon the original record
taken therein and no additional proof shall be permitted to be introduced. The
circuit court’s decision shall be final, saving the employee, however, the
right to petition the supreme court for a review of the court’s decision. The
removing officer and the person sought to be removed shall, at all times, both
before the commission and upon appeal be given the right to employ counsel to
represent either of them before said commission, and upon appeal, should the
person removed elect to appeal to the circuit court.
Statutory reference:
   Tenure and removal, see M.C.L.A. § 38.514
Reduction in force.
101.13A.   Section 26.13A.   If, for reasons of economy, it shall be deemed
necessary by the city to reduce the number of paid members of the department,
the said city shall follow the following procedure: Such removals shall be
accomplished by suspending in numerical order commencing with the last man
appointed to the fire department all recent appointees to said fire department
until such reduction shall have been accomplished; provided, further, however,
that in event the said fire department shall again be increased in numbers to
the strength existing prior to such reduction of members the said firemen
suspended last under the terms of the act shall be first reinstated before any
new appointments to said fire department shall be made.
Statutory reference:
   Reduction in force, see M.C.L.A. § 38.514
Frauds in examination prohibited.
101.14.   Section 26.14.   Any commissioner or examiner, or any other person,
who shall wilfully by himself, or in cooperation with one or more persons,
defeat, deceive or obstruct any person in respect to his right of examination
or registration according to this charter amendment, or to any rules, or
regulations prescribed pursuant thereto, or who shall wilfully or corruptly,
falsely mark, grade, estimate or report upon the examination or proper standing
of any person examined, registered or certified, pursuant to the provisions of
this charter amendment, or aid in doing so, or who shall wilfully or corruptly
furnish to any person any special or secret information for the purpose of
either improving or injuring the prospects or chances of appointment of any
person so examined, registered, or certified, or to be examined, registered or
certified; or who shall impersonate any other person, or permit or aid in any
manner any other person to impersonate him in connection with any examination
or registration, or application or request to be examined, shall, for each
offense be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 38.515
Violations: Penalty.
101.15.   Section 26.15.   Whosoever makes an appointment to office, or selects
a person for employment contrary to the provisions of this charter amendment,
or wilfully refuses or neglects otherwise to comply with, or conform to any of
the provisions of this charter amendment, or violate any of such provisions
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. Misdemeanors under the provisions of
this charter amendment shall be punished by a fine of not less than fifty
dollars ($50.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by
imprisonment in the Detroit House of Correction for a term not exceeding one
year, or by both fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court.
Statutory reference:
   Violations, etc., see M.C.L.A. § 38.516
Definition of terms.
101.16.   Section 26.16.   As used in this charter amendment the following
mentioned terms shall have the following described meaning: The term
“commission’* means the civil service commission herein created, the term
“commissioner” means any one of the three (3) commissioners of that commission.
   The term “appointing power” includes every person or groups of persons who,
acting singly or in conjunction as a mayor, city manager, council, common
council, commission, or otherwise, is or are vested by law with power and
authority to select, appoint, or employ any person to hold any office, place,
position or employment subject to civil service.
   The term “appointment” includes all means of selection, promotion,
appointing or employing any person to hold any office, place, position or
employment subject to the terms of this charter amendment.
   The term “city” means the City of Wyandotte.
   The term “paid fire department” means the fire department of this city in
which the officers and firemen employed are paid regularly by the city and
devote their whole time to fire fighting.
Statutory reference:
   Definitions, see M.C.L.A. § 38.517, M.C.L.A. § 5.3367
Validity of amendment.
101.17.   Section 26.17.   If any section, subsection, subdivision, sentence,
clause or phrase of this charter amendment, shall for any reason be held to be
unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions of this charter amendment.
Charter amendment.
101.18.   Section 26.18.   Any charter provision, charter amendment or
ordinance previously enacted which is in conflict or inconsistent with any of
the provisions of this charter amendment is hereby expressly repealed.
Date of effect.
101.19.   Section 26.19.   This charter amendment shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its publication and record as required by law.
FIRE DEPARTMENT
Destruction of buildings to arrest fire.
102.   Section 27. The officer in charge of the fire department at any fire,
with the concurrence of the mayor or two (2) members of the police and fire
commission may cause any building to be pulled down or destroyed when deemed
necessary, in order to arrest the progress of the fire. Whenever any building
is so pulled down or destroyed, any person having an interest in such building
may present his claim for damages to the council and it shall thereupon be the
duty of the council to pay such claimant such damages as may be just under all
the circumstances taking into consideration the fact whether or not such loss
would probably have occurred to such building if it had not been pulled down or
destroyed, and whether the same was insured or not. If the council and such
claimant shall not be able to agree upon the amount of damage to be paid such
claimant, then the amount of such damages shall be ascertained by the appraisal
of a jury, to be selected in the same manner as in cases of juries to appraise
damages for taking private property for public use. Such jury may visit the
premises and hear all the proofs in the case, and shall allow such claimant
such amount of damages as they may deem proper under all the circumstances, as
above stated. If such jury shall not be able to agree, a new jury shall be
impaneled as above provided, until a jury has been obtained that shall agree
and the city shall pay such claimant the amount of damages fixed by such jury.
There shall be no appeal from the verdict of such jury, either by the city or
any claimant.
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WELFARE
Wyandotte General Hospital and Public Welfare Commission-Generally.
103.   Section 28. The department of public welfare shall be in charge of the
Wyandotte General Hospital and Public Welfare Commission which shall consist of
five (5) members. The members of the commission shall be electors and
freeholders of the city and shall, with the exception of the secretary, serve
without compensation. No doctor of medicine or dentistry shall be appointed to
the commission. The members of the first commission existing hereunder shall be
appointed on the third Monday of April, 1926, and shall be appointed for the
term of one year, two (2) years, three (3) years, four (4) years and five (5)
years, respectively. On the third Monday of April, 1927 and on the third Monday
of April in each year thereafter, one member of the commission shall be
appointed for the term of five (5) years.
Editor’s note:
   The above section appears as amended by a proposition submitted to the
electors on 4-6-1959, which changed the name of the public welfare commission
to the Wyandotte General Hospital and Public Welfare Commission. The charter
compilation contained in the city’s 1956 Code has been relied upon for the
exact rewording and for the fact that the amendment was approved by the
electors.
Same-Officers and employees.
104.   Section 29. The Wyandotte General Hospital and Public Welfare Commission
shall elect from its number a president and vice-president. The commission
shall appoint a secretary who may or may not be a member of the commission and
whose duties shall be prescribed by the commission. The officers of the
commission shall hold office for the term of one year and until their
successors shall be duly elected and enter upon the duties of their respective
offices; provided that if the secretary of the commission be not a member
thereof he shall not be deemed an officer within the meaning of this provision.
The secretary shall receive such compensation as the commission with the
consent of the council shall determine. The commission shall appoint such
employees and assistants as shall be necessary and shall with the consent of
the council fix their compensation. The commission shall not have authority to
enter into any contract of employment not determinable at the will of the
commission, without the consent of the council. The commission may discharge
any assistant or employee without cause shown.
Editor’s note:
   By an amendment approved by the electorate on 4-6-1959, the name of the
public welfare commission was changed to the Wyandotte General Hospital and
Public Welfare Commission.
Same-Meetings, records, quorums.
105.   Section 30. The Wyandotte General Hospital and Public Welfare Commission
shall hold meetings regularly, at least one every two (2) weeks, and shall
designate the time and place thereof, shall adopt its own rules of procedure
and shall keep a record of its proceedings. Proper accounts of the receipts and
erpenditures [expenditures] of money shall be kept. All meetings, records and
accounts of the commission shall be public. Three (3) members shall constitute
a quorum for the transaction of business. The city treasurer shall be the
treasurer of the commission and shall keep all moneys appropriated to or under
the control of the commission in separate funds, one of which shall be known as
the hospital fund and one of which shall be knwon as the poor fund. The moneys
shall only be paid from said funds upon warrants drawn and signed by the
secretary of the commission and countersigned by the president thereof;
provided that the commission may make provision for the distribution of money
or necessities to the poor of the city in emergency cases, and may establish a
fund for that purpose to be drawn upon as the commission shall direct.
Editor’s note:
   By an amendment approved by the electorate on 4-6-1959, the name of the
Public Welfare Commission was changed to the Wyandotte General Hospital and
Public Welfare Commission.
General powers and duties.
106.   Section 31. The powers and duties of the Wyandotte General Hospital and
Public Welfare Commission which shall be exercised as herein provided and in
accordance with the general laws of the state and the ordinances of the city
shall be as follows:
   a.   The commission shall have the powers and duties of directors of the
poor of townships of this state, and shall have charge and control of all cases
of persons applying for public aid in the city and the disbursement of funds
for their relief.
   b.   The commission shall provide medical aid and treatment for sick persons
who shall have become charges of the city and who temporarily are unable to
obtain medical relief or treatment, and for this purpose shall have the right
to call upon the commissioner of health and sanitation to treat all sick
persons under its care, and may aid and treat in its discretion cases of
alcoholism, insanity and emergency accident cases occurring in the city.
   c.   The commission may receive and disburse donations for relief work and
act for such purpose in connection with any society or organization for
charitable purposes, and shall receive and disburse all moneys received from
penal institutions for the relief of dependent members of families of
prisoners, and of moneys apportioned and paid to the city by the county of
Wayne for relief work.
   d.   The commission shall have the control and management of all municipal
hospitals.
   e. The commission shall have such other powers and perform such other duties
as the
council shall by ordinance or resolution prescribe. Note-See the editor’s note
following paragraph 103.
DEPARTMENT OF PURCHASES AND SUPPLIES
Purchasing agent-Generally.
107.   Section 32. The department of purchases and supplies shall be in charge
of the purchasing agent. Unless the council shall otherwise prescribe by
ordinance, the city clerk shall be the purchasing agent of the city. If the
council shall by ordinance prescribe the appointment of a purchasing agent
other than the city clerk, said purchasing agent shall hold office for such
term and shall receive such compensation as the council shall determine.
Same-General powers and duties.
108.   Section 33. The powers and duties of the purchasing agent which shall be
exercised as herein provided and in conformity with the general ordinances of
the city, shall be as follows:
   a.   The purchasing agent shall cause to be kept a record of the proceedings
and accounts of the department, and all of such records, proceedings and
accounts shall be public.
   b.   He shall, in the manner provided by ordinance, purchase according to
specifications furnished by the various departments and approved by the council
all supplies, materials and equipment for all the departments, offices, boards,
courts, commissions and institutions.
   c.   He shall sell all personal property of the city no longer necessary, or
which shall have become unsuitable for public use, or which may have been
condemned as useless by any of the various departments, offices, boards,
courts, coin-missions and institutions. He shall inspect or cause to be
inspected all supplies delivered to determine conformity to specifications,
quality and quantity of deliveries, and shall refuse to sign any warrant in
payment of supplies delivered to the city, unless they conform to the
specifications, quality and quantity prescribed. He may make, with the approval
of the council, all contracts to carry out the objects and purposes of the
department as herein provided, provided that all such contracts shall be signed
by the mayor and attested by the city clerk.
   d.   He shall have such other powers and perform such other duties as are
herein prescribe or may be necessary hereunder for the proper discharge of his
duties.
Competitive bidding requirements.
109.   Section 34. All purchases and all sales by the purchasing agent shall be
on a competitive basis. Before making any purchase or sale of over 0.1% of the
City’s annual general operating fund appropriation (which will be determined by
the Council at the start of each fiscal year), the purchasing agent shall
advertise for bids and all proposals shall be made upon precise specifications
and under such rules and regulations as the council shall establish.
(Res. passed 1-7-1991, § 1)
Editor’s note:
   The above section appears as amended by a proposition approved by the voters
on 4-6-1959, by a vote of 3,845 to 3,162. Subsequently, the above section
appears as amended by a proposition approved by the voters on 11-8-2016, by a
vote of 6,730 to 3,027.
Reports by purchasing agent.
110.   Section 35. The purchasing agent shall on the last day of each month
file with the council and the city treasurer a report giving the date of all
collections or receipts and the amounts of all moneys collected or received by
the department, and pay into the city treasury all moneys so collected.
Council to regulate.
111.   Section 36. The council shall enact such ordinances as may be necessary
to carry out the provisions of this chapter regarding the department of
purchases and supplies.
PUBLIC RECREATION COMMISSION
Generally.
   111-A.   Section 37.   There is hereby established a “public recreation
commission,” consisting of five (5) members, serving without pay, who shall be
appointed by the mayor subject to the confirmation of the council. Their term
of office shall be for five (5) years or until their successors are appointed
and qualified, except that the members of such commission first appointed shall
be appointed for such term that the term of one member shall expire annually
thereafter. Said appointments shall be made on the third Monday of April, 1942
and on the third Monday of April every year thereafter. Vacancies in such
commission occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled by
the mayor subject to the confirmation of the council. No person shall be
appointed a member of such commission who is not a citizen of the United States
and who has not been a resident and elector of the City of Wyandotte for at
least three (3) years immediately preceding said appointment.
Editor’s note:
   The above paragraph was added by an amendment approved by the electorate on
4-6-1942 by a vote of 2,585 to 769.
Officers.
   111-B.   Section 38.   Immediately after their appointment, and yearly
thereafter, the commission shall meet and organize by electing one of their
members president and such other officers as may be necessary. The commission
shall have the power, within the provisions of this charter amendment, to
prescribe, amend and enforce by-laws and rules and regulations for carrying
into effect the provisions of this charter amendment and for the proper conduct
of public recreation for the city.
Editor’s note:
   The above paragraph appears as amended by an amendment approved by the
electorate on 4-6-1942 by a vote of 2,585 to 769.
Functions.
   111-C.   Section 39.   The public recreation commission shall provide,
conduct and supervise public playgrounds, athletic fields, recreation centers,
and other recreational facilities and activities on any of the properties owned
or controlled by the city, or on other properties with the consent of the
owners and authorities thereof. It shall have the power to conduct any form of
recreation or cultural activity that will employ the leisure time of the people
in a constructive and wholesome manner.
Editor’s note:
   The above paragraph was added by an amendment approved by the electorate on
4-6-1942 by a vote of 2,585 to 769.
Employees.
   111-D.   Section 40.   The public recreation commission shall have the power
to appoint or designate some one to act as superintendent who is trained and
properly qualified for the work. There shall be such other persons to help
conduct the activities as may be determined by the commission.
Editor’s note:
   The above paragraph appears as amended by an amendment approved by the
electorate on 4-6-1942 by a vote of 2,585 to 769.
Budget, gifts, etc.
   111-E.   Section 41.   Annually the public recreation commission shall
submit a budget to the city governing body for their approval. The commission
may also solicit or receive any gifts or bequests of money or other personal
property or any donation to be applied, principal or income, for either
temporary or permanent use for playgrounds or other recreational purposes.
Editor’s note:
   The above paragraph was added by an amendment approved by the electorate on
4-6-1942 by a vote of 2,585 to 769.
Reports.
   111-F.   Section 42.   The public recreation commission shall make full and
complete monthly and annual reports to the governing body of the city and other
reports from time to time as requested.
Editor’s note:
   The above paragraph was added by an amendment approved by the electorate on
4-6-1942 by a vote of 2,585 to 769.
CHAPTER VIII. JUSTICE COURTS
Editor’s note:
   The provisions of this chapter (paragraphs 112-120) are deleted as they
dealt with the justice of the peace which has now been abolished and replaced
by a district court. See M.C.L.A. §§ 600.9921 et seq.
CHAPTER IX. GENERAL PROVISIONS REGARDING OFFICERS
Qualifications.
131.   Section 1. No person shall be elected or appointed to any office unless
he be able to read and write the English language, and no person shall be
elected or appointed to any office in the city who has been or is a defaulter
to the city or to any board of officers thereof, or to any school district,
county, or other municipal corporation of the state. All votes fo [of], or any
appointment of, any such defaulter shall be void.
Statutory reference:
   Mandatory that charter provide for qualifications of city officers, see
M.C.L.A. § 117.3(d)
Filing of bonds.
132.   Section 2. The city clerk, city treasurer, and any other elective or
appointive officer, deputy or employee required by the general law, this
charter or direction of the council to furnish a bond, before entering upon the
duties of his office and within the time prescribed for filing his official
oath, shall file with the city clerk such bond or security as may be required
by law, or by this charter, or by any ordinance or requirement of the council
and with such sureties as shall be approved by the council for the due
performance of the duties of his office, except that the bond or security of
the city clerk shall be deposited with the city treasurer, and provided that
the sureties on all bonds shall be some responsible surety company authorized
to do business in the State of Michigan, and all bonds be approved by the
council before such officer or employee shall enter upon the duties of his
office; and provided further, that such officers and employees as are required
by this charter to furnish surety bonds shall be reimbursed out of the city
treasury for the premiums paid for the purpose of procuring such bonds. The
official bond of every officer and employee, unless herein otherwise provided,
shall be conditioned that he will faithfully perform the duties of his office
of employment, and will, on demand, deliver over to his successor or other
proper officer or agent of the city, all books, papers, moneys, effects and
property belonging to the city or appertaining to his office which may be in
his custody as an officer, and such bond may be further conditioned as the
council may prescribe. The official bond of every officer or employee whose
duty it may be to receive and pay out money shall be farther conditioned that
he will, on demand, pay over or account for to the city or any proper officer
or agent thereof all moneys received by him as such officer or employee; and
the bond of the city treasurer shall be further conditioned that he will
account for and pay over to the county treasurer all state and county taxes
collected by him when and in the manner required by law. The council may at any
time require any officer or employee to execute and file with the clerk or
proper officer, new official bonds in the same or such further sums and with
such new and other or further sureties as the council may deem requisite. The
council may require such bonds to be furnished within a period of not less than
ten (10) days, and unless such bond be furnished within and the vacancy may be
filled in the manner provided in this charter, the time fixed, the office or
employment so held shall thereby be vacated.
(Res. passed 9-22-2008, § 1)
Editor’s note:
   At the direction of the city, § 132 has been amended to its original
condition.
   Justices of the peace have been abolished; see M.C.L.A. § 600.9921; the
city, pursuant to M.C.L.A. § 117.32, has abolished constables. Section 1 of
Ord. 658, adopted 7-21-1980, provides that “the authority and office of
constable as set forth in the charter of the City of Wyandotte is hereby
abolished”.
Oath of office.
133.   Section 3. All officers of the city elected or appointed, shall within
five (5) days after receiving notice of their election or appointment, take and
subscribe the oath of office prescribed by the constitution of the state and
file the same with the city clerk.
(Res. passed 9-22-2008, § 1)
Editor’s note:
   Justices of the peace have been abolished, see M.C.L.A. § 600.9921
Appointment or employment of officer after election.
134.   Section 4. No member of the council shall after his election and during
the time for which he was elected, or within one year thereafter be appointed
to any office or employment which shall have been created or the emoluments of
which shall have been increased during such time.
Salary not to be increased nor diminished during term.
135.   Section 5. The salary or rate of compensation of any officer elected or
appointed by authority of this charter shall not be increased or diminished
during his term of office.
Statutory reference:
   Permissible that charter so provide, see M.C.L.A. § 117.5(d)
Conflicts of interest-Generally.
136.   Section 6. No member of the council or any other officer of the city
shall be directly or indirectly interested in any work, business, contract or
service (other than official services), the expense, price or consideration of
which is paid from the city treasury, or by any assessment levied by ordinance
or resolution of the council; nor be the surety of any person having any
contract work or business with said city for the performance of which security
may be required, nor be the surety on the official bond of any officer of the
city. Contracts in violation of said provision shall be void, and any member of
the council, or officer of the city herein specified, offending against the
provisions of this section, shall upon conviction thereof, be fined not less
than five hundred (500) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or be
imprisoned in the county jail not less than one or more than six (6) months, or
both, in the discretion of the court, and shall forfeit his office.
Same-Franchises.
137.   Section 7. No elective or appointive employee or officer of the city
shall be directly or indirectly in the employ of any person, company or
corporation holding or seeking to hold any franchise of the City of Wyandotte,
or shall receive, directly or indirectly, any wage, commission, fee, gift,
favor, or payment from any such franchise holder; and a violation of this
section shall, ipso factor, render vacant the position held by the person so
violating it, and shall be punished as bribery.
Vacancies in office.
138.   Section 8. In case of the expulsion, removal from office, death
resignation or permanent disability of any officer elective or appointive in
the city, his office shall thereby become vacant and may be so declared by the
council. If any officer shall cease to be a resident of the city during his
term of office, the office shall be vacated. If any officer shall be a
defaulter the office shall thereby be vacated. If any person elected or
appointed to office shall fail to take and file the oath of office, or shall
fail to file the bond or security required for the due performance of the
duties of his office, within the time herein limited therefor, the council may
declare the office vacant, unless previous thereto he shall file the oath and
give the requisite bond security.
Resignations.
139.   Section 9. Resignations of office or employment shall be made to the
council, except as herein otherwise provided, in writing and shall be subject
to its approval and acceptance. All resignations shall be immediately acted
upon by the council.
Appropriation or conversion of money.
140.   Section 10. If any officer of the corporation shall, directly or
indirectly, appropriate or convert any of the moneys, securities, evidences of
value, or any property whatsoever, belonging to the corporation or any board
thereof, to his own use, or shall directly or mdirectly and knowingly,
appropriate or convert the same to any other purpose than that for which such
moneys, securities, evidences of value or property may have been appropriated,
raised or received, or to any purpose not authorized by law, he shall be deemed
guilty of wilful and corrupt malfeasance in office, and may be prosecuted,
tried and convicted therefor, and on conviction, may be punished by fine not
exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment in the state
prison for a period not exceeding three (3) years, or both, in the discretion
of the court.
Suspension of elective officer.
141.   Section 11. Any elective officer may, if written charges shall be
preferred against him for any of the causes enumerated in sectioo 12 of this
charter be suspended from office by a vote of four (4) of the councilmen elect
until such charges, shall be heard and determined; and any officer elected or
appointed by the council may be in like manner suspended from his office, and
in the event of such suspension it shall be the duty of the council to proceed
to a hearing of such charges at the next regular meeting and to determine the
matter at such meeting, and if such charges are sustained by the vote of a
majority of said council the said officer shall be removed from office; but if
such officer shall not be removed from office, he shall be entitled to resume
his office and receive pay during the period of such suspension.
Statutory reference:
   Removal of officers by governor, see M.C.L.A. § 168.327
Causes for removal.
142.   Section 12. The council may remove from office any of its members,
including the mayor, and may remove any other officers of the city, either
elective or appointive, for any of the following causes, to wit:
   (a)   Wilful violation of any provision of the charter or ordinances.
   (b)   Conviction by a court of competent jurisdiction of any offense under
the charter or ordinances or under any law of this state or of the United
States, punishable by imprisonment in the state prison.
   (c)   Habitual drunkenness.
   (d)   Incompetency to perform the duties of his office.
   (e)   Wilful neglect of duty.
   (f)   Corrupt or wilful malfeasance or misfeasance in office.
   (g)   Wilful misconduct to the injury of the public service.
   Said proceedings may be initiated by any member of said council, or by any
twenty-five (25) electors as herein provided. Upon the filing with said council
of a complaint in writing, specifying any matter or thing made cause for
removal under this charter, which complaint shall be signed by not less than
twenty-five (25) electors of said city and verified by the oath of at least one
of said signers, the said council shall proceed to hear and determine said
matter as herein provided.
   If said officer be found guilty by a majority of the councilmen elect, in
such case the reason for such removal shall be entered upon the records of the
council with the names and votes of the members voting on the question, and no
officer shall be removed unless he be first furnished with a copy of the
charges in writing, and allowed to be heard in his defense with the aid of
counsel; and for such purpose the council shall have the power to compel the
attendance at such hearing of witnesses, and the production of papers thereat,
by subpoena or written order. The council shall hear and determine said charges
within ten (10) days after service of a copy of said charges in writing as
aforesaid, unless said proceedings shall be adjourned for cause to a time not
exceeding thirty (30) days in all; and at such adjourned meeting the council
shall hear and determine the matter as aforesaid. If such officer shall neglect
to appear and answer such charges, his default shall be deemed good cause for
his removal. Any person refusing or neglecting to comply with the requirements
of any subpoena or written order issued and served under this section shall be
liable to a fine not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00), or confinement in the
county jail not to exceed sixty (60) days on conviction of such refusal or
neglect before any justice of the peace of said city.
CHAPTER X. ORDINANCES
Statutory reference:
   General authority relative to adoption of ordinances, see Michigan Const.
1963, Art. VII, § 22
Enacting clause.
143.   Section 1. The enacting clause of all ordinances shall read, “The City
of Wyandotte ordains,” but such caption may be omitted when the ordinances are
published in book form or are revised and digested by authority of the council.
Vote necessary for adoption.
144.   Section 2. The adoption of any ordinance by the council shall require
for its passage the concurrence of a majority of all the members (elect) of the
council.
Effective date; passage on day of introduction.
145.   Section 3. The time when any ordinance shall take effect shall be
prescribed therein, which time shall not be less than fifteen (15) days from
the date of its passage, except emergency ordinances, which may be given
immediate effect. No ordinance shall be finally passed on the day it is
introduced except in case of public emergency. An emergency ordinance shall be
defined to be one necessary for the immediate preservation of the public peace,
property, health, safety or providing for the usual daily operation of a
department and which contains a statement of its urgency.
Signing, recording and authentication.
146.   Section 4. Immediately upon the final passage of any ordinance the mayor
and clerk shall sign the same under a certificate of the day and date of its
passage. All ordinances shall be recorded in an index book marked “Ordinance
Record;” and the record of each ordinance shall be authenticated by the
signature of the mayor and clerk. Such recording and authentication shall be
done within one week after the final passage of any ordinance, but failure so
to record and authenticate an ordinance shall not invalidate it or suspend its
operation.
Publication, certificate by clerk.
147.   Section 5. All ordinances shall be published once within ten (10) days
of their passage, in a newspaper printed and circulated within the city, and
the clerk shall certify on the record of ordinances the date of publication and
the newspaper in which any ordinance was so published; and such certificate
shall be prima facie evidence that legal publication of an ordinance has been
made.
Statutory reference:
   Authority to adopt technical codes by reference, see M.C.L.A. § 117.3(k)
   Authority to codify ordinances, see M.C.L.A. § 117.5b
   Mandatory that charter provide for the publication of all ordinances before
they become operative, see M.C.L.A. § 117.3(k)
Revival of repealed ordinances; amendments.
148.   Section 6. No repealed ordinances shall be revived unless the whole or
so much as is intended to be revived shall be re-enacted. When any section or
part of a section of any ordinance is amended, the whole section as amended
shall be re-enacted.
Statutory reference:
   Authority to codify ordinances, see M.C.L.A. § 117.5b
Prosecutions for violations.
149.   Section 7. Prosecutions for violation of any ordinance of the city shall
be commenced within two (2) years after the commission of the offense; provided
that the limitations herein imposed shall only apply to violations penal in
their nature, and shall not be construed as a limitation of the city’s right to
forfeit any franchise, grant or license for violation of the terms and
conditions thereof, after said two (2) year period.
Commencement of and prosecution for ordinance violations.
150.   Section 8. Prosecutions for violations of the ordinances of the city may
be commenced by warrant, and all process in such cases shall be in the name of
“The People of the State of Michigan.” The practice in such cases shall be the
same, as near as may be, as in criminal cases cognizable by justices of the
peace under the general laws of the state, except as herein otherwise provided.
Service of process for ordinance violations.
151.   Section 9. All process issued in any prosecution or proceeding for the
violation of any ordinance, shall be directed to any police officer of the
city, or County of Wayne, and may be executed in any part of the state by said
officer or any other officer authorized by law to serve process issued by a
justice of the peace [district judge].
Editor’s note:
   Justices of the peace have been abolished, see M.C.L.A. § 600.9921
Pleading ordinances.
152.   Section 10. In all judicial proceedings it shall not be necessary to
plead an entire ordinance or section, but it shall be sufficient to plead any
ordinance by title and the number of section or sections violated.
Judicial notice of ordinances.
153.   Section 11. Judicial notice shall be taken of the enactment, existence,
provisions and continuing force of all ordinances of the city.
Proof of records in court.
154.   Section 12. Whenever it shall be necessary to prove any ordinance or
resolution of the council in any judicial proceedings, the same may be proved
from the record thereof kept by the clerk, by a copy thereof duly certified by
the clerk under the seal of the city, or from any volume purporting to have
been published, printed and compiled by authority of the council.
155.   Section 13.
Editor’s note:
   This paragraph, dealing with jurisdiction of the justice of the peace over
ordinance violations has been deleted as justices of the peace have been
abolished. See M.C.L.A. § 600.9921
Penalty for violation.
156.   Section 14. The penalty for the violation of any city law or ordinance
shall not exceed a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment in
the city prison, county jail or in any work house in the state, authorized by
ordinance to receive prisoners from the city, for more than ninety (90) days or
both in the discretion of the court.
Statutory reference:
   Limitation on penalties, see M.C.L.A. § 117.4i(10)
Ordinances to remain in force.
157.   Section 15. All ordinances, regulations and resolutions in force at the
time this charter shall take effect and not inconsistent with the provisions
thereof, shall remain and be in force until amended, modified or repealed.
CHAPTER XI. INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM
Statutory reference:
   City authority relative to initiative and referendum on all matters within
the scope of its powers, see M.C.L.A. § 117.4i(6)
INITIATIVE
Generally.
158.   Section 1. Any proposed ordinance may be submitted to the council by a
petition filed with the city clerk praying that such ordinance be adopted by
the council, and that if it be not so adopted, it be submitted to a vote of the
electors of the city. Such petition shall be known as an initiative petition.
It shall set forth in full the proposed ordinance and shall contain a brief
statement of the substance thereof, which statement shall appear on the
official ballot as herein provided in the event of the submission of the
proposed ordinance to a vote of the electors. The petition shall be signed by
qualified electors of the city equal in number to ten (10) per cent of the
total number of votes cast for all candidates for the office of mayor at the
last general municipal election at which a mayor was elected prior to the
filing of such petition. Before the circulation of such petition for signature,
the proposed ordinance as contained therein shall be submitted to the city
attorney for approval as to form.
Signatures; affidavit.
159.   Section 2. Each signer of a petition shall sign his name in ink or
indelible pencil, and shall place on the petition after his name his place of
residence, by street and number, and the date of signature. The signatures to
any such petition need not all be appended to one paper, but to each paper
constituting a part of such petition there shall be attached an affidavit by
the circulator thereof stating the number of signers to such part of the
petition, and that each signature appended to the paper is the genuine
signature of the person whose name it purports to be, and was made in the
presence of the affiant.
Examination by city clerk.
160.   Section 3. Within ten (10) days from the filing of a petition the city
clerk shall ascertain whether it is signed by the required number of qualified
electors and shall indorse thereon a certificate of the result of his
examination as to its sufficiency.
Supplemental petitions.
161.   Section 4. If the clerk’s certificate shows that the number of
signatures to the petition is insufficient an additional paper or papers may be
filed at any time within fifteen (15) days from the date of such certificate in
the same manner as provided in case of the original petition.
Insufficient petitions.
162.   Section 5. Upon the filing of such additional paper or papers, the clerk
shall attach the same to the original petition, and shall within ten (10) days
thereafter, examine such additional paper or papers so attached, and certify
the result. If the petition as a whole is still insufficient, or if no
additional paper or papers shall have been filed, the clerk shall file the
petition in his office and shall notify the council to the effect that a
petition has been filed in his office, but that the number of signatures
thereto is insufficient, and shall state the substance of the petition, the
number of signatures required and the number of signatures attached thereto.
The filing of an insufficient petition shall not prejudice the filing of a new
petition for the same purpose.
Presentation to council.
163.   Section 6. If the certificate of the clerk shows that the petition is
sufficient, he shall present the proposed ordinance to the council at its next
regular meeting. The council shall at once proceed to consider the proposed
ordinance, and shall take final action thereon within thirty (30) days from the
date of the presentation thereof. If the council fails to adopt the proposed
ordinance as presented, then it shall be submitted to the vote of the electors
in the manner herein provided.
Submission of ordinance.
164.   Section 7. Such initiative ordinance shall be submitted at the next
regular city or state election held thereafter, or at any primary election or
at any special election called for any purpose, but no special election shall
be held solely for the purpose of submitting such proposed ordinance. The city
clerk shall cause a copy of the proposed ordinance and notice that it is to be
submitted to the electors of the city for their approval to be published once
in one of the newspapers of the city not more than twenty (20) days or less
than ten (10) days before the election at which such ordinance is to be
submitted.
Ballots: Vote required: Taking effect.
165.   Section 8. The ballots used in voting upon any such proposed ordinance
shall contain the title of the ordinance to be voted on, and a statement of the
substance thereof, as contained in the petition, and the two propositions: “For
the ordinance” and “Against the ordinance.” Immediately at the right of each
proposition there shall be a square in which by making a cross ? the voter may
vote for or against the proposed ordinance. If a majority of the electors
voting on any such proposed ordinance shall vote in favor thereof, it shall
thereupon become an ordinance of the city; provided that if the subject matter
of such ordinance is such as to require more than a majority vote under the
constitution or laws of the state, then it shall not go into effect unless it
receives such votes as may be required. The vote on such proposed ordinance
shall be taken, counted, returned, canvassed and certified in the same manner
as other votes are taken, counted, returned, canvassed and certified at
elections held under this charter. Upon the certificates of the board of city
canvassers that a proposed ordinance has been adopted as herein provided, the
city clerk shall file in his office with the other ordinances of the city the
copy thereof as presented to the council prior to submission. The clerk shall
forthwith notify the council of the filing of such ordinance and the notice
thereof shall be entered upon the journal of the council, whereupon such
ordinance shall take effect.
No repeal or amendment except by electors.
166.   Section 9. Any ordinance proposed by petition and adopted by the vote of
the electors of the city shall not be repealed or amended except by a vote of
electors of the city as in this chapter provided. The council may submit a
proposition for the repeal of any such ordinance, or for amendments thereto to
be voted upon at any succeeding general city election; and should such
proposition, so submitted, receive a majority of the votes cast thereon at such
election, such ordinance shall thereby be repealed or amended accordingly.
REFERENDUM
Generally.
167.   Section 10. No ordinance, except an emergency ordinance, shall take
effect before fifteen (15) days after its final passage. If, within said
fifteen (15) days, one hundred (100) electors of the city shall file a notice
in writing with the clerk, of their intention to circulate a petition for
submitting said ordinance to the electors for their adoption or rejection as
herein provided, then said ordinance shall not become effective until thirty
(30) days after its final passage by the council; provided that if petitions
containing the requisite number of signatures required herein are not filed in
accordance with such written notice within said thirty (30) days, then said
ordinance shall become effective after the expiration of said thirty (30) day
period. If within said thirty (30) days, a petition signed by qualified
electors of the city equal in number to at least ten (10) per centum of the
total number of votes cast for all candidates for the office of mayor, at the
last preceding general municipal election, at which a mayor was elected, be
presented to the council, requesting that such ordinance be repealed by the
council or be submitted to the qualified electors for their approval or
rejection, the same shall thereupon and thereby be suspended from taking
effect; and the council shall immediately reconsider such ordinance. If the
same be not entirely repealed, the council shall submit it, by the method
provided in this charter, to a vote of the qualified electors of the city,
either at the next general municipal election or at a special election, which
may in its discretion be called by it for that purpose, and such ordinances
shall not take effect unless a majority of the qualified electors voting on the
same at such election shall vote in favor thereof.
Petition, etc.
168.   Section 11. The provisions of this chapter relative to the form and
manner of signing initiative petitions, the filing, examination, certification
and sufficiency thereof, the presentation thereof to the council by the city
clerk, the form of ballot, the manner of conducting elections, the canvassing
of the votes and the certification of the results, for election in the case of
an ordinance initiated by petition, shall apply to petitions for a referendum
of an ordinance and the submission of such ordinance to the electors.
CHAPTER XII. FRANCHISES AND LICENSES
Length of franchise.
169.   Section 1. No franchise or grant shall be granted by the city for a
longer period than thirty (30) years.
State constitution reference:
   Franchises limited to 30 years, see Michigan Const., 1963, Art. VII, § 30
Acceptance of franchise or permit by grantee.
   169a.   Section 2.   Every permit granted by ordinance shall be accepted in
writing by the grantee before said ordinance takes effect, and every franchise
or modification of a franchise, before it is submitted to the electors, shall
be so accepted. Such acceptance shall be filed with the clerk. Any
noncompliance with this section shall automatically annul such permit or
franchise.
Approval of irrevocable franchise by electors.
170.   Section 3. No franchise or grant which is not revocable at the will of
the council, shall be granted or become operative until it shall have been
referred to the people at a general or special election and has received the
approval of three-fifths of the electors voting thereon at such election.
State constitution reference:
   Submission of irrevocable franchise to electors required, see Michigan
Const., 1963, Art. VII, § 25
No exclusive franchise to be granted.
171.   Section 4. No person, firm or corporation shall ever be granted any
exclusive franchise, license, right or privilege whatsoever.
Assignment of franchise.
172.   Section 5. No franchise, granted by the city, shall ever be leased,
assigned or otherwise alienated except in accordance with the express
provisions of such franchise, and all franchises granted by the city shall
provide how, and in what manner, and under what conditions such franchise may
be leased, assigned, or alienated, and no dealing with the lessee or assignee
on the part of the city, which shall recognize the performance of any act or
payment of any compensation by the lessee or assignee, shall be deemed to have
operated as a consent to such lease, assignment or alienation.
Change or modification of franchise.
173.   Section 6. No change or modification of any franchise or grant of rights
of powers previously granted to any corporation, firm, person, or association
of persons shall be made, except in the manner and subject to all conditions
herein provided for, in the making of original grants and franchises.
Implied reservations.
174.   Section 7. The grant of every franchise or privilege shall be subject to
the right of the city, whether in terms reserved or not, to make all
regulations which shall be necessary to secure in the most ample manner the
safety, welfare and accommodation of the public, including among other things,
the right to pass and enforce ordinances to require proper and adequate
extensions of the service of such grant, and to protect the public from danger
or inconvenience in the operation of any work or business authorized by the
grant of the franchise and the right to make and enforce all such regulations
as shall be reasonably necessary to secure adequate, sufficient and proper
service, extensions and accommodations for the people and insure their comfort
and convenience.
Use of tracks, etc., by others.
175.   Section 8. The city, by and through its council shall have the power to
require any corporation holding a franchise from the city, to allow the use of
its tracks, poles and wires by any other corporation to which the city shall
grant a franchise, subject to reasonable regulations and upon the payment of a
reasonable rental therefor. Any franchise or right which may hereafter be
granted, to any person or corporation to operate a street railway within the
city or its suburbs, shall be subject to the condition that the city shall have
the right to grant to any other person or corporation desiring to build or
operate a street railway or interurban railway within or into the city, the
right to operate its cars over the tracks of said railway insofar as it may be
necessary to enter and leave the city and to reach the section thereof used for
business purposes, provided, however, that the person or corporation desiring
to operate its cars over the lines of said street railway, shall first agree in
writing with the owner thereof as to terms and conditions and to pay it
reasonable compensation for the use of its tracks and facilities. And if the
person or corporation desiring to use the same cannot agree with said owner of
said street railway as to said compensation, terms and conditions, within sixty
days from offering the same in writing, then the council shall by resolution,
after hearing the parties concerned, fix the terms and conditions of such use,
and compensation to be paid therefor, which award of the council, when so made,
shall be binding upon and observed by parties concerned.
Ordinance required.
176.   Section 9. All contracts, granting or giving any original franchise,
right or privilege, or extending or renewing or amending any existing grant,
right, privilege or franchise, shall be made by ordinance and not otherwise.
Licenses-Generally.
177.   Section 10. The council shall by ordinance prescribe the terms and
conditions upon which licenses may be granted; and may require and exact
payment of such reasonable sums for any licenses as it may deem proper. The
persons receiving the license shall, before the issuing thereof, execute a bond
to the city, when required by any ordinance, in such sum and with such sureties
as prescribed by such ordinance, conditioned for the faithful observance of the
charter of the city, the ordinance under which the license is granted and
otherwise conditioned as any such ordinance may prescribe. Such license shall
be revocable by the council at pleasure; and when any license shall be revoked
for noncompliance with the terms and conditions upon which it was granted, the
person holding such license shall, in addition to other penalties imposed,
forfeit all payment made for such license.
Same-Term, transfer, etc.
178.   Section 11. No license shall be granted for any term beyond the first
Monday in June next thereafter, nor shall any license be transferable. The
council may provide for punishment by fine or imprisonment, or both, of any
person who, without license shall exercise any occupation or trade or do
anything for or in respect to which any license shall be required. All license
money shall be paid into the city treasury to the credit of the contingent
fund.
Expense of public election to be paid by grantee.
179.   Section 12. No franchise, grant or license shall be submitted under the
provisions of this charter, to the electors at a special election, unless the
expense of holding the election, as determined by the council, shall be paid to
the treasurer, in advance of calling such election, by the grantee or licensee
in said franchise, grant or license.
Statutory reference:
   Expense of special franchise election to be paid by grantee, see M.C.L.A. §
117.5(i)
CHAPTER XIII. FINANCE AND TAXATION
Fiscal year.
180.   Section 1. The fiscal year of the city shall commence on the first
Monday of October of each year.
Power to tax; collection in two installments.
181.   Section 2. The council shall have authority, within the limitations
herein prescribed, to raise annually by taxation within the corporation such
sum of money as may be necessary to defray the expenses and pay the liabilities
of the city and to carry into effect the powers in this charter granted. The
taxes in the city shall be levied and collected in two (2) installments, one of
which installments shall be for the general taxes, and which shall be assessed,
levied and payable as provided in the general tax laws of the state, where not
inconsistent with the provisions of this charter; the other installment of
which shall be for the city taxes and shall be payable on the first day of
August in each year.
Statutory references:
   General Property Tax Act, see M.C.L.A. §§ 211.1 et seq.
   Mandatory that charter provide for annually levying and collecting taxes,
see M.C.L.A. § 117.3(g)
Annual appropriation bill.
182.   Section 3. On or before the second Monday of May of each year, the
several departments shall prepare and file with the city clerk detailed
estimates of the expense of operation of their various departments for the next
succeeding fiscal year. Such estimates shall be tabulated by the city clerk in
accordance with a uniform system of budget grouping. The city clerk shall
furnish a list of the amounts required to provide for all interest and sinking
fund requirements, the estimated expense of operating his own department and of
all other general expenses of the city, not covered by the reports of
departments filed with him. All such estimates shall be presented to the
council by the city clerk, and shall be accompanied by statistics for the
current year of the amount appropriated, balance on hand or overdraft or
deficiency, of each budget allowance, and a statement of the cause of such
overdraft or deficiency, if any there be. The council shall, on or before the
fourth Tuesday in May, pass an annual appropriation bill for the next
succeeding fiscal year, which shall:
   (1)   Provide for all interest and sinking fund requirements and amounts due
upon the public debt;
   (2)   Appropriate fixed sums for the several purposes covered by the
operations of the various departments of the city as well as the general
expenses of administration of the city;
   (3)   Provide for any special expenses for improvements or otherwise, to be
paid out of current taxes, if any; and
   (4)   Provide for a contingent fund which, in the judgment of the council,
will be sufficient to supplement budget appropriations which may have been
underestimated and provide for unforeseen and unusual expenses.
   In appropriating money for budget funds, any estimated unexpended balance,
as of the first Monday of October of each year, shall be deducted from the
estimate for the succeeding fiscal year as presented to and allowed by the
council. The annual appropriation bill shall also contain, under the heading
“Special Assessments,” the amount of all special assessments finally returned
by the treasurer as “unpaid,” and which are to be reassessed in the next
general tax roll of the city. The total of the various amounts allowed and
appropriated by the council as hereinabove directed shall be assembled into the
appropriate general funds of the city, as in section 4 of the chapter set forth
and established, and the council shall thereupon by ordinance designate the
amounts of money allowed and appropriated by the council to be raised by
taxation for such general funds for the next succeeding fiscal year.
Statutory reference:
   Mandatory that charter provide for an annual appropriation of money for
municipal purposes, see M.C.L.A. § 117.3(h)
General funds.
183.   Section 4. The revenues raised by general tax upon all the property in
the city or by loan to be repaid by such tax shall be divided into so many of
the following general funds as are necessary:
   A.   Contingent fund-to defray the contingent and other expenses of the city
for the payment of which from some other fund no provision is made;
   B.   Fire department fund-to defray the expenses of purchasing grounds,
erecting engine houses thereon, purchasing engines and other fire apparatus,
and all other expenses necessary to maintain the fire department of the city;
   C.   General street fund-to defray the expenses of opening, widening,
extending, altering and vacating streets alleys and public grounds, and for
grading, paving, curbing, graveling and otherwise improving, repairing and
cleaning the streets, alleys and public grounds of the city, and for the
construction and repair of sidewalks and crosswalks, and for the care thereof;
   D.   General sewer fund-to defray the expenses of sewers, drains, ditches
and drainage, and the improvement of watercourses;
   E.   Water fund-for maintaining and extending a system of water works;
   F.   Public building fund-for providing for public buildings and for the
purchase of lands therefor, and for the erection, preservation and repair of
any such public buildings, city halls, offices, prisons, watchhouses, and
hospitals as the council is authorized to erect and maintain, and not herein
otherwise provided for;
   G.   Police fund-for the maintenance of the police of the city, and to
defray the expenses of the arrest and punishment of those violating the
ordinances of the city;
   H.   Interest and sinking fund-for the payment of the public debt of the
city and the interest thereon;
   I.   Park fund-for the purchase of grounds for public parks and the
maintenance and improvement thereof;
   J.   Light fund-for the construction, purchase and maintenance of electric
or other lights;
   K.   Poor fund-for the support and relief of poor persons residing in the
city;
   L.   Hospital fund-for the maintenance and operation of municipal hospitals;
   M.   Such other funds as the council may from time to time constitute.
Maximum tax-Generally.
184.   Section 5.   The aggregate amount which the council may raise by general
tax upon the taxable real and personal property in the city for the purpose of
defraying the general expenses and liabilities of the corporation, and for all
purposes for which the several general funds mentioned in section 4 of this
chapter are constituted (exclusive of taxes for schools and schoolhouse
purposes) shall not, except as herein otherwise provided, exceed in one year,
one and one-fourth (1¼) per cent, provided that the council may also raise such
further money annually, not exceeding three (3) mills on the dollar of the
assessed valuation of the property in the city as may be necessary to provide
an interest and sinking fund to pay the funded debts of the city and interest
thereon. In addition, the city shall levy an ad valorem tax in an amount of
.175 of one per cent (1.75 mills) on the dollar of the assessed valuation of
all such real and personal property in the city for a period of three (3)
years, from 2011 through 2013, for general operating purposes of the city. In
addition, the city shall levy an ad valorem tax in an amount of three tenths
(.30) of one per cent (3 mills) on the dollar of the assessed valuation of all
such real and personal property in the city for a period of five (5) years,
from 2014 through 2018, for general operating purposes of the city. In
addition, the city shall levy an ad valorem tax in an amount of three tenths
(.30) of one per cent (3 mills) on the dollar of the assessed valuation of all
such real and personal property in the city for a period of five (5) years,
from 2019 through 2023, for general operating purposes of the city. In
addition, the city shall levy an ad valorem tax in an amount of three tenths
(.30) of one percent (3 mills) on the dollar of the assessed valuation of all
such real and personal property in the city for a period of ten (10) years from
2024 through 2033 for general operating purposes of the city.
State constitution reference:
   Limit on taxation, see Michigan Const., 1963, Art. VII, § 21
Statutory reference:
   Limit on taxation, see M.C.L.A. § 117.5(o)
Same-Referendum to raise limit.
185.   Section 6. Should any greater amount be required in any year for public
improvements or purposes, to be paid for from the general funds of the city,
than can be raised by the council under the foregoing provisions of this
chapter, such amount may be raised by tax or loan, or partly by tax and partly
by loan, if authorized by three-fifths of the electors voting upon the question
at a regular city election or special election called for such purpose, in
accordance with chapter III of this charter. The amount that may be voted or
raised by tax in any year under the provisions of this section, shall not
exceed two (2) per cent of the assessed valuation of the property in the city
as shown by the last preceding tax rolls made therein.
Statutory reference:
   Popular vote on certain tax increases required, see M.C.L.A. § 117.5
School taxes.
186.   Section 7. All amounts reported to the council by the board of education
to be raised for schools, library and schoolhouse purposes, shall be certified
to the clerk of the board of supervisors of the county on or before the first
Monday of October in each year.
Amounts in appropriation bill to be certified to assessor; procedure when not
collected.
187.   Section 8. On or before the first Monday of June in each year, the city
clerk shall certify to the city assessor for assessment all sums ordered in the
annual appropriation bill, including all amounts which the council required to
be reassessed upon any parcel of land, or against any particular person as a
special assessment together with the description of the land or person upon
whom the several sums are to be reassessed, with such further descriptions and
directions as will enable such assessor to assess the several amounts upon the
property and person chargeable therewith. All such sums shall be levied and
collected on the August or city tax roll. If, however, any part of the taxes
assessed and levied on the August roll are not paid, such sums shall be levied
and collected with the state and county taxes next thereafter to be levied
within the city.
Subjects of taxation.
188.   Section 9. The subjects of taxation for municipal purposes shall be the
same as for state, county and school purposes under the general law.
Statutory reference:
   Subjects of taxation, see M.C.L.A. § 117.4(f)
Money in funds not to be transferred.
189.   Section 10. All moneys and taxes raised, loaned or appropriated for the
purpose of any particular fund, shall be paid in and credited to such fund and
shall be applied to the purposes for which such moneys were raised and
received, and to none other; nor shall the moneys belonging to one fund be
transferred to any other fund, or be applied to any purpose for which such
other fund is constituted. Moneys not received or appropriated for any
particular fund shall be credited to the contingent fund.
No money to be paid except upon warrant.
190.   Section 11. No money shall be drawn from the treasury, except as herein
otherwise provided, except in pursuance of the authority and appropriation of
the council and upon the warrant of the clerk. Such warrant shall specify the
fund from which it is payable and shall be paid from no other fund.
No warrant to be drawn when fund is exhausted.
191.   Section 12. No warrant shall be drawn from the treasury, after the fund,
from which it should be paid, has been exhausted; nor when the liabilities
outstanding and previously incurred and payable from such fund are sufficient
to exhaust it. Any warrant, draft or contract, payable by the provisions of
this charter from any particular fund, excepting bonds given for loans herein
authorized, and issued or made after such fund has been exhausted by previous
payments or by previous liabilities payable from such fund, shall be void as
against the city.
Assessment; when and how made.
192.   Section 13. The city assessor shall on or before the first Monday in May
in each year, make and complete an assessment of all the real and personal
property within the city liable to taxation under the laws of the state, and of
all property of any person liable to be assessed therein, in the same manner,
and within the same time, except as herein otherwise provided, as required by
law for the assessment of property in the townships of the state, and in so
doing he shall conform to the provisions of law governing the action of
supervisors of townships performing like services, and in all other respects he
shall unless otherwise in this charter provided, conform to the provisions of
law applicable to the action and duties of supervisors in townships, in the
assessment of property, the levying of taxes and in the issuing of warrants for
the collection and return thereof. Such assessor shall make his assessment of
property, in two (2) separate rolls, one for the city taxes and special
assessments to be known as the “city or August tax roll,” the other for the
state, county and school taxes, to be known as the “December tax roll,” and in
the making of such assessments and in the levying of taxes such city shall be
treated as a whole or as one assessment district as townships are treated under
the general tax laws of the state.
Editor’s note:
   The above section appears as amended by an amendment approved by the
electorate on 4-1-1935 by a vote of 3,312 to 1,434.
Statutory reference:
   Mandatory that charter provide for preparation of assessment roll, see
M.C.L.A. § 117.3(i)
Sworn statement of taxable personal property.
193.   Section 14. On or before the tenth day of April in each year every
person, owning or having charge of, as agent or otherwise, any personal
property taxable by the city, shall file with the city assessor a sworn list of
such personal property, with such description as will enable said assessor to
assess the same. If any such person fails to file said list as herein provided,
or if he omits any such property in the list delivered, the assessor shall
assess such personal property not listed, at its cash value upon such knowledge
or information as may be satisfactory to him and according to his best judgment
and discretion. Uniform printed blanks for the purpose of the statement herein
required, shall be furnished upon request, by the city assessor, at the expense
of the city.
Board of review.
194.   Section 15. The mayor, city assessor, city clerk, city treasurer and
city attorney shall constitute a board of equalization and review of the
general assessment rolls of the city, a majority of whom shall constitute a
quorum for the transaction of business, but a less number may adjourn from day
to day. They shall have power and it shall be their duty, to examine said
assessment rolls, and they shall have authority to and shall correct any errors
or deficiencies found therein, either as to names, valuations or descriptions;
and of their own motion, or on cause shown, may reduce or increase the
valuation of any property found on said rolls, and shall add thereto any Supp.
No. 2 taxable property in said city that may have been omitted, and shall value
the same; and to strike from said rolls any property wrongfully thereon, and
generally to perfect said rolls in any respect by said board deemed necessary
and proper.
Meetings of board of review.
195.   Section 16. The board of review shall meet on the third Monday in
February in each year, at the council room in the city, at 8:00 in the forenoon
Central [Eastern] Standard time, of which time and place notice shall be given
by the clerk at least two (2) weeks prior to the time of meetings, by
publishing a notice thereof in one or more newspapers of said city, and also by
posting the same in three public places in each voting precinct of the city, at
which time and place the city assessor shall submit to said board his general
assessment roll. The mayor shall be chairman of the board and the city clerk,
clerk thereof. In the absence of the mayor or city clerk the members of the
board shall select a temporary chairman or clerk from their number. The board
shall continue in session at least six days successively, and as much longer as
may be necessary to complete the review, and at least six (6) hours in each day
during said six (6) days or more; and any person or persons desiring so to do,
may examine his, her or their assessment on said roll, and may show cause, if
any exists, why the valuation thereof should be changed and the said board
shall decide the same, and their decision shall be final, except as otherwise
herein provided. They may examine on oath any person touching the matter of his
or her assessment, and the chairman or any member of said board may administer
oaths. They shall keep a record of their proceedings and all changes made in
said roll, and the amount added to or deducted from the total valuation shall
be entered upon such record, which record shall be deposited with the city
clerk. The decision of a majority of the members of said board upon all
questions shall govern. The roll as prepared by the city assessor shall stand
as approved and adopted as the act of the board of review, except as changed as
herein provided. Said board shall have the same power and perform the same
duties in all respects as boards of review of townships, in reviewing and
correcting assessments made by supervisors of townships, except as in this
charter otherwise provided. After said board shall have completed the revision
of said roll, the clerk shall endorse and sign a statement upon said roll, to
the effect that the same is the general assessment roll of the city for the
year in which it has been prepared as approved by the board of review.
   Such statement may be in the following form, namely:
 
STATE OF MICHIGAN
CITY OF WYANDOTTE   ss.
I hereby certify that the board of review and equalization of the City of Wyandotte have reviewed, equalized and corrected the within assessment roll,
and have deducted (or added, as the case may be)                   dollars from (or to, as the case may be) the valuation of the real estate made by the
assessor, and have determined the aggregate value of such real estate to be                 dollars, and the total value of the personal estate to be
                 dollars for the year            AD.
Dated                                                     
                                                                            
            Clerk of the Board of Review
 
   Upon the completion of such rolls, and their endorsement in manner
aforesaid, they shall be returned to the city assessor, and shall be
conclusively presumed by all courts and tribunals to be valid, and shall not be
set aside except for causes mentioned in the general laws of the state relating
to the assessment of property and the levy and collection of taxes thereon;
provided that the omission of such endorsement, shall not affect the validity
of any such roll; and provided ;further that nothing in this section contained
shall prevent the appeal mentioned in the next section.
Editor’s note:
   The above paragraph appears as amended by an amendment approved by the
electorate on 4-1-1935 by a vote of 3,460 to 2,377.
Statutory reference:
   Mandatory that charter provide for the meeting of the Board of Review, see
M.C.L.A. § 117.3(i)
196.   Section 17. Deleted by a resolution adopted on 11-8-2010. Section 17
pertained to “appeals to council”.
Clerk to certify amount of unpaid taxes.
197.   Section 18. On or before the first Monday in October in each year the
city clerk shall certify to the county clerk of the County of Wayne, the
aggregate amount of all sums for city purposes that have not been paid upon the
August rolls, and the amount required to be raised for schools and library and
schoolhouse purposes, by general taxation upon all the taxable property of the
whole city.
Amounts to be apportioned by supervisors.
198.   Section 19. The board of supervisors of the county in which the city is
located shall apportion the amounts to be raised as mentioned in the preceding
section to the city, according to the equalized valuation of the property
appearing upon the certificate of the assessment roll of the city for such
year, as finally equalized by the board of supervisors and the clerk of said
board shall certify to the city assessor for assessment therein, the amount so
apportioned to the city; giving the amount apportioned for school, library and
schoolhouse purposes in a separate sum, within five (5) days after the board of
supervisors of the county shall have completed the equalization of the
valuation of the property in the county for the year. Said clerk of the board
shall also certify to the city clerk the amounts apportioned to the city, as
aforesaid.
Taxes to be levied by assessor.
199.   Section 20. The city assessor shall, in the month of July in each year,
levy in the August roll upon all taxable property in the city, the amounts
certified to him by the city clerk to be raised for city taxes, and to be
reassessed as special assessments, and he shall, at the time fixed in the
general tax law, levy in the December roll, all sums to be raised for school,
library and schoolhouse taxes, and all such taxes as were not paid on the
fifteenth day of November next following the levy of such city taxes, and
special assessments together with the interest thereon, from August first to
December first, at ten (10) per cent per annum, placing said interest in a
separate column headed “Penalty,” and said penalty shall thereafter be treated
in all respects as an item of taxes, such item of taxes, and each special
assessment shall be entered in a separate column in such rolls, and the total
taxes shall be entered in the last column of said roll.
Certification of assessor of amount of taxes levied.
200.   Section 21. The city assessor upon completing his roll shall certify to
the city clerk the amounts of taxes levied in the roll for the state and county
purposes, and for city and school taxes, reassessment of special assessments
and other purposes, and the clerk shall charge the said amounts to the city
treasurer. The city treasurer shall give bond to the county treasurer in the
same manner as township treasurers are required to do; and thereup, and on or
before the first Monday in December, the city assessor shall deliver a
certified copy of the December tax roll, with the taxes extended therein as
aforesaid, to the city treasurer, with his warrant for the collection of taxes
therein, annexed thereto. The city tax roll shall be delivered to the city
treasurer on or before the first day of August.
Statutory reference:
   Confirmation of assessment roll, see M.C.L.A. § 117.3(i)
Warrant annexed to each roll.
201.   Section 22. The warrant annexed to each roll shall state the several
amounts levied therein to be paid into the city and county treasuries
respectively; and shall command the city treasurer to collect from the several
persons named in the said roll the several sums named in the last column
thereof opposite their respective names, and to pay over and to account for all
moneys collected and specified in the roll as in said warrant directed, on the
first day of March then next ensuing. If, however, the roll be the August roll,
the warrant annexed thereto shall command the city treasurer to collect from
the several persons named in said roll the several sums named in the last
column thereof opposite their respective names, and to pay over and account for
all moneys collected and specified in the roll as in said warrant directed, on
or before the fifteenth day of September next following. Or, if the roll be the
December roll, the warrant annexed thereto shall command the city treasurer to
collect, pay over, and account as aforesaid, within the time first above
limited, and the several warrants shall authorize the treasurer, in case any
person shall neglect to pay his tax, to levy the same by distress and sale of
the goods and chattels of such persons.
Taxes to be lien.
202.   Section 23. All taxes levied in any city tax roll, shall be and remain a
lien upon the lands upon which they are levied from the first day of August of
the year when levied until paid.
Duties of city treasurer.
203.   Section 24. Upon receiving the tax rolls as above provided, the city
treasurer shall give notice immediately to the taxpayers of the city that such
rolls have been delivered to him and that the taxes therein levied can be paid
to him at his office at any time before the tenth day of January then next
ensuing, without any charge for collection; or if the roll be the August roll,
on or before the fifteenth day of September, without any charge for collection;
but that four (4) per cent collection fee shall be charged and collected upon
all taxes remaining unpaid on said tenth day of January or fifteenth day of
September as the case may be, provided that the council may by resolution
extend the time for the payment without penalty, of the taxes due the tenth day
of January and the fifteenth day of September to and including the 26th day of
February for the taxes due the tenth day of January and the 26th day of
September for the taxes due the fifteenth day of September. Said notice shall
be given by publishing the same twice in one or more of the newspapers of the
city and by posting copies thereof in three (3) public places in each voting
precinct of the city; and it shall be the duty of the treasurer to be at his
office at such times previous to the said tenth day of January and fifteenth
day of September, as the council shall direct, and there receive payment of
such taxes as may be offered to him. He shall collect no fees upon any taxes
paid to him on the December tax roll before the said tenth day of January, or
on the August roll, on or before the said fifteenth day of September, but in
all other cases he shall collect both the tax and the four (4) per cent
collection fee, except as herein otherwise provided.
Powers of treasurer in case of unpaid taxes.
204.   Section 25. For the collection of all taxes remaining unpaid on the
general roll on the tenth day of January, and on the August roll, on the
fifteenth day of September, the city treasurer shall proceed in the same manner
as township treasurers are required by law to do for the collection of taxes in
townships, and shall for that purpose have all the powers and authority
conferred by law upon township treasurers for such purposes, and shall, when
necessary, enforce the payment of the tax against any person by distress and
sale of his goods and chattels, if any such can be found anywhere within the
county or any county adjoining thereto, and from which seizure no property
shall be exempt.
New warrants by county treasurer.
205.   Section 26. The county treasurer may issue new warrants to the city
treasurer for the collection of taxes in the same manner and in the same cases,
and with the same effect, as such new warrant may be issued to township
treasurers. The city collector may, and it shall be his duty to, proceed by
suit in the name of the city, for the collection of unpaid taxes in the same
cases, and under like circumstances in which’ township treasurers are
authorized to proceed in that manner, and all the provisions of law applicable
to suits and evidence therein brought by township treasurers in the name of
their township for such purposes, shall apply to suits brought by the city
treasurer as aforesaid.
City to be considered same as township in assessing and levying taxes.
206.   Section 27. For the purpose of assessing and levying taxes in the city,
for state, county, school and library purposes, the city shall be considered
the same as a township; and all provisions of law relative to the collection of
taxes levied in townships shall apply to the collection of taxes levied and
assessed by the city assessor, except as herein otherwise provided. For the
purpose of collecting taxes and returning property for nonpayment thereof, the
city treasurer shall perform the same duties and have the same powers as
township treasurers, except as herein otherwise provided.
Payment by city treasurer to county treasurer.
207.   Section 28. The city treasurer shall, within one week after the time
specified and directed in the warrants annexed to said several December tax
rolls, pay to the county treasurer the sums required in said warrants to be so
paid, either in delinquent taxes on lands, or in funds then receivable by law,
and all lands upon which any unpaid tax shall be returned shall be sold
therefor the same as lands returned for delinquent taxes by township
treasurers.
Law applicable to townships to apply.
208.   Section 29. All the provisions of law respecting delinquent taxes levied
in townships shall apply to all taxes levied in the city, and be returned as
delinquent to the county treasurer, and the city, in respect to taxes levied
therein and returned to the county treasurer, as delinquent, shall, except as
herein otherwise provided, be considered and treated as a township, and all
provisions of law for the sale of lands for the payment of taxes levied for
state, county and township purposes, and returned delinquent, shall apply to
the return and sale of property for the nonpayment of delinquent taxes levied
in the city except as herein otherwise provided.
CHAPTER XIV. PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
SUBDIVISION 1. GENERAL PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
Definition.
209.   Section 1. General public improvements are such improvements as are
acquired for the general use and benefit of the city at large and are to be
paid for by the city:
   (1)   From the proper general fund of the city;
   (2)   By a special tax voted by the electors for the specific purpose;
   (3)   By the proceeds of general obligation bonds, authorized by the
electors for that specific purpose;
   (4)   In the case of public utilities, by the proceeds of duly authorized
mortgage bonds;
   (5)   Partly from each of any two or more of the above enumerated sources of
revenue; all subject to the provisions of and limitations prescribed by this
charter and the general laws of the state.
Acquisition of certain public improvements by purchase or construction.
210.   Section 2. The city may acquire, extend, or alter, as the case may be,
by purchase, lease, condemnation or construction, the following general public
improvements, including all necessary lands therefor, to wit: Public building
necessary or convenient for the administration of the city; water works,
lighting plants, pumping stations, water mains with hydrants and other
necessary equipment; plants for the purification of water; a system of trunk
sewers; plants for the disposal of sewage; plants for the disposal of garbage;
parks; fire engine stations and the necessary equipment therefor, including all
necessary fire fighting apparatus; recreation and playgrounds; public toilets
and comfort stations; boulevards, cemeteries, hospitals, almshouses, markets,
city prisons, police stations; public libraries; public scales; bridges; public
wharves and landings upon navigable waters and levees; permanent structures
required to accomplish the separation of street grades at railroad crossings,
including the necessary approaches thereto; works which involve the public
health or safety; and other general improvements of any nature needed for
public city purposes.
Public improvements within or without city limits.
211.   Section 3. Subject to the provisions of this charter, the city may
acquire, own, establish, operate and maintain public utilities for supplying
water, heat, light, power and transportation to the city, and to the
inhabitants thereof; and may also acquire, own, improve, maintain, construct,
and operate parks, public recreational and playgrounds, boulevards, cemeteries,
hospitals, almshouses and plants necessary for the disposal of sewage and
garbage, and all other works which involve the public health and safety, and
also any land necessary for any such improvement, or for use in connection with
any other proper public purposes either within or without its corporate limits;
provided, however, that the city shall not acquire any facilities for
transportation until the city have a population of twenty-five thousand
(25,000) or more and such transportation facilities shall not extend more than
ten (10) miles from the limits of the city.
Constitutional vote on acquisition of public utilities.
212.   Section 4. The city shall have no power to acquire any public utility
unless the proposition to acquire such public utility shall have first received
an affirmative vote of two-thirds of the qualified electors of the city voting
thereon at any regular, special or municipal election; provided, however, that
only those works, improvements and utilities designed or used for the supplying
of water, heat, light and power and transportation to the municipality and the
inhabitants thereof shall be deemed public utilities falling within the
restrictions of this section.
State constitution reference:
   Mandates relative to public utilities, see Michigan Const. 1963, Art. VII,
§§ 24, 25
Statutory reference:
   Mandate relative to utilities, see M.C.L.A. §§ 117.4c, 117.4f
Power to purchase water, light, heat and power.
213.   Section 5. The city shall have power to purchase from adjacent or
neighboring municipalities, or from private corporations or individuals water,
light, heat and power.
General improvements, alterations, repairs, etc.
214.   Section 6. All public improvements hereinabove provided for, either by
specific mention or by implication, shall be considered general public
improvements. The cost and expense of acquiring the foregoing permanent public
improvements shall be paid by the city; provided, however, that nothing in this
section contained shall be construed as preventing the city from requiring the
owners of land benefited by the extension of water mains paying their pro rata
share of the costs of such extensions before connecting with such mains; and
provided further that if the majority of the property owners along a street or
a part thereof, owning a major portion of the frontage affected thereon, shall
so petition the council in writing, the whole or part of the cost and expenses
of installing a boulevard lighting system on such street may be made by;
special assessment upon the lands abutting thereon as in this chapter provided.
SUBDIVISION 2. SPECIAL ASSESSMENT IMPROVEMENTS
Statutory reference:
   Powers re special assessments, see M.C.L.A. §§ 117.4a, 117.4b, 117.4d, 117.5
Generally.
215.   Section 7. The council shall have power to provide for the payment of
all or any part of the cost of construction, reconstruction, repair, operation
or maintenance of any structure or work in the nature of public improvement, by
levying and collecting special assessments upon property specially benefited.
Such special assessments may be payable in yearly installments for a period not
exceeding five (5) years.
Petition.
216.   Section 8. When the owners of sixty (60) per centum of the frontage of
lands, liable to be assessed in any special assessment district, or part of the
city which may be constituted a special assessment district, shall petition the
council for any public improvement, the council shall order such improvement to
be made; provided, however, that the petitioning parties shall have paid in
full all taxes, both general and special, assessed against the property owned
by them. In other cases public improvements shall be made in the discretion of
the council.
Editor’s note:
   The above paragraph appears as amended by an amendment approved by the
electorate on 4-6-1936 by a vote of 4,316 to 2,412.
Resolution by council.
217.   Section 9. When the council shall determine to make an public
improvement or repairs and defray the whole or part of the cost and expenses
thereof, by special assessment, they shall so declare by resolution, stating
the nature of the improvement and what part or proportion of the expenses
thereof shall be paid by special assessment, and what part if any, shall be
paid from the general funds of the city, and shall designate the district or
lands and premises upon which the special assessment shall be levied.
Estimates and plans; notice.
218.   Section 10. Before ordering any public improvements or repairs, any part
of the expenses of which is to be defrayed by special assessment, the council
shall cause estimates of the expenses thereof to be made, and also plats and
diagrams of the work and of the locality to be improved and deposited the same
with the clerk for public examination; and he shall give notice thereof and of
the proposed improvements and of the district to be assessed, and of the time
and place when the council will meet and consider any objections thereto, by
publication once in each week for two (2) successive weeks in one of the
newspapers of the city.
Council to order assessment.
219.   Section 11. When any special assessment is to be made pro rata upon the
lots and premises in any special assessment district, according to frontage or
benefits, the council shall, by resolution, direct the same to be made by the
city assessor and shall state therein the amount to be assessed and whether
according to frontage or benefit; and describe or designate an assessment
district comprising the lands to be assessed.
Assessment roll.
220.   Section 12. Upon receiving such order and directions, the city assessor
shall make out an assessment roll, entering and describing therein the lots,
premises and parcels of land to be assessed, with the names of the persons, if
known, chargeable with the assessments thereon; and shall levy thereon and
against such persons the amount to be assessed, in the manner directed by the
council and the provisions of this charter, applicable to the assessment. In
all cases where the ownership of any description is unknown to the assessor, he
shall, in lieu of the name of the owner, insert the name “unknown” and, if by
mistake or otherwise, any person shall be improperly designated as the owner of
any lot, parcel of land or premises, or if the same shall be assessed without
the name of the owner, or in the name of a person other than the owner, such
assessment shall not, for any such cause be vitiated, but shall, in all
respects, be as valid upon and against such lot, parcel of land or premises as
though assessed in the name of the proper owner, and when the assessment roll
shall have been confirmed, be a lien on such lot, parcel of land or premises,
and collected as in other cases.
Assessment according to frontage or benefit.
221.   Section 13. If the assessment is required to be according to frontage,
the assessor shall assess to each lot or parcel of land such relative portion
of the whole amount to be levied as the length of front of such premises
abutting upon the improvement bears to the whole frontage of all the lots to be
assessed, unless on account of the shape or size of any lot, an assessment for
a different number of feet would be more equitable. If the assessment is
directed to be according to benefits, he shall assess upon each lot such
relative portion of the whole sum to be levied as shall be proportionate to the
estimated benefit resulting to such lot from the improvement. When the city
assessor shall have completed the assessment he shall report the same to the
council. Such report shall be signed by the assessor and may be in the form of
a certificate, indorsed on the assessment roll, as follows:
 
STATE OF MICHIGAN      )
CITY OF WYANDOTTE   ) ss.
To the Council of the City of Wyandotte:
   I hereby certify and report that the foregoing is the special assessment roll, and the assessment made by me pursuant to a resolution of the council of said city, adopted (give date)
for the purpose of paying that part of the cost which the council decided should be paid and borne by special assessment for the (here insert the object of the assessment) that in making
such assessment I have, as near as may be, and according to my best judgment, conformed in all things to the directions contained in the resolution of the council hereinbefore referred to,
and the charter of the city relating to such assessments.
                                                                                              
                        City Assessor
Dated                                                   
 
Collection of expenses as special assessment.
222.   Section 14. When any expense shall be incurred by the city upon or in
respect to any separate or single lot, parcel of land or premises which by the
provisions of this charter, the council is authorized to charge and collect as
a special assessment against the same, and not being of that class of special
assessments required to be made pro rata upon several lots or parcels of land
in a special assessment district; an account of the labor or services for which
such expense was incurred, verified by the officer or person performing the
labor or services, or causing the same to be done, with a description of the
lot or premises upon or in respect to which the expense was incurred, and the
name of the owner or person, if known, chargeable therewith, shall be reported
to the council in such manner as it shall prescribe. And the provisions of the
preceding sections of this chapter with reference to special assessments
generally, and the proceedings necessary to be had before making the
improvement shall not apply to assessments to cover the expense incurred, in
respect to that class of improvements contemplated in this section.
Determining amount of expense.
223.   Section 15. The council shall determine what amount or part of every
such expense shall be charged, and the person, if known, against whom, and the
premises upon which the same shall be levied as a special assessment; and as
often as the council shall deem it expedient it shall require all of the
several amounts so reported and determined, and the several lots or premises,
and the persons chargeable therewith, respectively, to be reported by the city
clerk to the city assessor for assessment.
Special assessment roll.
224.   Section 16. Upon receiving the report mentioned in the preceding
section, the city assessor shall make a special assessment roll, and levy as a
special assessment therein, upon each lot or parcel of land, so reported to him
and against the persons chargeable therewith, if known, the whole amount or
amounts of all the charges so directed as aforesaid, to be levied upon each of
such lots or premises respectively, and when completed he shall report the
assessment to the council.
Publishing of notice.
225.   Section 17. When any special assessment shall be reported by the city
assessor to the council as in this chapter directed, the same shall be filed in
the office of the city clerk, and numbered consecutively. Before adopting such
assessment the council shall cause notice to be published once each week for
two (2) successive weeks in some newspaper of the city, of the filing of the
same with the city clerk and appointing a time when the council and the city
assessor will meet to review said assessment. Any person objecting to the
assessment may file his objections thereto in writing with the city clerk. The
notice provided for in this section may be in the following form:
 
NOTICE OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENT
Notice is hereby given that the roll of the special assessment heretofore made by the city assessor for the purpose of defraying that part of the cost which the council decided
should be paid and borne by special assessment for the (insert the object of the assessment and the locality of the proposed improvement in general terms) is now on file in my office
for public inspection. Notice is also given that the council and city assessor of the City of Wyandotte will meet at the council room in said city on (insert the date fixed upon) to
review said assessment, at which time and place opportunity will be given all persons interested to be heard.
                                                                                           
                     City Clerk
Dated                                                             
 
Objections to assessment; confirmation of assessment.
226.   Section 18. At the time and place appointed for the purpose, as
aforesaid, the council and city assessor shall meet and there, or at some
adjourned meeting, review the assessment and shall hear any objections to any
assessment, which may be made by any person deeming himself aggrieved thereby,
and the council may correct said roll as to any assessment, or description of
premises, appearing therein, and may confirm it as reported, or as corrected;
or they may refer the assessment back to the assessor, or annul it and direct a
new assessment, in which case the same proceedings shall be held as in respect
to the previous assessment. When a special assessment shall be confirmed, the
city clerk shall make an indorsement upon the roll showing the date of
confirmation. When any special assessment shall be confirmed by the council, it
shall be final and conclusive.
Assessment lien.
227.   Section 19. All special assessments, from the date of confirmation
thereof, shall constitute a lien upon the respective lots or. parcels of land
assessed, and shall be charged against the person to whom assessed, until paid.
When due; installments, when payable.
228.   Section 20. Upon the confirmation of any special assessment, the amount
thereof may be divided into not more than five (5) installments, one of which
shall be collected each year, at such times as the council shall determine,
with annual interest at a rate not exceeding six (6) per cent per annum, but
the whole assessment after confirmation may be paid to the city treasurer at
any time in full, with the accrued interest thereon, provided that no interest
shall be charged until thirty (30) days after confirmation. All special
assessments, except such installments thereof as the council shall make payable
at a future time, as provided in this section, shall be due and payable upon
confirmation.
Insufficient or excess assessments.
229.   Section 21. Should any special assessment prove insufficient to pay for
the improvement or work for which it was levied and the expenses incident
thereto, the council may, within the limitations prescribed for such
assessments, make an additional pro rata assessment to supply the deficiency,
and in case a larger amount should have been collected than was necessary, the
excess shall be refunded ratably to those by whom it was paid.
Invalid assessments.
230.   Section 22. Whenever any special assessment shall, in the opinion of the
council be invalid by reason of irregularity or informality in the proceedings,
or if any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge such assessment to be
illegal, the council shall, whether the improvement has been made or not, or
whether any part of the assessments have been made or not, have power to cause
a new assessment to be made for the same purpose for which the former
assessment was made. All proceedings on such reassessment and for the
collection thereof shall be conducted in the same manner as provided for the
original assessment, and whenever any sum or part thereof, levied upon any
premises in the assessment so set aside has been paid and not refunded, the
payment so made shall be applied upon the reassessment on said premises and the
reassessment shall to that extent be deemed satisfied.
Lien not to be destroyed or impaired.
231.   Section 23. No judgment or decree nor any act of the council vacating a
special assessment shall destroy or impair the lien of the city upon the
premises assessed, for such amount of the assessment as may be equitably
charged against the same, or, as by his regular mode of proceeding, might have
been lawfully assessed thereon.
Levying assessments on lots.
232.   Section 24. Whenever any special assessment shall be confirmed and be
payable, the council may direct the city clerk to report to the city assessor a
description of such lots and premises as are contained in said roll, with the
amount of the assessment levied upon each, and the name of the owner or
occupant against whom the assessment was made, and direct the city assessor to
levy the several sums so assessed as a tax upon the several lots and premises
to which they were assessed respectively. Upon receiving such report the city
assessor shall levy the sums therein mentioned upon the respective lots and
premises to which they are specially assessed, and against the persons
chargeable therewith, as a tax in the city tax roll next thereafter to be made,
in a column for special assessment and thereupon the amounts so levied in said
tax roll shall be collected and enforced with the other taxes, in the tax roll,
and in the same manner; and shall continue to be a Hen upon the premises
assessed, until paid, and when collected shall be paid into the city treasury.
Collection by city treasurer.
233.   Section 25. When any special assessment shall be confirmed, and be
payable as hereinbefore provided, the council, instead of requiring the
assessments to be reported to the city assessor, as provided in the preceding
section, may direct the assessment so made in the special assessment roll to be
collected directly therefrom; and thereupon the city clerk shall attach his
warrant to a certified copy of said special assessment roll, therein commanding
the city treasurer to collect from each of the persons assessed in said roll
and the amount of money assessed to and set opposite his name therein and in
case any person named in said roll shall neglect or refuse to pay his
assessment upon demand, then to levy and collect the same by distress and sale
of the goods and chattels of such person and return said roll and warrant,
together with his doings thereon, within sixty (60) days from the date of such
warrant.
Collection of assessment.
234.   Section 26. Upon receiving said assessment roll and warrant, the city
treasurer shall proceed to collect the amounts assessed therein. If any person
shall neglect or refuse to pay his assessment upon demand, the treasurer shall
seize and levy upon any personal property found within the city, or elsewhere
within the county, belonging to such person, and sell the same at public
auction, first giving six (6) days notice of the time and place of such sale,
by posting such notices in three (3) of the most public places in the city or
township where such property may be found. The proceeds of such sale, or so
much thereof as may be necessary for that purpose, shall be applied to the
payment of the assessment and a percentage of five (5) per centum upon the
amount of the assessment for the costs and expenses of said seizure and sale,
and the surplus, if any, shall be paid to the person entitled thereto.
Treasurer’s return.
235.   Section 27. The treasurer shall make a return of said assessment roll
and warrant to the city clerk according to the requirement of the warrant and
if any of the assessments in said roll shall be returned unpaid, the treasurer
shall attach to his return a statement, verified by affidavit, containing a
list of the persons delinquent, and a description of the lots and premises upon
which the assessments remain unpaid and the amount unpaid on each.
Renewal of warrant.
236.   Section 28. Said warrant may be renewed from time to time by the city
clerk, if the council shall so direct, and for such time as they shall
determine and during the time of such renewal the warrant shall have the same
force, and the city treasurer shall perform the same duties and make the like
returns, as provided. In case any assessment shall be finally returned by the
city treasurer unpaid, as aforesaid, the same may be certified to the city
assessor in the manner provided in section 24 of this chapter, and shall then
be reassessed with interest included at the rate of ten (10) per cent per annum
from the date of the confirmation of the assessment until the first day of
August next, if the next tax roll be for city taxes payable August first, or
until the first day of December if the next tax roll be for general taxes
payable December first, and be collected and paid in all respects as provided
in section 24 aforesaid.
CHAPTER XV. BONDS
Statutory reference:
   Bonding power of municipalities generally, see M.C.L.A. § 117.5
   Limitation of net bonded indebtedness incurred for all public purposes, see
M.C.L.A. § 117.4a(l)
General obligation bonds.
237.   Section 1. The city may borrow money within the limits of legal
indebtedness of the city and issue its general obligation bonds therefor for
the purpose of paying a part or all of the cost of any general public
improvement authorized by chapter XIV of this charter or by law; and also for
the purpose of paying part or all of that portion of a special assessment
improvement, not exceeding forty (40) per cent of the entire cost of such
improvement, which the council shall have determined that the city shall pay;
and also for the portion of a special assessment to be paid by taxes levied
upon a special assessment improvement district in anticipation of the
collection of such special assessment taxes; and shall pledge the full faith
and credit of the city for the full and punctual payment of such general
obligation bonds; provided that no general obligation bonds, except special
assessment bonds, bond for the city portion of local improvements not to exceed
forty (40) per cent of the cost of such improvement, refunding bonds and bonds
for relief from fire, flood or calamity or for payment of judgments, shall be
issued unless approved by three-fifths of the electors voting thereon at a
general or special election. At no time shall the bonded indebtedness of the
city exceed eight (8) per centum of the assessed valuation of all real and
personal property in the city; provided, that school bonds, bonds issued to
defray costs of improvements to be paid by special assessments and bonds issued
to defray the cost of purchasing or installing, improving or extending public
utilities which are issued in accordance with section 18 of this chapter shall
not be included in the aforesaid limitation.
Statutory reference:
   City authority to borrow money on credit of city and issue bonds therefor,
see M.C.L.A. § 117.4a(l)
Special assessment bonds.
238.   Section 2. The council shall have authority to raise money by loan, in
anticipation of the receipts from special assessments, for the purpose of
defraying the costs of the improvement for which the assessment was levied.
Bonds or notes may be issued for such loans which shall not exceed the amount
of the assessment for the completion of the whole work, nor shall such loan be
made until after the special assessment roll shall have been confirmed. The
council shall pledge the faith and credit of the city for the payment of such
loan.
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to borrow and issue bonds thereof in anticipation of the
payment of special assessments, see M.C.L.A. § 117.4(a)(2)
Refunding bonds.
239.   Section 3. The council, when it deems it necessary to extend the time of
payment of bonds falling due, may issue new bonds in the place of the former
bonds, in such manner as merely to change, but not increase the indebtedness of
the city.
Statutory reference:
   Refunding bonds, see M.C.L.A. § 141.20
Bonds in case of fire, flood, etc.
240.   Section 4. In case of fire, floods, and other calamity, the council may
borrow, for the relief of the inhabitants of the city and for the preservation
of municipal property, a sum not exceeding one-quarter of one per centum of the
assessed value of all real and personal property in the city, due in not more
than three (3) years. For any such loan lawfully made, the bonds of the city
may be issued, payable in equal annual installments.
Resolution for general obligation bonds.
241.   Section 5. Whenever the council shall deem it advisable to borrow money
and issue the general obligation bonds of the city therefor, for any purpose
authorized by this charter or by law, it shall so declare by resolution, and in
said resolution shall set forth a general description and the full cost of the
improvement for which bonds are to be issued and the definite amount of money
to be borrowed and to be evidenced by bonds, which amount in the case of
special assessment bonds shall correspond with the amounts still unpaid upon
each installment of such special assessment at the time of the issuance of said
bonds. If the bonds are such as to require the authorization of the electors,
said resolution shall fix the date of the election at which the proposition
shall be submitted to the electors, prescribe the form in which the question
shall appear upon the ballot, and call the election.
Elections-Generally.
242.   Section 6. Except as in this chapter otherwise provided, bond elections
shall be called, held and conducted in the manner provided in chapter III of
this charter relating to elections.
Same-Determination of results.
243.   Section 7. The determination by the council of the result of any bond
election shall, except for fraud, be final and conclusive for all purposes,
unless court proceedings to contest the validity of proceedings taken in the
matter of the authorization of such bonds prior to and including such
declaration, be instituted within thirty (30) days after the day of such
declaration.
Condition, terms to be determined by council.
244.   Section 8. When any bonds are authorized to be issued by the qualified
electors of the city, the council, by resolution shall provide for their
issuance. In such resolution it shall determine the date of issuance of such
bonds, but such date shall not be prior to the date of the election at which
they were authorized, the date or dates of their maturity, which shall not
exceed thirty (30) years from their date of issuance; their denominations;
their place of payment, which may be anywhere in the United States; their rate
of interest, which shall not exceed five (5) per centum per annum in amount and
which interest shall be paid semiannually, and their form. Every bond issued by
the city shall contain on its face a statement specifying the object for which
it is issued, and the fund or funds from which such bond and interest thereon
are payable. Bonds issued hereunder shall be coupon bonds. The city may, at its
discretion, reserve the right to pay the bonds before maturity upon any
interest paying date, and if such reserved right be exercised, shall give
notice of redemption by mailing such notice to the last known holder and also
by publication in a newspaper, published in said city, once a week for three
(3) successive weeks prior to the date fixed for redemption, and if the bond be
not then presented, it shall cease to bear interest from and after the date so
fixed for redemption.
Execution of bonds and coupons.
245.   Section 9. Such bonds shall be signed by the mayor; countersigned by the
city clerk and sealed with the seal of the city. Interest coupons attached to
such bonds shall hear the original or printed or lithographed signature of the
city clerk.
Taxes and sinking fund for general obligation bonds.
246.   Section 10. In the resolution authorizing the issuance of general
obligation bonds, the council shall make full provision for the levy of an
annual tax upon all the taxable property of the city sufficient to pay the
semiannual interest on such bonds as the same becomes due and a like tax
sufficient to pay the principal of such bonds as it becomes due.
   Such taxes shall be assessed and collected in the same manner as other city
taxes; provided that in the case of serial bonds which fall due annually, the
provisions of this section shall not apply. The proceeds of such taxes shall be
deposited by the city treasurer in a fund separate from all other moneys, which
fund shall be designated by name in such manner as to identify it with the
bonds, to pay the interest and principal of which such taxes were levied. The
moneys in such sinking fund shall be used only for the purpose of paying the
interest and principal of the particular issue of bonds, to pay which such
taxes were levied.
Sinking fund for special assessment bonds.
247.   Section 11. The treasurer shall collect the several installments of any
special assessment, together with interest thereon, and shall pay the proceeds
thereof into a fund separate from all other funds and designated as “Special
Assessment Sinking Fund No. “ (number to correspond with number of special
assessment roll). The moneys in said sinking fund shall be used only for the
purpose of paying the principal and interest of such special assessment bonds.
Time limit for issuance.
248.   Section 12. All bonds must be issued and delivered to the purchasers
thereof, within three (3) years after the day of the election at which such
bonds were authorized, or in case of bonds not requiring authorization by the
electors, within three (3) years after the date on which the council determined
to issue the same.
Sale at face value required.
249.   Section 13. No bonds issued under the provisions of this charter shall
be sold at a price amounting to less than their face value with accrued
interest thereon to the date of their delivery to the purchaser thereof. The
council shall have no power to make purchasers of any such bonds allowances for
legal expenses, for printing the bonds or for any other purpose whatsoever,
when the total of any such allowances would result in the city obtaining for
such bonds less than the face value thereof, together with accrued interest to
date of delivery.
Handling of proceeds of bond sale.
250.   Section 14. The proceeds resulting from the sale of any issue of bonds,
including any premium received therefor, shall be deposited in a fund, separate
from all other funds and such proceeds shall be used only for the purpose for
which said bonds were issued. If, after the payment in full of the cost of the
improvement for which such bonds were issued, there remain any moneys in such
special fund, then the treasurer shall immediately so report to the council and
it shall order the treasurer to transfer all such moneys to the sinking fund
established for the payment of the principal and interest of said bonds.
Power of council to borrow in anticipation of revenues to pay installments.
251.   Section 15. Should the first semiannual installment of interest become
due before the necessary tax to pay the same has been collected, the council
shall have the power to borrow from the contingent fund and also, if need be,
from the proper general fund, sufficient moneys to pay such first semiannual
installment of interest due on bonds; provided, however, that all moneys so
borrowed shall be returned to the fund or funds from which borrowed, out of the
first proceeds of such interest tax when collected.
Sinking fund investments.
252.   Section 16. The city treasurer shall deposit the moneys belonging to any
sinking fund in banks in the same manner in which he deposits other city
moneys. The council shall from time to time invest the moneys in any such
sinking fund in general obligation and special assessment bonds of the city, or
in general obligation bonds of any township, school district, village, city or
county of the State of Michigan; or in bonds of the State of Michigan or of the
United States; provided, that no bonds shall be purchased for any such sinking
fund which do not mature prior to the date of maturity of bonds to pay which
such sinking fund was constituted. All bonds purchased by moneys from any
sinking funds shall be placed in such depository as the council shall by
resolution determine. No bonds shall be withdrawn from such depository except
upon the production of a certified copy of a resolution of the council
directing such withdrawal in which resolution the names and numbers of the
bonds to be withdrawn shall be specified. The mayor and the city clerk shall
accompany the treasurer whenever such bonds are withdrawn from the depository
or coupons clipped from such bonds.
Balances in sinkin g funds.
253.   Section 17. If, after the payment in full of the principal and interest
of any issue of bonds, a balance should remain in the sinking fund established
to pay such bonds, the treasurer shall so report to the council. Such balance
shall remain in such sinking fund and may be invested in the manner herein
provided for the investment of moneys in sinking funds.
Public utility mortgage bonds-Generally.
254.   Section 18. When the city, in accordance with the provisions of this
charter, has been authorized to acquire and operate any public utility, it may
issue mortgage bonds beyond the legal indebtedness limit of eight (8) per
centum as provided in this charter, to help pay the cost of acquiring such
public utility; provided, that such mortgage bonds, issued beyond said legal
indebtedness limit, shall not impose any liability, either as to the interest
or principal, upon the city; but shall be secured only by the property and
revenues of such public utility, including a franchise stating the terms upon
which, in case of foreclosure, the purchaser may operate the same which
franchise shall in no case extend for a longer period than twenty (20) years
from the date of the sale of such utility and franchise on foreclosure.
Same-Vote of qualified electors.
255.   Section 19. Prior to the issuance of any public utility mortgage bonds,
the council shall submit to the qualified electors of the city, the proposition
of the granting of the franchise mentioned in the preceding section. Such bonds
shall not be issued or such franchise granted unless approved by the
affirmative vote of three-fifths of the qualified electors voting thereon at
the election at which such propositions are submitted. In the resolution
authorizing the issuance of such bonds, the council shall create a sinking fund
into which shall be paid such percentage of the gross or net earnings of the
public utility as may be deemed necessary and sufficient for the payment of the
mortgage bonds at maturity.
Bonds to satisfy judgment or decree.
256.   Section 20. Whenever any judgment or decree of any court shall be
rendered or decreed against the city and the city shall be unable to meet the
payment of such judgment or decree by reason of the limitation of its powers of
taxation, then and in such case it shall be lawful for the council to issue the
bonds of the city to an amount not exceeding the sum of such judgment or
decree, and the taxed costs arising in the procuring of such judgment or
decree, together with the interest thereon, which bonds may be made payable at
such time and place and at such rate of interest, not exceeding five (5) per
centum per annum, as shall be prescribed by the council, and such bonds shall
be sold and disposed of at not less than par value, in such manner as may be
deemed advisable by the council.
CHAPTER XVI. STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PARTITION FENCES
Power of council.
257.   Section 1. The council shall have supervision and control of all public
highways, bridges, streets, avenues, alleys, sidewalks and public grounds
within the city and may improve the same by grading, graveling, curbing,
paving, repaying, constructing sidewalks or otherwise and shall have authority
to lay out, open, widen, extend, straighten, alter, close, vacate, abolish or
change the name of any highway, street or alley in the city whenever it shall
deem the same a public improvement.
Expense of improvement.
258.   Section 2. The expense of grading, graveling, curbing, paving, or
otherwise improving any street, lane or alley in the city and the expense of
laying out, opening, widening, extending or straightening any highway, street
or alley in the city, may be paid by special assessment upon the property
adjacent to or benefited by such improvement in the manner in this charter
provided for levying and collecting special assessments; or in the discretion
of the council, a portion of such costs and expenses may be paid by special
assessments as aforesaid and the balance by the city, subject to the
limitations in this charter contained.
Vacation of streets.
259.   Section 3. When the council shall deem it advisable to vacate,
discontinue or abolish any street, alley or public ground, or any part thereof,
it shall, by resolution, so declare and in the same resolution shall appoint a
time, not less than four (4) weeks hereafter, when they shall meet and hear
objections thereto. Notice of such meeting, with a copy of said resolution,
shall be published twice, not less than one week before, the time appointed for
such meeting, in a newspaper published and circulating in the city.
Street grades.
260.   Section 4. The council shall have authority to determine and establish
the grades of all streets, avenues, alleys and sidewalks within the city, and
to require improvements and buildings adjacent to or abutting upon such
streets, alleys, or sidewalks to be made and constructed in conformity with
such grade and upon such line as shall be prescribed by the council; and the
council may change or alter the grade of any street, alley or sidewalk or any
part thereof, whenever in its opinion the public convenience will be promoted
thereby. Whenever a grade be established or altered, a record and diagram
thereof shall be made in the book of street records in the office of the
department of engineering and building.
Special assessment prohibited for expenses incurred in changing street grade.
261.   Section 5. Whenever any street, alley or sidewalk shall have been graded
or pavement shall have been constructed in conformity to grades established by
authority of the city, and the expense thereof shall have been assessed upon
lots or lands bounded by or abutting upon such street, alley or sidewalk, the
owner or owners of such lots or lands shall not be subject to any special
assessment occasioned by any subsequent change of grade in such pavement, alley
or sidewalk, unless such change be asked for by a majority of the owners of
such lots or lands; but the expense of all improvements occasioned by such
change of grade shall be chargeable and paid by the city.
Compensation of abutting property owners for changes in street grades.
262.   Section 6. Whenever the grade of any street or sidewalk shall have been
heretofore, or shall hereafter be established and improvements shall thereafter
be made by the owner or occupant of the adjacent property in conformity to such
grade, such grade shall not be changed without compensation to the owner for
all damages to such property resulting therefrom to be ascertained in the
manner in this charter provided for the condemnation of private property for
public use.
Sidewalks.
263.   Section 7. Sidewalks, except crosswalks, shall be built, rebuilt,
maintained and repaired by the owners of lands within the city in the manner
and within the time prescribed by ordinance; provided that, in case of the
failure of any such owner to comply with the provisions of such ordinance, the
city may build or cause to be built, such sidewalk and assess against such
owner the cost thereof, together with an additional ten (10) per centum of such
cost as a penalty for the violation of such ordinance.
Partition fences.
264.   Section 8. The council is authorized to enact all such ordinances and
by-laws as it may deem proper relative to the building, rebuilding, maintaining
and repairing of partition fences by the owners and occupants of adjoining
lots, inclosures and parcels of land in said city; and relative to the
assigning to the owners or occupants of such adjoining pieces of land the
portion of such partition fences to be maintained by them respectively; and may
provide for the recording of such assignments and divisions when made, and may
provide for the recovery of damages from any owner or occupant who shall fail
to comply with the provisions and requirements of any ordinance relative to
such partition fences. And the council may appoint fence viewers, and prescribe
their duties and mode of proceeding in all cases relative to partition fences
in said city.
CHAPTER XVII. APPROPRIATION OF PRIVATE PROPERTY
Authorized.
265.   Section 1. Private property may be appropriated by the city, for any
public use or purpose within the scope of its powers, in the manner provided
for by the general laws of the state.
Special assessments to pay awards.
266.   Section 2. In all cases where awards for damages have been made in
condemnation proceedings, if the council believe that a portion of the city in
the vicinity of the proposed improvement, will be benefited by such
improvement, it may, by an entry in its minutes, determine that the whole or
any just proportion of the compensation awarded by the jury shall be assessed
upon the owners or occupants of real estate deemed to be thus benefited, and
thereupon it shall, by resolution, fix and determine the district or portion of
the city benefited, and specify the amount to be assessed upon the owners or
occupants of the taxable real estate therein. The amount of the benefit thus
ascertained shall be assessed upon the owners or occupants of such taxable real
estate in proportion as nearly as may be, to the advantage which each such lot,
parcel or subdivision is deemed to acquire by the improvement. The assessment
shall be made and the amount levied and collected in the same manner and by the
same officers and proceedings as near as may be, provided in and by this
charter, for assessing, levying and collecting the expense of a public
improvement. The assessment roll containing said assessment when ratified and
confirmed by the council shall be final and conclusive and prima facie evidence
of the regularity and legality of all proceedings prior thereto, and the
assessment therein contained shall be and continue a lien on the premises on
which the same is made until payment thereof. Whatever amount or portion of
such award compensation shall not be raised in the manner herein provided,
shall be assessed, levied and collected upon the taxable real estate of the
city, the same as other general taxes are assessed and collected therein. At
any sale which takes place of the assessed premises, or any portion thereof,
delinquent for nonpayment of the amount assessed and levied thereon, the city
may become a purchaser.
CHAPTER XVIII. MISCELLANEOUS
Contracts for public work.
267.   Section 1. Any public work or improvement costing more than $0.1% of the
City’s annual general operating fund appropriation (which will be determined by
the Council at the start of each fiscal year) shall be executed by contract,
except where a specific work or improvement is authorized by the council, based
on detailed estimates submitted by the department authorized to execute such
work or improvement. Contracts shall be awarded to a responsible bidder after
notice as the council shall direct that sealed proposals for performance of the
work are required. The city shall have the right to reject any and all bids and
to advertise again, and all advertisements shall contain a reservation of this
right.
(Res. passed 1-7-1991, § 1)
Editor’s note:
   The above section appears as amended by two propositions approved by the
voters on 11-8-2016.
Plans and drawings of public improvements to be submitted.
268.   Section 2. No public improvement costing more than 0.1% of the City’s
annual general operating fund appropriation (which will be determined by the
Council at the start of each fiscal year) shall be contracted for or commenced
until drawings, profiles and estimates for the same shall have been submitted
to the council, or the proper administrative department, and approved by it.
Such drawings, profiles and estimates, or copies thereof, shall thereafter
remain on file in the office of the city clerk for public inspection.
(Res. passed 1-7-1991, § 1)
Editor’s note:
   The above section appears as amended by a proposition approved by the voters
on 11-8-2016 by a vote of 6,714 to 2,862.
Employee pensions.
269.   Section 3. The council may by ordinance, provide for pensioning persons
injured by violence, accident or exposure while employed by the city in the
fire or police departments, when such injuries arise out of or in the course of
such employment; also for the dependents of the person killed while so
employed, subject to such rules and regulations as the council may prescribe.
Workmen’s compensation.
269-A.   Section 3-A.   The council shall, by ordinance, establish and maintain
a system of compensation for the employees of the city coming under the
provisions of the Workmen’s Compensation Laws of the State of Michigan and
their dependents, in the case of the disability, injury or death of such
employee, which system of compensation shall include the maintenance of a fund
to defray the expenses thereof; out of which no monies shall be expended or
disbursed except for the administration of such system of compensation. The
minimum standards for such system of compensation shall comply with the
standards set by the Workmen’s Compensation Act of the State of Michigan. Such
ordinance, whether existing at the time of the adopting of this section or
thereafter enacted, may be amended or revised from time to time, or a new
ordinance may be substituted therefor, as the best interests of the city and
the requirements of such system of compensation demand, but no such amendment,
revision or substitution shall destroy the existence of such plan of
compensation or alter it or the fund established so that it will not meet the
minimum requirements which are established herein. In case that the annual
earnings of the accumulated funds shall equal the average cost of operation of
the prior three (3) years’ experience, then the workmen’s compensation board of
the city shall be empowered to cancel the annual contribution requirements to
the said fund during that period and in case the earnings of the accumulated
funds shall equal sixty-five (65) per cent of the average cost of operation of
the prior three (3) years’ experience, the workmen’s compensation board of the
city may reduce the annual requirement to the said fund during that period by
an amount equal to the earnings of said fund.
Editor’s note:
   The above paragraph was added by an amendment approved by the electorate on
4-6-1942 by a vote of 2,757 to 794.
Statutory reference:
   Charter may provide for workmen’s compensation, see M.C.L.A. § 117.4i(8)
Definitions.
270.   Section 4. Where the following specified words are used herein they
shall be construed to mean as follows:
   “State” shall mean the “State of Michigan.”
   “City” shall mean the “City of Wyandotte.”
   “Clerk” shall mean the “city clerk,” unless from the context the contrary
shall plainly appear.
   Words of the singular number only, may extend to and embrace the plural
number and words of the plural number may be applied and limited to the
singular number. Words imparting the masculine gender only, may extend to and
be applied to the feminine gender.
   Words purporting to give joint authority to two (2) or more public officers
or other persons either as a board or otherwise shall be construed as giving
such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons unless it shall
be otherwise expressly declared.
   The word “person” may extend and be applied to bodies, politic and corporate
as well as individuals.
   The words “written” and “in writing” may be construed to include printing,
engraving, typewriting and lithographing, except that this rule shall not apply
to provisions requiring written signatures, unless it be otherwise expressly
herein provided.
Severability.
271.   Section 5. Should any portion of this charter be declared void, illegal
or unconstitutional, such finding shall not invalidate the remainder of the
charter.
Notice of personal injuries.
272.   Section 6. The city shall not be liable for unliquidated damages for
personal or other injuries, unless the person suffering the injury or
sustaining the damage, or someone in his behalf, shall serve a notice in
writing upon the city, within sixty (60) days after such injury shall have
occurred, which notice shall specify the location and the nature of the defect,
the injury sustained and the names of the witnesses, as to the fact of the
happening of the accident complained of, which are known at that time by said
claimant. The failure to so notify the city within the time and in the manner
specified herein shall exonerate, excuse and exempt the city from any and all
liability on account of any such injury. Service of all process and notice of
claims for unliquidated damages against the city shall be made on the mayor or
clerk.
City not to own stock.
273.   Section 7. The city shall not become the owner or holder of stock or
shares in any incorporated or unincorporated company.
Affidavit of publishing or posting to be prima facie evidence.
274.   Section 8. When, by the provisions of this charter, notice of any matter
or proceeding is required to be published or posted, an affidavit of the
publication or posting of the same, made by the printer of the newspaper in
which the same was inserted, or by some person in his employ knowing the facts
if such notice was required to be made by publication, or by the person posting
the same, when required to be by posting, shall be prima facie evidence of the
facts therein contained, provided, the same shall be filed with the city clerk
within six (6) months from the date of the last publication thereof, or of
posting the same.
Collection of old unpaid special assessments.
275.   Section 9. In cases where a special assessment has been made by
authority of and confirmed by the city commission of the City of Wyandotte, and
the same or some part thereof shall not have been collected when this charter
shall take effect, the city, as hereby reincorporated shall have authority to
enforce the payment thereof, and the same proceedings may be had therefor as
are provided in this charter.
Licenses to remain in force.
276.   Section 10. All licenses granted by the city under its former act of
incorporation shall be and remain in full force and virtue until the expiration
of the time for which they are granted.
277.   Section 11.Reserved.
Editor’s note:
   This section was amended by a resolution dated 9-22-2008. Formerly, it
contained the definition of “freeholder”.
Approval of plats required.
278.   Section 12. No lands or premises shall hereafter be laid out, divided
and platted into lots, streets and alleys, within the city, except by
permission and approval of the council by resolution passed for that purpose;
nor until the proprietor shall file with the city clerk a correct survey, plan
and map of such grounds and the subdivisions thereof platted and subdivided as
approved by the council, and made to their satisfaction; showing also the
relative position and location of such lots, streets and alleys with respect to
the adjacent lots and streets of the city; nor shall any such plat and
dedication of the streets and public grounds thereon be recorded in the office
of the register of deeds of the county in which the city is located until a
certificate has been endorsed thereon by the city clerk, under the seal of the
city, showing that such plat and dedication has been approved by the council;
nor shall the city by reason of such approval, be responsible for the
improvement, care and repairs of such streets and alleys excepting such as the
council shall accept and confirm by ordinance or resolution as in this charter
provided.
Submission and adoption of charter.
279.   Section 13. This charter shall be submitted to the electors of the City
of Wyandotte for their approval or rejection on the second day of March, A.D.
1926. Prior to such submission this charter shall be published once in the
Wyandotte Herald, a newspaper published and circulated in said city, at least
thirty (30) days before the second day of March, A.D. 1926. If adopted, this
charter shall take effect on the fifth day of March, A.D. 1926, provided that
all officers and boards now existing shall continue their official duties and
retain all their official powers until the second Monday of April, 1926, at 12:
00 noon Central Standard time, except as herein, otherwise specified, and in
case of appointive officers until their successors, if any, to whom their
respective duties are committed under this charter shall have been selected and
shall qualify according to this charter, whereupon their respective duties,
powers and compensation shall cease an determine. The term of office of all
appointive officers for whom no successors have been provided for in this
charter or whose duties have not been retained and provided for in this charter
shall terminate and cease upon the third Monday of April, 1926.
Existing officers to comply with charter.
280.   Section 14. It shall be the duty of the mayor, the city commission and
the city clerk in office when this charter takes effect to comply with all the
requirements of this charter relating to nominations and election to the end
that all things may be done necessary to the nomination and election of the
officers first to be elected under this charter according to the provisions
hereof.
Wyandotte, Michigan
November 25, 1925
Resolution by Commissioner Van Alstyne
   RESOLVED: That the Charter Commission of the City of Wyandotte does hereby
adopt the foregoing proposed city charter as presented at this meeting and that
the clerk is hereby instructed to submit the same to the Governor of the State
of Michigan in accordance with the provisions of the Statute, for his approval.
   The above resolution was presented at the meeting of said Charter Commission
held on November 25, 1925, and on motion of Commissioner Van Alstyne, second by
Commissioner Cramer, it was voted to adopt the same, the following being the
vote thereon:
   Yeas: Commissioners Clare F. Allan, Thomas E. Benjamin, Charles H. Block,
John C. Cahalan, Jr., John Clements, Joseph Cramer, Joseph S. Laczynski, John
J. Marx and Fred E. Van Alstyne.
   Nays: None.
   Absent: None.
   EDWARD C. BRYAN,
City Clerk and Clerk of the Charter
Commission of the City of Wyandotte.
Countersigned-
   Charles H. Block, Fred E. Van Alstyne, Joseph Cramer, Clare F. Allan, John
C. Cahalan, Jr., John Clements, Joseph S. Laczynski, Thomas E. Benjamin, John
J. Marx.
   I hereby approve the foregoing provisions of the revised charter of the City
of Wyandotte.
   Dated: November 28, 1925.
ALEX J. GROESBECK,
Governor of the State of Michigan
Wyandotte, Michigan
                                    November 25, 1925.
   I, Edward C. Bryan, Clerk of the City of Wyandotte, County of Wayne, State
of Michigan, and ex officio Clerk of the Charter Commission of said city, do
hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the minutes, and each and
every part thereof spread upon the journal of said Charter Commission at its
meeting held on the 25th day of November, 1925, that I have duly compared the
same with the said original and that it is a true copy of the whole and each
and every part thereof, and I do further certify that the following named
persons are the same .persons mentioned in said minutes and are all the persons
constituting the membership of said Charter Commission.
 
   Clare F. Allan, Thomas E. Benjamin, Charles H. Block, John C. Cahalan, Jr.,
Joseph Cramer, John Clements, Joseph S. Laczynski, John J. Marx and Fred E. Van
Alstyne.
   IN TESTIMONY WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and affixed the official
corporate seal of the City of Wyandotte this 25th day of November, 1925.
   EDWARD C. BRYAN,
   City Clerk
STATE OF MICHIGAN,
COUNTY OF WAYNE,
ss.
                                    Wyandotte, Michigan,
                                    November 28, 1925.
   I, Edward C. Bryan, City Clerk of the City of Wyandotte, do hereby certify
that the foregoing charter was filed in my office on the 28th day of November,
1925, at 12 o’clock M.
EDWARD C. BRYAN,
City Clerk
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
      
11.   MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTIONS
CHAPTER 10: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.001   How code designated and cited
   
10.002   Definitions
   
10.003   Section catchlines and other headings
   
10.004   Certain ordinances not affected by code
   
10.005   Continuation of ordinances
   
10.006   Prior rights, offenses and the like
   
10.007   Ordinances repealed not reenacted
   
10.008   Amendments to code
   
10.009   Supplementation of code
   
10.010   Separability of provisions
   
10.011   Notice
   
10.012   Responsibility of officers with respect to assigned copies of code
 
   
10.999   General penalty
§ 10.001 HOW CODE DESIGNATED AND CITED.
   This code shall constitute and be designated as the “The City of Wyandotte
Code”, for which designation “code of ordinances”, “codified ordinances”, “this
code” or “code” may be substituted.
Statutory reference:
   Authority to codify ordinances, see M.C.L.A. § 117.3(k)
§ 10.002 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Terms used in this code, unless otherwise specifically defined, have
the meanings prescribed by the statutes of the state for the same terms.
   (B)   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      AUTHORIZED CITY OFFICIAL. A police officer, building inspector or other
designated official or employee of the city authorized by this code to issue
municipal civil infraction citations or municipal civil infraction violation
notices.
      CHARTER. The Charter of the City of Wyandotte, approved by the electors
on 3-2-1926, and shall include any amendment to such Charter.
      CITY. The City of Wyandotte, Michigan.
      CODE. The City of Wyandotte Code, as designated in §
10.001 of this chapter.
      COMPUTATION OF TIME. The time within which an act is to be done, as
provided in this code or in any order issued pursuant to this code, when
expressed in days, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including
the last; except that, if the last day is Sunday or a legal holiday, it shall
be excluded; and, when the time is expressed in hours, the whole of Sunday or a
legal holiday, from midnight to midnight, shall be excluded.
      COUNCIL. The City Council of Wyandotte, Michigan.
      COUNTY. The County of Wayne, Michigan.
      JOINT AUTHORITY. All words purporting to give joint authority to three or
more public officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such
authority to a majority of such officers or other persons unless it is
otherwise expressly declared in the ordinance granting the authority.
      JUVENILE. Any person under 17 years of age.
      MINOR. A person under 21 years of age.
      MONTH. A calendar month.
      NUMBER. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be
applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing.
      OATH, AFFIRMATION, SWORN, AFFIRMED. The word “oath” shall be construed to
include the word “affirmation” in all cases where, by law, an affirmation may
be substituted for an oath; and, in like cases, the word “sworn” shall be
construed to include the word “affirmed”.
      OFFICER, DEPARTMENT, BOARD AND THE LIKE. Whenever any officer,
department, board or other public agency is referred to by title only, the
reference shall be construed as if followed by the words “of the City of
Wyandotte, Michigan”. Whenever, by the provisions of this code, any officer of
the city is assigned any duty or empowered to perform any act or duty,
reference to the officer shall mean and include the officer or his or her
deputy or authorized subordinate.
      ORDINANCES. The ordinances of the city and all amendments thereto.
      OWNER. Applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the
entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land.
      PERSON. Any natural individual, firm, trust, partnership, association or
corporation. Whenever the word PERSON is used in any section of this code
prescribing a penalty or fine, as applied to partnerships or associations, the
word includes the partners or members thereof and, as applied to corporations,
the word includes officers, agents or employees thereof who are responsible for
any violations of the section. The singular includes the plural. The masculine
gender includes the feminine and neuter genders.
      PRECEDING, FOLLOWING. When used by way of reference to any title, chapter
or section of any ordinance of the city shall be construed to mean the title,
chapter or section next preceding or next following that in which such
reference is made, unless some other title, chapter or section is expressly
designated in such reference.
      PROPERTY. Real and personal property.
      PUBLIC PLACE. Any place to or upon which the public resorts or travels,
whether such place is owned or controlled by the city or any agency of the
state or is a place to or upon which the public resorts or travels by custom or
by invitation, express or implied. The term PUBLIC PLACE shall include any
street, alley, park, public building, any place of business or assembly open to
or frequented by the public, and any other place which is open to the public
view, or to which the public has access.
      SEAL. In all cases in which the seal of any court or public office shall
be required to be affixed to any paper issuing from such court or office, the
word SEAL shall be construed to mean the impression of such seal on such paper
alone, as well as the impression of such seal affixed thereto by means of a
wafer or wax.
      SHALL, MAY. The word “shall” shall be mandatory. The word “may” shall be
permissive.
      SIDEWALK. The portion of a street, between the curblines or lateral lines
and the right-of-way lines, which is intended for the use of pedestrians.
      SIGNATURE, SUBSCRIPTION. Include a mark when the person cannot write.
      STATE, THE STATE or THIS STATE. The State of Michigan.
      STREET, HIGHWAY AND ALLEY. The entire width, subject to an easement for
public right-of-way or owned in fee by the city, county or state, of every way
or place, of whatever nature, whenever any part thereof is open to the use of
the public, as a matter of right, for purposes of public travel. The word ALLEY
shall mean any such way or place providing a secondary means of ingress and
egress from a property.
      SUNDAYS, LEGAL HOLIDAYS. Whenever any act required to be done pursuant to
the provisions of any ordinance falls on a Sunday or legal holiday, that act
shall be performed on the next succeeding business day.
      WEEK. Seven days.
      WRITTEN, IN WRITING. Any form of reproduction or expression of language.
      YEAR. A calendar year; and, the word “year” alone, shall be equivalent to
the words “year of our Lord”.
(Prior Code, § 1-2)
§ 10.003 SECTION CATCHLINES AND OTHER HEADINGS.
   (A)   The catchlines of the several sections of this code printed in
boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the
sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be the titles of the sections, nor
as any part of the sections, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be
so deemed when any of the sections, including the catchlines, are amended or
reenacted.
   (B)   No provision of this code shall be held invalid by reason of
deficiency in any catchline or in any heading or title to any chapter,
subchapter or division.
§ 10.004 CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT AFFECTED BY CODE.
   Nothing in this code or the ordinance adopting this code shall affect any
ordinance not in conflict with or inconsistent with this code:
   (A)   Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city,
authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city, any evidence of the city’s
indebtedness, any contract or obligations assumed by the city;
   (B)   Containing any administrative provisions of the City Council;
   (C)   Granting any right or franchise;
   (D)   Dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening,
paving, widening, vacating and the like any street or public way in the city;
   (E)   Making any appropriation;
   (F)   Levying or imposing taxes;
   (G)   Establishing or prescribing grades in the city;
   (H)   Providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor;
   (I)   Dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city;
   (J)   Extending or contracting the boundaries of the city;
   (K)   Prescribing the number, classification or compensation of any city
officers or employees;
   (L)   Prescribing specific parking restrictions, no parking zones, specific
speed zones, parking meter zones and specific stop or yield intersections or
other traffic ordinances pertaining to specific streets;
   (M)   Pertaining to rezoning; and
   (N)   Any other ordinance, or part thereof, which is not of a general and
permanent nature; and all ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in
full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this code.
The ordinances are on file in the city offices.
§ 10.005 CONTINUATION OF ORDINANCES.
   The provisions of this code, so far as they are the same in substance as
those of heretofore existing ordinances, shall be construed as a continuation
of these ordinances and not as new enactments.
§ 10.006 PRIOR RIGHTS, OFFENSES AND THE LIKE.
   Any act done, offense committed or right accruing, accrued or acquired, or
liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred prior to the time of
adoption of this code, shall not be affected by the adoption, but may be
enjoyed, asserted, enforced, prosecuted or inflicted as fully and to the same
extent as if the adoption had not been effected.
§ 10.007 ORDINANCES REPEALED NOT REENACTED.
   (A)   No ordinance or part of any ordinance heretofore repealed shall be
considered re-ordained or reenacted by virtue of this code, unless specifically
reenacted.
   (B)   The repeal of any curative or validating ordinances shall not impair
or affect any cure or validation already effected thereby.
§ 10.008 AMENDMENTS TO CODE.
   (A)   Amendments to any of the provisions of this code shall be made by
amending the provisions by specific reference to the section number of this
code in the following language: “That section of the City of Wyandotte Code of
Ordinances, is hereby amended to read as follows:...”. The new provisions shall
then be set out in full as desired.
   (B)   If a new section not heretofore existing in the code is to be added,
the following language shall be used: “That the City of Wyandotte Code of
Ordinances is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered           ,
which section reads as follows:...”. The new section shall then be set out in
full as desired.
§ 10.009 SUPPLEMENTATION OF CODE.
   (A)   By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this code shall be
prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the City Council. A
supplement to the code shall include all substantive permanent and general
parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all
changes made thereby in the code. The pages of a supplement shall be so
numbered that they will fit properly into the code and will, where necessary,
replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete and the new
pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the code will be
current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in
the supplement.
   (B)   In preparing a supplement to this code, all portions of the code which
have been repealed shall be excluded from the code by the omission thereof from
reprinted pages.
   (C)   When preparing a supplement to this code, the codifier (meaning the
person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make
formal, non-substantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included
in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a
unified code. For example, the codifier may:
      (1)   Organize the ordinance material into appropriate divisions;
      (2)   Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections
and other divisions of the code printed in the supplement, and make changes in
catchlines, headings and titles;
      (3)   Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other divisions to be
inserted in the code and, where necessary, to accommodate new material, change
existing section or other division numbers;
      (4)   Change the words “this ordinance” or words of the same meaning to
“this chapter”, “this subchapter”, “this division” and the like, as the case
may be, or to “§§       through       ” (inserting section numbers to indicate
the sections of the code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance
incorporated into the code); and
      (5)   Make other non-substantive changes necessary to preserve the
original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the code, but in no case
shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance
material included in the supplement or already embodied in the code.
§ 10.010 SEPARABILITY OF PROVISIONS.
   Each section, division, sentence, clause and provision of this code is
separable and, if any provision shall be held unconstitutional or invalid for
any reason, the decision shall not affect the remainder of this code, or any
part thereof, other than that part affected by the decision.
§ 10.011 NOTICE.
   (A)   Except where otherwise provided or when a different method of notice
is required by state law, any notice required to be given by any section of
this code shall be served:
      (1)   By delivering the notice to the owner personally or by leaving the
same at his or her residence, office or place of business with some person of
suitable age or discretion;
      (2)   By mailing said notice by first class mail to such owner at his or
her last known address; or
      (3)   If the owner is unknown, by posting said notice in some conspicuous
place on the premises at least three days before the act or action concerning
which the notice is given is required or is to occur.
   (B)   No person shall interfere with, obstruct, mutilate, conceal or tear
down any notice made pursuant to this section without the authority of the City
Manager, the Chief of Police or the city officer responsible for placing said
notice.
§ 10.012 RESPONSIBILITY OF OFFICERS WITH RESPECT TO ASSIGNED COPIES OF CODE.
   (A)   Each city officer assigned a copy of this code shall be responsible
for maintaining the same and for the proper insertion of amendatory pages as
received.
   (B)   Each such copy shall remain the property of the city and shall be
turned over by the officer having custody thereof, upon expiration of his or
her term of office, to his or her successor or to the City Clerk, in case he or
she shall have no successor.
(Prior Code, § 1-10)
§ 10.999 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this code for any
particular provision or section, every person convicted of a violation of any
provision of this code shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500, or by
imprisonment for not more than 93 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
Each act of violation and every day upon which any such violation shall occur
shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   In addition to the penalties provided in division (A) above, the city
may enjoin or abate any violation of this code by appropriate action.
   (C)   Any person who is found responsible for any civil infraction,
municipal civil infraction or city ordinance resulting from the enforcement of
a city ordinance shall be required to pay a fee of $15 in addition to any other
civil fine and court cost imposed. This provision shall not apply to parking
tickets.
   (D)   All such fees collected from those remitting payments under this
section shall be directed to the city’s 27th District Court to be utilized in
the following manner:
      (1)   Five dollars directed for Court operations;
      (2)   Five dollars directed for police equipment and technology; and
      (3)   Five dollars directed for Police and Court Facility Building Fund
and maintenance.
(Prior Code, § 1-6) (Ord. 1218, passed 2-7-2005)
Cross-reference:
   Municipal Civil Infractions, see
Ch. 11
CHAPTER 11: MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTIONS
Section
   
11.001   Definitions
   
11.002   Municipal civil infraction; commencement
   
11.003   Municipal civil infraction citations; issuance and service; contents
   
11.004   Authorized city officials
   
11.005   Municipal civil infractions; second offense; misdemeanor
   
11.006   Fines and costs
   
11.007   Default in payment of fines, costs, damages or expenses; civil
contempt; imprisonment
   
11.008   Violations and the like
§ 11.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT. Public Act 236 of 1961, being M.C.L.A. §§ 600.101 et seq., as amended.
   AUTHORIZED CITY OFFICIAL. A police officer or other personnel of the city
authorized by this code or any ordinance to issue municipal civil infraction
citations or municipal civil infraction violation notices or appearance
tickets.
   BUREAU. The City of Wyandotte Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau, as
established by this chapter.
   MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION ACTION. A civil action in which the defendant is
alleged to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction.
   MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION CITATION. A written complaint or notice prepared
by an authorized city official, directing a person to appear in District Court
regarding the occurrence or existence of a municipal civil infraction violation
by the person cited.
   MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION VIOLATION NOTICE. A written notice prepared by an
authorized city official, directing a person to appear at the city’s Ordinance
Violations Bureau and to pay the fine and costs, if any, prescribed for the
violation by the schedule of civil fines adopted by the city, as authorized
under §§ 8396 and 8707(6) of Public Act 236 of 1961, being M.C.L.A. §§ 600.8396
and 600.8707(6).
(Prior Code, § 23.5-1) (Ord. 1050, passed 8-17-1998)
§ 11.002 MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION; COMMENCEMENT.
   A municipal civil infraction action may be commenced upon the issuance by an
authorized city official of:
   (A)   A municipal civil infraction citation directing the alleged violator
to appear in court; or
   (B)   A municipal civil infraction violation notice directing the alleged
violator to appear at the city’s Ordinance Violations Bureau.
(Prior Code, § 23.5-2) (Ord. 1050, passed 8-17-1998)
§ 11.003 MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION CITATIONS; ISSUANCE AND SERVICE; CONTENTS.
   (A)   Municipal civil infraction citations shall be issued and served by
authorized city officials as follows:
      (1)   The time for appearance specified in a citation shall be within a
reasonable time after the citation is issued;
      (2)   The place for appearance specified in a citation shall be the 27th
District Court;
      (3)   Each citation shall be numbered consecutively and shall be in a
form approved by the state court administrator. The original citation shall be
filed with the District Court. Copies of the citation shall be retained by the
city and issued to the alleged violator as provided by § 8705 of Public Act 236
of 1961, being M.C.L.A. § 600.8705;
      (4)   A citation for a municipal civil infraction signed by an authorized
city official shall be treated as made under oath if the violation alleged in
the citation occurred in the presence of the official signing the complaint and
if the citation contains the following statement immediately above the date and
signature of the official: “I declare under the penalties of perjury that the
statements above are true to the best of my information, knowledge and belief”;
      (5)   An authorized city official who witnesses a person commit a
municipal civil infraction shall prepare and subscribe, as soon as possible and
as completely as possible, an original and required copies of a citation;
      (6)   An authorized city official may issue a citation to a person if:
         (a)   Based upon investigation, the official has reasonable cause to
believe that the person is responsible for a municipal civil infraction; or
         (b)   Based upon investigation of a complaint by someone who allegedly
witnessed the person commit a municipal civil infraction, the official has
reasonable cause to believe that the person is responsible for an infraction
and if the City Attorney approves in writing the issuance of the citation.
      (7)   Municipal civil infraction citations shall be served by an
authorized city official as follows.
         (a)   Except as provided by division (A)(7)(b) below, an authorized
city official shall personally serve a copy of the citation upon the alleged
violator.
         (b)   If the municipal civil infraction action involves the use or
occupancy of land, a building or other structure, a copy of the citation does
not need to be personally served upon the alleged violator, but may be served
upon an owner or occupant of the land, building or structure by posting the
copy on the land or attaching the copy to the building or structure. In
addition, a copy of the citation shall be sent by first class mail to the owner
of the land, building or structure at the owner’s last known address.
(Prior Code, § 23.5-3)
   (B)   (1)   A municipal ordinance citation shall contain the name and
address of the alleged violator, the municipal civil infraction alleged, the
place where the alleged violator shall appear in court, the telephone number of
the court and the time at or by which the appearance shall be made.
      (2)   Further, the citation shall inform the alleged violator that he or
she may do one of the following:
         (a)   Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by mail,
in person or by representation at or by the time specified for appearance;
         (b)   Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction “with
explanation” by mail by the time specified for appearance or in person or by
representation; or
         (c)   Deny responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by doing
either of the following:
            1.   Appearing in person for an informal hearing before a judge or
District Court magistrate, without the opportunity of being represented by an
attorney, unless a formal hearing before a judge is requested by the city; or
            2.   Appearing in court for a formal hearing before a judge, with
the opportunity of being represented by an attorney.
      (3)   The citation shall also inform the alleged violator of all of the
following.
         (a)   If the alleged violator desires to admit responsibility “with
explanation” in person or by representation, the alleged violator must apply to
the court in person, by mail, by telephone or by representation within the time
specified for appearance and obtain a scheduled date and time for an
appearance.
         (b)   If the alleged violator desires to deny responsibility, the
alleged violator must apply to the court in person, by mail, by telephone or by
representation within the time specified for appearance and obtain a scheduled
date and time to appear for a hearing, unless a hearing date is specified on
the citation.
         (c)   A hearing shall be an informal hearing unless a formal hearing
is requested by the alleged violator or the city.
         (d)   At an informal hearing, the alleged violator must appear in
person before a judge or District Court magistrate, without the opportunity of
being represented by an attorney.
         (e)   At a formal hearing, the alleged violator must appear in person
before a judge with the opportunity of being represented by an attorney.
      (4)   The citation shall contain a notice in boldfaced type that the
failure of the alleged violator to appear within the time specified in the
citation or at the time scheduled for a hearing or appearance is a misdemeanor
and will result in entry of a default judgment against the alleged violator on
the municipal civil infraction.
(Prior Code, § 23.5-4)
(Ord. 1050, passed 8-17-1998)
§ 11.004 AUTHORIZED CITY OFFICIALS.
   The following officials of the city are hereby authorized to issue and serve
appearance tickets as authorized under Public Act 147 of 1968, as amended,
being M.C.L.A. § 764.9c, and to issue and serve municipal ordinance violation
notices and municipal civil infraction citations as authorized under Public Act
12 of 1994, as it may from time to time be amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 600.8701
et seq., when said persons are assigned, as part of their employment duties, to
conduct an investigation or to enforce the ordinance in question:
   (A)   Police officers;
   (B)   Ordinance officers;
   (C)   Animal Control Officers;
   (D)   27th District Court officers;
   (E)   Park rangers;
   (F)   Building Inspector;
   (G)   Electrical Inspector;
   (H)   Plumbing Inspector;
   (I)   Mechanical Inspector; and
   (J)   Fire Inspector.
(Prior Code, § 23.5-5) (Ord. 1050, passed 8-17-1998)
§ 11.005 MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTIONS; SECOND OFFENSE; MISDEMEANOR.
   (A)   A first violation of any of the following listed ordinances shall
constitute a municipal civil infraction:
      (1)   Section
150.005 of this chapter, concerning loitering in public places;
      (2)   Section
152.014 of this chapter, concerning unauthorized pagers, beepers or any other
devices by students;
      (3)   Section
152.015 of this code of ordinances, concerning violation of posted notices;
      (4)   Section
152.016 of this coded of ordinances, prohibiting littering;
      (5)   Sections
94.001 through
94.007,
94.020 and
94.021 of this code of ordinances, concerning nuisances;
      (6)   All of
Ch. 51 and §§
94.035 through
94.040 of this code of ordinances, concerning garbage, trash and weeds and
including noxious weeds and tall grass;
      (7)   All of
Ch. 99 of this code of ordinances, concerning alarm systems;
      (8)   Sections
132.001 through
132.025 and
132.040 through
132.045 of this code of ordinances, concerning amusements;
      (9)   All of
Ch. 90 of this code of ordinances, concerning animals and fowl;
      (10)   All of
Ch. 110 of this code of ordinances, concerning auctions and auctioneers;
      (11)   All of
Ch. 170 of this code of ordinances, concerning buildings and building
regulations;
      (12)   All of
Ch. 53 of this code of ordinances, concerning cable television;
      (13)   
Ch. 50 and
172 of this code of ordinances, concerning electricity;
      (14)   Section
170.004 of this code of ordinances, concerning fences;
      (15)   All of
Ch. 91,
92 and
93 of this code of ordinances, concerning fire prevention and protections;
      (16)   All of
Ch. 116 of this code of ordinances, concerning food and drink;
      (17)   Sections
110.055 through
110.060 of this code of ordinances, concerning garage sales, yard sales and the
like;
      (18)   All of
Ch. 176 of this code of ordinances, concerning grading and soil erosion
control;
      (19)   Sections
112.001 through
112.005 of this code of ordinances, concerning handbills;
      (20)   All of
Ch. 171 of this code of ordinances, concerning the Housing Code;
      (21)   Sections
131.001 through
131.011 of this code of ordinances, concerning junk dealers, junkyards and the
like;
      (22)   All of
Ch. 130 of this code of ordinances, concerning licenses, permits and business
regulations;
      (23)   All of
Ch. 111 of this code of ordinances, concerning peddlers, solicitors and the
like;
      (24)   Sections
170.080 through
170.083 of this code of ordinances, concerning plumbing and gas;
      (25)   All of
Ch. 181 of this code of ordinances, concerning rental dwellings;
      (26)   All of
Ch. 174 of this code of ordinances, concerning streets and sidewalks;
      (27)   All of
Ch. 179 of this code of ordinances, concerning swimming pools;
      (28)   All of
Ch. 175 of this code of ordinances, concerning trees and vegetation;
      (29)   All of
Ch. 134 of this code of ordinances, concerning used car dealers;
      (30)   All of
Ch. 52 of this code of ordinances, concerning water and sewers;
      (31)   All of
Ch. 100 of this code of ordinances, concerning weights and measurements;
      (32)   Section
150.004 of this code of ordinances, concerning abandoned iceboxes;
      (33)   Section
150.009 of this code of ordinances, concerning curfew for minors;
      (34)   Section
150.010(A) of this code of ordinances, concerning school attendance;
      (35)   Section
150.018 of this code of ordinances, concerning posting bills;
      (36)   Section
150.019 of this code of ordinances, concerning the violation of rules of
Municipal Service Commission;
      (37)   Section
150.022 of this code of ordinances, concerning swimming, bathing and the like
in the Detroit River;
      (38)   Section
152.009 of this code of ordinances, concerning maliciously injuring or
destroying fruit, shade or ornamental trees;
      (39)   Section
152.010 of this code of ordinances, concerning maliciously injuring or
destroying boundary markers, guideposts and the like;
      (40)   Section
152.014 of this code of ordinances, concerning the use of unauthorized pagers,
beepers and other devices by students;
      (41)   All of
Ch. 95 of this code of ordinances, concerning marine safety, except where
otherwise stated;
      (42)   All of
Ch. 115 of this code of ordinances, concerning telecommunications; and
      (43)   All of
Ch. 190 of this code of ordinances, concerning zoning.
   (B)   (1)   If any person commits a second offense, or subsequent violation
of the same ordinance listed above, such a violation constitutes a misdemeanor
punishable by a fine not exceeding $500 and/or imprisonment not exceeding 90
days; provided, the authorized city official issues an appearance ticket (and
not a municipal civil infraction citation or notice) and marks it as a
misdemeanor.
      (2)   However, nothing herein requires the authorized city official to
charge a repeat offense of the same ordinance by the save individual as a
misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 23.5-6) (Ord. 1050, passed 8-17-1998; Ord. 1118, passed 6-11-
2001; Ord. 1169, passed 4-14-2003)
§ 11.006 FINES AND COSTS.
   (A)   A defendant who is found responsible for an ordinance violation
designated as a municipal civil infraction, whether by admission or by court
determination, is subject to all of the following fines and costs:
      (1)   A civil fine not less than $25 and not more than $500; and
      (2)   The judge or magistrate shall summarily tax and determine the costs
of the action (which are not limited to the costs taxable in ordinary civil
actions) and may include all expenses, direct and indirect, to which the city
has been put in connection with the municipal civil infraction, up to the entry
of judgment. Expenses include, but are not limited to, time of authorized city
official, time of City Attorney, witness and mileage fees and postage. Costs
may not be less than $9, or more than $500. Costs shall be payable to the
city’s General Fund, except as otherwise provided by law.
   (B)   In addition to ordering the defendant to pay a civil fine, costs,
damages and expenses, the judge or magistrate may issue a writ or order as
permitted by M.C.L.A. § 600.8302.
   (C)   (1)   The District Court Judge may establish a schedule of civil fines
and costs to be imposed for municipal civil infractions.
      (2)   The schedule need not include all municipal civil infractions and
may exclude a case on the basis of a defendant’s prior record of municipal
civil infractions.
   (D)   A default in the payment of a civil fine, costs or damages or expenses
ordered under this chapter, or an installment of the fine, costs or damages or
expenses may be collected by a means authorized for the enforcement of a
judgment under M.C.L.A. §§ 600.4001 et seq. or M.C.L.A. §§ 600.6001 et seq.
   (E)   (1)   In any citation involving land, buildings or property, the
District Court Judge may issue and enforce any judgment, writ or order
necessary to enforce the ordinance.
      (2)   The District Court Judge may enter an order that if the defendant
does not comply with the ordinance requirements, judgment, writ or order, the
city employees or their agents are authorized to enter onto the land, building
or property involved for the purpose of enforcing the ordinance requirements,
judgment, writ or order.
      (3)   The defendant shall be responsible to reimburse the city for all
its costs incurred in enforcement as provided by this section.
   (F)   If the defendant in a municipal civil infraction is determined
responsible for a municipal civil infraction, the District Court, in addition
to any fine and cost imposed under this chapter, may assess additional costs
incurred in compelling the appearance of the defendant, which additional costs
shall be returned to the General Fund of the city.
(Prior Code, § 23.5-7) (Ord. 1050, passed 8-17-1998)
§ 11.007 DEFAULT IN PAYMENT OF FINES, COSTS, DAMAGES OR EXPENSES; CIVIL
CONTEMPT; IMPRISONMENT.
   (A)   If a defendant defaults in the payment of a civil fine, costs or, if
applicable, damages or expenses, or any installment, as ordered, the court,
upon the motion of the plaintiff or upon its own motion, may require the
defendant to show cause why the defendant should not be held in civil contempt
and may issue a summons, order to show cause or a bench warrant of arrest for
the defendant’s appearance.
   (B)   If a corporation or an association is ordered to pay a civil fine,
costs or damages or expenses, the individuals authorized to make disbursement
shall pay the fine, costs or damages or expenses, and their failure to do so
shall be civil contempt unless they make the showing required in this section.
   (C)   Unless the defendant shows that the default was not attributable to an
intentional refusal to obey the order of the court or to a failure on his or
her part to make a good faith effort to obtain the funds required for payment,
the court shall find that the default constitutes a civil contempt and may
order the defendant committed until all or a specified part of the amount due
is paid.
   (D)   If it appears that the default in the payment of a fine, costs or
damages or expenses does not constitute civil contempt, the court may enter an
order allowing the defendant additional time for payment, reducing the amount
of payment or of each installment, or revoking the fine, costs or damages or
expenses.
   (E)   (1)   The term of imprisonment on civil contempt for non-payment of a
civil fine, costs or damages or expenses shall be specified in the order of
commitment, and shall not exceed one day for each $30 due.
      (2)   A person committed for non-payment of a civil fine, costs or
damages or expenses shall be given credit toward payment for each day of
imprisonment and each day of detention in default of recognizance before
judgment at the rate of $30 per day.
   (F)   A defendant committed to imprisonment for civil contempt for non-
payment of a civil fine, costs or damages or expenses shall not be discharged
from custody until one of the following occurs:
      (1)   The defendant is credited with the amount due pursuant to division
(E) above;
      (2)   The amount due is collected through execution of process or
otherwise; or
      (3)   The amount due is satisfied pursuant to a combination of divisions
(F)(1) and (F)(2) above.
(Prior Code, § 23.5-8) (Ord. 1050, passed 8-17-1998)
§ 11.008 VIOLATIONS AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   If a defendant does not pay a civil fine or costs or an installment
ordered within 30 days after the date on which payment is due in a municipal
civil infraction action brought for a violation involving the use or occupation
of land or a building or other structure, the plaintiff may obtain a lien
against the land, building or structure involved in the violation by recording
a copy of the court order requiring payment of the fine and costs with the
Register of Deeds for the county in which the land, building or structure is
located. The court order shall not be recorded unless a legal description of
the property is incorporated in or attached to the court order. The lien is
effective immediately upon recording of the court order with the Register of
Deeds.
   (B)   The court order recorded with the Register of Deeds shall constitute
notice of the pendency of the lien. In addition, a written notice of the lien
shall be sent by the plaintiff by first-class mail to the owner of record of
the land, building or structure at the owner’s last known address.
   (C)   The lien may be enforced and discharged by a county, city, village or
township in the manner prescribed by its charter, by the General Property Tax
Act, Public Act 206 of 1893, being M.C.L.A. §§ 211.1 through 211.157, or by an
ordinance duly passed by the governing body of the city. However, property is
not subject to sale under § 60 of Public Act 206 of 1893, being M.C.L.A. §
211.60, for non-payment of a civil fine or costs or an installment ordered
under § 8727 unless the property is also subject to sale under § 60 of Public
Act 206 of 1893, being M.C.L.A. § 211.60, for delinquent property taxes.
   (D)   A lien created under this section has priority over any other lien
unless one or more of the following apply:
      (1)   The other lien is a lien for taxes or special assessments;
      (2)   The other lien is created before the effective date of the
amendatory act that added this section;
      (3)   Federal law provides that the other lien has priority; and/or
      (4)   The other lien is recorded before the lien under this section is
recorded.
   (E)   The city may institute an action in a court of competent jurisdiction
for the collection of the fines and costs imposed by a court order for a
municipal civil infraction. However, an attempt by the city to collect the
fines or costs by any process does not invalidate or waive the lien upon the
land, building or structure.
   (F)   A lien provided for by this section shall not continue for a period
longer than five years after a copy of the court order imposing a fine or costs
is recorded, unless within that time an action to enforce the lien is
commenced.
(Prior Code, § 23.5-9) (Ord. 1050, passed 8-17-1998)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   ORGANIZATIONS
      
31.   OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
      
32.   RETIREMENT SYSTEM
      
33.   LAW ENFORCEMENT
      
34.   FINANCE AND REVENUE; TAXATION
CHAPTER 30: ORGANIZATIONS
Section
   
30.001   Department of Purchasing and Personnel
   
30.002   Commission on Aging
   
30.003   Beautification Commission
   
30.004   Cultural and Historical Commission
   
30.005   Youth Guidance Commission
   
30.006   Worker’s Compensation Commission
§ 30.001 DEPARTMENT OF PURCHASING AND PERSONNEL.
   (A)   Created. There is hereby created a Department of Purchasing and
Personnel.
(Prior Code, § 2-21)
   (B)   Director. The Department of Purchasing and Personnel shall be under
the supervision of the Director of Purchasing and Personnel, who shall be
appointed by the Mayor. The Director shall have the following power and duties.
      (1)   He or she shall perform the duties and possess the powers
prescribed by the Mayor and Council.
      (2)   He or she shall make recommendations to the Mayor in regard to the
selection, number, compensation, tenure and the duties of those persons serving
and classified as employees of the city in its various departments, bureaus and
offices, and generally make surveys and recommend improvements and changes and
economies in the local municipal government, including matters of welfare and
employee relations and training.
      (3)   He or she shall adopt rules and regulations, subject to the
approval of the Council, consistent with the provisions of the Charter, to
regulate the administration of his or her Department and provide for the
following:
         (a)   The installation and maintenance of a classification plan based
on the duties, authority and responsibility of positions in the city service;
         (b)   The administration and maintenance of a salary plan with minimum
and maximum rates for positions in the classified city service;
         (c)   The establishment of policies and practices governing permanent,
temporary and emergency appointments to positions in the classified service.
The establishing of employment and re-employment lists, containing the names of
persons eligible for appointments and for extending, cancelling and combining
employment and re-employment lists;
         (d)   The establishment of policies and practices controlling
personnel status, changes affecting employees while in the city service,
including transferring employees from one position to another either within the
same department or to a different department; the promotion of employees from a
position of a lower grade to one of a higher grade or the demotion of employees
from a position of higher grade to one of a lower grade; administering service
ratings for appraising the performance of employees and the establishment of
employees in training programs and also for establishing uniform practices with
regard to hours of work, attendance and leave;
         (e)   The establishment of policies and practices governing the
separation of employees from the city service, including rejecting probationary
employees during the working test period and establishing uniform practices
with regard to resignations, suspensions for disciplinary purposes and
dismissals for cause;
         (f)   The establishment of policies and practices governing the manner
in which employees in the city classified service may make appeals relative to
any proceedings of the city, having a bearing on their status or conditions of
employment under the provisions of this section and the rules adopted
thereunder; and
         (g)   The establishment of policies and practices governing personnel
records and forms including roster cards showing the complete employment
history of each officer and employee and other required personnel records. All
such records and forms shall be deemed confidential and shall not be open to
public inspection.
      (4)   He or she shall examine payrolls and accounts for compensation of
employees at least once each month and shall notify the City Clerk of any names
or irregularities which appear on such payrolls or accounts in violation of the
provisions of any ordinance or the rules pertaining thereto.
      (5)   He or she shall serve as city purchasing agent and perform the
duties and possess such powers as are enumerated in the Charter or prescribed
by law.
      (6)   With the approval of the Council, he or she may appoint the
personnel required for the proper administration of the Department.
(Prior Code, § 2-22)
§ 30.002 COMMISSION ON AGING.
   (A)   Created. There is hereby created a non-charter commission to be known
as the “Commission on Aging”.
(Prior Code, § 2-62)
   (B)   Members. The Commission on Aging shall be composed of seven members,
who are registered voters of the city and who insofar as possible, represent
different professions and occupations. Members shall be appointed by the Mayor,
subject to the approval of the Council. The term of each member shall be three
years, and until his or her successor is appointed. Vacancies occurring
otherwise than through the expiration of the term shall be filled for the
unexpired term by appointment by the Mayor, subject to the approval of the
Council. The members shall serve without compensation; except that, they may be
reimbursed for any actual expense paid in the performance of their duties.
(Prior Code, § 2-63)
   (C)   Officers, meetings and reports. The Commission on aging shall select
its President and the Vice-President and Secretary. The Commission shall hold
meetings monthly and shall designate the time and place thereof. It shall adopt
its own rules of parliamentary procedure and shall keep a record of its
proceedings. A quarterly report shall be made to the Council to report the
progress of the Committee. Four members shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business.
(Prior Code, § 2-64)
   (D)   Powers and duties. The Commission on Aging shall have such powers and
perform such duties as are designated by the Council and shall, in addition
thereto, exercise and perform the following duties:
      (1)   Make surveys, studies and analyses of:
         (a)   Employment opportunities;
         (b)   Educational opportunities;
         (c)   Recreation;
         (d)   Mental and physical health;
         (e)   Housing;
         (f)   Social welfare; and
         (g)   Legal aid.
      (2)   Make recommendations to the City Council of any proposed plans.
(Prior Code, § 2-65)
§ 30.003 BEAUTIFICATION COMMISSION.
   (A)   Created. There is hereby created a non-charter commission to be known
as the “City Beautification Commission”.
(Prior Code, § 2-87)
   (B)   Members. The City Beautification Commission shall be composed of no
less than seven members and no more than 11 members, each of whom shall be
residents of the city. Members shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to the
approval of the Council. The term of each member shall be three years and until
his or her successor is appointed. Vacancies occurring otherwise than through
the expiration of the terms shall be filled for the unexpired term by
appointment by the Mayor, subject to the approval of the Council. The members
shall serve without compensation; except that, they may be reimbursed for any
actual expense paid in the performance of their duties.
(Prior Code, § 2-88)
   (C)   Officers, meetings and reports. The city’s Beautification Commission
shall select annually a Chairperson and a Vice-Chairperson and a Secretary. The
Commission shall hold meetings monthly and shall designate the time and place
thereof. It shall adopt its own rules of parliamentary procedure and shall keep
a record of its proceedings. An annual report shall be made to the Council to
report the progress of the Commission. Four members shall constitute a quorum
for the transaction of business.
(Prior Code, § 2-89)
   (D)   Powers and duties.
      (1)   The city’s Beautification Commission shall have such powers and
perform such duties as are designated by the Council and, in addition, shall
exercise and perform the following duties:
         (a)   Study, conceive, formulate, promulgate and develop plans for the
beautification of streets, highways, alleys, utility installations, parks,
streams, playgrounds, yards, lots and buildings;
         (b)   Study, investigate and develop plans for improving the health,
sanitation, safety and cleanliness of the city;
         (c)   Foster the prevention of fires, diseases and other public
hazards;
         (d)   Encourage and recommend the placing, planting and preservation
of trees, flowers, plants, shrubbery and other objects of ornamentation in the
city;
         (e)   Collect, study and evaluate information on community
improvements and to make recommendations thereon; and
         (f)   Sponsor, plan, promote, coordinate and carry out clean up-paint
up-fix up campaign activities and to otherwise promote public interest in the
general improvement of the appearance of the city.
      (2)   Nothing herein shall be construed to abridge, invade, supplant or
change the powers or duties of the other commissions, departments, boards and
agencies of the city.
(Prior Code, § 2-90)
(Ord. 1538, passed 11-6-2023)
§ 30.004 CULTURAL AND HISTORICAL COMMISSION.
   (A)   Established. There is hereby established a non-charter commission to
be known as the “Cultural and Historical Commission”.
(Prior Code, § 2-112)
   (B)   Members.
      (1)   The Cultural and Historical Commission shall consist of 11 members
approved by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Council. No person shall
be eligible to appointment who is not an elector of the city. The term of
office of members shall, subject to the provisions hereof relative to removal,
be four years, and until their successors are duly appointed and qualified.
Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation.
      (2)   Members of the Commission shall be subject to removal from office
by the Mayor without cause assigned. Any vacancy in office shall be filled by
the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Council, for the remainder of the
unexpired term.
(Prior Code, § 2-113)
   (C)   Officers and employees. The Cultural and Historical Commission shall
select a President and a Vice-President. It may appoint a Director and
prescribe the duties thereof. The compensation, if any, of the Director shall
be fixed by the Commission subject to the approval of the Council.
(Prior Code, § 2-114)
   (D)   Meetings and records. The Cultural and Historical Commission shall
hold meetings regularly, at least once in each month, and shall designate the
time and place thereof. It shall adopt its own rules of procedure and shall
keep a record of its proceedings. Proper accounts of the receipt and
expenditures of money shall be kept. All meetings, records and accounts of the
Commission shall be public. Five members shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business.
(Prior Code, § 2-115)
   (E)   Functions. The functions of the Cultural and Historical Commission
shall be to further the interest of the people in all matters relating to the
history of the city and its environs; to that end, it may acquire and maintain
appropriate exhibits, and cooperate in educational programs, and issue
bulletins and other publications.
(Prior Code, § 2-116)
   (F)   General powers and duties. The powers and duties of the Cultural and
Historical Commission shall be as follows:
      (1)   To operate and maintain suitable buildings to be used for
appropriate exhibits of historical interest and for auditorium purposes, to be
known as the “Wyandotte Historical Museum”, and to which, under proper rules
and regulations, the public may have access. The Commission, in its discretion,
shall have the authority to make reasonable charges for general admission to
the Wyandotte Historical Museum, subject to the approval of the Council. On
occasions when special exhibitions, public lectures or other entertainments are
held in any of said buildings, the commission may in its discretion make an
additional reasonable charge for admittance. It shall have the right to lend or
rent to other organizations or individuals any of the buildings or space for
special exhibits or occasions, whenever required by the interest of the city,
subject to the approval of the Council;
      (2)   It shall manage and direct the several buildings, premises and
property of the city under its control, and shall make reasonable rules and
regulations concerning them if provided however that the foregoing shall not
prevent the city from selling such property as the city deems in its best
interests;
      (3)   It may, with the approval of the Council and in the name of the
city, acquire, take and hold, by purchase, gift, devise, bequest or otherwise,
such real and personal property as may be proper for carrying out the objects
and functions for which it is established; and any property, real or personal,
received in trust, shall be held in the name of the city, but in conformity
with the terms of the trust;
      (4)   It shall acquire, collect, own and exhibit, in the name of the
city, articles of historical interest and other objects such as are usually
incorporated in historical museums, but any such articles received on loan or
in trust shall be held in conformity with such loan or trust agreement; and
      (5)   It may make, with the approval of the Council, all contracts to
carry out its purposes and objectives, as herein provided.
(Prior Code, § 2-117)
   (G)   Monthly financial reports. The Cultural and Historical Commission
shall, on the last day of each month, file with the Finance Officer and City
Treasurer a report giving the date of collection or receipt of all money
collected or received by the Commission, and shall pay daily into the city
treasury all moneys so collected.
(Prior Code, § 2-118)
   (H)   Application of funds; annual estimate. All moneys paid into the city
treasury by the Cultural and Historical Commission shall apply exclusively on
the payment of expenses incurred by it. On or before the second Monday in May
of each year, the Commission shall transmit to the City Clerk its estimate of
the amount of money required for its purposes for the next succeeding fiscal
year. Such estimate shall be used in preparing the annual appropriation bill of
the city.
(Prior Code, § 2-119)
   (I)   Reports. The Cultural and Historical Commission shall, on or before
January 15 in each year, make a written report to the Council of the work of
the department during the preceding year and the condition of the property
under the control of the Commission. The report shall be certified by the
Commission, entered of record by the City Clerk and published in such manner as
the Council may direct. The Commission shall also make such other reports as
the Council may from time to time require.
(Prior Code, § 2-120)
(Ord. 734, passed 6-14-1982; Ord. 746, passed 3-28-1983)
§ 30.005 YOUTH GUIDANCE COMMISSION.
   (A)   Established. There is hereby established a non-charter commission to
be known as the “Wyandotte Youth Guidance Commission”.
(Prior Code, § 2-142)
   (B)   Members. The Youth Guidance Commission shall consist of ten
representative citizens of the community appointed by the Mayor on the approval
of the Council, each for a term of five years. Any vacancies shall be filled by
the Mayor for the remainder of the unexpired term. The members shall serve
without compensation and may be removed by the Mayor with due cause.
(Prior Code, § 2-143)
   (C)   Officers. The Youth Guidance Commission shall elect biennially a
Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and appoint a Secretary, and shall, subject to
the approval of the Council, fix compensation for the Secretary.
(Prior Code, § 2-144)
   (D)   Meetings and accounts. The Youth Guidance Commission shall hold
meetings regularly at least once in each month, and shall designate the time
and place thereof, and shall adopt its own rules of procedure and keep a record
of its proceedings. Proper accounts shall be kept of the receipts and
expenditures of money in accordance with established city procedure. Five
members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of official business.
(Prior Code, § 2-145)
   (E)   Powers and duties.
      (1)   The powers and duties of the Youth Guidance Commission shall be as
follows:
         (a)   Establishing policies and general procedures for the purpose of
considering the needs of youth of the city and appraising conditions and
influences affecting said youth;
         (b)   Collaborating in the evaluation of the adequacy of existing
services with public and private agencies which are actively engaged in
promoting the development, education and general welfare of youth in the city;
         (c)   Advising the Mayor and Council regarding findings of the
Commission recommending action in the best interests of the youth;
         (d)   Providing information to the community regarding its aims and
functions, and regarding findings of the Commission; and
         (e)   When requested by the Mayor or Council, performing any other
services which they deem advisable for the promotion of the interests of youth
in the community.
      (2)   The Commission shall have such other powers as are herein
prescribed or may be necessary for the proper discharge of its duties.
(Prior Code, § 2-146)
   (F)   Reports. On or before February 15 of each year, the Youth Guidance
Commission shall make a written report to the Council relative to the work of
the Commission during the preceding year. The report shall be certified by the
Secretary, entered of record by the City Clerk, and published in such manner as
the Council shall direct. The Commission shall also make such other reports as
the Mayor and/or Council may from time to time require.
(Prior Code, § 2-147)
   (G)   Financial estimates. The Youth Guidance Commission shall transmit in
duplicate to the Mayor and Council estimate of the amount of money required for
its purpose for the ensuing fiscal year, in accordance with established city
procedure.
(Prior Code, § 2-148)
   (H)   Relationship to other city departments. Nothing herein contained shall
be presumed to infringe upon the powers and duties of other city departments or
to in any way relieve any other city department of its responsibilities under
the terms of the City Charter or under the law.
(Prior Code, § 2-149)
§ 30.006 WORKER’S COMPENSATION COMMISSION.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   Report of compensation cases; expenses. Each department head of
each city department shall, semi-monthly, check and report to the Board each
compensation case in his or her department. This report shall state in detail
the facts of each case and the nature and status of any proceedings pending in
connection therewith. All disbursements in each case shall be approved by the
department head prior to submission to the Board and Council for payment. The
Secretary shall keep a separate account of the expenses of each department.
(Prior Code, § 2-175)
      (2)   Worker’s Compensation Fund; computation of payments; depository.
The City Clerk shall, at the time of the making of the annual budget, inform
each department head of the amount due from each department for worker’s
insurance. Each department in submitting its budget shall include that item for
insurance. The method of computing the amount due from each department shall be
similar to the method used by the Commissioner of Insurance of the state. The
amount so computed shall be placed in the Worker’s Compensation Fund hereby
created, to be deposited in a bank designated by the Council, which fund shall
be drawn on for no other purpose, except payment for worker’s compensation
claims or expenses.
(Prior Code, § 2-176)
   (B)   Commission.
      (1)   Created. There is hereby created a non-charter commission to be
known as the “Worker’s Compensation Commission”.
(Prior Code, § 2-188)
      (2)   Members.
         (a)   The Worker’s Compensation Commission shall be composed of the
City Engineer, the City Attorney, the City Clerk, the Mayor and the Presidents
of each of the following commissions:
            1.   Municipal Service Commission;
            2.   Police and Fire Commission; and
            3.   Public Recreation Commission.
         (b)   The President of such a Commission may designate a
representative to act in his or her stead. Members of the Commission shall
serve without compensation as such.
(Prior Code, § 2-189)
      (3)   Meetings. The meetings of the Worker’s Compensation Commission
shall be at the call of the Mayor. A majority of the members shall constitute a
quorum. All members of the Worker’s Compensation Commission, including, but not
limited to, the Mayor, shall be entitled to vote at Commission meetings. The
Commission shall, subject to the provisions of this section promulgate and
adopt rules and regulations for the conduct of its business and meetings.
(Prior Code, § 2-190)
      (4)   Secretary. The Secretary of the Worker’s Compensation Commission
shall keep all records and keep a copy of the minutes of the meetings of said
Board, which shall be presented to the Council at its next regular meeting. The
Secretary shall also be charged with the duty of notifying the Department of
Labor and Industry of any injury or death of any city employee during the
course of his or her employment, as soon as information concerning the same is
received.
(Prior Code, § 2-191)
(Ord. 900, passed 1-7-1991)
CHAPTER 31: OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
Section
General Provisions
   
31.001   Voting precincts
   
31.002   Oath of elected officials and members of boards and commissions
   
31.003   Authority to issue appearance tickets
   
31.004   Declaration of public emergency for public meetings
Conduct and Disclosure Statements
   
31.015   Definitions
   
31.016   Investments in conflict with official duties
   
31.017   Disclosure of interest
   
31.018   Incompatible employment
   
31.019   Offer or acceptance of gifts or favors
   
31.020   Incompatible appointments
   
31.021   Disclosure of unlawful or improper policies or actions
   
31.022   Public officials or employees; disclosure of information
   
31.023   Official policies
   
31.024   Citizen participation
   
31.025   Disclosure statement required each year
   
31.026   Conflict of interest disclosure statements
   
31.027   Violation and enforcement
   
31.028   Distribution of copies of subchapter; orientation
 
   
31.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.001 VOTING PRECINCTS.
   The voting precincts shall be as established by ordinance and shown on a map
on file in the office of the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 2-1)
§ 31.002 OATH OF ELECTED OFFICIALS AND MEMBERS OF BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS.
   (A)   All elected officials of the city and all members of boards or
commissions of the city shall take the following oath before entering upon the
duties of their respective offices:
      “I do solemnly swear (or affirm), that I will support the Constitution of
the United States, and the Constitution of the State of Michigan, and that I
will faithfully discharge the duties of the of    [insert title of
office]   for the City of Wyandotte according to the best of my abilities so
help me God.”
   (B)   Such oath shall be reduced to writing and filed in the office of the
City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 2-2)
§ 31.003 AUTHORITY TO ISSUE APPEARANCE TICKETS.
   (A)   The Building Inspector, Electrical Inspector, Plumbing Inspector,
Mechanical Inspector, Fire Inspector and ordinance officials shall have
authority to issue appearance tickets with respect to the following class of
offenses when said persons are assigned as part of their employment duties to
conduct an investigation concerning any of these enumerated offenses:
      (1)   Nuisance offenses;
      (2)   All code enforcement, including, but without limitation, the
following:
         (a)   Electrical Code violations;
         (b)   Plumbing Code violations;
         (c)   Mechanical Code violations;
         (d)   Building Code violations;
         (e)   Fire Prevention Code violations;
         (f)   Housing Code violations; and
         (g)   Rental dwelling violations.
      (3)   All ordinances involving the maintenance and upkeep of public or
private property, including all ordinances concerning garbage, weeds and
fences.
   (B)   The persons listed in division (A) above may issue and serve upon a
person an appearance ticket if they have reasonable cause to believe that a
person or legal entity has committed an offense within the class of offenses
described in this section.
(Prior Code, § 2-3) (Ord. 821, passed 7-6-1987)
§ 31.004 DECLARATION OF PUBLIC EMERGENCY FOR PUBLIC MEETINGS.
   (A)   The Mayor may declare a public emergency whenever he or she determines
that a condition exists that would risk the personal health or safety of
members of the public or the City Council or any other city commission or
authority if a meeting were held in public.
   (B)   If the Mayor declares a public emergency, the start and end of the
public emergency shall be stated in a written declaration signed by the Mayor
and filed at the City Clerk’s office.
   (C)   The notice shall be posted at the city’s principal office and on the
city’s website. The city may post the notice at any other location considered
appropriate by the City Clerk and cable television may also be utilized for
purposes of posting the notice.   
   (D)   Meetings during the declared public emergency may be conducted
electronically pursuant to the provisions of the Open Meetings Act, including
§§ 3 and 3a and any policy adopted by the city.
(Ord. 1505, passed 3-22-2021)
CONDUCT AND DISCLOSURE STATEMENTS
§ 31.015 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGENCY. Any multi-member body created by charter or ordinance of the city
and quasi- government or independent agencies, including boards and
commissions, created pursuant to state law and properly established or created
by the city.
   APPOINTEE. Any department head (Director of Administrative Services,
Director of Financial Services, City Engineer, Director of Community
Development, the Police Chief, the Fire Chief, the Superintendent of Recreation
and the General Manager of the Municipal Service Department) or member of a
board or commission, whether in a paid or unpaid position for the city, acting
in a policy making capacity in the performance of an official duty for the
city.
   BUSINESS. Any entity operated for economic gain, whether professional,
industrial or commercial, and whether established to produce or deal with a
product or a service, including, but not limited to, entities operated in the
form of sole proprietorship, self-employed persons, partnership, corporation,
joint stock company, joint venture, receivership or trust, and entities which
for purposes of taxation are treated as non-profit organizations.
   BUSINESS WHICH A PERSON IS ASSOCIATED WITH. Any business in which the person
is a director, officer, owner, member, partner or employee.
   COMPENSATION. Any payment received for service, performance or participation
as a board or commission member of an agency of the city.
   COMPLAINANT. Any person who files a written formal complaint as provided in
this subchapter.
   ELECTED OFFICIAL. The Mayor, any City Council member, the City Clerk, the
City Treasurer and the City Assessor.
   FINANCIAL BUSINESS, COMMERCIAL OR CONTRACTUAL INTEREST. Any direct or
indirect pecuniary or material benefit accruing to an elected official or
appointee as the result of a contract, vote or other transaction which is or
may be subject to an official act or action by or with the city for purposes of
this section. INTEREST shall also include:
      (1)   An elected official or appointee shall be deemed to have an
interest in the affairs of the person’s spouse, children, grandchildren,
brothers, sisters, parents and parents of a spouse to the extent provided
herein;
      (2)   Any interest with a current or future value; and
      (3)   Any interest of a corporation, partnership, franchise, organization
or other legal entity organization for profit. However, a CONFLICT OF INTEREST
shall not include:
         (a)   The employment of a spouse, child, brother, sister, parent or
parent of a spouse shall not be considered if such employment is in a non-
ownership, non-policy making, non-controlling interest or is not in a contract
negotiating and monitoring capacity;
         (b)   Any ownership which is acquired through purchase at fair market
value or inheritance of less than 1% of the shares of a corporation, or as a
parent, subsidiary or affiliate, is such shares have been registered on a
securities exchange pursuant to the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as
amended, being 15 U.S.C. §§ 78a et seq.;
         (c)   The authorized compensation and fringe benefits paid to an
elected official, appointee or civil servant;
         (d)   A time or demand deposit in a financial institution;
         (e)   An endowment, insurance policy or annuity contract purchased
from an insurance company; and
         (f)   Service by elected officials and appointees of the city’s
Retirement Commission shall not be considered a conflict of interest requiring
disclosure.
   GIFTS. A payment, subscription, advance, forbearance, rendering or deposit
of money, services or any thing of value which exceeds $100 in value, but shall
not include campaign contributions.
   INTERESTS IN REAL PROPERTY. Any leasehold interests, beneficial interests,
vendor’s or vendee’s interests in land contracts, ownership interests or an
option to acquire any such interests in real property.
   OFFICIAL ACTION, OFFICIAL AUTHORITY or OFFICIAL DUTIES. A decision,
recommendation, approval, disapproval or other action, including inaction,
which involves the use of discretionary authority.
   PUBLIC OFFICE. An elected official or appointee of the city.
   PUBLIC OFFICIALS or PUBLIC OFFICERS. Appointees and elected officials of the
city.
   RESPONDENT. Any person to whom a written formal complaint is directed to by
the City Attorney for information or a reply to the formal complaint.
   SOURCE OF INCOME. Any corporation, partnership, proprietorship, firm,
enterprise, franchise, association, organization, self-employed individual and
any other legal entity; provided, nothing herein shall be construed to require
the reporting of individual clients or patients.
(Prior Code, § 2-300) (Ord. 1235, passed 7-18-2005)
§ 31.016 INVESTMENTS IN CONFLICT WITH OFFICIAL DUTIES.
   All public officials, either elected or appointed, whether paid or unpaid,
shall be required to disclose any financial, business, commercial, contractual
interest or other private transaction which conflicts with or otherwise
adversely affects the performance of his or her official duties; such
transactions shall be disclosed as a matter of public record, on the form
attached to the ordinance codified herein, prescribed in §
31.026 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 2-301) (Ord. 1235, passed 7-18-2005)
§ 31.017 DISCLOSURE OF INTEREST.
   Elected officials and appointees of the city who have an interest in any
proposed legislation or decision pending before any body of which the official
or appointee is a member shall abstain from any vote, refrain from
participation in deliberations of the matter and publicly disclose on the
official records of the body, the nature and extent of such interest prior to
any vote or official action of the matter.
(Prior Code, § 2-302) (Ord. 1235, passed 7-18-2005)
§ 31.018 INCOMPATIBLE EMPLOYMENT.
   (A)   No elected official or appointee shall engage in employment with any
other agency or department of the city. No elected official or appointee shall
render services for private interest, when such employment or service is in
conflict with or is incompatible with the proper discharge of his or her
official duties.
   (B)   Appointees to multi-member boards or commissions which are policy
making bodies, whether paid or unpaid, shall disclose any financial, business,
commercial, contractual or other private transaction interest prior to any
official action or vote taken, for which the appointee’s vote or other official
action is in conflict with or is incompatible with the interests of the city.
   (C)   Any elected official or appointee who serves on the board of any
agency of the city shall disclose any financial interest in or compensation
received from the agency, as the result of the service or participation.
(Prior Code, § 2-303) (Ord. 1235, passed 7-18-2005)
§ 31.019 OFFER OR ACCEPTANCE OF GIFTS OR FAVORS.
   (A)   No elected official or appointee, whether paid or unpaid, shall
solicit or accept or give any thing of value which is intended to influence a
vote, decision or other exercise of official authority in any matter involving
the city and any violations of this section shall be subject to the penalty
provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit any official or appointee from
accepting a gift on behalf of the city; provided, the person accepting the gift
shall promptly report the receipt of such gift to the Finance Department for
the purpose of adding the inventory of property of the city.
   (C)   Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to prohibit an offer or
acceptance of consumable gifts or entertainment with a value under $100.
“Gifts” do not include a gift received from one or more of the following:
      (1)   A relative within the fifth degree of consanguinity, under the
civil law computation method, to the elected official or appointee, or the
spouse of such relative;
      (2)   A spouse of the elected official or appointee, or a spouse’s
relative within the fifth degree of consanguinity to the spouse, under the
civil law computation method;
      (3)   A person to whom the city official or candidate if engaged or
intends to marry; or
      (4)   As used in this section, “gifts” do not include campaign
contributions.
(Prior Code, § 2-304) (Ord. 1235, passed 7-18-2005)
§ 31.020 INCOMPATIBLE APPOINTMENTS.
   An elected official or appointee may serve as a member of a board,
commission or authority unless prohibited by the City Charter or state law.
(Prior Code, § 2-305) (Ord. 1235, passed 7-18-2005)
§ 31.021 DISCLOSURE OF UNLAWFUL OR IMPROPER POLICIES OR ACTIONS.
   (A)   Public officials or employees who have a good faith belief that the
public interest requires the disclosure of governmental policies or actions
thought to be unlawful or improper should reveal their information to the City
Council.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for public official or employee to harass, punish
or seek reprisals against public officials or employees who seek to hold
government accountable through conscientious disclosure of unlawful or improper
policies or actions.
(Prior Code, § 2-306) (Ord. 1235, passed 7-18-2005) Penalty, see §
31.999
§ 31.022 PUBLIC OFFICIALS OR EMPLOYEES; DISCLOSURE OF INFORMATION.
   (A)   No public officer or employee shall divulge to any unauthorized person
confidential information acquired in the course of holding his or her position
in advance of the time prescribed by the governmental body for its authorized
release to the public, except as otherwise required or permitted by law.
   (B)   No public officer or employee shall make unauthorized use of his or
her public position, or any confidential information received through holding
such public position, to obtain financial gain for himself or herself, a member
of his or her immediate family or a business with which such individual is
associated. This provision shall not prevent the public officer or employee
from accepting his or her regular compensation as a public officer or employee.
(Prior Code, § 2-307) (Ord. 1235, passed 7-18-2005) Penalty, see §
31.999
§ 31.023 OFFICIAL POLICIES.
   A public official or employee shall not make policies affecting the citizens
of the city that are not authorized by the City Charter, code of ordinances,
City Council, authorized agency of the city or adopted policies of the city.
   (A)   Official policies shall be in writing and made available to the
citizens of the city when requested, subject to the Freedom of Information Act
Policy of the city, being M.C.L.A. §§ 15.231 et seq.
   (B)   No public officer or employee shall act on behalf of the city in the
making of policy statements, in authorizing any action, agreement or contract,
or in promising to prevent any future action, when such officer or employee
has, in fact, no authority to do so.
(Prior Code, § 2-308) (Ord. 1235, passed 7-18-2005) Penalty, see §
31.999
§ 31.024 CITIZEN PARTICIPATION.
   (A)   No agency of the city shall take final action on any matter under
consideration before the agency until the citizens’ rights to address the
agency have been provided for, subject always to the provisions of the state’s
Open Meetings Act, being M.C.L.A. §§ 15.261 et seq.
   (B)   A public body may meet in a closed session only for the following
purposes:
      (1)   To consider the dismissal, suspension or disciplining of, or to
hear complaints or charges brought against, or to consider a periodic personnel
evaluation of, a public officer, employee, staff member or individual agent, if
the named person requests a closed hearing. A person requesting a closed
hearing may rescind the request at any time; in which case, the matter at issue
shall be considered thereafter only in open sessions;
      (2)   For strategy and negotiation sessions connected with the
negotiation of a collective bargaining agreement if either negotiation party
requests a closed hearing;
      (3)   To consider the purchase or lease of real property up to the time
an option to purchase or lease that real property is obtained;
      (4)   To consult with its attorney regarding trial or settlement strategy
in connection with specific pending litigation, but only if an open meeting
would have a detrimental financial effect on the litigating or settlement
position of the public body;
      (5)   To review the specific contents of an application for employment or
appointment to public office if the candidate requests that the application
remain confidential. However, all interviews by a public body for employment or
appointment to a public office shall be held in an open meeting pursuant to the
state’s Open Meetings Act; and
      (6)   To consider material exempt from discussion or disclosure by state
or federal statute.
(Prior Code, § 2-309) (Ord. 1235, passed 7-18-2005)
§ 31.025 DISCLOSURE STATEMENT REQUIRED EACH YEAR.
   (A)   The disclosure statement required herein shall be on a form (Exhibit B
attached to the ordinance codified herein) obtained from and filed with the
City Clerk and shall be signed as a verified statement. Any violation of this
section shall be subject to all remedies and punishments as may be provided for
under state law, Charter or ordinance, including, but not limited to,
forfeiture of office and removal for cause.
   (B)   The disclosure statement shall include the following information and
be governed by the following provisions:
      (1)   On or before April 28 of each calendar year, or in the case of
appointed public officials on or before the anniversary date of their
appointment each year, each public official shall file with the City Clerk a
disclosure statement, which statement shall cover the previous calendar year.
The public official shall file the statement at the office of the City Clerk or
shall mail it by certified mail to the City Clerk prior to the time specified.
A copy of the disclosure statement shall be provided by the City Clerk to each
public official at least 30 days prior to when the disclosure statement is to
be filed;
      (2)   A person who becomes a public official less than ten days before
the filing date or who becomes a public official after the filing date shall
file a disclosure statement for the previous 12 months no later than ten days
after the date on which he or she assumes the duties of his or her office
unless he or she has filed a disclosure statement with the City Clerk during
the preceding 12 months;
      (3)   A candidate for elected office shall file a disclosure statement
with the City Clerk for the previous 12 months no later than ten days after he
or she becomes a candidate, unless he or she has filed a disclosure statement
with the City Clerk during the previous 12 months. As used in this section, a
CANDIDATE is a person who officially files as a candidate for office, as
defined in Public Act 338 of 1976, as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 169.201
through 169.282. A copy of the disclosure statement shall be provided by the
City Clerk to each candidate at the time the candidate files as a candidate for
office;
      (4)   The City Clerk shall retain financial disclosure statements in its
files for not less than ten years from the date of filing;
      (5)   The disclosure statement shall include the date, month and year,
the name, address and public position held or sought by the public official or
candidate;
      (6)   A listing of all interests the public official or candidate has in
real property located within the city (including vendor’s or vendee’s interests
in land contracts), excluding his or her principal residence, held by him or
her at any time during the previous year which has a fair market value
exceeding $2,500. If he acquired or divested any such interest during the year,
he or she shall disclose the transaction and the date it occurred. This listing
shall include the street address and legal description of the property and its
current estimated value;
      (7)   The occupations or principal place(s) of business of the public
official or candidate;
      (8)   The name of each business with which the public official or
candidate was associated at any time during the filing year, and a brief
description of the business or activity of each business entity, and the nature
of the associate of the public official with each such business;
      (9)   A list of all gifts received which exceed $100 in value, excluding
campaign contributions; and
      (10)   Once a public official has filed a completed disclosure statement,
in lieu of completely filling out a new form each year, the official may file a
signed and dated form provided by the City Clerk that indicated there were no
material changes in the past 12 months.
   (C)   Upon failure of an elected official or appointee to file said
disclosure form with the City Clerk when due, the City Clerk shall send a
notice to said elected official or appointee requesting that the disclosure
statement be filed within 15 days. All disclosure statements must be readily
available for public inspection in the office of the City Clerk and shall be
considered public documents immediately upon filing and made available to the
citizens of the city when requested, subject to the Freedom of Information Act
Policy of the city, being M.C.L.A. §§ 15.231 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 2-310) (Ord. 1235, passed 7-18-2005)
§ 31.026 CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURE STATEMENTS.
   (A)   The disclosure statement required in §
31.016 of this chapter shall be on a form (Exhibit A attached to the ordinance
codified herein) obtained from and filed with the City Clerk and shall be
signed as a verified statement. Any violation of this section shall be subject
to all remedies and punishments as may be provided for under state law, Charter
or ordinance, including, but not limited to, forfeiture of office removal for
cause. Public officials serving at the time of adoption of this subchapter
shall file the conflict of interest disclosure statement within 14 days of the
date said subchapter takes effect.
   (B)   The form shall include the following information:
      (1)   Date, month, year;
      (2)   Name of person filing;
      (3)   Address of person filing;
      (4)   Name of person or business entity with which a conflict exists;
      (5)   Address of person or business entity with which a conflict exists;
and
      (6)   Does said person or business entity do business with the city or
with an elected official or appointee in a policy making position and, if so,
the amount of income received or anticipated.
(Prior Code, § 2-311) (Ord. 1235, passed 7-18-2005) Penalty, see §
31.999
§ 31.027 VIOLATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Any individual who believes that a violation exists as prohibited by
this subchapter may make a complaint which shall be a written formal signed
complaint which shall be filed with the City Clerk’s office. The Clerk shall
forward it to the City Attorney. The City Attorney upon receipt will proceed as
follows:
      (1)   Review the complaint and determine whether the matter may be
resolved without the need for investigation or referral;
      (2)   Forward a copy to the respondent to file a response or provide
further information within 21 days;
      (3)   Upon receipt of the response from the respondent, the City Attorney
may determine that the complaint should be dismissed, or may request further
information from the complainant or the respondent if it is deemed necessary,
or may determine that an investigation is warranted; and
      (4)   Any determination to either dismiss the complaint or to proceed
with an investigation is subject to an appeal by either the complainant or
respondent to the City Council within ten days of said determination. The City
Attorney shall disclose his or her determination to the complainant and
respondent. If a timely appeal is not filed, then the matter shall proceed in
accordance with the determination made by the City Attorney. In the event that
the matter is referred to the Chief of Police for investigation, he or she
shall cause the same to be investigated and referred back to the City Attorney
for review and recommendation with a copy to the complainant and respondent.
   (B)   The above listed authorities, when requested, shall take appropriate
action upon any complaint, request for information or otherwise resolve matters
concerning a violation of said ordinance.
   (C)   The appropriate action to be taken in any individual case shall be at
the discretion of the above authorities, which may include, but is not limited
to, any of the following:
      (1)   Pursing further investigation by the controlling authority;
      (2)   Taking appropriate disciplinary action, including removal from
office, appointed position or employment, in accordance with the City Charter,
code of ordinance or state law;
      (3)   Pursuing such other course of action which is reasonable, just and
appropriate under the circumstances; and
      (4)   Pursue issuance of a municipal civil infraction if it is determined
that a person willfully violated a provision of this subchapter.
   (D)   While a complaint is pending, the city may exempt from disclosure as a
public record any of the material, notes, communications, information or
investigative records and materials if it is determined that said records are
exempt under the provisions of the Freedom of Information Act, being M.C.L.A.
§§ 15.231 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 2-312) (Ord. 1235, passed 7-18-2005) Penalty, see §
31.999
§ 31.028 DISTRIBUTION OF COPIES OF SUBCHAPTER; ORIENTATION.
   The Director of Administrative Services shall provide a copy of this
subchapter to each officer, employee, contract employee, appointee,
commissioner and other appointed officials of the city at or prior to the time
said person assumes their position. All new appointees shall attend an
orientation concerning standards of conduct and applicable ordinance and state
law provisions pertaining to their position as arranged by the Director of
Administrative Services. Information packets are to be distributed to the
public appointees and each appointee shall sign a form acknowledging receipt.
(Prior Code, § 2-313) (Ord. 1235, passed 7-18-2005)
§ 31.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   A person who willfully violates a provision of §§
31.015 through
31.028 of this chapter is responsible for a municipal civil infraction.
(Prior Code, § 2-312)
      (2)   Failure of an elected official or appointee to file said conflict
of interest disclosure form with the City Clerk under §
31.026 of this chapter shall be a municipal civil infraction and may result in
a fine not to exceed $500. All conflict of interest disclosure forms must be
readily available for public inspection in the office of the City Clerk and
shall be considered public documents immediately upon filing and made available
to the citizens of the city when requested, subject to the Freedom of
Information Act Policy of the city.
(Prior Code, § 2-311)
(Ord. 1235, passed 7-18-2005)
CHAPTER 32: RETIREMENT SYSTEM
Section
General Provisions
   
32.001   Name; establishment
   
32.002   Hospital member provisions void
   
32.003   Retirement system continued; Retirement Commission
   
32.004   Assets; transfer
   
32.005   Credited service; transfer
   
32.006   Retirement allowance continued
   
32.007   Definitions
   
32.008   Right to waive, maintain or alter definitions
   
32.009   Membership in system
   
32.010   Membership termination
   
32.011   Credited service; computation
   
32.012   Right to waive, maintain or alter provisions dealing with credited
service and computation of same
   
32.013   Military service credit
   
32.014   Voluntary retirement
   
32.015   Required distribution date
   
32.016   Retirements; allowances
   
32.017   Voluntary withdrawal of annuity option
   
32.018   Social security option
   
32.019   Disability eligibility requirement; allowance
   
32.020   Duty death benefits
   
32.021   Non-duty death benefits
   
32.022   Mobility in city employment
   
32.023   Refunds
   
32.024   Accounting funds
   
32.025   Divisions established; separate accounting controls
   
32.026   Funds
   
32.027   Health and Life Insurance Benefit Reserve
   
32.028   Instrumentalities
   
32.029   Investment of assets
   
32.030   Allowance of regular interest
   
32.031   Method of making payments
   
32.032   Supplement payment to retirants and beneficiaries
   
32.033   Retirement benefit improvement payment to retirants or beneficiaries
   
32.034   Retirement supplemental retirement benefit allowance
   
32.035   Rights unassignable
   
32.036   Correction of errors
Retirement Commission
   
32.050   Authority; responsibility
   
32.051   Composition
   
32.052   Commissioners; elections
   
32.053   Term, oath and compensation
   
32.054   Filling vacancies
   
32.055   Meetings; procedure, quorum and vote
   
32.056   Officers; election, duties
   
32.057   Records; annual report
   
32.058   Decrement tables; adoption
   
32.059   Reciprocal Retirement Act
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 32.001 NAME; ESTABLISHMENT.
   The city’s employees’ retirement system established effective 10-1-1944, by
Art. 14 of the Charter of the city, as amended, and since maintained and now
existing pursuant to said article, is hereby designated and continued as the
“City of Wyandotte Employees’ Retirement System”, including the continuing of
the existing membership, service credits, funds, powers and obligations. All
business of the retirement system shall be transacted in the name of the city’s
Employees’ Retirement System.
(Prior Code, § 2-201) (Ord. 368, passed 9-25-1967)
§ 32.002 HOSPITAL MEMBER PROVISIONS VOID.
   As a result of all active and retired hospital member’s liability in this
chapter being transferred to the Wyandotte Hospital and Medical Center, Inc., a
subsidiary of the Henry Ford Health Care Corporation (HFHCC), effective on 4-
30-1988, notwithstanding anything elsewhere in this chapter to the contrary,
all references to hospital members and their benefits in this subchapter are
hereby declared null and void and of no further effect after 4-30-1988. All
references to hospital member retirees and their benefits in this article shall
continue to apply to those hospital member retirees on 4-30-1988, and prior
thereto in accordance with the Wyandotte Hospital and Medical Center, Inc.,
Retirement Plan.
(Prior Code, § 2-201.1) (Ord. 874, passed 1-15-1990)
§ 32.003 RETIREMENT SYSTEM CONTINUED; RETIREMENT COMMISSION.
   The Retirement Commission established by the aforesaid Art. 14, as amended,
and now existing pursuant thereto, is hereby designated and continued as the
Retirement Commission authorized and empowered to administer the retirement
system established by this subchapter. The terms of office of the five-member
Commission now holding office pursuant to § 295(g) of the aforesaid Art. 14, as
amended, shall expire on the same dates as they would otherwise have expired.
The term of office of the citizen Commissioner now holding office pursuant to §
295(f) of the aforesaid Art. 14, as amended, shall expire 10-1-1967.
(Prior Code, § 2-202) (Ord. 368, passed 9-25-1967)
§ 32.004 ASSETS; TRANSFER.
   All assets of every description belonging to the city’s employee’s
retirement system established by the aforesaid Art. 14, as amended, shall be
transferred to and become the assets of the city’s employees’ retirement system
established by this subchapter. When transferred, the Retirement Commission
shall credit the said assets to the various funds and accounts, provided for in
this chapter, according to the purpose for which said assets were held and
credited in the retirement system established under the aforesaid Art. 14, as
amended.
(Prior Code, § 2-203) (Ord. 368, passed 9-25-1967)
§ 32.005 CREDITED SERVICE; TRANSFER.
   All service credited to members, prior to the effective date of this
subchapter, under the aforesaid Art. 14, as amended, shall be credited to the
said members under the retirement system established by this chapter, to the
extent such service credits are in force the day preceding the effective date
of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 2-204) (Ord. 368, passed 9-25-1967)
§ 32.006 RETIREMENT ALLOWANCE CONTINUED.
   (A)   Each retirant and beneficiary in receipt of a retirement allowance on
the day preceding the effective date of this subchapter, pursuant to the
aforesaid Art. 14, as amended, shall continue to receive the same retirement
allowance under the terms provided in the aforesaid Art. 14, as amended, as the
said article was in force the day preceding the effective date of this
subchapter.
   (B)   The payment of such retirement allowances shall become an obligation
of the city’s employees’ retirement system established by this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 2-205) (Ord. 368, passed 9-25-1967)
§ 32.007 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCUMULATED CONTRIBUTIONS. The sum of all amounts deducted from the
compensation of a member and credited to his or her individual account in the
Annuity Savings Fund, together with regular interest thereon.
   ANNUITY. An annual amount, derived from a member’s accumulated
contributions, payable in equal monthly installments throughout the future life
of a person, or for a temporary period, as provided in this subchapter.
   ANNUITY RESERVE. The present value of all payments to be made on account of
any annuity. The present value shall be computed using regular interest and
such decrement tables as the Retirement Commission shall from time to time
adopt.
   BENEFICIARY. Any person, except a retirant, who is in receipt of or who is
designated to receive, a retirement allowance or other benefit payable by the
retirement system.
   COMPENSATION. A member’s salary or wages paid him or her by the city for
personal services rendered by him or her to the city. If a member’s
compensation is not all paid in money, the Retirement Commission shall fix the
value of that part of his or her compensation not paid in money.
   CREDITED SERVICE. The number of years and months of service credited a
member by the Retirement Commission as provided in this subchapter.
   EMERGENCY EMPLOYEE. One who is hired on an emergency basis for a period not
to exceed seven days unless approved by the City Council, effective 4-1-1992.
   FINAL AVERAGE COMPENSATION.
      (1)   For general members, the average of any three consecutive years of
a member’s credited service producing the highest total amount of said member’s
base wage, plus the average longevity payments made to the member during the
last three years of his or her employment, effective 10-6-1980. If a member has
less than three years of credited service, his or her FINAL AVERAGE
COMPENSATION received by him or her during his or her total period of credited
service. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, effective 10-5-1987,
for members of the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees
(A.F.S.C.M.E.) Local 894, and for members of the Police Officers Association of
Michigan (P.O.A.M.), FINAL AVERAGE COMPENSATION (except in the case of a
deferred retirement, a member’s resignation or a member’s discharge) shall also
include a member’s accrued vacation and sick leave paid on retirement;
provided, however, that, said accrued vacation and sick leave amounts shall in
no event increase a member’s FINAL AVERAGE COMPENSATION more than 10%.
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, effective 2-1-1990, for non-
union general members, for members of the American Federation of State, County
and Municipal Employees (A.F.S.C.M.E.) Local 894, and members of the F.O.P.
police/fire dispatcher/clerical, FINAL AVERAGE COMPENSATION (except in the case
of a deferred retirement, a member’s resignation or a member’s discharge) shall
also include a member’s accrued vacation and sick leave paid on retirement;
provided, however, that, said accrued vacation and sick leave amounts shall in
no event increase a member’s FINAL AVERAGE COMPENSATION more than 25%.
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, effective 2-1-2000, for non-
union general members and for members of the American Federation of State,
County and Municipal Employees (A.F.S.C.M.E.) Local 894, FINAL AVERAGE
COMPENSATION means the average of the highest three consecutive years of
compensation, and includes all base wages, overtime and longevity. FINAL
AVERAGE COMPENSATION (except in the case of a deferred retirement, a member’s
resignation or a member’s discharge) will also include accrued sick and
vacation time paid on retirement. The accrued sick and vacation amounts shall
not increase a member’s final average compensation by more than 25%.
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, effective 2-1-2013, for non-
union general members, and 6-30-2013, for members of the American Federation of
State, County and Municipal Employees (A.F.S.C.M.E.) Local 894, FINAL AVERAGE
COMPENSATION means the average of the highest three consecutive years of
compensation, and includes all base wages, and longevity. FINAL AVERAGE
COMPENSATION (except in the case of a deferred retirement, a member’s
resignation or a member’s discharge) will also include accrued sick and
vacation time paid on retirement. The accrued sick and vacation amounts shall
not increase a member’s final average compensation by more than 25%.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, effective 1-1-1999, for members of
the American Federation of State, County, and Municipal Employees
(A.F.S.C.M.E.) Local 894, FINAL AVERAGE COMPENSATION means the average of the
highest three consecutive years of compensation, and includes all base wages,
overtime, and longevity. FINAL AVERAGE COMPENSATION (except in the case of a
deferred retirement, a member’s resignation or a member’s discharge) will also
include accrued sick and vacation time paid on retirement. The accrued sick and
vacation amounts shall not increase a member’s final average compensation by
more than 25%.
      (2)   For police members, the best 12 months of compensation plus holiday
pay for the 365-day period preceding the effective date of retirement plus
longevity contained in the last year of credited service, effective 10-6-1980.
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, effective 2-1-1987, for
members of the patrol officers bargaining unit only, FINAL AVERAGE COMPENSATION
(except in the case of a deferred retirement, a member’s resignation or a
member’s discharge) shall also include a member’s accrued vacation and sick
leave paid on retirement; provided, however, that, said accrued vacation and
sick amounts shall in no event increase a member’s FINAL AVERAGE COMPENSATION
more than 10%. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, for police
members and Police Department command officers, FINAL AVERAGE COMPENSATION
means the best 12 consecutive months of compensation, plus longevity contained
in the last year of credited service, and shall also include holiday pay for
the 365-day period preceding the effective date of retirement, effective 10-5-
1981. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, effective 2-1-1990, for
police members and Police Department command officers, FINAL AVERAGE
COMPENSATION (except in the case of a deferred retirement, a member’s
resignation or a member’s discharge) shall also include a member’s accrued
vacation and sick leave paid on retirement; provided, however, that, said
accrued vacation and sick leave amounts shall in no event increase a member’s
final average compensation more than 25%. Notwithstanding anything herein to
the contrary, effective 2-1-1999, for police patrol members and 2-1-2000, for
police command members, FINAL AVERAGE COMPENSATION means the average of the
highest three out of the last ten years of compensation, and includes all base
wages, shift differential, eligible overtime as defined in the collective
bargaining agreement, annual payments of accrued compensatory time, longevity
pay and holiday pay. FINAL AVERAGE COMPENSATION (except in the case of a
deferred retirement, a member’s resignation or a member’s discharge) will also
include sick and vacation time paid on retirement. The accrued sick and
vacation amounts shall not increase a member’s final average compensation by
more than 25%. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, effective 1-1-
2020, for police patrol and command officers hired after 2-1-1999, FINAL
AVERAGE COMPENSATION means the average of the highest 60 consecutive months of
base wages out of the last ten consecutive years. For fire members, FINAL
AVERAGE COMPENSATION means the best 12 months of compensation, plus longevity,
contained in the last year of credited service, effective 10-4-1976, and FINAL
AVERAGE COMPENSATION shall also include holiday pay for the 365-day period
preceding the effective date of retirement, effective 10-5-1981.
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, effective 2-1-1987, for fire
members, FINAL AVERAGE COMPENSATION (except in the case of a deferred
retirement, a member’s resignation or a member’s discharge) shall also include
a member’s accrued vacation and sick leave paid on retirement; provided,
however, that, said accrued vacation and sick leave amounts shall in no event
increase a member’s final average compensation by more than 10%.
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, effective 2-1-1990, for fire
members, FINAL AVERAGE COMPENSATION (except in the case of a deferred
retirement, a member’s resignation or a member’s discharge) shall also include
a member’s accrued vacation and sick leave paid on retirement; provided,
however, that, said accrued vacation and sick leave amounts shall in no event
increase a member’s final average compensation more than 25%. Notwithstanding
anything herein to the contrary, effective 2-1-2000, for fire members, FINAL
AVERAGE COMPENSATION means the average of the highest three out of the last ten
consecutive years of compensation, and includes all base wages, ALS premium
pay, overtime, longevity, food allowance and holiday pay. FINAL AVERAGE
COMPENSATION (except in the case of a deferred retirement, a member’s
resignation or a member’s discharge) will also include accrued sick and
vacation time paid on retirement. The accrued sick and vacation amounts shall
not increase a member’s FINAL AVERAGE COMPENSATION by more than 25%.
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, effective 2-1-2012, for fire
members FINAL AVERAGE COMPENSATION means the average of the highest three
consecutive years out of the last ten years of compensation, and includes all
base wages, ALS premium pay, food allowance and holiday pay for this time
period. FINAL AVERAGE COMPENSATION (except in the case of a deferred
retirement, a member’s resignation or a member’s discharge) will also include
accrued sick and vacation time paid on retirement. The accrued sick and
vacation amounts shall not increase a member’s final average compensation by
more than 25%. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, effective 1-1-
2016, for fire members, FINAL AVERAGE COMPENSATION means the average of the
highest three out of the last ten consecutive years of compensation, and
includes all base wages, ALS premium pay, eligible overtime as defined in the
collective bargaining agreement, longevity, food allowance and holiday pay.
FINAL AVERAGE COMPENSATION (except in the case of a deferred retirement, a
member’s resignation or a member’s discharge) will also include accrued sick
and vacation time paid on retirement. The accrued sick and vacation amounts
shall not increase a member’s final average compensation by more than 25%.
   HYPOTHETICAL ACCUMULATED CONTRIBUTIONS FOR A GENERAL MEMBER, POLICE OFFICER
OR FIREFIGHTER OR AN EXEMPT OR NON-EXEMPT SALARIED MUNICIPAL SERVICE MEMBER.
The sum of:
      (1)   The portion, if any, of the member’s accumulated contributions on
11-15-1982 for non-union general members, 2-21-1983 for union general members,
3-21-1983 for command officer police officer members, 3-18-1984 for patrol
officer police officer members, 3-21-1983 for firefighter members and 6-1-1983
for exempt and non-exempt salaried municipal service members, that is returned
to him or her pursuant to §
32.017 of this chapter, together with interest thereon at the rate of 5% per
year for all time periods after 10-1-1982 for non-union general members, union
general members, command officer police officer members and firefighter
members, 10-1-1983 for patrol officer members and 10-1-1982 for exempt and non-
exempt salaried municipal service members;
      (2)   All amounts that would have been deducted from the member’s
compensation after 11-15-1982 for non-union general members, 2-21-1983 for
union general members, 3-21-1983 for command officer police officer members, 3-
18-1984 for patrol officer police officer members, 3-21-1983 for firefighter
members and 6-1-1983 for exempt and non-exempt salaried municipal service
members if member contributions had been continued after that date, based on
the provisions of §
32.026(A) of this chapter in effect on that date, together with interest
thereon at the rate of 5% per year for all time periods after 10-1-1982 for
non-union general members, union general members, command officer police
officer members and firefighter members, 10-1-1983 for patrol officer members
and 10-1-1982 for exempt and non-exempt salaried municipal service members; and
      (3)   All amounts that would have been deducted from the member’s
compensation after 2-1-2000 for firefighter members hired after 10-1-1982 if
member contributions had began at that date based on the provisions of §
32.026(A) of this chapter adopted in conjunction with this section, together
with interest thereon at the rate of 5% per year for all time periods after 2-
1-2000.
   MANDATORY RETIREMENT AGE. The applicable age set forth below:
      (1)   Age 70 years for a police officer or firefighter member;
      (2)   Age 70 years for a hospital member;
      (3)   Age 70 years for a municipal service member; and
      (4)   Age 70 years for a general member.
   MEMBER. Any person who is included in the membership of the retirement
system as set forth below:
      (1)   POLICE OFFICER OR FIREFIGHTER MEMBER. Any member who is employed in
the Police or Fire Departments of the city holding the rank of patroler or
piper, including probationary patroler or piper, or higher rank. The term
POLICE OFFICER OR FIREFIGHTER MEMBER shall not include:
         (a)   Any person who is privately employed as a police officer or a
firefighter;
         (b)   Any person who is temporarily employed as a police officer or
firefighter for any emergency;
         (c)   Any civilian employee in the Police or Fire Departments;
         (d)   Any police patrol member hired after 2-1-1999 and 12-31-2019 who
did not elect to join the system as of 1-1-2020;
         (e)   Any police command member hired after 2-1-1999 and 12-31-2019
who did not elect to join the system as of 1-1-2020; and
         (f)   Any firefighter member hired after 10-1-2000.
      (2)   HOSPITAL MEMBER. Any member who is employed in the Wyandotte
General Hospital.
      (3)   MUNICIPAL SERVICE MEMBER. Any member who is employed in the
Municipal Service Department of the city.
      (4)   GENERAL MEMBER. Any member, including non-union administrative,
technical and clerical employees and members of the American Federation of
State, County and Municipal Employees (A.F.S.C.M.E.) Local 894, and members of
the Police Officers Association of Michigan (P.O.A.M.), except:
         (a)   A police officer or firefighter member;
         (b)   A hospital member;
         (c)   A municipal service member;
         (d)   Non-union administrative, technical or clerical employees of the
city hired after 10-1-1999;
         (e)   Members of the American Federation of State, County and
Municipal Employees (A.F.S.C.M.E.) Local 894, hired after 3-31-2000;
         (f)   Non-union administrative, technical or clerical employees of the
city hired before 10-1-1999, who voluntarily elected to leave membership of the
retirement system on 3-31-2001, pursuant to the rules in effect at that time;
         (g)   Members of the American Federation of State, County and
Municipal Employees (A.F.S.C.M.E.) Local 894, hired before 3-31-2000, who
voluntarily elected to leave membership of the retirement system on 3-31-2001,
pursuant to the rules in effect at that time;
         (h)   Members of the Police Officers Association of Michigan
(P.O.A.M.) - dispatchers/ clerical bargaining unit hired after 7-1-2001;
         (i)   Members of the Police Officers Association of Michigan
(P.O.A.M.) - dispatchers/ clerical bargaining unit hired before 7-1-2001, who
voluntarily elected to leave membership of the retirement system on 6-30-2002,
pursuant to the rules in effect at that time; and
         (j)   Members of the American Federation of State, County and
Municipal Employees (A.F.S.C.M.E.) Local 894, hired before 3-31-2000, who
voluntarily elected to leave membership of the retirement system on 3-31-2013,
pursuant to the rules in effect at that time.
   MINIMUM CREDIT SERVICE. The applicable period of credited service set forth
below:
      (1)   Ten years of credited service for a police officer or firefighter
member;
      (2)   Five years of credited service for a hospital member, unless
otherwise specifically provided for in this chapter, effective 1-1-1977;
      (3)   Ten years of credited service for a municipal service member; and
      (4)   Ten years of credited service for a general member.
   NORMAL RETIREMENT AGE. The applicable age set forth below:
      (1)   Age 60 years for a police officer or firefighter member;
      (2)   Age 65 years for a hospital member;
      (3)   Age 65 years for a municipal service member; and
      (4)   Age 65 years for a general member.
   PART-TIME EMPLOYEE. One who works in a year-round position, usually less
than 40 hours per week on a regular and continuing basis (50.4 hours for
firefighters) and has completed the probationary period, and is not subsidized
by non-city governmental funds, effective 4-1-1992.
   PENSION. An annual amount, derived from contributions made by the city or an
appropriating division of the city, payable in equal monthly installments
throughout the future life of a person, or for a temporary period, as provided
in this subchapter.
   PENSION RESERVE. The present value of all payments to be made on account of
any pension. The present value shall be computed using regular interest and
such decrement tables as the Retirement Commission shall from time to time
adopt.
   REGULAR INTEREST. Such rate or rates of interest per annum, compounded
annually, as the Retirement Commission shall from time to time adopt.
   RETIREMENT. Any member who retires with a retirement allowance payable by
the retirement system.
   RETIREMENT. A member’s withdrawal from city employment with a retirement
allowance payable by the retirement system.
   RETIREMENT ALLOWANCE. The sum of the annuity and pension payable to a
retirant or beneficiary for a police member hired after 10-1-1982. For a
general, police officer or firefighter member or an exempt or non-exempt
salaried municipal service member who is an active member on or after 11-15-
1982 for non-union general members, 2-21-1983 for union general members, 3-21-
1983 for command officer police officer members, 3-18-1984 for patrol officer
police officer members, 3-21-1983 for firefighter members and 6-1-1983 for
exempt and non-exempt salaried municipal service members, the RETIREMENT
ALLOWANCE shall equal the pension only.
   RETIREMENT COMMISSION or COMMISSION. The Retirement Commission provided for
in this subchapter.
   RETIREMENT SYSTEM or SYSTEM. The city’s employee’s retirement system
established by this subchapter.
   SEASONAL EMPLOYEE. One who normally is hired for a specific length of time,
usually of a short-term nature, and whose services are required during only
parts of the year, effective 4-1-1992.
   SERVICE. Personal service rendered to the city by the officer or employee of
the city.
   TEMPORARY EMPLOYEE. One who normally is hired for a specific length of time,
usually of a short-term nature due to employment in a situation such as a
special project or in relief of another employee on leave, effective 4-1-1992.
   VOLUNTARY RETIREMENT AGE. The applicable age set forth below:
      (1)   (a)   For a police member hired prior to 2-1-1999, the first to
occur:
            1.   Fifty-five years of age; or
            2.   Twenty-five years of credited service and at least age 50,
effective 10-4-1976.
         (b)   For a police member hired after 2-1-1999, the first to occur:
            1.   Fifty-five years of age and 25 years of credited service; or
            2.   Sixty years of age with ten years of credited service.
      (2)   (a)   For a fire member, the first to occur:
            1.   Fifty-five years of age; or
            2.   Fifty years of age and 30 years of credited service, effective
10-3- 1977.
         (b)   Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, effective 2-1-
1990, for a fire member, 25 years of credited service without regard to age, or
age 55 with ten or more years of credited service.
      (3)   Age 60 years for a hospital member;
      (4)   For an hourly municipal service member, age 60 years or the age at
which he or she acquires 30 years of credited service. Effective 1-1-1988, for
an exempt or non-exempt salaried municipal service member only, the first to
occur of:
         (a)   Age 60 years; or
         (b)   The age at which he or she acquires 25 years of credited
service.
      (5)   For a general member, the first to occur of age 55 years or the age
at which he or she acquires 25 years of credited service, effective 10-4-1976.
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, effective 2-1-1990, for a
general member, 25 years of credited service without regard to age or age 55
with ten or more years of credited service.
   WORKER’S COMPENSATION PERIOD. The period a person is in receipt of worker’s
compensation on account of a member’s disability or death arising out of and in
the course of his city employment. If the said person is paid a single sum in
lieu of his or her future worker’s compensation, his or her WORKER’S
COMPENSATION PERIOD shall be the period, if any, he or she was in receipt of
worker’s compensation in weekly or other periodic payments, plus the period
derived by dividing the said single sum by his or her weekly or other periodic
payment award.
(Prior Code, § 2-206) (Ord. 368, passed 9-25-1967; Ord. 490-A, passed 12-4-
1972; Ord. 541, passed 12-9-1974; Ord. 586, passed 5-9-1977; Ord. 624, passed
12-4-1978; Ord. 637, passed 7-3-1979; Ord. 702, passed 7-6-1981; Ord. 707,
passed 8-3-1981; Ord. 709, passed 9-14-1981; Ord. 771, passed 9-24-1984; Ord.
830, passed 10-19-1987; Ord. 858, passed 12-5-1988; Ord. 917, passed 8-19-1991;
Ord. 958, passed 10-5-1992; Ord. 1060, passed 3-1-1999; Ord. 1077, passed 9-13-
1999; Ord. 1082, passed 11-1-1999; Ord. 1091, passed 6-5-2000; Ord. 1159,
passed 11-18-2002; Ord. 1388, passed 10-14-2013; Ord. 1485, passed 4-20-2020)
§ 32.008 RIGHT TO WAIVE, MAINTAIN OR ALTER THE DEFINITIONS.
   Notwithstanding anything elsewhere in this subchapter to the contrary,
effective 2-1-1990, as it relates to police members, Police Department command
officers, members of the F.O.P. police/fire dispatcher/clerical bargaining
unit, fire members and general members, the city expressly reserves the right
to waive, maintain or alter the provisions of §
32.007 of this chapter; provided, however, in no event shall any pension
benefits set forth in this subchapter be lessened or reduced as a result of
waiving, maintaining or altering any provisions thereof.
(Prior Code, § 2-206.1) (Ord. 917, passed 8-19-1991)
§ 32.009 MEMBERSHIP IN SYSTEM.
   (A)   The membership of the retirement system shall include all persons who
are, and who become, officers or employees of the city, except as provided in
division (B) below.
   (B)   The membership of the retirement system, effective April 1992, shall
not include:
      (1)   Elective and appointive officials who are not in full time
employment with the city;
      (2)   Any person whose services are compensated on a fee or contractual
basis;
      (3)   Any person in a position normally working less than 80 hours per
month;
      (4)   Any person hired on a temporary part-time seasonal, co-op,
internship or emergency or volunteer basis, including crossing guards and park
rangers;
      (5)   The medical director and actuary;
      (6)   Any person who cannot complete the minimum credited service
requirements, other than those eligible under §
32.059 of this chapter dealing with the Reciprocal Retirement Act, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 38.1101 et seq.; or
      (7)   Any person in receipt of retirement allowance from the city’s
employee’s retirement system.
   (C)   In addition to the exclusions identified in division (B) above,
membership of the retirement system shall not include:
      (1)   Any police patrol member hired between 2-1-1999 and 12-31-2019, who
did not elect to join the system effective 1-1-2020;
      (2)   Any non-union administrative technical or clerical employees of the
city hired after 10-1-1999;
      (3)   Any member of the American Federation of State, County and
Municipal Employees (A.F.S.C.M.E.) Local 894, hired after 3-31-2000;
      (4)   Any police command member hired between 2-1-1999 and 12-31-2019,
who did not elect to join the system effective 1-1-2020;
      (5)   Any firefighter member hired after 10-1-2000;
      (6)   Any non-union administrative, technical or clerical employee of the
city hired before 10-1-1999, who voluntarily elected to leave membership of the
retirement system on 3-31-2001, pursuant to the rules in effect at that time;
      (7)   Any member of the American Federation of State, County and
Municipal Employees (A.F.S.C.M.E.) Local 894, hired before 3-31-2000, who
voluntarily elected to leave membership of the retirement system on 3-31-2001,
pursuant to the rules in effect at that time;
      (8)   Any member of the dispatch/clerical bargaining unit hired after 7-
2-2001;
      (9)   Any member of the dispatch/clerical bargaining unit hired before 7-
1-2002, who voluntarily elected to leave membership of the retirement system on
6-30-2002, pursuant to the rules in effect at that time;
      (10)   Any municipal service employee hired after 9-30-2006;
      (11)   Any municipal service employee hired before 10-1-2006, who
voluntarily elected to leave membership of the retirement system; and
      (12)   Any member of the American Federation of State, County and
Municipal Employees (A.F.S.C.M.E.) Local 894, hired before 3-31-2000, who
voluntarily elected to leave membership of the retirement system on 3-31-2013,
pursuant to the rules in effect at that time.
   (D)   In all cases of doubt, the Commission shall decide who is a member of
the system within the meaning of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 2-207) (Ord. 368, passed 9-25-1967; Ord. 567, passed 6-14-1976;
Ord. 958, passed 10-5-1992; Ord. 1060, passed 3-1-1999; Ord. 1082, passed 11-1-
1999; Ord. 1091, passed 6-5-2000; Ord. 1159, passed 11-18-2002; Ord. 1371,
passed 9-17-2012; Ord. 1388, passed 10-14-2013; Ord. 1485, passed 4-20-2020)
§ 32.010 MEMBERSHIP TERMINATION.
   Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, any member who leaves the
employ of the city for any reason, except his or her retirement or death shall
thereupon cease to be a member and his or her credited service at the time
shall be forfeited by him or her. If he or she is reemployed by the city in a
position covered by the retirement system, he or she shall again become a
member of the system. If his or her reemployment occurs within a period of five
years from and after the date he or she last left city employment, his or her
credited service last forfeited by him or her shall be restored to his or her
credit upon his or her return to the Annuity Savings Fund the amount, if any,
he or she withdrew therefrom, together with regular interest from the date of
withdrawal to the date of repayment. The requirement for repayment of withdrawn
accumulated contributions to restore forfeited credited service shall not apply
to accumulated contributions withdrawn from the Annuity Savings Fund in
accordance with the provisions of §
32.023(B) of this chapter. Upon a member’s retirement or death, he or she shall
thereupon cease to be a member.
(Prior Code, § 2-208) (Ord. 368, passed 9-25-1967; Ord. 725, passed 4-5-1982)
§ 32.011 CREDITED SERVICE; COMPUTATION.
   The service rendered by a member shall be credited him or her by the
Commission in accordance with such rules and regulations as the Commission
shall from time to time adopt consistent with the provisions of this
subchapter. Effective 4-1-1992, 80 hours of service in a month entitles the
member to one month of credited service and, for example, ten months of service
in a year entitles the member to ten months of credited service, but no more
than one year of service shall be credited a member for all service rendered by
him or her in any calendar year. Effective 4-1-1992, unless otherwise eligible
under §
32.010 of this chapter, if the Commission grants any additional credited
service, the member granted same shall, within 90 days, contribute to the
retirement system the actuarially computed pension contributions for the
additional credited service granted which normally would have been paid by the
member’s appointing authority.
(Prior Code, § 2-209) (Ord. 368, passed 9-25-1967; Ord. 830, passed 10-19-1987;
Ord. 958, passed 10-5-1992)
§ 32.012 RIGHT TO WAIVE, MAINTAIN OR ALTER PROVISIONS DEALING WITH CREDITED
SERVICE AND COMPUTATION OF SAME.
   Notwithstanding anything elsewhere in this subchapter to the contrary,
effective 2-1-1990, as it relates to police members, Police Department command
officers, members of the F.O.P. police/fire dispatcher/clerical bargaining
unit, fire members and general members, the city expressly reserves the right
to waive, maintain or alter the provisions of §
32.011 of this chapter; provided, however, in no event shall any pension
benefits set forth in this subchapter be lessened or reduced as a result of
waiving, maintaining or altering any provisions thereof.
(Prior Code, § 2-209.1) (Ord. 917, passed 8-19-1991)
§ 32.013 MILITARY SERVICE CREDIT.
   (A)   A member who, while employed by the city, entered or enters the armed
service of the United States Government, and who has been or shall be on active
duty in such armed service during time of war or period of compulsory military
service, shall have such armed service actually required of him or her credited
him or her as city service in the same manner as if he or she had served the
city uninterruptedly; provided that:
      (1)   He or she re-enters the employ of the city, in a position covered
by the retirement system, within one year after termination of such armed
service actually required of him or her;
      (2)   He or she pays into the members deposit fund the amount, if any, he
or she withdrew therefrom at the time he entered or while in such armed
service, together with regular interest from the date of withdrawal to the date
of repayment; and
      (3)   In no case shall more than five years of city service be credited
any member for all such armed service rendered by him or her.
   (B)   In any case of doubt as to the period to be so credited any member,
the Commission shall have the final power to determine such period. During the
period of such armed service and until his or her reemployment by the city, a
member’s contributions to the retirement system shall be suspended and any
balance standing to his or her credit in the Annuity Savings Fund shall be
accumulated at regular interest.
(Prior Code, § 2-210) (Ord. 368, passed 9-25-1967)
§ 32.014 VOLUNTARY RETIREMENT.
   A member who has attained or attains his or her applicable voluntary
retirement age and who has acquired or acquires his or her applicable minimum
credited service may retire upon his or her written application filed with the
Commission setting forth at what time, not less than 30 days, nor more than 90
days subsequent to the execution and filing thereof, he or she desires to be
retired. Upon his or her retirement, he or she shall receive a retirement
allowance provided in §
32.016(C) of this chapter if he or she is a police officer or firefighter
member, or as provided in §
32.016(D) of this chapter if he or she is a hospital member, or as provided in
§
32.016(E) of this chapter if he or she is a municipal service member, or as
provided in §
32.016(F) of this chapter if he or she is a general member.
(Prior Code, § 2-211) (Ord. 368, passed 9-25-1967)
§ 32.015 REQUIRED DISTRIBUTION DATE.
   (A)   Distribution date.
      (1)   Distribution of a member’s benefits hereunder shall be made or
commenced to be paid not later than April 1 of the year following the year in
which the later of the following occurs:
         (a)   The member attains age 70.5; or
         (b)   The members retires.
      (2)   The later of these events shall be the member’s “required
distribution date”.
   (B)   Minimum distribution requirements; pension.
      (1)   Effective date. The provisions of this section will apply for
purposes of determining required minimum distributions for calendar years
beginning with the 2003 calendar year.
      (2)   Precedence. The requirements of this section will take precedence
over any inconsistent provisions of this chapter.
      (3)   Requirements of Treasury regulations incorporated. All
distributions required under this section will be determined and made in
accordance with the Treasury regulations under I.R.C. § 401(a)(9).
      (4)   Bipartisan Budget Act elections. Notwithstanding the other
provisions of this section, other than division (B)(3) above, distributions may
be made under a designation made before 1-1-1984, in accordance with the
Bipartisan Budget Act.
      (5)   Required beginning date. The member’s entire interest will be
distributed, or begin to be distributed, to the member no later than the
member’s required beginning date.
      (6)   Death of member before distributions begin.
         (a)   If the member dies before distributions begin, the member’s
entire interest will be distributed, or begin to be distributed, no later than
as follows.
            1.   If the member’s surviving spouse is the member’s sole
designated beneficiary, then, except as provided in the adoption agreement,
distributions to the surviving spouse will begin by December 31 of the calendar
year immediately following the calendar year in which the member died, or by
December 31 of the calendar year in which the member would have attained age
70.5, if later.
            2.   If the member’s surviving spouse is not the member’s sole
designated beneficiary, then, except as provided in the adoption agreement,
distributions to the designated beneficiary will begin by December 31 of the
calendar year immediately following the calendar year in which the member died.
            3.   If there is no designated beneficiary as of September 30 of
the year following the year of the member’s death, the member’s entire interest
will be distributed by December 31 of the calendar year containing the fifth
anniversary of the member’s death.
            4.   If the member’s surviving spouse is the member’s sole
designated beneficiary and the surviving spouse dies after the member, but
before distributions to the surviving spouse begin, this division (B)(6), other
than division (B)(6)(a) above, will apply as if the surviving spouse were the
member.
         (b)   For purposes of this division (B)(6) and divisions (B)(13)
through (B)(15) below, distributions are considered to begin on the member’s
required beginning date (or, if division (B)(6)(d) above applies, the date
distributions are required to begin to the surviving spouse under division (B)
(6)(a) above). If annuity payments irrevocably commence to the member before
the member’s required beginning date (or to the member’s surviving spouse
before the date distributions are required to begin to the surviving spouse
under division (B)(6)(a) above), the date distributions are considered to begin
is the date distributions actually commence.
      (7)   Form of distribution. Unless the member’s interest is distributed
in the form of an annuity purchased from an insurance company or in a single
sum on or before the required beginning date, as of the first distribution
calendar year distributions will be made in accordance with divisions (B)(8)
through (B)(15) below. If the member’s interest is distributed in the form of
an annuity purchased from an insurance company, distributions thereunder will
be made in accordance with the requirements of I.R.C. § 401(a)(9) and the
Treasury regulations. Any part of the member’s interest which is in the form of
an individual account described in I.R.C. § 414(k) will be distributed in a
manner satisfying the requirements of I.R.C. § 401(a)(9) and the Treasury
regulations that apply to individual accounts.
      (8)   General annuity requirements. If the member’s interest is paid in
the form of annuity distributions under the retirement system, payments under
the annuity will satisfy the following requirements:
         (a)   The annuity distributions will be paid in periodic payments made
at intervals not longer than one year;
         (b)   The distribution period will be over a life (or lives) or over a
period certain not longer than the period described in divisions (B)(11) and
(B)(12) below or divisions (B)(13) through (B)(15) below;
         (c)   Once payments have begun over a period certain, the period
certain will not be changed even if the period certain is shorter than the
maximum permitted; and
         (d)   Payments will either be non-increasing or increase only as
follows:
            1.   By an annual percentage increase that does not exceed the
annual percentage increase in a cost-of-living index that is based on prices of
all items and issued by the Bureau of Labor Statistics;
            2.   By the increase in compensation for a position held by the
employee at the time of retirement;
            3.   By the amount of a variable or fixed rate paid directly from
the trust. A fixed rate increase may be provided if the rate of increase is
less than 5%. A variable rate increase, based solely on better than assumed
investment performance, is permitted, but only if the assumed interest rate for
calculating the initial level of payments is at least 3%;
            4.   To the extent of the reduction in the amount of the member’s
payments to provide for a survivor benefit upon death, but only if the
beneficiary whose life was being used to determine the distribution period
described in divisions (B)(11) or (B)(12) below dies or is no longer the
member’s beneficiary pursuant to a qualified domestic relations order within
the meaning of I.R.C. § 414(p);
            5.   To provide cash refunds of employee contributions upon the
member’s death; or
            6.   To pay increased benefits that result from a plan amendment.
      (9)   Amount required to be distributed by required beginning date. The
amount that must be distributed on or before the member’s required beginning
date (or, if the member dies before distributions begin, the date distributions
are required to begin under divisions (B)(6)(a) or (B)(6)(b) above) is the
payment that is required for one payment interval. The second payment need not
be made until the end of the next payment interval even if that payment
interval ends in the next calendar year. Payment intervals are the periods for
which payments are received (e.g., bimonthly, monthly, semi-annually or
annually). All of the member’s benefit accruals as of the last day of the first
distribution calendar year will be included in the calculation of the amount of
the annuity payments for payment intervals ending on or after the member’s
required beginning date.
      (10)   Additional accruals after first distribution calendar year. Any
additional benefits accruing to the member in a calendar year after the first
distribution calendar year will be distributed beginning with the first payment
interval ending in the calendar year immediately following the calendar year in
which such amount accrues.
      (11)   Joint life annuities where the beneficiary is not the member’s
spouse. If the member’s interest is being distributed in the form of a joint
and survivor annuity for the joint lives of the member and a non-spouse
beneficiary, annuity payments to be made on or after the member’s required
beginning date to the designated beneficiary after the member’s death must not
at any time exceed the applicable percentage of the annuity payment for such
period that would have been payable to the member using the table set forth in
Q&A-2 of § 1.401(a)(9)-6T of the Treasury regulations. If the form of
distribution combines a joint and survivor annuity for the joint lives of the
member and a non- spouse beneficiary and a period certain annuity, the
requirement in the preceding sentence will apply to annuity payments to be made
to the designated beneficiary after the expiration of the period certain.
      (12)   Period certain annuities. Unless the member’s spouse is the sole
designated beneficiary and the form of distribution is a period certain and no
life annuity, the period certain for an annuity distribution commencing during
the member’s lifetime may not exceed the applicable distribution period for the
member under the Uniform Lifetime Table set forth in § 1.401(a)(9)-9 of the
Treasury regulations for the calendar year that contains the annuity starting
date. If the annuity starting date precedes the year in which the member
reaches age 70, the applicable distribution period for the member is the
distribution period for age 70 under the Uniform Lifetime Table set forth in §
1.401(a)(9)-9 of the Treasury regulations, plus the excess of 70 over the age
of the member as of the member’s birthday in the year that contains the annuity
starting date. If the member’s spouse is the member’s sole designated
beneficiary and the form of distribution is a period certain and no life
annuity, the period certain may not exceed the longer of the member’s
applicable distribution period, as determined under this division (B)(12), or
the joint life and last survivor expectancy of the member and the member’s
spouse as determined under the Joint and Last Survivor Table set forth in §
1.401(a)(9)-9 of the Treasury regulations, using the member’
      (13)   Member survived by designated beneficiary. If the member dies
before the date distribution of his or her interest begins and there is a
designated beneficiary, the member’s entire interest will be distributed,
beginning no later than the time described in divisions (B)(6)(a) or (B)(6)(b)
above, over the life of the designated beneficiary or over a period certain not
exceeding:
         (a)   Unless the annuity starting date is before the first
distribution calendar year, the life expectancy of the designated beneficiary
determined using the beneficiary’s age as of the beneficiary’s birthday in the
calendar year immediately following the calendar year of the member’s death; or
         (b)   If the annuity starting date is before the first distribution
calendar year, the life expectancy of the designated beneficiary determined
using the beneficiary’s age as of the beneficiary’s birthday in the calendar
year that contains the annuity starting date.
      (14)   No designated beneficiary. If the member dies before the date
distributions begin and there is no designated beneficiary as of September 30
of the year following the year of the member’s death, distribution of the
member’s entire interest will be completed by December 31 of the calendar year
containing the fifth anniversary of the member’s death.
      (15)   Death of surviving spouse before distributions to surviving spouse
begin. If the member dies before the date distribution of his or her interest
begins, the member’s surviving spouse is the member’s sole designated
beneficiary, and the surviving spouse dies before distributions to the
surviving spouse begin, this section will apply as if the surviving spouse were
the member; except that, the time by which distributions must begin will be
determined without regard to division (B)(6)(a) above.
      (16)   Payments to children. Payments made to a member’s child are
treated as payments to the surviving spouse if they cease after the child
reached the age of majority (or upon the death of the child) and are payable to
the surviving spouse thereafter.
      (17)   Designated beneficiary. The individual who is designated as the
beneficiary under this chapter and is the designated beneficiary under I.R.C. §
401(a)(9) and § 1.401(a)(9)-1, Q&A-4, of the Treasury regulations.
      (18)   Distribution calendar year.
         (a)   A calendar year for which a minimum distribution is required.
         (b)   For distributions beginning before the member’s death, the first
distribution calendar year is the calendar year immediately preceding the
calendar year which contains the member’s required beginning date. For
distributions beginning after the member’s death, the first distribution
calendar year is the calendar year in which distributions are required to begin
pursuant to division (B)(6) above.
      (19)   Life expectancy. Life expectancy as computed by use of the Single
Life Table in § 1.401(a)(9)-9 of the Treasury regulations.
      (20)   Required beginning date. The date specified in division (B)(1)
above.
(Prior Code, § 2-211.1) (Ord. 1262, passed 12-19-2005)
§ 32.016 RETIREMENTS; ALLOWANCES.
   (A)   Normal retirement.
      (1)   Subject to division (A)(2) below, a member, except an elected
officer of the city, shall be separated from the employ of the city the last
day of the calendar month in which he or she attains his or her applicable
normal retirement age.
      (2)   Upon the written application of a member and the approval of his or
her appointing authority, the Retirement Commission may defer said member’s
separation from the employ of the city for periods not to extend beyond the
last day of the calendar month in which he or she attains his or her applicable
mandatory retirement age.
      (3)   A member who is separated from the employ of the city as provided
in this division (A) and who has acquired his or her applicable minimum
credited service shall receive a retirement allowance provided in division (C)
below if he or she is a police officer or firefighter member, or as provided in
division (D) below if he or she is a hospital member, or as provided in
division (E) below if he or she is a municipal service member, or as provided
in division (F) below if he or she is a general member.
(Prior Code, § 2-212)
   (B)   Deferred retirement.
      (1)   Subject to division (B)(2) below, a member who leaves the employ of
the city prior to his or her attainment of his or her voluntary retirement age,
for any reason other than his or her retirement or death, shall be entitled to
a retirement allowance provided in division (C) below if he or she is a police
officer or firefighter member, or as provided in division (D) below if he or
she is a hospital member, or as provided in division (E) below if he or she is
municipal service member, or as provided in division (F) below if he or she is
a general member, as the applicable section was in force at the time he or she
left the employ of the city; provided, he or she has satisfied the applicable
age and/or service requirements set forth below:
         (a)   Ten or more years of credited service without regard to age, if
he or she is a police officer or firefighter member, effective 10-3-1977;
         (b)   Fifty percent vesting after five years of service, then 10%
additional vesting for each of the next five years if he or she is a hospital
member, effective 1-1-1977;
         (c)   Age 25 years and ten or more years of credited service if he or
she is a municipal service member; and
         (d)   Ten or more years of credited service without regard to age, if
a general member belonging to A.F.S.C.M.E., Local 894, effective 2-1-1987, or
any age and ten or more years of credited service for all other general
members, effective 10-4-1976.
      (2)   His or her retirement allowance shall begin the first day of the
calendar month next following the month in which his or her written application
for same is filed with the Commission on or after his or her attainment of his
or her voluntary retirement age. Prior to 9-30-1994, if a municipal service
hourly member withdraws his or her accumulated contributions from the Annuity
Savings Fund, except as provided in §
32.024(B) of this chapter, he or she shall forfeit his or her right in and to a
deferred retirement allowance provided in this section; provided, however,
after 9-30-1994, if a municipal service hourly member withdraws his or her
accumulated contributions from the Annuity Savings Fund, except as provided in
§
32.024(B) of this chapter, he or she shall not forfeit his or her right in and
to a deferred retirement allowance provided in this section. In no case shall
he or she be given service credit for the period of his or her absence from the
employ of the city unless such credit is specifically provided for in this
subchapter. Until the beginning date of his or her retirement allowance, his or
her accumulated contributions standing to his or her credit in the Annuity
Savings Fund shall be accumulated at regular interest.
(Prior Code, § 2-213)
   (C)   Police officer and firefighter member retirement allowance.
      (1)   Effective 2-1-1999 for patrol police members and 2-1-2000 for
command police members, hired after 10-1-1982, retroactive to date of hire,
shall receive a straight life retirement allowance and shall have the right to
elect a retirement allowance under an option provided in division (J) below in
lieu of a straight life retirement allowance. The straight life retirement
allowance shall equal the sum of:
         (a)   An annuity which shall be the actuarial equivalent of his or her
accumulated contributions standing to his or her credit in the Annuity Savings
Fund at the time of his or her retirement; and
         (b)   A pension which when added to his or her annuity will provide a
retirement allowance equal to the number of years and months of credited
service, not to exceed 25 years, multiplied by 2.5%, times the final average
compensation, plus the number of years and months of credited service in excess
of 25 years, if any, multiplied by 1% times the final average compensation.
      (2)   Maximum benefit is 75% of final average compensation. Members will
make pretax contributions of 5% from all income included in the final average
compensation. Effective 2-1-2000, a firefighter member, retroactive to date of
hire, shall be guaranteed a minimum straight life pension equal to:
         (a)   An amount equal to the sum of:
            1.   The number of years, and fraction of a year, of his or her
credited service not to exceed 25 years, multiplied by and 2.5% of his or her
final average compensation; plus
            2.   The number of years, and fraction of a year, of his or her
credited service in excess of 25 years, if any, multiplied by 1% of his or her
final average compensation, but not to exceed 75% of final average
compensation; less division (C)(2)(b) below.
         (b)   An amount equal to the actuarial equivalent of his or her
hypothetical accumulated contributions standing to his or her credit at the
time of his or her retirement, such actuarial equivalent amount to be computed
on the basis of the 1971 group annuity mortality table, with a five-year
setback for females, and interest at the rate of 6% per year, compounded
annually. Effective 2-1-2000, interest will be applied at 5% per year,
compounded annually.
      (3)   Effective 9-16-2005, a firefighter member who is an active member
on 10-1-1982 who retires within 60 days after the attainment of 25 years of
credited service as a fire member (provided, said retirement occurs subsequent
to 9-16-2005), or who retires subsequent to 9-16-2005 and no later than 11-15-
2005, shall be eligible for a minimum straight life pension equal to:
         (a)   An amount equal to the sum of:
            1.   The number of years, and fraction of a year, of his or her
credited service not to exceed 25 years, multiplied by 2.80% of his or her
final average compensation; plus
            2.   The number of years, and fraction of a year, of his or her
credited service in excess of 25 years, if any, multiplied by 1% of his or her
final average compensation, but not to exceed 75% of final average
compensation; less division (C)(3)(b) below.
         (b)   An amount equal to the actuarial equivalent of his or her
hypothetical accumulated contributions standing to his or her credit at the
time of his or her retirement, such actuarial equivalent amount to be computed
on the basis of the 1971 group annuity mortality table, with a five-year
setback for females, and interest at the rate of 6% per year, compounded
annually.
      (4)   A command police member who is an active member on October 1982
shall be guaranteed a minimum straight life pension equal to:
         (a)   An amount equal to the sum of:
            1.   The number of years, and fraction of a year, of his or her
credited service not to exceed 25 years, multiplied by 2.5% of his or her final
average compensation; plus
            2.   The number of years, and fraction of a year, of his or her
credited service in excess of 25 years, if any, multiplied by 1% of his or her
final average compensation, but not to exceed 75% of final average
compensation; less division (C)(4)(b) below.
         (b)   An amount equal to the actuarial equivalent of his or her
hypothetical accumulated contributions standing to his or her credit at the
time of retirement, such actuarial equivalent amount to be computed on the
basis of the 1971 group annuity mortality table, with a five-year setback for
females, and interest at the rate of 6% per year, compounded annually.
      (5)   Effective 10-16-2001, a command police member who is an active
member on 10-1-1982 who retires within 30 days after the attainment of 25 years
of credited service as a police member; provided, said retirement occurs
subsequent to 10-16-2001 (but in no case have cumulative credited service in
excess of 30 years) will be eligible for a minimum straight life pension equal
to:
         (a)   An amount equal to the sum of:
            1.   The number of years, and fraction of a year, of his or her
credited service not to exceed 25 years, multiplied by 2.80% of his or her
final average compensation; plus
            2.   The number of years, and fraction of a year, of his or her
credited service in excess of 25 years, if any, multiplied by 1% of his or her
final average compensation, but not to exceed 75% of final average
compensation; less division (C)(5)(b) below.
         (b)   An amount equal to the actuarial equivalent of his or her
hypothetical accumulated contributions standing to his or her credit at the
time of his or her retirement, such actuarial equivalent amount to be computed
on the basis of the 1971 group annuity mortality table, with a five-year
setback for females, and interest at the rate of 6% per year, compounded
annually.
      (6)   Effective 1-1-2020, for police members hired after 2-1-1999, shall
be guaranteed a minimum straight life pension equal to an amount equal to the
sum of the number of years, and fraction of a year, of his or her credited
service, multiplied by 2% of his or her final average compensation, but not to
exceed 70% of final average compensation.
      (7)   Notwithstanding anything elsewhere in this section to the contrary,
effective 2-1-1990, as it relates to police or fire members and Police
Department command officers, the city expressly reserves the right to waive,
maintain or alter the provisions of this section; provided, however, in no
event shall any pension benefits set forth in this subchapter be lessened or
reduced as a result of waiving, maintaining or altering any provisions thereof.
(Prior Code, § 2-214)
   (D)   Hospital member retirement allowance. Subject to §
32.022 of this chapter, upon a hospital member’s retirement, as provided in
this subchapter, he or she shall receive a straight life retirement allowance
and he or she shall have the right to elect and to receive his or her
retirement allowance under an option provided in division (J) below and §
32.019 of this chapter in lieu of a straight life retirement allowance.
Effective for retirements commencing on or after 3-8-1982, his or her straight
life retirement allowance shall consist of the benefits set forth below:
      (1)   An annuity which shall be the actuarial equivalent of his or her
accumulated contributions standing to his or her credit in the Annuity Savings
Fund at the time of his or her retirement; and
      (2)   A pension equal to the number of years, and fraction of a year, of
his or her credited service multiplied by the sum of:
         (a)   One percent of the first $4,200 of his or her final average
compensation; and
         (b)   One and one-half percent of the portion, if any, of his or her
final average compensation in excess of $4,200.
(Prior Code, § 2-215)
   (E)   Municipal service member retirement allowance. Subject to §
32.022 of this chapter, upon a municipal member’s retirement on or after 10-1-
1973, as provided in this subchapter, he or she shall be paid a straight life
retirement allowance or he or she may elect to be paid his or her retirement
allowance under an optional form of payment provided in division (J) below or §
32.022 of this chapter in lieu of a straight life retirement allowance.
      (1)   Hourly members. The amount of an hourly municipal service member’s
straight life retirement allowance shall be equal to 1.70% of an hourly
municipal service member’s final average compensation multiplied by his or her
credited service effective for retirements on or after 10-1-2009.
      (2)   Exempt and non-exempt salaried members. The amount of an exempt
salaried municipal service member’s straight life retirement allowance shall be
equal to 1.70% of an exempt salaried member’s final average compensation
multiplied by his or her credited service, effective 1-1-2006, and the amount
of a non-exempt salaried municipal service member’s straight life retirement
allowance shall be equal to 1.65% of a non-exempt salaried member’s final
average compensation multiplied by his or her credited service, effective 1-1-
2006.
      (3)   Computation of retirement allowance. Notwithstanding anything
elsewhere in this division (E) to the contrary, any hourly member who shall
become an exempt or non-exempt salaried member after 6-1-1983, shall, unless an
optional form of retirement allowance is elected as hereinabove provided for,
have his or her straight life retirement allowance computed under division (E)
(2) above.
(Prior Code, § 2-216)
   (F)   General member retirement allowance.
      (1)   Subject to §
32.022 of this chapter, upon a general member’s retirement, as provided in this
subchapter, he or she shall receive a straight life pension and he or she shall
have the right to elect and to receive his or her pension under an option
provided in division (J) below or §
32.022 of this chapter in lieu of a straight life pension. His or her straight
life pension shall equal the number of years, and fraction of a year, of his or
her credited service multiplied by 1.4% of his or her final average
compensation, but not to exceed 50% of final average compensation.
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, effective 4-24-2000, for non-
union general members and for members of the American Federation of State,
County and Municipal Employees (A.F.S.C.M.E.), Local 894, his or her straight
life pension shall equal the number of years, and fraction of a year, of his or
her credited service multiplied by 1.4% of his or her final average
compensation, but not to exceed 70% of final average compensation.
      (2)   A general member who is an active member on 10-1-1982 shall be
guaranteed a minimum straight life pension equal to:
         (a)   An amount equal to the number of years, and fraction of a year,
of his or her credited service, multiplied by 2% of his or her final average
compensation, but not to exceed 70% of final average compensation; less
         (b)   An amount equal to the actuarial equivalent of his or her
hypothetical accumulated contributions standing to his or her credit at the
time of his or her retirement, such actuarial equivalent amount to be computed
on the basis of the 1971 group annuity mortality table, with a five-year
setback for females, and interest at the rate of 6% per year, compounded
annually.
      (3)   With regards to the above provisions of this section, a general
member, who exercises his or her right to retire under the “voluntary
retirement age” provisions of this subchapter, shall be entitled to the above
retirement allowance reduced by 2% for each year if said member has retired
prior to his or her sixtieth year of age or thirtieth year of credited service,
whichever produces the greater retirement allowance, effective 10-4-1976;
provided, however, said 2% per year reduction shall not apply to any general
member exercising his or her right to retire under the “voluntary retirement
age” provisions of this chapter on or after 2-1-1990.
      (4)   Notwithstanding anything elsewhere in this section to the contrary,
effective 2-1-1990, as it relates to general members and F.O.P./police and fire
dispatcher/clerical bargaining unit members, the city expressly reserves the
right to waive, maintain or alter the provisions of this section; provided,
however, in no event shall any pension benefits set forth in this subchapter be
lessened or reduced as a result of waiving, maintaining or altering any
provisions thereof.
(Prior Code, § 2-217)
   (G)   Terminal payment. If a retirant dies before he or she has received in
payment of his or her straight life retirement allowance an aggregate amount
equal to his or her accumulated contributions standing to his or her credit in
the Annuity Savings Fund at the time of his or her retirement, the difference
between his or her said accumulated contributions and the said aggregate amount
of retirement allowance payments received by him or her shall be paid to such
person or persons as he or she shall have nominated by written designation duly
executed and filed with the Commission. If there be no such designated person
surviving the retirant, such difference, if any, shall be paid to the
retirant’s legal representative. No payment shall be made under this section on
account of the death of a retirant if he or she elected option 1, 2 or 3
provided in division (J) below.
(Prior Code, § 2-218)
   (H)   Supplemental retirement allowance for retirants, or beneficiaries,
prior to 1-1-1966.
      (1)   The provisions of this section shall be operative during a fiscal
year if the City Council:
         (a)   Adopts a resolution declaring the provisions of this section in
effect for the fiscal year; and
         (b)   Appropriates an amount sufficient to finance the supplemental
retirement allowance payments to be made during the fiscal year.
      (2)   Subject to the preceding restrictions, each retirant or beneficiary
included in one of the following three groups shall be eligible for a
supplemental retirement allowance upon his or her written application filed
with the Retirement Commission:
         (a)   Retirants who retired prior to 1-1-1966, and who were general
members or police officer or firefighter members of the retirement system;
         (b)   Beneficiaries of retirants who retired prior to 1-1-1966, and
who were general members or police officer or firefighter members of the
retirement system; and
         (c)   Beneficiaries of general members or police officer or
firefighter members who died prior to 1-1-1966.
      (3)   The annual amount of supplemental retirement allowance shall be
determined in accordance with the following schedule:
 
Calendar Year of Retirement Annual Supplemental Retirement Allowance
1946 and prior              $390
 
(Prior Code, § 2-219)
   (I)   Supplemental retirement allowance for retirants, or beneficiaries,
prior to 1-1-1975.
      (1)   Each retirant or beneficiary included in one of the following
groups shall be eligible for a supplemental retirement allowance upon his or
her written application filed with the Retirement Commission.
         (a)   Retirants who retired on or before 1-1-1975, who were general
members or police officer or firefighter members or hospital or municipal
service members of the retirement system.
         (b)   Beneficiaries of retirants who retired on or before 1-1-1975,
and who were general members or police officer or firefighter members or
hospital members or municipal service members of the retirement system.
         (c)   Beneficiaries of general members or police officer or
firefighter members or hospital members or municipal service members who died
on or before 1-1-1975.
      (2)   Annual supplemental retirement allowance:
         (a)   1.   Using the following formula for year 1977 back to 1-1-1977:
               a.   Per year for each year retired: $2; and
               b.   Per year for each year of employment service: $4.
            2.   This formula to be used for years prior to ordinance change of
increased benefits to all city departments:
               a.   General city: 10-1-1972;
               b.   Police and Fire Departments: 10-1-1969;
               c.   Department of municipal service: 10-1-1973; and
               d.   Wyandotte General Hospital: 12-31-1974 (no change).
         (b)   The year 1978, starting 1-1-1977, a 5% increase to the total
retirement payroll as of 1-1-1975, adjusted.
         (c)   Said benefits shall be in effect and payable to his or her
beneficiary until death.
(Prior Code, § 2-220)
   (J)   Retirement allowance options.
      (1)   Subject to the provisions of division (J)(2) below set forth, prior
to the effective date of his or her retirement, but not thereafter, a member
may elect to receive his or her retirement allowance as a straight life
retirement allowance payable throughout his or her life, or he or she may elect
to receive the actuarial equivalent, computed as of the effective date of his
or her retirement, of his or her straight life retirement allowance in a
reduced retirement allowance payable throughout his or her life, and nominate a
beneficiary in accordance with the provisions of option 1, 2 or 3 set forth
below. If a member does not elect an option prior to the effective date of his
or her retirement, his or her retirement allowance shall be paid him or her as
a straight life retirement allowance.
         (a)   Option 1 - cash refund annuity. Under option 1, a retirant shall
receive a reduced retirement allowance payable throughout his or her life, with
the provisions that if he or she dies before he or she has received in payment
of the annuity portion of his or her reduced retirement allowance an aggregate
amount equal to his or her accumulated contributions standing to his or her
credit in the Annuity Savings Fund at the time of his or her retirement, the
difference between his or her said accumulated contributions and the said
aggregate amount of annuity payments received by him or her shall be paid to
such person or persons as he or she shall have nominated by written designation
duly executed and filed with the Commission. If there be no such designated
person surviving the retirant, such difference, if any, shall be paid to the
retirant’s legal representative.
         (b)   Option 2 - joint and survivor allowance. Under option 2, a
retirant shall receive a reduced retirement allowance payable throughout his or
her life with the provisions that upon his or her death his or her reduced
retirement allowance shall be continued throughout the life of and paid to such
person, having an insurable interest in his or her life, as he or she shall
have nominated by written designation duly executed and filed with the
Commission prior to the effective date of his or her retirement.
         (c)   Option 3 - modified joint and survivor allowance. Under option
3, a retirant shall receive a reduced retirement allowance payable throughout
his or her life with the provision that upon his or her death one-half his or
her reduced retirement allowance shall be continued throughout the life of and
paid to such person, having an insurable interest in his or her life, as he or
she shall have nominated by written designation duly executed and filed with
the Commission prior to the effective date of his or her retirement.
      (2)   Notwithstanding anything elsewhere in this section to the contrary,
effective 2-1-1990, as it relates to police members, hired before 2-1-1999,
Police Department command officers hired before 2-1-1999, members of the F.O.P.
police/fire dispatcher/clerical bargaining unit, fire members and general
members, and effective 10-1-1995 for hourly municipal members, and effective 6-
6-1990 for salaried municipal service members, if said member has elected
either an option 2 or option 3 prior to the effective date of his or her
retirement and the retirant and the nominated beneficiary become legally
divorced or the beneficiary nominated in accordance with either option dies
prior to said retirant, then in either case the retirant’s retirement allowance
shall be paid to him or her as a straight life retirement allowance as of the
date of the entry of the judgment of divorce or the date of death of said
nominated beneficiary, as the case may be.
      (3)   (a)   Effective 9-16-1996, all general city, police and fire
employees who retired on or before 1-31-1990 and received a monthly pension
payroll paycheck on 9-15-1996 with said retiree selecting either an option 2 or
option 3 survivorship retirement benefit prior to the effective date of his
retirement and the beneficiary nominated in accordance with either option
having died prior to said retirement, then the retirant’s retirement allowance
shall be paid as a straight life retirement allowance to the retirant as of the
date of the beneficiaries death or 9-18-1996 whichever date occurs later.
         (b)   Effective 9-16-2004, all municipal service salary and hourly
employees who retired on or before and received a monthly pension payroll
paycheck on 9-15-2004 with said retiree selecting either an option 2 or option
3 survivorship retirement benefit prior to the effective date of his or her
retirement and the beneficiary nominated in accordance with either option
having died prior to 9-16-2004, then the retirant’s retirement allowance shall
be paid as a straight life retirement allowance to the retirant as of the
beneficiaries death or 9-16-2004, whichever date occurs later.
      (4)   A retroactive benefit shall be paid to all general city, police and
fire retirees who have met all of the requirements of division (J)(3) above
from 9-16-1996 to date of the resolution passage by the City Council. This
benefit shall be paid in the month following City Council passage of Ord. 1028,
passed 1-6-1997. In no instance shall any retroactive straight life benefit be
paid for any retirement time prior to 9-16-1996 or to a deceased retiree’s
estate if the retiree died prior to 9-16-1996.
      (5)   A retroactive benefit shall be paid to all municipal service salary
and hourly retirees who have met all of the requirements of division (J)(3)
above that pertains to municipal service as of 9-16-2004. This benefit shall be
paid in the month following City Council passage of Ord. 1204, passed 9-13-
2004. In no instance shall any retroactive straight life benefit be paid for
any retirement time prior to 9-16-2004 or to a deceased retiree’s estate if the
retiree died prior to 9-16-2004.
(Prior Code, § 2-221)
(Ord. 368, passed 9-25-1967; Ord. 375, passed 1-8-1968; Ord. 415, passed 2-9-
1970; Ord. 456, passed 1-24-1972; Ord. 490-A, passed 12-4-1972; Ord. 541,
passed 12-9-1974; Ord. 586, passed 5-9-1977; Ord. 625, passed 11-27-1978; Ord.
725, passed 4-5-1982; Ord. 771, passed 9-24-1984; Ord. 784, passed 6-3-1985;
Ord. 830, passed 10-19-1987; Ord. 858, passed 12-5-1988; Ord. 874, passed 1-15-
1990; Ord. 917, passed 8-19-1991; Ord. 1028, passed 1-6-1997; Ord. 1060, passed
3-1-1999; Ord. 1077, passed 9-13-1999; Ord. 1091, passed 6-5-2000; Ord. 1159,
passed 11-18-2002; Ord. 1204, passed 9-13-2004; Ord. 1247, passed 10-24-2005;
Ord. 1371, passed 9-17-2012; Ord. 1485, passed 4-20-2020)
§ 32.017 VOLUNTARY WITHDRAWAL OF ANNUITY OPTION.
   (A)   Under this option, a general member, police member or a fire member
retiree of the surviving spouse of said retiree may, only at the time of the
selection of a retirement allowance option, choose to have 25%, 50%, 75% or
100% of the accumulated contributions returned in a lump sum. The retirement
allowance shall be reduced by the actuarial equivalent of the accumulated
contributions withdrawn, effective 10-4-1976.
   (B)   Effective 10-1-1977, the above provisions also apply to a municipal
service member retiree; except that, the surviving spouse of a municipal
service member retiree shall not be entitled to select any return of any
accumulated contributions in a lump sum.
   (C)   Upon the written request of a general, police officer or firefighter
member who is an active member on 10-1-1982, his or her accumulated
contributions as of 11-15-1982 for non-union general members, 2-21-1983 for
union general members, 3-21-1983 for command officer police officer members, 3-
18-1984 for patrol officer police officer members and 3-21-1983 for firefighter
members shall be returned to him or her in a lump sum.
   (D)   Upon the written request of an exempt or non-exempt salaried municipal
service member, as determined by the Municipal Service Commission, who is an
active member on 7-1-1983, his or her accumulated contributions as of 6-1-1983
shall be returned to him or her in a lump sum. Any hourly municipal service
member who shall become an exempt or non-exempt salaried municipal service
member after 6-1-1983 shall be governed by and be entitled to the benefits of
this division (D).
   (E)   Upon the written request of an hourly municipal service member, as
determined by the Municipal Service Commission, who is an active member on 9-
30-1994, his or her accumulated contributions as of 9-30-1994 shall be returned
to him or her in a lump sum.
(Prior Code, § 2-222) (Ord. 586, passed 5-9-1977; Ord. 684, passed 3-2-1981;
Ord. 771, passed 9-24-1984; Ord. 784, passed 6-3-1985; Ord. 1077, passed 9-13-
1999)
§ 32.018 SOCIAL SECURITY OPTION.
   According to such rules and regulations as the Commission may from time to
time adopt, any member who retires prior to his or her attainment of age 65
years and who is covered by the federal old-age, survivors, disability and
health insurance program on account of his employment by the city may elect to
have his or her straight life retirement allowance actuarially equated to
provide an increased retirement allowance payable to his or her attainment of
age 65 years and a reduced retirement allowance payable thereafter. His or her
increased retirement allowance payable to his or her attainment of age 65 years
shall approximate the sum of his or her reduced retirement allowance payable
after his or her attainment of age 65 years and his or her estimated social
security primary insurance amount. This section shall not apply to a member who
elects option 1, 2 or 3 provided in §
32.016(J) of this chapter, nor shall it apply to a member who retires under §
32.019(B) of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 2-223) (Ord. 368, passed 9-25-1967)
§ 32.019 DISABILITY ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENT; ALLOWANCE.
   (A)   Disability eligibility requirements.
      (1)   Upon the application of a member, or his or her department head, a
member who has satisfied the applicable service requirement set forth below and
becomes totally and permanently mentally or physically incapacitated for duty
in the employ of the city may be retired by the Commission; provided that,
after a medical examination of the member by the employee’s attending
physician, and also after a medical examination by the city’s physician, if
elected by the city, said physician or physicians, as the case may be, reports
to the Commission in writing that the member is mentally or physically totally
incapacitated for duty in the employ of the city, will likely be so
incapacitated permanently and should be retired:
         (a)   Ten years of credited service for a police officer or
firefighter member;
         (b)   Ten years of credited service for a municipal service member; or
         (c)   Ten years of credited service for a general member.
      (2)   The applicable credited service requirement in division (A)(1)
above shall be waived if the Commission finds that the member’s total and
permanent incapacity is the natural and proximate result of a personal injury
or disease arising out of and in the course of his or her actual performance of
duty in the employ of the city, and that he or she is in receipt of worker’s
compensation on account of his or her total and permanent incapacity.
      (3)   Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, effective
2-1-1990, for a police member, a Police Department command officer, a member of
the F.O.P. police/fire dispatcher/clerical bargaining unit, a fire member or a
general member, should a dispute exist between the said member’s attending
physician and the city’s physician on whether or not said member has satisfied
the requirements of division (A)(1) above, then the city and said member’s
bargaining unit shall mutually select and agree upon a third duly licensed and
qualified physician to examine said member and make a final review and
determination and report to the Commission on whether or not the said member
meets the requirements for a disability retirement under this section.
(Prior Code, § 2-224)
   (B)   Disability retirement allowance.
      (1)   Upon his or her retirement on account of disability, as provided in
division (C) below, a member shall receive a straight life disability
retirement allowance computed according to §
32.016(C) of this chapter if he or she is a police officer or firefighter
member, or computed according to §
32.016(D) of this chapter if he or she is a hospital member, or computed
according to §
32.016(E) of this chapter if he or she is a municipal service member, or
computed according to §
32.016(F) of this chapter if he or she is a general member. Upon his or her
retirement, he or she may elect to receive his or her disability retirement
allowance under an option provided in §
32.016(J) of this chapter in lieu of a straight life annuity. His or her
disability retirement allowance shall be subject to division (C) below and
shall not be less than the applicable amount set forth below:
         (a)   Twenty percent of his or her final average compensation if he or
she is a police officer or firefighter member;
         (b)   The sum of 10% of the first $4,200 of his or her final average
compensation and 15% of the portion, if any, of his or her final average
compensation in excess of $4,200, if he or she is a hospital member;
         (c)   Sixteen and seventy-hundredths percent of his or her final
average compensation if he or she is a municipal service member; or
         (d)   Sixteen and seventy-hundredths percent of his or her final
average compensation if he or she is a general member.
      (2)   If a disability retirant was in receipt of worker’s compensation on
account of his or her city employment, his or her disability retirement
allowance shall be recomputed upon termination of his or her worker’s
compensation period or at his or her attainment of age 65 years, whichever
occurs first, to include the period between the effective date of his or her
disability retirement allowance and the date of recomputation as additional
credited service.
(Prior Code, § 2-225)
   (C)   Reexamination of disability retirants.
      (1)   The Commission may require a disability retirant, who has not
attained his or her applicable voluntary retirement age, to undergo a medical
examination to be made by or under the direction of the Medical Director at
least once a year during the first five years following his retirement and at
least once in each three-year period thereafter. Should the disability retirant
refuse to submit to any such medical examination, his or her disability
retirement allowance may be suspended by the Commission until his or her
withdrawal of such refusal; and should such refusal continue for one year, all
his or her rights in and to a disability retirement allowance shall be
forfeited by him or her. If, upon such medical examination of a disability
retirant, the Medical Director reports to the Commission that the retirant is
physically able and capable of resuming employment with the city, and his or
her report is concurred in by the Commission, the retirant shall be returned to
the employ of the city and his or her disability retirement allowance shall be
terminated. In returning the retirant to city employment, the city shall be
allowed reasonable latitude in placing him or her in a suitable position
commensurate to his or her type of work and compensation at the time of his or
her retirement.
      (2)   A disability retirant who is returned to city employment, as
provided in division (C)(1) above, shall again become a member of the
retirement system. His or her credited service in force at the time of his or
her retirement shall be restored in full force and effect. He or she shall be
given service credit for the period he or she was in receipt of a disability
retirement allowance if within such period he or she was in receipt of worker’s
compensation on account of his or her total and permanent disability arising
out of and in the course of his or her city employment; otherwise, he or she
shall not be given service credit for the period he or she was in receipt of a
disability retirement allowance.
      (3)   If a disability retirant, who has not attained his or her
applicable voluntary retirement age, is or becomes engaged in a gainful
occupation, business or employment, his or her disability retirement allowance
while he or she is so engaged shall not exceed the difference between his or
her annual rate of compensation at the time of his or her retirement and the
amount earned by him or her in such gainful occupation, business or employment.
(Prior Code, § 2-226)
   (D)   Right to waive, maintain or alter disability provisions.
Notwithstanding anything elsewhere in this subchapter to the contrary,
effective 2-1-1990, as it relates to police members, Police Department command
officers, members of the F.O.P. police/fire dispatcher/clerical bargaining
unit, fire members and general members, the city expressly reserves the right
to waive, maintain or alter the requirements of divisions (A), (B) and (C)
above; provided, however, in no event shall any pension benefits payable to
said retirant be less than the normal calculation of benefits for the
applicable credited service rendered.
(Prior Code, § 2-226.1) (Ord. 368, passed 9-25-1967; Ord. 490-A, passed 12-4-
1972; Ord. 541, passed 12-9-1974; Ord. 917, passed 8-19-1991; Ord. 1046, passed
1-26-1998)
§ 32.020 DUTY DEATH BENEFITS.
   (A)   If a member dies as the result of personal injury or disease arising
solely and exclusively out and in the course of his or her employment by the
city or a disability retirant dies, while in receipt of worker’s compensation
on account of his or her city employment and prior to his or her attainment of
his or her applicable voluntary retirement age, as the result of the same
injury or disease for which he or she was retired and, in either case, the
Commission finds that his or her death, injury or disease resulting in death is
the result of his or her actual performance of duty in the employ of the city,
the applicable benefits provided in this division (A) shall be paid, subject to
the condition that worker’s compensation is granted on account of the member’s
death.
      (1)   The member’ accumulated contributions standing to his or her credit
in the Annuity Savings Fund at the time of his or her death shall be refunded
in accordance with §
32.023(A)(2) of this chapter.
      (2)   The member’s widow shall receive a pension equal to his or her
weekly worker’s compensation converted to an annual basis. The widow’s pension
shall begin upon termination of his or her worker’s compensation period and
shall terminate upon remarriage or death, whichever occurs first.
      (3)   Each unmarried child of the deceased member who is under the age of
18 years shall receive a pension equal to his or her weekly worker’s
compensation converted to an annual basis. Each such child’s pension shall
begin upon termination of his or her worker’s compensation period and shall
terminate upon his or her adoption, marriage, death or attainment of age 18
years, whichever occurs first. If the widow’s pension is terminated on account
of his or her remarriage or death, the pension of each child shall be increased
by an equal share of the said widow’s pension.
      (4)   Each parent of the deceased member shall receive a pension equal to
his or her weekly worker’s compensation converted to an annual basis. Each such
parent’s pension shall begin upon termination of his or her worker’s
compensation period and shall terminate upon his or her remarriage or death,
whichever occurs first.
   (B)   As used in this section, the term WIDOW means the person to whom a
member was married at the time his or her employment with the city last
terminated. The term WIDOW shall include a widower whom the Commission finds to
be totally and permanently disabled and to have been dependent upon the
deceased member for at least 50% of his or her financial support.
(Prior Code, § 2-227) (Ord. 368, passed 9-25-1967)
§ 32.021 NON-DUTY DEATH BENEFITS.
   (A)   (1)   A member who has satisfied the applicable age and service
requirement set forth below may at any time prior to the effective date of his
or her retirement, but not thereafter, elect option 2 provided in §
32.016(J) of this chapter and nominate a beneficiary whom the Commission finds
to be dependent upon the member for at least 50% of his or her financial
support:
         (a)   Any age, and ten or more years of credited service, if he or she
is a police officer or firefighter member;
         (b)   Age 60 years and ten or more years of credited service or 25 or
more years of credited service without regard to age if he or she is a hospital
member;
         (c)   Age 60 years and ten or more years of credited service or 25 or
more years of credited service without regard to age if he or she is a
municipal service member; and/or
         (d)   Any age and ten or more years of credited service if he or she
is a general member.
      (2)   Prior to the effective date of his or her retirement, but not
thereafter, a member may revoke his or her election of option 2 and nomination
of beneficiary and he or she may, prior to the effective date of his or her
retirement, again elect said option 2 and nominate a beneficiary as provided in
this division (A)(2). Upon the death of a member who has an option 2 election
in force his or her beneficiary, if living, shall immediately receive a
retirement allowance which is the option 2 equivalent of a retirement allowance
computed according to §
32.016(C) of this chapter if the member was a police officer or firefighter
member, or computed according to §
32.016(D) of this chapter if the member was a hospital member, or computed
according to §
32.016(E) of this chapter if the member was a municipal service member, or
computed according to §
32.016(F) of this chapter if the member was a general member, in the same
manner in all respects as if the member had retired the date preceding the date
of his or her death, notwithstanding that he or she might not have attained his
or her applicable voluntary retirement age. If a member has an option 2
election in force at the time of his or her retirement, his or her said
election of option 2 and nomination of beneficiary shall thereafter continue in
force unless prior to the effective date of his or her retirement he or she
elects to take his or her retirement allowance as a straight life allowance or
under another option provided in §§
32.016(J) or
32.018 of this chapter. No benefit shall be paid under this division (A)(2) on
account of the death of a member if any benefits are paid under §
32.021 of this chapter on account of his or her death.
   (B)   (1)   If a member has satisfied the applicable age and service
requirements set forth below and does not have an option 2 election provided in
division (A) above in force and dies while in the employ of the city and leaves
a widow or a widower, the widow or widower shall immediately be paid a
retirement allowance which is the option 2 equivalent of a retirement allowance
computed according to §
32.016(C) of this chapter if the member was a police officer or firefighter
member, or computed according to §
32.016(D) of this chapter if the member was a hospital member, or computed
according to §
32.016(E) of this chapter if the member was a municipal service member, or
computed according to §
32.016(F) of this chapter if the member was a general member, in the same
manner in all respects as if the member had retired the day preceding the date
of his or her death, notwithstanding that he or she might not have attained his
or her applicable voluntary retirement age, elected option 2 provided in §
32.016(J) of this chapter and nominated his or her widow or widower as
beneficiary:
         (a)   Any age, and ten or more years of credited service, if he or she
is a police officer or firefighter member;
         (b)   Age 60 years and ten or more years of credited service, or 25 or
more years of credited service without regard to age, if he or she is a
hospital member;
         (c)   Age 25 years and ten or more years of credited service, if he is
a municipal service member. The retirement allowance payable on account of the
death of a municipal service member shall terminate upon the remarriage of the
widow or widower unless the member at the time of his death either:
            1.   Had 25 or more years of credited service; or
            2.   Was age 60 years or older and had ten or more years of
credited service.
         (d)   Any age and ten or more years of credited service if he or she
is a general member.
      (2)   No benefit shall be paid under this division (B)(2) on account of
the death of a member if any benefits are paid under §
32.020 of this chapter on account of his or her death. The surviving spouse of
a deceased general member, police member or a fire member may elect in writing,
prior to payment of any pension benefits, to be paid the deceased member’s
accumulated contributions in a lump sum in accordance with §
32.017 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 2-228) (Ord. 368, passed 9-25-1967; Ord. 415, passed 2-9-1970;
Ord. 490-A, passed 12-4-1972; Ord. 514, passed 1-28-1974; Ord. 586, passed 5-9-
1972; Ord. 686, passed 3-2-1981)
§ 32.022 MOBILITY IN CITY EMPLOYMENT.
   If a member has credited service in force for service rendered as a member
in more than one of the classifications of member defined in §
32.007 of this chapter, his or her retirement allowance or any retirement
allowance payable on his or her behalf shall be computed using his or her final
average compensation at time of retirement, according to §
32.016(C) of this chapter for credited service rendered as a police officer or
firefighter member, according to §
32.016(D) of this chapter for credited service rendered as a hospital member,
according to §
32.016(E) of this chapter for credited service rendered as a municipal service
member, and according to §
32.016(F) of this chapter for credited service rendered as a general member.
The portion of such retirement allowance based upon credited service in each
classification of member shall not become payable prior to the member’s
attainment of his or her voluntary retirement age applicable to the
classification in which the service was rendered, unless the member retired
under §
32.019(A) of this chapter or was considered to have retired as provided in §
32.021 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 2-229) (Ord. 368, passed 9-25-1967)
§ 32.023 REFUNDS.
   (A)   Refund of accumulated contributions.
      (1)   If a member leaves the employ of the city before both he or she has
attained his or her applicable voluntary retirement age and he or she has
acquired his or her applicable minimum credited service, for any reason, except
his or her retirement or death, he or she shall be paid his or her accumulated
contributions standing to his or her credit in the Annuity Savings Fund upon
his or her request in writing filed with the Commission. Payment of his or her
accumulated contributions shall be subject to division (A)(3) below.
      (2)   If a member dies and no retirement allowance or pension becomes or
will become payable by the retirement system, except as provided in §
32.020 of this chapter, his or her accumulated contributions standing to his or
her credit in the Annuity Savings Fund at the time of his or her death shall be
paid to such person or persons as he or she shall have nominated by written
designation duly executed and filed with the Commission. If no such designated
person survives the member, his or her said accumulated contributions shall be
paid to his or her estate. Payment of his or her accumulated contributions
shall be subject to division (A)(3) below.
      (3)   The return of a member’s accumulated contributions, as provided in
this section, shall be made in accordance with such rules and regulations as
the Commission shall from time to time adopt.
(Prior Code, § 2-230)
   (B)   Refund of hospital member accumulated contributions. Each hospital
member who is in the employ of the hospital on 3-8-1982, may request, on a form
furnished by the hospital personnel office, a refund of the accumulated
contributions standing to his or her credit in the Annuity Savings Fund. If
such written request is not filed with the personnel office on or before 4-30-
1982, the member’s accumulated contributions shall remain in the Annuity
Savings Fund where they shall accumulate with regular interest and be subject
to the provisions of division (A) above.
(Prior Code, § 2-230.1)
(Ord. 368, passed 9-25-1967; Ord. 725, passed 4-5-1982)
§ 32.024 ACCOUNTING FUNDS.
   The accounting funds of the retirement system shall be the Annuity Savings
Fund, Pension Reserve Fund, Retirement Reserve Fund, Income Fund and Expense
Fund. The Commission may from time to time establish such other funds as are
necessary in the proper operation of the system.
(Prior Code, § 2-231) (Ord. 368, passed 9-25-1967)
§ 32.025 DIVISIONS ESTABLISHED; SEPARATE ACCOUNTING CONTROLS.
   There is hereby established a Police Officer and Firefighter Division to
cover the participation of police officer and firefighter members in the
retirement system, a Hospital Division to cover the participation of hospital
members, a Municipal Service Division to cover the participation of municipal
service members and a General Division to cover the participation of general
members. Separate accounting controls shall be maintained in the Annuity
Savings Fund, Pension Reserve Fund and Retirement Reserve Fund for each
division. The maintaining of separate accounting controls for the divisions
shall not cause the assets of the retirement system to be segregated in the
divisions.
(Prior Code, § 2-232) (Ord. 368, passed 9-25-1967)
§ 32.026 FUNDS.
   (A)   Annuity Savings Fund.
      (1)   The Annuity Savings Fund shall be the fund in which shall be
accumulated, at regular interest, the contributions deducted from the
compensation of members, and from which shall be made refunds and transfers of
accumulated contributions, as provided in this subchapter.
      (2)   The contributions of a member shall be the applicable percents of
his or her compensation set forth below:
         (a)   For a patrol command police officer or firefighter member, or a
police patrol member hired prior to 10-1-1982, no contributions are required,
effective 3-21-1983 for command officer police officer members, 3-18-1984 for
patrol officer police officer members and 3-21-1983 for firefighter members.
For police officer members hired after 10-1-1982, the required contribution of
the police officer member will be 5% of all compensation included in the final
average compensation;
         (b)   If he or she is a hospital member, no contributions are
required, effective 5-11-1981;
         (c)   If he is an exempt salaried municipal service member or a non-
exempt salaried municipal service member, as determined by the Municipal
Service Commission, no contributions are required effective 6-1-1983. If he or
she is an hourly municipal service member, as determined by the Municipal
Service Commission, no contributions are required effective 9-30-1994; and
         (d)   If he or she is a general member, no contributions are required,
effective 11-15-1982 for non-union general members and 2-21-1983 for union
general members.
      (3)   The officer or officers responsible for making the payroll shall
cause the applicable contributions provided in division (A)(2) above to be
deducted from the compensation of each member on each and every payroll, for
each and every payroll period, so long as he or she remains a member in the
employ of the city. The contributions of a member when deducted from his or her
compensation shall be paid to the retirement system and shall be credited to
his or her individual account in the Annuity Savings Fund. The member’s
contributions provided for herein shall be made notwithstanding that the
minimum compensation provided by law for any member shall be thereby changed.
Every member shall be deemed to consent and agree to the deductions made and
provided for herein. Payment of his or her compensation less said deductions
shall be a full and complete discharge and acquittance of all claims and
demands whatsoever for services rendered by the member during the period
covered by such payment, except as to benefits provided under this subchapter.
      (4)   In addition to the contributions deducted from the compensations of
members as hereinbefore provided, a member shall deposit in the Annuity Savings
Fund, by a single contribution or by an increased rate of contribution as
approved by the Commission, all amounts he or she withdrew from the Annuity
Savings Fund, together with regular interest from the date of withdrawal to the
date of repayment. In no case shall any member be given credit for service
rendered prior to the date he or she withdrew his or her accumulated
contributions until he or she returns to the Annuity Savings Fund all amounts
due the fund by him or her; provided, however, this division (A)(4) shall not
apply to amounts withdrawn from the Annuity Savings Fund in accordance with the
provisions of division (B) below.
      (5)   Upon the retirement of a member, his or her accumulated
contributions standing to his or her credit in the Annuity Savings Fund shall
be transferred to the Retirement Reserve Fund. At the expiration of a period of
three years from the date an employee ceases to be a member, any balance
standing to his or her credit in the Annuity Savings Fund, unclaimed by the
member or his or her legal representative, shall remain a part of the assets of
the retirement system and shall be transferred to the Pension Reserve Fund.
(Prior Code, § 2-233)
   (B)   Pension Reserve Fund.
      (1)   The Pension Reserve Fund shall be the account to which shall be
credited contributions made by the city (general city, municipal services and
Wyandotte General Hospital) to the retirement system and from which shall be
made transfers as provided in this section.
      (2)   Each year following receipt of the report of the annual actuarial
valuation, the excess, if any, of the reported value of retirement allowances
being paid and likely to be paid retirants and beneficiaries over the balance
in the Retirement Reserve Fund shall be transferred from the Pension Reserve
Fund to the Retirement Reserve Fund.
      (3)   The financial objective of this subchapter is to require city
contributions to the retirement system each fiscal year shall be sufficient to
fully fund the cost of benefits likely to be paid on account of service
rendered by members during the year and finance unfunded costs of benefits
likely to be paid on account of service rendered by members prior to the
current year over a period of not more than 40 years. Such contributions shall
be computed by the actuary as legal percents of member payroll in accordance
with generally accepted actuarial principles. The Commission shall annually
certify to the City Council the contributions determined according to this
section, and the City Council shall appropriate and pay to the retirement
system the contributions so certified.
(Prior Code, § 2-234)
   (C)   Retirement Reserve Fund. The Retirement Reserve Fund shall be the fund
from which shall be paid all annuities, pensions and retirement allowances
payable as provided in this article. Should a disability retirant return to the
employ of the city, his or her annuity reserve computed as of the date of his
or her return shall be transferred from the Retirement Reserve Fund to the
Annuity Savings Fund, and his or her pension reserve computed as of the date of
his or her return shall be transferred from the Retirement Reserve Fund to the
Pension Reserve Fund.
(Prior Code, § 2-235)
   (D)   Income Fund.
      (1)   The Income Fund shall be the fund to which shall be credited all
interest, dividends and other income from investments of the retirement system,
all gifts and bequests received by the system and all other moneys received by
the system the disposition of which is not specifically provided in this
subchapter. There shall be paid or transferred from the Income Fund all amounts
required to credit regular interest to the Annuity Savings Fund, Pension
Reserve Fund and Retirement Reserve Fund, as provided in this subchapter, and
effective 6-1-1986, there also shall be paid or transferred from the Income
Fund all amounts, fees and/or charges required to pay for the investment
services and/or investment costs to said city’s employees retirement system. At
the end of each fiscal year, if the balance in the Income Fund is more than
sufficient to cover current charges, the remainder, if any, shall be
proportioned to the Pension Reserve Fund of the various divisions in proportion
to their mean balances in the system during the year.
      (2)   Whenever the balance in the Income Fund is insufficient to meet the
charges to the fund, the amount of such insufficiency shall be transferred from
the Pension Reserve Fund to the Income Fund.
(Prior Code, § 2-236)
   (E)   Expense Fund. The Expense Fund shall be the fund to which shall be
credited all moneys provided by the city, or instrumentalities of the city, to
pay the administrative expenses of the system, and from which such expenses
shall be paid.
(Prior Code, § 2-237)
   (F)   Special Retirement Reserve Fund. The special Retirement Reserve Fund
shall be the fund to which shall be credited all moneys the Commission may
annually allocate up to 1.25% of the mean balance of the Retirement Reserve
Fund for the improvement of retirement allowances payable to retirants by the
retirement system. Any and all allocations that may be annually made by the
Commission to the special Retirement Reserve Fund shall be made from the Income
Fund.
(Prior Code, § 2-238) (Ord. 368, passed 9-25-1967; Ord. 375, passed 1-8-1968;
Ord. 456, passed 1-24-1972; Ord. 490-A, passed 12-4-1972; Ord. 506, passed 8-3-
1973; Ord. 541, passed 12-9-1974; Ord. 586, passed 5-9-1977; Ord. 593, passed
10-3-1977; Ord. 670, passed 11-17-1980; Ord. 683, passed 3-2-1981; Ord. 696,
passed 5-11-1981; Ord. 703, passed 7-6-1981; Ord. 706, passed 8-3-1981; Ord.
725, passed 4-5-1982; Ord. 771, passed 9-24-1984; Ord. 786, passed 9-23-1985;
Ord. 804, passed 11-17-1986; Ord. 1060, passed 3-1-1999; Ord. 1077, passed 9-
13-1999)
§ 32.027 HEALTH AND LIFE INSURANCE BENEFIT RESERVE.
   (A)   The health and life insurance benefit for health and life insurance
shall be the reserve to which shall be credited the unallocated portion of the
retained assets remaining after the negotiated transfer of pension assets to
the Wyandotte Hospital and Medical Center, Inc., less funds transferred to the
reserve for employer contributions for general members (in the amount of
$485,333) and the reserve for employer contributions for police and fire
members (in the amount of $1,175,618) to cover previous employer contribution
shortfalls with interest added.
   (B)   The Health and Life Insurance Benefit Reserve created in this section
shall be used exclusively for the funding of negotiated health and life
insurance costs attributable to general member retirees and police and fire
member retirees and regular interest shall be credited to this reserve in the
same manner as it is credited to the reserve for employer contributions, but in
no case less than 7.5% interest compounded annually on the mean average balance
of this reserve.
   (C)   The actuary shall perform such actuarial services to determine if
additional funding of the health and life insurance benefit reserve is
necessary and shall include information regarding same in its actuarial report.
   (D)   (1)   Effective 5-1-1993, the city may fund from this section the
payment of monthly Blue Cross/Blue Shield complimentary coverage health care
deductions being paid by general city, police and fire retirees or
beneficiaries who are 73 years old or older and have retired on or before 4-30-
1977, and who have met all four of the following criteria (except that,
criteria one will be waived if the beneficiary’s spouse (the employee) died
while in the employ of the city):
         (a)   Criteria One - Age: all general city, police and fire retirees
and beneficiaries must have been 73 years of age or older on 12-31-1992;
         (b)   Criteria Two - Monthly health care withholding: all general
city, police and fire retirees and beneficiaries, who on 12-31-1992 have or
would have, a monthly pension payroll deduction from the city for the city
complimentary health care coverage. On 1-1-1993 that coverage is commonly
referred to as Complimentary Blue Cross/Blue Shield of Michigan;
         (c)   Criteria Three - Date of retirement: all general city, police
and fire retirees or beneficiaries’ spouses must have retired on or before 4-
30-1977; and
         (d)   Criteria Four - Health care group: on 12-31-1992, the retiree or
beneficiary was a member or eligible member of Complimentary Blue Cross and
Blue Shield of Michigan Health Care Group 66759 000.
      (2)   The city will pay on behalf of all eligible retirees and
beneficiaries the individual’s monthly health care deduction for complimentary
Blue Cross/Blue Shield at the January 1993 complimentary coverage rate as long
as funding is appropriated by the City Council. If the retiree or beneficiary
has one-person complimentary coverage on 1-1-1993, the city will pay the
Complimentary Blue Cross/Blue Shield contract rate of $79.33 per month. If the
retiree or beneficiary has a two-person complimentary Blue Cross/Blue Shield
coverage contract on 1-1-1993, the city will pay Blue Cross/Blue Shield rate of
$158.67 per month.
      (3)   If rate increases are passed on to the city by Blue Cross and Blue
Shield for said current complimentary health care coverage, said increase will
be passed on to the retiree in the month required to make payment for said
benefit. If rate decreases are passed on to the city, the amount paid for by
the retirement system shall be the actual monthly charges being assessed by
Blue Cross/Blue Shield of Michigan for the complimentary health care coverage
and the amount of any increase will be deducted monthly from the retiree’s
monthly payroll check, but any savings from rate decreases will not be passed
on to the retiree.
      (4)   If the city substitutes an equal health care benefit that is
currently being provided on 1-1-1993, the monthly benefit amounts in division
(D)(2) above will be adjusted to reflect actual current rates being paid for
the substituted health care coverage. If rates increase or decrease after the
substituted coverage has been implemented, then division (D)(3) above will be
utilized to calculate and pay for any increases or decreases in coverage.
      (5)   If a retiree who meets all four eligibility requirements
established in division (D)(1) above elects any other city-sponsored health
care package, the city will only pay the retirees and beneficiaries benefit
amount as outlined in division (D)(2) above and any additional costs incurred
by the retiree/ beneficiary shall be the responsibility of the retiree/
beneficiary.
      (6)   If a deduction is being paid by the retiree for a beneficiary, and
the beneficiary dies, the retirement system will only pay for the surviving
spouse’s health care up to the maximum outlined in division (D)(2) above.
   (E)   (1)   Effective 1-1-1997, the city will allow complimentary Blue
Cross/Blue Shield master medical benefits which include complimentary
prescription coverage to retirees and beneficiaries who meet all of the
criteria established below in this division (E)(1). The city may also fund from
this division (E)(1) the payment of monthly Blue Cross/Blue Shield
complimentary coverage premiums at 100% of monthly premium cost. Criteria:
         (a)   Be a general city, police, and/or fire retiree as of 11-11-1996,
or be a general city, police and/or fire beneficiary with a survivorship
pension benefit allowance as of 11-11-1996;
         (b)   Be a member or an eligible member of Blue Cross and Blue Shield
of Michigan Health Care Group 66759 000 as of 12-31-1996;
         (c)   All general city, police and fire retirees and eligible
beneficiaries’ spouses must have retired on or before 4-30-1977; and
         (d)   All general city, police and fire retirees and eligible
beneficiaries must be 73 years of age or older on 12-1-1996; provided, however,
this criteria four shall be waived if the beneficiary’s spouse (the employee)
died while in the employ of the city.
      (2)   Effective 1-1-1997 the city shall move all eligible retirees and
eligible beneficiaries from Blue Cross and Blue Shield Health Care Group 66759
000 to Blue Cross and Blue Shield Health Care Group 66759 001.
      (3)   All eligible retirees and beneficiaries transferred to Blue Cross/
Blue Shield Complimentary Coverage Group 66759 001 shall be eligible for
complimentary coverage for master medical benefits, said complimentary coverage
master medical benefits shall include complimentary prescription coverage.
      (4)   The city may fund 100% of the eligible retirees and beneficiaries
monthly Blue Cross/Blue Shield Complimentary Health Care premiums only.
Eligible retirees and beneficiaries are responsible for all deductibles which
are part of the Blue Cross/Blue Shield Complimentary Group 66759 001 coverage.
      (5)   The city has, the right if necessary, as determined by the city, to
substitute an equal complimentary health care benefit which is currently being
provided on 1-1-1997. The monthly premiums may be paid at 100% of city cost.
All deductibles of the substituted health care are the responsibility of the
eligible retiree or beneficiary.
      (6)   If a beneficiary is paying a COBRA benefit prior to 1-1-1997 to the
city for complimentary health care coverage in Group 66759 000 that
beneficiary, at the beneficiaries option, may elect COBRA coverage from Group
66759 001 effective 1-1-1997. All federal COBRA health care coverage rules will
remain in effect from the original COBRA election date.
(Prior Code, § 2-238.1) (Ord. 874, passed 1-15-1990; Ord. 962, passed 3-8-1993;
Ord. 1029, passed 1-6-1997)
§ 32.028 INSTRUMENTALITIES.
   Contributions to the retirement system by the city to finance pensions and
other benefits provided members who are employees of an instrumentality of the
city shall be made from the revenues of such instrumentalities.
(Prior Code, § 2-239) (Ord. 368, passed 9-25-1967)
§ 32.029 INVESTMENT OF ASSETS.
   (A)   The Retirement Commission shall be the trustee of the assets of the
retirement system and shall have full power to invest and reinvest such assets
in accordance with the provisions of Public Act 314 of 1965, as amended, and as
the same might from time to time be amended. The Commission shall have the
power to purchase, hold, sell, assign, transfer, exchange and dispose of any of
the securities and investments in which any of the moneys of the system have
been invested, as well as the proceeds of such investments and moneys belonging
to the system.
   (B)   All assets and moneys belonging to the system shall be held in the
name of the city’s employees’ retirement system and shall be placed in such
depositories as the Commission shall from time to time determine. Access to and
withdrawal of such assets and moneys shall be in accordance with such rules and
regulations as the Commission shall from time to time adopt.
   (C)   The description of the various funds and divisions of the retirement
system shall be interpreted to refer to the accounting records of the system
and not to the segregation of the assets in the funds and divisions of the
system. All moneys and assets of the system shall be kept and accounted for
separate and distinct from the other moneys and assets of the city.
(Prior Code, § 2-240) (Ord. 368, passed 9-25-1967)
§ 32.030 ALLOWANCE OF REGULAR INTEREST.
   (A)   The Retirement Commission shall, at the end of each fiscal year, allow
and credit regular interest computed on the member’s individual balances in the
Annuity Savings Fund at the beginning of the fiscal year; and on the mean
assets in the Pension Reserve Fund and the Retirement Reserve Fund. The amounts
of interest so allowed and credited shall be charged to the Income Fund.
   (B)   Further, upon the death, retirement or termination of membership from
the retirement system, the member shall receive regular interest prorated from
the beginning of the current fiscal year to the end of the month preceding said
member’s death, retirement or termination of membership, effective 10-1-1978.
The amount of interest so allowed and credited shall be charged to the Income
Fund.
(Prior Code, § 2-241) (Ord. 368, passed 9-25-1967; Ord. 634, passed 5-7-1979)
§ 32.031 METHOD OF MAKING PAYMENTS.
   All payments by the retirement system shall be made by the City Treasurer
according to charter provisions governing payments from the city’s General
Fund. No such payment shall be made unless it has been previously authorized by
a specific or continuing resolution adopted by the Retirement Commission.
(Prior Code, § 2-242) (Ord. 368, passed 9-25-1967)
§ 32.032 SUPPLEMENT PAYMENT TO RETIRANTS AND BENEFICIARIES.
   A supplemental payment shall be made 10-15-1976 to each retirant or
beneficiary who satisfies the applicable following conditions:
   (A)   The retirant or beneficiary is entitled to a retirement allowance
payment for the month of October 1976; and
   (B)   Eligibility for this supplemental payment shall be determined as
follows and shall consist of the following elements.
      (1)   Supplemental payment A.
         (a)   To be eligible for supplemental payment A, the retirant shall
have retired on or before:
            1.   October 1, 1972, if the retirement allowance derives from
service as a general member;
            2.   October 1, 1969, if the retirement allowance derives from
service as a police officer or firefighter;
            3.   October 1, 1973, if the retirement allowance derives from
service as a municipal service member; and
            4.   January 1, 1975, if the retirement allowance derives from
service as a hospital member.
         (b)   In the case of a beneficiary, the effective date of the
retirement allowance shall be the date of death of the member or the date of
retirement of the member, as the case may be.
         (c)   The amount of supplemental payment A shall be equal to the sum
of:
            1.   Two dollars multiplied by the number of complete years between
the effective date of the retirement allowance and 12-31-1975; and
            2.   Four dollars multiplied by the credited service of the member
at the time of retirement or death, as the case may be.
      (2)   Supplemental payment B.
         (a)   To be eligible for supplemental payment B, the retirant shall
have retired on or before 1-1-1975.
         (b)   In the case of a beneficiary, the effective date of the
retirement allowance shall be the date of death of the member or the date of
retirement of the member, as the case may be.
         (c)   The amount of supplemental payment B shall be equal to 5% of the
annual amount of retirement allowance payment of each retirant or beneficiary,
as the case may be.
(Prior Code, § 2-243) (Ord. 571, passed 8-23-1976)
§ 32.033 RETIREMENT BENEFIT IMPROVEMENT PAYMENT TO RETIRANTS OR BENEFICIARIES.
   Retirement benefit improvement payments shall commence being paid on 4-15-
1979, to each retirant or beneficiary who satisfies the applicable following
conditions.
   (A)   Eligibility. To be eligible for a retirement benefit improvement, the
retirant or beneficiary must have been in receipt of a retirement allowance for
one full calendar year since the date of retirement of the member through 12-
31-1978.
   (B)   Benefit payment. The amount of the retirement benefit improvement to
be paid each eligible retiree or beneficiary shall be equal to the sum of $1.50
per month multiplied by the number of each full calendar year that said retiree
shall have been retired and receiving a retirement allowance or that said
beneficiary shall have been receiving a retirement allowance as a result of the
death of the member, including those full calendar years that said retirement
allowance was paid to the member prior to death.
   (C)   Request form. Notwithstanding anything elsewhere in this section to
the contrary, no retirement benefit improvement payments shall be paid any
eligible retirant or beneficiary until said eligible retirant or beneficiary
signs and files with the city’s Finance Director a benefit request form for
said additional benefits.
(Prior Code, § 2-244) (Ord. 630, passed 3-12-1979)
§ 32.034 SPECIAL SUPPLEMENTAL RETIREMENT BENEFIT ALLOWANCE.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/84f314df5911a4b8d75bf8da219d5dc254290259/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4401.png]Publisher's Note: This Section has been REPEALED by new
legislation (Ord. 1558, effective 11-17-2025). The text of the amendment will
be incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
   (A)   The provisions of this section shall be effective 12-15-1980 and shall
be operative during a fiscal year if the:
      (1)   Retirement commission adopts a resolution as of September 30 of
each fiscal year to allocate moneys to the Special Retirement Reserve Fund for
the fiscal year under §
32.026(F) of this chapter; and
      (2)   The City Council adopts a resolution declaring the provisions of
this section in effect for the fiscal year.
   (B)   Subject to the preceding restrictions, to be eligible for a special
supplemental retirement benefit allowance, the retirant or beneficiary must
have been in receipt of a retirement allowance for one full calendar year as of
the September 30 prior to receiving a retirement allowance. Police members
hired after 2-1-1999 are ineligible for any improvement or supplemental
payments of retirement allowances payable to retirants of the retirement
system.
   (C)   The amount of the special supplemental retirement allowance to be paid
each eligible retirant or beneficiary shall be equal to one-half of the total
moneys credited to the special Retirement Reserve Fund as of September 30 of
each fiscal year under §
32.026(F) of this chapter divided by the total number of years of credited
service for all eligible retirants and beneficiaries of the system multiplied
by each retirant’s or beneficiary’s respective years of credited service in the
system.
   (D)   Payment of the special supplemental retirement benefit allowance set
forth herein shall be paid to each eligible retirant or beneficiary on December
15 of each year.
   (E)   A request form shall be submitted to each eligible retirant or
beneficiary, and shall be returned within 30 days of mailing. Failure to return
the form will eliminate the benefit payment to the retirant or beneficiary for
that fiscal period.
   (F)   In the case of a beneficiary, the effective date of the special
supplemental retirement benefit allowance shall be the date of death of the
member of the system or the date of retirement of the member of the system, as
the case may be.
   (G)   The Commission shall evaluate the requirements of this section and the
possibility of increasing benefits under this section each fiscal year.
   (H)   Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, no special
supplemental retirement benefit allowance shall be made to any retirant or
beneficiary in any fiscal year unless sufficient moneys are available in the
Special Retirement Reserve Fund to make the benefit payments provided in
division (C) above.
(Prior Code, § 2-245) (Ord. 697, passed 6-8-1981; Ord. 1485, passed 4-20-2020)
§ 32.035 RIGHTS UNASSIGNABLE.
   (A)   The right of a person to a retirement allowance, pension, annuity, to
the return of accumulated contributions, the retirement allowance, pension or
annuity itself, any optional benefit, any other right accrued or accruing to
any person under this subchapter shall not be subject to execution,
garnishment, attachment, the operation of bankruptcy or insolvency law or any
other process of law whatsoever, and shall be unassignable, except as is
specifically provided in this subchapter.
   (B)   (1)   If a member is covered by a group insurance or prepayment plan
participated in by the city, and should he or she be permitted to, and elected
to, continue such coverage as a retirement allowance the payments required of
him or her to continue coverage under such group insurance or prepayment plan.
      (2)   The city shall have the right of set-off for any claim arising from
embezzlement by or fraud of a member, retirant or beneficiary.
(Prior Code, § 2-246) (Ord. 368, passed 9-25-1967)
§ 32.036 CORRECTION OF ERRORS.
   Should any change in the records result in any pension receiving from the
retirement system more or less than he or she would have been entitled to
receive had the records been correct, the Commission shall correct such error
and, as far as practicable, shall adjust the payment in such a manner that the
actuarial equivalent of the benefit to which the person was correctly entitled
shall be paid.
(Prior Code, § 2-247) (Ord. 368, passed 9-25-1967)
RETIREMENT COMMISSION
§ 32.050 AUTHORITY; RESPONSIBILITY.
   The authority and responsibility for the administration, management and
proper operation of the retirement system, and for constructing and making
effective the provisions of this subchapter, shall be vested in a Retirement
Commission.
(Prior Code, § 2-253) (Ord. 368, passed 9-25-1967)
§ 32.051 COMPOSITION.
   The Retirement Commission shall consist of seven Commissioners, as follows:
   (A)   A member appointed by the Municipal Service Commission;
   (B)   A member appointed by the City Council;
   (C)   A member of the retirement system to be elected by the general
members;
   (D)   A member of the retirement system to be elected by the police officer
members;
   (E)   A member of the retirement system to be elected by the firefighter
members;
   (F)   A member of the retirement system to be elected by the municipal
service members; and
   (G)   The City Treasurer.
(Prior Code, § 2-254) (Ord. 368, passed 9-25-1967; Ord. 525, passed 6-24-1974;
Ord. 664, passed 8-18-1980; Ord. 791, passed 12-2-1985; Ord. 835, passed 3-21-
1988; Ord. 845, passed 5-23-1988; Ord. 874, passed 1-15-1990; Ord. 937, passed
4-13-1992)
§ 32.052 COMMISSIONERS; ELECTION.
   The elections of the Commissioners provided in §
32.051(C), (D), (E) and (F) of this chapter shall be held under such rules and
regulations as the Commission shall from time to time adopt.
(Prior Code, § 2-255) (Ord. 368, passed 9-25-1967; Ord. 791, passed 12-2-1985;
Ord. 835, passed 3-21-1988; Ord. 845, passed 5-23-1988; Ord. 874, passed 1-15-
1990)
§ 32.053 TERM, OATH AND COMPENSATION.
   (A)   Except for their initial term of office as herein provided, the
regular term of office for the commissioners provided in §
32.051(A) and (B) of this chapter shall be two years, one such term to expire
each year and the regular term of office for the Commissioners provided in §
32.051(C), (D), (E) and (F) of this chapter shall be four years, one such term
to expire each year.
   (B)   The initial term of office for the Commissioner provided in §
32.051(A) of this chapter shall be one year.
   (C)   The initial term of office for the Commissioner provided in §
32.051(B) of this chapter shall be two years.
   (D)   The initial term of office for the Commissioner provided in §
32.051(C) of this chapter shall be one year.
   (E)   The initial term of office for the Commissioner provided in §
32.051(D) of this chapter shall be two years.
   (F)   The initial term of office for the Commissioner provided in §
32.051(E) of this chapter shall be three years.
   (G)   The initial term of office for the Commissioner provided in §
32.051(F) of this chapter shall be four years.
   (H)   Each Commissioner shall, within ten days after his or her appointment
or election, take an oath of office before the City Clerk. The Commissioners
shall serve without compensation for their services as Commissioners.
(Prior Code, § 2-256) (Ord. 368, passed 9-25-1967; Ord. 663, passed 8-18-1980;
Ord. 791, passed 12-2-1985; Ord. 835, passed 3-21-1988; Ord. 845, passed 5-23-
1988; Ord. 874, passed 1-15-1990)
§ 32.054 FILLING VACANCIES.
   (A)   Any vacancy occurring in the office of a Commissioner provided in §
32.051(A) or (B) of this chapter shall be filled within 60 days from and after
the date of vacancy, for the unexpired portion of the term, by appointment by
the Municipal Service Commission or the City Council, as the case may be.
   (B)   Any vacancy occurring in the office of a Commissioner provided in §
32.051(C), (D), (E) or (F) of this chapter shall be filled within 60 days from
and after the date of vacancy, for the unexpired portion of the term, in
accordance with §
32.052 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 2-257) (Ord. 368, passed 9-25-1967; Ord. 553, passed 7-28-1975;
Ord. 661, passed 8-18-1980; Ord. 791, passed 12-2-1985; Ord. 835, passed 3-21-
1988; Ord. 845, passed 5-23-1988; Ord. 874, passed 1-15-1990)
§ 32.055 MEETINGS; PROCEDURE, QUORUM, VOTE.
   The Retirement Commission shall hold meetings regularly, at least once in
each calendar month, and shall designate the time and place thereof. The
Commission shall adopt its own rules of procedure and shall keep a record of
its proceedings. All meetings of the Commission shall be public. Four
Commissioners shall constitute a quorum at any meeting of the Commission. Each
attending Commissioner shall have full voting rights and shall be entitled to
one vote on each question before the Commission, and a majority of those
Commissioners in attendance at which a quorum is present casting concurring
votes shall be necessary for a decision by the Commission.
(Prior Code, § 2-258) (Ord. 368, passed 9-25-1967; Ord. 662, passed 8-18-1980;
Ord. 666, passed 9-15-1980; Ord. 791, passed 12-2-1985; Ord. 874, passed 1-15-
1990)
§ 32.056 OFFICERS; ELECTION, DUTIES.
   (A)   The Retirement Commission shall elect from its members a Chairperson
and a Vice- Chairperson.
   (B)   The City Clerk, or his or her representative, shall be secretary of
the retirement system.
   (C)   The City Treasurer shall be the treasurer of the retirement system and
shall be the custodian of its assets.
   (D)   The City Attorney shall be legal advisor to the Commission.
   (E)   The Commission shall appoint an actuary who is a member of the
American Academy of Actuaries and who shall be the technical advisor to the
Commission on matters regarding the operation of the retirement system. The
actuary shall perform such duties as are required of him or her under this
subchapter.
   (F)   The Commission shall appoint as medical director a physician who is
not a member, retirant or beneficiary of the retirement system and who has not
filled an elective, appointive or salaried office in the city or county
government within a period of five years. Service as an intern in any city,
county or state hospital or sanitarium, or in any military body, shall not
disqualify a physician for appointment as Medical Director. The Medical
Director shall be responsible to and shall hold office at the pleasure of the
Commission. The Medical Director shall:
      (1)   Arrange for the pass upon all medical examinations required under
this subchapter;
      (2)   Investigate all essential statements and certificates of medical
nature furnished by or on behalf of a member, retirant or beneficiary in
connection with an application for disability or death benefits; and
      (3)   Report in writing to the Commission his or her conclusions on
medical matters referred to him or her by the Commission.
   (G)   The Commission, subject to the approval of the Council, may employ
such professional and other services as are required for the proper operation
of the retirement system. The compensation for such services shall be fixed by
the Commission, subject to approval by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 2-259) (Ord. 368, passed 9-25-1967)
§ 32.057 RECORDS; ANNUAL REPORT.
   The Secretary shall keep or cause to be kept, such data regarding members,
retirants and beneficiaries as shall be necessary for an actuarial valuation of
the actuarial assets and liabilities of the system and for checking and
compiling the actuarial experience of the system. The Retirement Commission
shall render a report to the Mayor and Council each calendar year showing the
fiscal transactions of the system for the year ended the preceding September 30
and the actuarial condition of the system by means of an actuarial valuation of
the actuarial assets and liabilities of the system.
(Prior Code, § 2-260) (Ord. 368, passed 9-25-1967)
§ 32.058 DECREMENT TABLES; ADOPTION.
   The Commission shall from time to time adopt such mortality and other tables
of decrements as are necessary in the operation of the system on an actuarial
basis.
(Prior Code, § 2-261) (Ord. 368, passed 9-25-1967)
§ 32.059 RECIPROCAL RETIREMENT ACT.
   The city, subsequent to 2-1-1990, shall become a reciprocal community under
the state’s Reciprocal Retirement Act, Public Act 88 of 1961, as amended, and
as the same might from time to time be amended, said act providing for the
preservation and continuity of retirement system service credits for public
employees who transfer their employment between units of government.
(Prior Code, § 2-262) (Ord. 917, passed 8-19-1991)
CHAPTER 33: LAW ENFORCEMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
33.001   Minimum employment standards
Emergency Police Reserve Officers
   
33.015   Authorization
   
33.016   Qualifications, appointment and the like
   
33.017   Compensation
   
33.018   Worker’s compensation
   
33.019   Badge, dress and insignia
   
33.020   Exercise of authority; restriction
   
33.021   Neglect of duty; suspension or dismissal
   
33.022   Impersonation
Civilian Crossing Guards
   
33.035   Authorization
   
33.036   Appointment and removal
   
33.037   Compensation
   
33.038   Worker’s compensation
   
33.039   Dress, badge and the like
   
33.040   Powers and duties
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 33.001 MINIMUM EMPLOYMENT STANDARDS.
   The minimum employment standards for law enforcement officers as established
and adopted by the state’s Law Enforcement Officers Training Council, in
accordance with Public Act 203 of 1965, being M.C.L.A. §§ 28.601 et seq., are
hereby adopted by reference.
(Prior Code, § 30-1)
EMERGENCY POLICE RESERVE OFFICERS
§ 33.015 AUTHORIZATION.
   The Police and Fire Commission is directed to appoint special patrolers to
be known as “emergency police reserve officers” in such numbers as it deems
necessary, subject to such rules and regulations as the Commission may
promulgate.
(Prior Code, § 30-18)
§ 33.016 QUALIFICATIONS, APPOINTMENT AND THE LIKE.
   The Police and Fire Commission shall promulgate rules relating to the
qualifications, appointments and removal of emergency police officers.
(Prior Code, § 30-19)
§ 33.017 COMPENSATION.
   Emergency police officers shall serve without compensation.
(Prior Code, § 30-20)
§ 33.018 WORKER’S COMPENSATION.
   Emergency police reserve officers shall be entitled to all rights and
benefits provided under the provisions of the Worker’s Disability Compensation
Act of 1969, as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 418.101 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 30-21)
§ 33.019 BADGE, DRESS AND INSIGNIA.
   Emergency police reserve officers shall wear such badge, dress and insignia
and be equipped in such manner for the proper discharge of their duties as the
Police and Fire Commission shall direct.
(Prior Code, § 30-22)
§ 33.020 EXERCISE OF AUTHORITY; RESTRICTION.
   It shall be unlawful for any emergency police reserve officer to exercise
his or her authority as a patroler or to wear the uniform or insignia, or
display his or her badge in an attempt to exercise his or her authority, except
during the performance of actual authorized police duty.
(Prior Code, § 30-23) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 33.021 NEGLECT OF DUTY; SUSPENSION OR DISMISSAL.
   Any police reserve officer who willfully neglects or refuses to respond for
assignment or duty when called, under such rules and regulations as promulgated
by the Police and Fire Commission, may be subject to suspension or dismissal.
(Prior Code, § 30-24)
§ 33.022 IMPERSONATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person not duly appointed and sworn in as an
emergency police reserve officer to impersonate such officer, or to wear, carry
or display the badge, dress or insignia designated for emergency police reserve
officers.
(Prior Code, § 30-25) Penalty, see §
10.999
CIVILIAN CROSSING GUARDS
§ 33.035 AUTHORIZATION.
   The Police and Fire Commission shall appoint special guards known as
civilian crossing guards in such numbers as they deem necessary.
(Prior Code, § 30-41)
§ 33.036 APPOINTMENT AND REMOVAL.
   The Police and Fire Commission shall adopt rules and regulations for the
appointment and removal of civilian crossing guards.
(Prior Code, § 30-42)
§ 33.037 COMPENSATION.
   Civilian crossing guards shall receive such compensation as may be
authorized by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 30-43)
§ 33.038 WORKER’S COMPENSATION.
   Civilian crossing guards shall be entitled to all the rights and benefits
provided under the provisions of Worker’s Disability Compensation Act of 1969,
as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 418.101 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 30-44)
§ 33.039 DRESS, BADGE AND THE LIKE.
   The civilian crossing guards shall wear such dress, badge and insignia as
prescribed by the Police and Fire Commission while actually performing
authorized police duties. It shall be unlawful for any guard to wear such
dress, badge or insignia or to exercise any police duties at any other time.
(Prior Code, § 30-45) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 33.040 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   Civilian crossing guards shall have the powers and duties provided by the
Police and Fire Commission.
(Prior Code, § 30-46)
CHAPTER 34: FINANCE AND REVENUE; TAXATION
Section
Tax Assessment Roll
   
34.001   Tax day
   
34.002   Completion of assessment rolls; notice
   
34.003   Board of Review
   
34.004   Appeals to Council
   
34.005   Confirmation by Council
TAX ASSESSMENT ROLL
§ 34.001 TAX DAY.
   December 31 shall be deemed the tax day in the city. The taxable status of
persons and the value of real and personal property shall be determined as of
that date. All general city taxes levied upon real and personal property shall
become a debt against the owner on such date.
(Prior Code, § 2-41)
§ 34.002 COMPLETION OF ASSESSMENT ROLLS; NOTICE.
   Notice shall be published in one or more newspapers of the city at least two
weeks prior to January 1 each year stating that the assessment rolls of the
city will be completed on that date.
(Prior Code, § 2-42)
§ 34.003 BOARD OF REVIEW.
   (A)   The Board of Review shall meet the third Monday in February in each
year in the Council room in the City Hall at 9:00 a.m. Notice shall be given by
the Clerk not less than two weeks prior to the time of the meeting by
publishing a notice thereof in one or more newspapers of the city. The City
Assessor shall submit the general assessment roll to the Board at the opening
of the meeting. The Mayor shall be Chairperson of the Board and the City Clerk,
Clerk of the Board. In the absence of the Mayor or City Clerk, the members of
the Board shall elect a temporary Chairperson and Clerk from their number. The
Board shall continue in session at least six days successively and as much
longer as may be necessary to complete the review. The Board shall remain in
session not less than six hours each day until its review is completed. Any
person may appear and examine the assessment roll and may show cause why any
valuation shall be changed. Except as hereinafter provided, the determination
of the Board shall be final.
   (B)   The Board may, under oath, examine any person relative to any matter
affecting the assessment charged against him or her. The Chairperson, or any
member of the Board, may administer oaths. The Board shall keep a record of the
proceedings. The record shall show all changes in the assessment roll, and the
amounts added or deducted from the total valuation. The record of proceedings
shall be deposited with the Clerk. The decision of the majority of the members
of the Board shall govern any question. The Board shall have the same power and
perform the same duties as boards of review of townships in reviewing and
correcting assessments made by supervisors of townships, except as this
subchapter otherwise provides. The Board shall notify each person complaining
of the assessment against him or her of its determination in connection
therewith. Upon the completion of the review, revision and correction of the
general assessment roll by the Board, the members shall subscribe their names
to the roll and, on the first Tuesday next following the first Monday in March
each year, shall deliver it to the Council.
(Prior Code, § 2-43)
§ 34.004 APPEALS TO COUNCIL.
   Anyone who is aggrieved by the action of the Board of Review and
Equalization may appeal therefrom to the Council by filing with the City Clerk,
within four days after the adjournment of said Board, a claim of appeal, sworn
to before a notary public, which claim of appeal shall specifically set forth
the facts relied upon to show wherein said Board erred. The Council shall
determine the time and place of the hearing of such appeals, which time shall
not be later than 15 days after the adjournment of said Board. The appellant
shall have the right to attend the meeting of the Council and to be heard
thereat; provided that, all testimony taken before the Council shall be under
oath. If, by the action of the Council in such appeal cases, the rolls as
completed by the Board of Review and Equalization is changed or amended in any
way, the action of the Council shall be certified to the City Assessor by the
City Clerk, within three days after such determination, and the City Assessor
shall thereupon note such changes or amendments on said rolls and such changes
or amendments shall be final and shall stand in lieu of the action of said
Board.
(Prior Code, § 2-44)
§ 34.005 CONFIRMATION BY COUNCIL.
   The Council shall correct any error in the assessment roll; place thereon
the names of any persons and the descriptions of any property not assessed and
assess the property; and may increase or decrease any assessment; except that,
no assessment shall be increased without notice to the person affected thereby,
affording him or her reasonable opportunity to appear and object to the
increase and to be heard in connection therewith. The Council shall fully and
finally confirm the assessment roll prior to the first Monday in April each
year, and as confirmed the assessment roll shall be the basis, according to
valuation of property therein, for the levy of all taxes until the next
assessment roll is prepared and confirmed as provided in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 2-45)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   ELECTRICITY
      
51.   GARBAGE AND TRASH
      
52.   WATER AND SEWERS
      
53.   CABLE TELEVISION
CHAPTER 50: ELECTRICITY
Section
General Provisions
   
50.001   Definition
   
50.002   Fees
   
50.003   Protection of permanent electrical equipment from damage by other work
   
50.004   Accessibility of installations
   
50.005   Telephone information
   
50.006   Exemptions
Demand Response Program
   
50.020   Authority
   
50.021   City as sole entity permitted to aggregate retail customer’s demand
response and bid demand response
   
50.022   Program participation required for retail customers desiring to bid
demand response
   
50.023   City sole entity permitted to bid demand response on behalf of retail
customers
   
50.024   Retail customers must participate in city-approved program to bid
demand response into independent system
   
50.025   Authority to adopt regulations to implement subchapter
 
   
50.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.001 DEFINITION.
   As used in this chapter, the term EMERGENCY SYSTEM shall mean the
installation, operation and maintenance of circuits, systems and equipment
intended to supply illumination and power in the event of failure of the normal
supply or in the event of accident to elements of a system supplying power and
illumination essential for safety to life and property, as herein required.
(Prior Code, § 9-1) (Ord. 597, passed 11-7-1977; Ord. 770, passed 8-27-1984)
§ 50.002 FEES.
   (A)   Fees under this chapter shall be as follows:
Additional inspection                        $40
Base minimum fee                             $40
Final circuit (first)                        $20
   Each additional final circuit residenti$7
   Each additional final circuit commercia$10
License registration                         $45
Low voltage wiring
   Office partitions (first unit)         $25
      Each additional partitions       $3
   Low voltage 1 to 1,000 feet            $35
      Each additional 1,000 feet       $3
Minor repairs                                $40
Motors (first unit)                          $40
   Each additional unit in the same buildi$15
Reinspection fee                             $40
Rough circuit (first)                        $20
   Each additional rough circuit residenti$7
   Each additional rough circuit commercia$10
Service change
   100 AMP                                $30
   150 AMP                                $35
   200 AMP                                $40
   400 AMP                                $60
   Over 400 AMP                           $60, plus $25 per 100 AMP
   Temporary service                      $40
Special fees
   Administration fee                     $30
   License registration fee               $15
   Late fee                               $25
 
   (B)   If a permit is not obtained before the work is started, a late fee of
$125 will be charged in addition to regular permit fee.
(Prior Code, § 9-2) (Ord. 597, passed 11-7-1977; Ord. 770, passed 8-27-1984;
Ord. 892, passed 7-23-1990; Ord. 1182, passed 10-20-2003; Ord. 1230, passed 7-
11-2005; Ord. 1238, passed 8-29-2005; Ord. 1256, passed 12-12-2005)
§ 50.003 PROTECTION OF PERMANENT ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT FROM DAMAGE BY OTHER
WORK.
   Electrical contractors shall in no case install permanent electrical
equipment that may be damaged by the roughing in of heating, ventilation and
plumbing construction.
(Prior Code, § 9-3) (Ord. 597, passed 11-7-1977; Ord. 770, passed 8-27-1984;
Ord. 892, passed 7-23-1990) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.004 ACCESSIBILITY OF INSTALLATIONS.
   No installation of plumbing equipment, refrigeration equipment, space
heating equipment, duct work, cabinets, partitions or materials shall be made
in such a way as to render the wiring in any electrical service equipment,
distribution panel, outlet, splice, junction or pull box inaccessible.
(Prior Code, § 9-4) (Ord. 597, passed 11-7-1977; Ord. 770, passed 8-27-1984;
Ord. 892, passed 7-23-1990) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.005 TELEPHONE INFORMATION.
   The electrical inspection authority shall not be responsible for code
interpretations or other information relative to electrical installations given
over the telephone. Requests for such information should be made in person or
in writing.
(Prior Code, § 9-5) (Ord. 597, passed 11-7-1977; Ord. 770, passed 8-27-1984;
Ord. 892, passed 7-23-1990)
§ 50.006 EXEMPTIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to apparatus and equipment
installed by or for any public utility operating under jurisdiction of the
state’s Public Service Commission and/or the city’s Department of Municipal
Service and used primarily for the generation or distribution of electrical
current or for signal or communication purposes.
(Prior Code, § 9-6) (Ord. 597, passed 11-7-1977; Ord. 770, passed 8-27-1984;
Ord. 892, passed 7-23-1990)
DEMAND RESPONSE PROGRAM
§ 50.020 AUTHORITY.
   The City Council, as the retail electric regulatory authority for the
municipality and its retail electric consumers, determines it to be desirable
that the aggregation of demand response on behalf of its retail customers to be
bid directly into the organized electric and ancillary services markets
administered by the regional transmission organization that includes the
municipality (or any successor independent system operator or regional
transmission organization) be performed by the municipality or its authorized
designee.
(Prior Code, § 9-200) (Ord. 1307, passed 1-26-2009)
§ 50.021 CITY AS SOLE ENTITY PERMITTED TO AGGREGATE RETAIL CUSTOMER’S DEMAND
RESPONSE AND BID DEMAND RESPONSE.
   The municipality or its authorized designee is the sole entity permitted to
aggregate retail customer’s demand response and bid demand response on behalf
of retail customers of the municipality directly into any Commission-approved
independent system operator’s or regional transmission organization’s organized
electric markets.
(Prior Code, § 9-201) (Ord. 1307, passed 1-26-2009)
§ 50.022 PROGRAM PARTICIPATION REQUIRED FOR RETAIL CUSTOMERS DESIRING TO BID
DEMAND RESPONSE.
   Retail customers on the municipality’s electric system desiring to bid their
demand response into a Commission-approved independent system operator’s or
regional transmission organization’s organized electric markets may do so only
by participating in the program established by the municipality or its
authorized designee.
(Prior Code, § 9-202) (Ord. 1307, passed 1-26-2009)
§ 50.023 CITY SOLE ENTITY PERMITTED TO BID DEMAND RESPONSE ON BEHALF OF RETAIL
CUSTOMERS.
   The municipality or its authorized designee is the sole entity permitted to
bid demand response on behalf of retail customers of the municipality directly
into any Commission-approved independent system operator’s or regional
transmission organization’s organized markets for energy imbalance, spinning
reserves, supplemental reserves, reactive power and voltage control or
regulation and frequency response ancillary services (or its functional
equivalent in the Commission-approved independent system operator’s or regional
transmission organization’s tariff).
(Prior Code, § 9-203) (Ord. 1307, passed 1-26-2009)
§ 50.024 RETAIL CUSTOMERS MUST PARTICIPATE IN CITY-APPROVED PROGRAM TO BID
DEMAND RESPONSE INTO INDEPENDENT SYSTEM.
   Retail customers of the municipality’s electric system desiring to bid their
demand response into a Commission-approved independent system operator’s or
regional transmission organization’s organized markets for energy imbalance,
spinning reserves, supplemental reserves, reactive power and voltage control or
regulation and frequency response ancillary services (or its functional
equivalent in the Commission-approved independent system operator’s or regional
transmission organization’s tariff) may do so only by participating in the
program established by the municipality or its authorized designee.
(Prior Code, § 9-204) (Ord. 1307, passed 1-26-2009)
§ 50.025 AUTHORITY TO ADOPT REGULATIONS TO IMPLEMENT SUBCHAPTER.
   The Department of Municipal Service is authorized to adopt any necessary
regulations to implement this subchapter subject to approval of the City
Council.
(Prior Code, § 9-205) (Ord. 1307, passed 1-26-2009)
§ 50.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Civil liability. This chapter shall not be construed to relieve from
or lessen the responsibility of any party owning, operating, controlling or
installing any electric wiring, electric devices and/or electric material for
damages to person or property caused by any defect therein nor shall the city
be held as assuming any such liability by reason of the inspection authorized
herein or certificate of inspection issued, as herein provided.
(Prior Code, § 9-7)
   (B)   Penalty. Any person who shall violate a provision of this chapter or
code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall
erect, construct, alter or repair electrical equipment or systems in violation
of an approved plan or directive of the code official, or of a permit or
certificate issued under the provisions of this chapter or code, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $500, or by
imprisonment not exceeding 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each
day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 9-8)
(Ord. 597, passed 11-7-1977; Ord. 770, passed 8-27-1984; Ord. 892, passed 7-23-
1990)
CHAPTER 51: GARBAGE AND TRASH
Section
   
51.001   Definitions
   
51.002   Receptacles; generally; protection
   
51.003   Collection; location; frequency; requirements
   
51.004   Accumulation of solid waste or filth prohibited
   
51.005   Accumulation of yard waste
   
51.006   Dumping
   
51.007   Collection of solid waste and recyclables prohibited
   
51.008   Abatement of violations
   
51.009   License
   
51.010   Prohibited waste
   
51.011   Enforcement
 
   
51.999   Penalty
§ 51.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ASHES. The residue of combustible materials used as fuel for cooking or
heating purposes.
   BULK REFUSE. Large household appliances, such as stoves, television sets,
dryers, washing machines or the equivalent in size, discarded house furnishings
and furniture, plumbing materials, large crates, tools, machinery or parts
thereof and similar items, excluding construction and demolition debris.
   COMMERCIAL RUBBISH. The miscellaneous waste and materials resulting from the
operation of mercantile enterprises and includes packing boxes, cartons,
excelsior, paper and rubbish; the term does not include waste from building
construction, alteration, demolition or repair or earth or dirt from
excavating, unusual or special manufacturing or trade wastes.
   COMMERCIAL UNIT. A building or portion thereof where solid waste material
resulting from the operation of mercantile enterprises, commercial business or
manufacturing operations is disposed of by other than non-portable rear load
receptacles (dumpsters).
   COMPOSTING. A deliberate, systematic effort to assist the natural
decomposition process that all dead organic materials undergo to reduce them to
a human material useful as a soil amendment.
   DOMESTIC RUBBISH. The miscellaneous waste materials resulting from the usual
routine of housekeeping, including grass, leaves, cutting of brush, shrubbery
and tree limbs, but excluding garbage and the waste of building construction,
alteration, demolition or repair.
   GARBAGE. Every refuse, accumulation of animal, fruit or vegetable matter
that attends the preparation, use cooking, dealing in or storing of meats,
fish, fowl, fruit, vegetables, including dead animals and condemned foods found
within the city limits.
   INFLAMMABLE WASTE. Paper cartons and boxes, oil, waste, excelsior, rubber,
oil paper, scrap paper or other inflammable or combustible refuse, materials or
products.
   LEAF COLLECTION SEASON. A period during the fall of each year as scheduled
by the City Engineer during which leaf collection service is provided in
specified areas of the city.
   RESIDENTIAL UNIT. A building, or portion thereof, designated for occupancy
exclusively by one family for residential purposes and having cooking
facilities and separate sanitary facilities. This definition does not include
apartment buildings with six or more residential units.
   SOLID WASTE. Garbage, rubbish and ashes. SOLID WASTE does not include human
body waste, liquid waste, materials that have been separated either at the
source or a processing site for the purpose or reuse, recycling or composting
or any material that has been identified by state or federal regulation to be
unsuitable for disposal in a Type II sanitary landfill.
   SPECIAL REFUSE. Any item which includes Freon such as refrigerators,
freezers or air conditioners and tires.
   SPECIAL REFUSE STICKER. A preprinted sticker sold by the city which
evidences advance payment for the collection and disposal of special refuse.
   YARD WASTE. Grass clippings, sod, leaves, weeds, garden and hedge trimmings
and small twigs less than the diameter of a pencil.
(Prior Code, § 14-1) (Ord. 965, passed 5-10-1993; Ord. 1263, passed 3-6-2006)
§ 51.002 RECEPTACLES; GENERALLY; PROTECTION.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   The person in charge of any dwelling, building or structure shall
provide a receptacle of substantial construction for the receipt of solid waste
and deposit therein or cause to be deposited all solid waste resulting from the
use of the premises and place the same in locations designated by the city.
Solid waste shall not be stored in the front yards. The storage of solid waste
shall only be stored in a rear yard in a receptacle with a cover.
      (2)   Each receptacle for solid waste shall be constructed of metal or
durable plastic, or an approved equal material, and shall have a tight-fitting
cover sufficient to make it water-tight, fly-proof, odor-proof and prevent
entry by rodents or other animals. Such containers shall not exceed 32 gallons
in capacity and shall not weigh more than 60 pounds when filled. In addition to
the above, the city will make available for lease 96-gallon totes with 250-
pound capacities. Receptacles shall not include plastic bags.
      (3)   All special refuse items (e.g., refrigerators and tires) shall be
labeled with an appropriate special refuse sticker to be obtained from the
city. Failure to so label shall result in collection costs as defined in §
51.008 of this chapter. The continued failure to pay such costs may result in
placement of a lien upon the affected property and/or the initiation of the
appropriate ordinance violation action against the owner thereof.
      (4)   Notwithstanding divisions (C) and (D) below, upon written notice
from the city, multiple residential, commercial and industrial premises must
place all solid waste in non-portable rear load or front load receptacles. All
apartment buildings with six or more residential units are required to have
non-portable rear load or front load receptacles.
      (5)   For purposes of this section, a rebuttable presumption as to the
ownership of any solid waste shall exist if at least two pieces of
documentation indicating or substantiating such ownership are recovered from
among said material.
      (6)   The owner or occupant shall utilize sufficient number of containers
with covers to conveniently store the accumulation of solid waste.
      (7)   It shall be unlawful for any person to steal or counterfeit a
special refuse sticker. In addition to §
51.999 of this chapter, the city may pursue criminal penalties for a violation
of this division (A).
(Prior Code, § 14-2)
   (B)   Protection from scattering, animals and the like. The occupant of any
dwelling, building or structure shall arrange, locate, cover or protect all
receptacles or special containers required herein so that the contents thereof
cannot be removed therefrom by animals or blown out by the wind and scattered
over any public or private property within the city.
(Prior Code, § 14-3)
   (C)   Rubbish generally. Rubbish may also be placed in non-portable rear
load receptacles approved by the City Engineer which can be mechanically
handled by collection equipment of the city contractors. Should a non-portable
rear load receptacle be utilized, the charges will be determined by resolution
of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 14-4)
   (D)   Commercial rubbish.
      (1)   Commercial rubbish may be placed in non-portable rear load or front
load receptacles of substantial metal construction of two to four cubic yards
capacity and shall meet all specifications established by the City Engineer on
the basis of the requirements of the solid waste equipment being used by the
city contractor.
      (2)   Corrugated cardboard may be placed in non-portable corrugated
cardboard receptacles of substantial metal construction of six-cubic-yard
capacity as supplied by the city contractors.
      (3)   Receptacles that are badly broken or otherwise fail to meet the
requirements of this division (D) may be classified as rubbish and, after due
notice to the owner, may be collected as rubbish by the Department.
      (4)   Receptacles that are badly broken or otherwise fail to meet the
requirements of this section may be classified as rubbish and, after due notice
to the owner, may be collected as rubbish by the Department.
      (5)   Should a non-portable rear load receptacle or non-portable
corrugated cardboard receptacle be utilized, the charges will be determined by
resolution of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 14-5)
   (E)   City-owned receptacles. City-owned rubbish receptacles are placed in
business streets for the convenience of pedestrians, shoppers and the general
public; no commercial rubbish, domestic rubbish or garbage, except sweepings
from in front of establishments, shall be deposited herein by the owner or
employee of any business or commercial establishment.
(Prior Code, § 14-6)
(Ord. 960, passed 12-7-1992; Ord. 964, passed 4-19-1993; Ord. 965, passed 5-10-
1993; Ord. 977, passed 3-21-1994; Ord. 1211, passed 12-20-2004; Ord. 1263,
passed 3-6-2006; Ord. 1389, passed 10-28-2013; Ord. 1401, passed 7-21-2014;
Ord. 1486, passed 5-4-2020) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.003 COLLECTION; LOCATION; FREQUENCY; REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Location for collection.
      (1)   All receptacles and containers for garbage and rubbish and all
bundles of boxes and crates shall be located on private property; except that,
where the garbage and rubbish collection is being made from the street, such
receptacles, special debris containers and bundles may be placed between the
sidewalk and the curb during the time hereinafter designated. Where the garbage
and rubbish collections is being made from the alley, such receptacles,
containers and bundles may be placed in the alley right-of-way, during the time
hereinafter designated, but sufficiently close to the side of the alley to
allow the free and clear passage of the collection trucks.
      (2)   (a)   Said receptacles, containers and bundles shall not be placed
between the sidewalk and curb, or in the alley, as the case may be, before 6:00
p.m. of the day preceding the day scheduled for collection, and all empty
receptacles and containers shall be removed back onto private property no later
than 8:00 p.m. of the day following collection.
         (b)   If said receptacles, containers and bundles are placed between
the sidewalk and curb, or in the alley, prior to or after the permitted times,
and the city deems that this condition would pose a health hazard, subject
adjacent property occupants to an unreasonably offensive odor, or be a public
nuisance, the city, with no notification to the property owner or tenant, shall
pick up the items prior to the next regularly scheduled pick up day. The
property owner shall be responsible to pay the city costs as billed by the city
to the property owner within 30 days of the city’s mailing of the costs owed.
If the property owner fails to do so, the property owner is in violation of
this ordinance and will be responsible for a municipal civil infraction.
         (c)   It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to ensure
its tenants are in compliance with this provision.
      (3)   Any receptacle or container not kept or placed on private property
in accordance with the provisions of this division (A), shall be presumed to
have been abandoned by its owner, and may be picked up and disposed of as
rubbish by the city refuse collection employees or by city contractors.
      (4)   The City Engineer shall designate the areas of the city having a
street or alley collection.
(Prior Code, § 14-7)
   (B)   Collection frequency, supervision and the like. The collection of
rubbish from non-portable rear load or front load receptacles approved by the
City Engineer shall be up to three times each week. The collection of rubbish
from all other locations shall be once a week. The collection of garbage,
rubbish and ashes shall be under the direction of the Department of Engineering
and shall be performed by the person designated by the City Council to collect
same.
(Prior Code, § 14-8)
   (C)   Collection requirements. 
      (1)   All residents, property owners, lessees of property or businesses
within the city who shall place for disposal, removal or collection the
following items shall do so in strict conformity with the following
requirements. Further said items must have been generated in the city, except
as provided for in §
51.006(D) of this chapter.
         (a)   Brush. All brush may be either taken to the drop-off recycling
center for grinding for free or scheduled for grinding by the Department of
Public Service at the property location for which a service fee will be
charged.
         (b)   Christmas trees. Christmas trees may be placed at regular pick-
up locations for free collection from December 26 until the end of the third
week in January of each year.
         (c)   Construction and demolition debris. All construction and
demolition debris shall be separated and collected by licensed contractors
privately contracted for by the person who produced the waste, and shall
otherwise comply with this chapter. Trucks and dumpsters will be available from
the DPS at certain times of the year for a fee.
         (d)   Corrugated cardboard non-portable receptacle (dumpster). The
city’s contractor will provide subscription corrugated cardboard recycling
receptacles to serviceable commercial units, apartment buildings and industrial
properties. A service fee approved by City Council will apply.
         (e)   Grass and yard waste (curbside). The city’s contractor will
provide seasonal weekly curbside subscription grass and yard waste collection
services to all residential units, serviceable apartment buildings and
commercial units. A service fee approved by City Council will apply.
         (f)   Hazardous waste. All hazardous waste shall be separated and
collected by licensed collectors privately contracted for by the person or
business who produced the waste and shall otherwise comply with this chapter.
         (g)   Leaves. Leaves may be placed along the curb of local streets
during leaf collection season for collection.
         (h)   Medical waste. All medical waste shall be separated and disposed
of in accordance with any and all applicable state and federal regulations, and
shall be collected by licensed contractors privately contracted for by the
person who produced the waste, and shall otherwise comply with this chapter.
         (i)   Non-portable rear load or front load receptacles (dumpsters).
Solid waste shall be contained in receptacle, as defined in §
51.002(C) and (D) of this chapter and division (B) above. A service fee
approved by City Council will apply.
         (j)   Recyclables (curbside). The city’s contractor will provide
weekly curbside subscription recycling services to all residential units,
serviceable apartment buildings and commercial units. A service fee approved by
City Council will apply.
         (k)   Recyclables/grass and yard waste (drop-off). The city will
operate a drop recycling center at 1170 Grove during posted hours. Residents
may drop off recyclables, grass and yard waste into properly designated
containers at no charge. Grass and yard waste shall not be in a bag.
         (l)   Solid waste. Solid waste shall be contained in receptacles, as
defined in §
51.002(A) of this chapter.
         (m)   Special refuse/bulk refuse. Special refuse or bulk refuse shall
be separated and clearly marked with a special refuse sticker. Refrigerators
and freezers shall have the doors removed and be placed on their side. Bulk
refuse shall be neatly placed out for collection. All fabric materials such as,
but not limited to, sofas, mattresses and box springs that are soiled or
infested with bed bugs shall be completely wrapped in plastic and securely
taped, otherwise the items will not be picked up.
         (n)   Toter cart. The city will provide 96-gallon toter carts for
lease in the city. A service fee approved by the City Council will apply.
      (2)   (a)   Removal of mass disposal of bulk refuse, domestic rubbish,
garbage, solid waste and special refuse generated from site evictions,
foreclosures, move-outs or construction/renovations, shall be the
responsibility of the property owner. The property owner shall contract for the
disposal of such materials with a private contractor and pay all costs
associated with the mass disposal of the materials from the property on the day
of the site eviction, move-out or construction/renovation activity.
         (b)   In cases where the Court is involved and has issued a writ for
possession, the Court Officer with the writ may hire a private contractor for
disposal of such materials.
         (c)   Dumpsters may be available from the city DPS at certain times of
the year for a fee.
         (d)   If said bulk refuse, domestic rubbish, garbage, solid waste and
special refuse generated from site evictions, foreclosures, move-outs or
construction/renovations are placed between the sidewalk and curb, or in the
alley, prior to or after the permitted times, and the city deems that this
condition would pose a health hazard, subject adjacent property occupants to an
unreasonably offensive odor, or be a public nuisance, the city, with no
notification to the property owner or tenant, shall pick up the items prior to
the next regularly scheduled pick up day. The property owner shall be
responsible to pay the city costs as billed by the city to the property owner
within 30 days of the city’s mailing of the costs owed. If the property owner
fails to do so, the property owner is in violation of this ordinance and will
be responsible for a municipal civil infraction
(Prior Code, § 14-8.1)
(Ord. 960, passed 12-7-1992; Ord. 964, passed 4-19-1993; Ord. 965, passed 5-10-
1993; Ord. 977, passed 3-21-1994; Ord. 1044, passed 12-15-1997; Ord. 1263,
passed 3-6-2006; Ord. 1389, passed 10-28-2013; Ord. 1486, passed 5-4-2020)
Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.004 ACCUMULATION OF SOLID WASTE OR FILTH PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person owning, renting, controlling, using or
occupying any building or private premises in the city to permit the
accumulation thereon of, and that person shall remove and keep clear therefrom,
all filth, solid waste, bulk items, special refuse or other unsightly,
offensive or unsanitary matter, articles or materials or accumulation that
would pose a health hazard, subject adjacent property occupants to an
unreasonably offensive odor, or become a public nuisance. The accumulation of
filth, solid waste, bulk items and/or special refuse in excess of seven days
shall be prima facie evidence of posing a health hazard and creating a public
nuisance. Such person shall properly stack or store any lumber, wood, masonry
and the like off the ground at least 18 inches above ground level to prevent
the harboring of rodents.
(Prior Code, § 14-9) (Ord. 965, passed 5-10-1993) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.005 ACCUMULATION OF YARD WASTE.
   Yard waste may be stored for composting purposes in a manner which will not
harbor rodents, subject adjacent property owners to an unreasonably offensive
odor, or become a public nuisance. Individual backyard compost systems must be
located in a rear yard, as defined by Ch. 159 of this code of ordinances, and
be at least 30 feet from any dwelling including the dwellings of neighboring
properties. Garbage is not allowed in the compost system. Violations of this
section shall be abated in accordance with §
51.008 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 14-10) (Ord. 965, passed 5-10-1993) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.006 DUMPING.
   (A)   Subject to the provision of division (D) below, it shall be unlawful
for any person to place, leave, throw, dump or deposit, or cause of permit to
be placed, left, thrown, dumped or deposited, any unacceptable bulk items,
construction materials, demolition debris, municipal solid waste, recyclables,
special refuse, yard waste and residential, commercial or industrial solid
waste, unusual or special manufacturing or trade wastes, or any noxious thing,
on or along any public highway, street, alley or public places, or on any lot
or land either public or private, or in any non-portable rear load receptacle
(dumpster) unless the solid waste is generated on the same premises, or on
water adjoining a public highway or street, other than those designated by the
City Engineer.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, leave, throw, dump or
deposit, or cause or permit to be placed, left, thrown, dumped or deposited,
any such refuse or thing specified in division (A) above, over the sides or
approaches of any bridge or culvert or into any stream, canal, ditch,
watercourse or body of water.
   (C)   Subject to the provisions of division (D) below, it shall be the duty
of the owner, lessee, tenant, occupant, agent or other person having control of
any lot or land, either public or private, either occupied or vacant, within
the city, to keep said lot or land, any adjoining easement, sidewalk and the
abutting or adjoining one-half of the public street or public alley immediately
adjacent to said lot or land, free and clear of such refuse and things
specified in division (A) above.
   (D)   Any person engaged in any lawful commercial or manufacturing
enterprise within the city or activity on any lot or land within the city may
place or deposit any such refuse or thing specified in division (A) above
generated from his or her business or commercial enterprise in a suitable
receptacle or special container as is provided for in this chapter and in
accordance with any and all applicable state and federal regulations, on his or
her lot or privately owned land, or leased property preparatory to being
removed therefrom.
   (E)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be
deemed to have committed a nuisance, and if any motor vehicle, or other type of
conveyance, was used in committing such nuisance, it shall be seized by the
police and shall be impounded and held until such nuisance is abated. All
charges shall be paid to the Police Department, including towage and storage of
any such motor vehicle or conveyance, before it will be released to its
rightful owner.
(Prior Code, § 14-11) (Ord. 965, passed 5-10-1993; Ord. 977, passed 3-21-1994)
Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.007 COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLABLES PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to take, obtain,
possess, collect or transport any solid waste and recyclables from any
premises, or from upon the streets, alleys or public ways of this city, for the
purpose of selling, or using same. This section shall not apply to city
employees in the performance of their duties or persons authorized by contract
with the city to do so.
(Prior Code, § 14-12) (Ord. 465, passed 5-10-1993) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.008 ABATEMENT OF VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   The City Engineer is hereby authorized and empowered to notify, in
writing, the owner proprietor, occupant, agent and/or tenant(s) of any
premises, to remove solid waste, yard waste, special refuse and/or recyclable
(“waste or recyclables”) which has accumulated on such premises and not
disposed of in compliance with this chapter (unless the same is on the abutting
public property, or public rights-of-way, in which no notice is required). Such
notice shall be hand delivery or first class mail, addressed to said owner and/
or tenant(s) at the last known address.
   (B)   If wastes are not removed from the premises within six days after the
date of mailing of such notice, or if the wastes are on abutting public
property or public rights-of-way, the City Engineer is hereby authorized and
empowered to contract and pay for the removal of the waste or to order the
removal by the city.
   (C)   When the city has effected the removal of such waste or has paid for
its removal, the actual cost thereof shall be charged to the owner(s) of the
premises and forwarded to such owner(s) by the city, and said charge shall be
due and payable upon receipt.
   (D)   Where cost of removal is not paid by an owner(s) after the removal of
such waste as set forth herein, then the City Engineer shall deliver to the
City Clerk a copy of all said statements which are delinquent more than 60
days. The Clerk shall present all such statements to the Council. The Council
shall audit and, if correct, it shall be the duty of the City Clerk to certify
it forthwith to the City Assessor. All expenditures represented by said
accounts shall be severally spread upon the tax roll next in preparation,
levied on the land on which such expenditures were made, be a lien and
collected in the same manner as other taxes.
(Prior Code, § 14-13) (Ord. 965, passed 5-10-1993)
§ 51.009 LICENSE.
   (A)   All persons engaged in the business or practice of collection or
transporting any solid waste or yard waste from any premises, or upon the
streets, alleys or public ways of the city, shall be licensed. This section
shall not apply to city employees in the performance of their duties or persons
authorized to perform said services by contract with the city.
   (B)   The annual fee for a license for solid waste and garbage collection
shall be $100. Application shall be made to the city. At a minimum, the
application must include the following information:
      (1)   Description of the methods and equipment used to collect material,
description of services provided, location by address, size in cubic yards and
type front or rear load of all dumpsters serviced by applicant;
      (2)   Proof of liability insurance acceptable to the city;
      (3)   The license shall specify location where collected material is
disposed. No licensed collector shall dispose of material at sites other than
those herein specified;
      (4)   Each licensed collection receptacle provided by said license must
be the proper type, as determined by the City Engineer, and be hygienic, and
not contributing to litter and be properly maintained;
      (5)   Such other pertinent facts as the City Engineer may from time to
time require for the purpose of determining whether the applicant complies with
any and all laws, rules or regulations established by the city, county, state
or federal government in regards to waste handling or disposal; and
      (6)   Unless revoked, every license granted under this section shall
expire on the next succeeding May 31 following issuance.
   (C)   The annual fee for a license for yard waste collection shall apply if
the city drop-off recycling center is utilized by said business. The yard waste
collector shall only utilize the drop-off recycling center with yard waste
collected from city properties. The fee shall be approved by the City Council.
Application shall be made to the City Engineer:
      (1)   Description of the vehicles used to collect yard waste, license
number of vehicles, location by address, name and phone number of all locations
in the city serviced by the applicant;
      (2)   Proof of liability insurance acceptable to the city;
      (3)   Applicant shall agree to utilize the recycling drop-off center
during posted hours. However, the applicant shall not utilize the recycling
drop-off center during the following days or times Friday after 2:30 p.m.: all
day Saturday and all day Sunday; and
      (4)   Such other pertinent facts as the City Engineer may from time to
time require for the purpose of determining whether the applicant complies with
any and all laws, rules or regulations established by the city, county, state
or federal government in regards to yard waste disposal.
   (D)   Unless revoked, every license granted under this section shall expire
on the next succeeding May 31 following issuance.
(Prior Code, § 14-14) (Ord. 961, passed 2-1-1993; Ord. 965, passed 5-10-1993;
Ord. 977, passed 3-21-1994; Ord. 1211, passed 12-20-2004; Ord. 1263, passed 3-
6-2006; Ord. 1425, passed 3-14-2016)
§ 51.010 PROHIBITED WASTE.
   It shall be unlawful to place in any container or receptacle any material
that might endanger the collection personnel or to deposit or deliver any
hazardous waste or any such waste or recyclable to a disposal site which would
be detrimental to the normal operation of collection, recycling or disposal
(e.g., gaseous, solid or liquid poison; dead animals; ammunition; explosives;
inflammable liquid; undrained garbage of a liquid or semi-liquid nature whether
in containers or not, concrete, dirt, auto or equipment parts; or any material
that possess heat sufficient to ignite any other collected materials. No motor
vehicle shall be abandoned at any disposal site or dumped anywhere.
(Prior Code, § 14-15) (Ord. 465, passed 5-10-1993) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.011 ENFORCEMENT.
   The City Engineer, inspectors and the Police Department are hereby
authorized and directed to enforce this chapter. The City Engineer is hereby
authorized to employ inspectors, to have the care and control of established
collection and drop-off recycling sites and to enforce this chapter. Such
inspector may be empowered with police power and duly authorized to issue
tickets and shall enforce the rules that are or may hereafter be promulgated
for the government and control of solid waste and recyclables.
(Prior Code, § 14-16) (Ord. 965, passed 5-10-1993)
§ 51.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation or any other legal entity who violates
or neglects to comply with any provisions of this chapter, or any regulation
promulgated pursuant thereto, is responsible for a municipal civil infraction
and subject to the following fines:
      (1)   For the first violation a fine not exceeding $500, plus court
costs; and
      (2)   For a second or subsequent violation(s), a mandatory fine of $500,
plus court costs.
   (B)   Each day that a violation(s) is permitted to exist shall constitute a
separate offense. The imposition of any infraction shall not exempt the
offender from compliance with the other requirements contained herein,
including, but not limited to, the abatement of violations and the payment of
the costs for removal of any yard waste, solid waste or refuse incurred by the
city.
(Prior Code, § 14-17) (Ord. 965, passed 5-10-1993; Ord. 1246, passed 10-24-
2005)
CHAPTER 52: WATER AND SEWERS
Section
General Provisions
   
52.001   Sewer Use Ordinance adopted; amendments
Rates and Charges
   
52.015   Lien enforcement; unpaid water bills
   
52.016   Non-residential user fee
   
52.017   Sewage disposal charges
Illicit Discharge Elimination Program
   
52.030   Purpose
   
52.031   Definitions
   
52.032   Applicability
   
52.033   Responsibility for administration
   
52.034   Ultimate responsibility
   
52.035   Discharge prohibitions
   
52.036   Suspension of MS4 access
   
52.037   Industrial or construction activity discharges
   
52.038   Monitoring of discharges
   
52.039   Enforcement
   
52.040   Appeal of notice of violation
   
52.041   Injunctive relief
   
52.042   Violations deemed a public nuisance
   
52.043   Remedies not exclusive
Post Construction Stormwater Runoff Controls
   
52.055   Findings of fact
   
52.056   Purpose
   
52.057   Applicability
   
52.058   Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements
   
52.059   Development of a stormwater design manual
   
52.060   Definitions
   
52.061   Permit procedures and requirements
   
52.062   Waivers to stormwater management requirements
   
52.063   General performance criteria for stormwater management
   
52.064   Basic stormwater management design criteria
   
52.065   Requirements for stormwater management plan approval
   
52.066   Construction inspection
   
52.067   Maintenance and repair of stormwater facilities
   
52.068   Enforcement
 
   
52.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 52.001 SEWER USE ORDINANCE ADOPTED; AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   (1)   The city hereby adopts, incorporates herein and makes a part of
this code of ordinances, the following articles and sections of the county’s
Sewer Use Ordinance, as amended, (Wayne County Enrolled Ord. 2010-682), enacted
and published herewith:
         (a)   Article I: Definitions;
         (b)   Article II: Permit Requirements;
         (c)   Article III: Design and Construction Requirements for Wastewater
Transmission Facilities;
         (d)   Article IV: Design and Construction Requirements for Storm Water
Facilities;
         (e)   Article V: Discharge of Wastewater into Public Sewers;
         (f)   Article VI: Authority and Duties of Inspectors and Protection of
Owners;
         (g)   Article VII: Appeal Procedures;
         (h)   Article VIII: Separability and Repealer Clause and Effective
Date; and
         (i)   Appendix A: Local Discharge Limitations - Wyandotte Wastewater
Treatment Plant.
      (2)   A copy of said County Sewer Use Ordinance is maintained at the
Clerk’s office for the city at 3131 Biddle, Wyandotte, Michigan, and is
available to the public for inspection.
(Prior Code, § 38.1-1)
   (B)   (1)   The county’s Sewer Use Ordinance, Enrolled Ord. 2002-70-076,
adopted by reference in division (A) above, is amended as follows.
         (a)   Article I. Definitions. Change the first sentence of the
definition “POTW” to read:
            POTW means a treatment works as defined by Section 212 of the Act
which is operated in this case by the County.
         (b)   Article V. Discharge of Wastewater Into Public Sewers.
            1.   Amended to add a new § 3.00, User Charge System for Sewer
Service:
               (1)   Rates and charges for the use of the wastewater system of
the City of Wyandotte are hereby established and made against each lot, parcel
of land or premises which may have direct or indirect connections to the system
or which may otherwise discharge wastewater either directly or indirectly into
the system.
               (2)   The rates and charges hereby established shall be based
upon a methodology which complies with applicable federal and state statutes
and regulations. The amount of the rates and charges shall be sufficient to
provide for debt service and for the expenses of operation, maintenance and
replacement of the system as necessary to preserve the same in good repair and
working order. The amount of the rates and charges shall be reviewed annually
and revised when necessary to insure system expenses are met and that all users
pay their proportionate share of operation, maintenance and equipment
replacement expenses.
               (3)   The amount of such rates and charges and the intervals at
which users of the wastewater system are billed shall be determined by
resolution of the City Council.
               (4)   The rates and charges for operation, maintenance and
replacement hereby established shall be uniform within the area serviced by the
City of Wyandotte. No free service shall be allowed for any user of the
wastewater system.
               (5)   All customers of the City of Wyandotte wastewater shall
receive an annual notification, either printed on the bill or enclosed in a
separate letter, which will show the breakdown of the wastewater disposal bill
into its components for:
                  a.   Operation, maintenance and replacement; and
                  b.   Debt service.
               Prohibition of direct connection of roof downspouts to a
building sewer or drain. Incorporated into this ordinance is the prohibition of
direct connection of roof downspouts to a building sewer or drain.
            2.   Amended to add a new § 11(a)(b).
               New construction or interior repairs to capture groundwater
shall not have footing drains connected to the building sewer. Footing drains
shall be connected to a sump pump that conveys the water away from the
building, but not onto a neighboring property, without creating a nuisance.
      (2)   In the event there is any conflict in the terms between the
amendment as set forth in division (B)(1) above and the current provisions of
this division (B), then the terms of this division (B) shall prevail and remain
in full force and effect.
(Prior Code, § 38.1-2)
(Ord. 802, passed 8-4-1992; Ord. 973, passed 11-15-1993; Ord. 1000, passed 9-
11-1995; Ord. 1040, passed 8-18-1997; Ord. 1055, passed 11-9-1998; Ord. 1116,
passed 6-11-2001; Ord. 1203, passed 9-13-2004; Ord. 1360, passed 3-12-2012)
RATES AND CHARGES
§ 52.015 LIEN ENFORCEMENT; UNPAID WATER BILLS.
   (A)   The city shall have as security for the collection of water rates and
sewer system rates for the use or consumption of water or sewer services
supplied to any house or building or any premises, lot or lots, or parcel or
parcels of land, a lien upon such house or other building and upon the premises
or lot, or lots, or parcel or parcels upon which such house or other building
shall be situated or to which such water or sewer system service was supplied.
Such lien shall become effective immediately upon the distribution of the water
or sewer service to the premises or property supplied as aforesaid, but shall
not be enforceable for more than five years thereafter.
   (B)   The lien set forth in division (A) above may be enforced by at least
one of the following ways.
      (1)   Unpaid water rates and sewer system rates may be reported to the
City Assessor to be spread by him or her on the next general city tax rolls, as
a special tax or assessment upon the lot or premises on which said unpaid water
rates and sewer system rates have become a lien. The unpaid water rates and
sewer system rates shall be collected in the same manner as other city taxes.
No attempt to collect any water rates and sewer system rates by this process
shall invalidate the lien upon the lot or premises.
      (2)   A lien for unpaid water rates and sewer system rates may be filed
by the Department of Municipal Service, to be recorded in the County Register
of Deeds office, setting forth the amount of the unpaid water rate and sewer
system rates for the particular parcel of real property and the filing of said
lien shall be deemed notice of the lien for the unpaid water rates and sewer
system rates.
      (3)   The lien set forth in division (A) above may be enforced in any
manner prescribed by the general laws of the state providing for the
enforcement of tax liens.
(Prior Code, § 38.1-16) (Ord. 660B, passed 8-11-1980; Ord. 1482, passed 10-21-
2019)
§ 52.016 NON-RESIDENTIAL USER FEE.
   (A)   Generally. Effective 7-1-1980, the Department of Municipal Service of
the city is directed to collect a non-residential user fee in the amount of $10
per 1,000,000 gallons of water consumed; the fee to be collected only from
customers meeting the criteria of a non-residential user. This will provide the
city with funds to pay for the city’s share of the federally-mandated
industrial surveillance program. The moneys collected shall be placed in an
appropriate fund to be used for the above stated purposes, and any balance that
may accrue shall be retained for future payments and contingencies.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      NON-RESIDENTIAL UNITS. Any sewered premises which do not meet the above
description.
      RESIDENTIAL UNIT. Any structure designed and used for year-round
habitation where average occupancy by the same person or persons was longer
than two consecutive months during the previous year.
   (C)   Charges to become a lien. The charges provided for in division (A)
above shall become and be, until paid, a lien on the lot or lots or parcel or
parcels of land which comes within the definition as set forth in division (B)
above.
   (D)   Unpaid charges. Whenever any person, firm or corporation shall fail to
pay the rates fixed herein, the water may be shut off and suit may be
instituted by the city for the collection of the same in any court of competent
jurisdiction, or the same may be reported to the City Assessor to be spread by
him or her on the next general city tax rolls, as a special tax or assessment
upon the lot or premises on which the said unpaid charges become a lien. In
case said unpaid charges are so spread by the City Assessor, they shall be
collected in the same manner as other city taxes. No attempt to collect the
said charges by any process herein provided shall invalidate the lien upon the
lot or premises.
(Prior Code, § 38.1-17) (Ord. 653, passed 7-21-1980)
§ 52.017 SEWAGE DISPOSAL CHARGES.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/84f314df5911a4b8d75bf8da219d5dc254290259/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4401.png]Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new
legislation (Ord. 1555, effective 7-1-2025). The text of the amendment will be
incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
   (A)   Generally. Effective as of July 1, 2024 the Department of Municipal
Service of the city is directed to increase the billing for sewage disposal
charges to $5,053 per 1,000,000 gallons of water consumed. This will provide
the city with funds for the following purposes: to pay charges for the city’s
share of the operation and maintenance of the sewage disposal system (including
debt service and replacement); to pay for meter loss; to pay for maintaining
and operating the city sewers, which are a part of the sewage disposal system;
to pay for collection costs. The monies collected, except for collection costs
of $50.50 per million gallons of water consumed, which shall be retained by the
Municipal Service Commission, shall be placed in an appropriate fund to be used
for the above-stated purposes and any balance that may accrue shall be retained
therein to provide for emergencies and contingencies.
   (B)   Charges to become a lien. The charges provided for in division (A)
above shall become and be until paid, a lien upon the house or other building
having the use of water, and upon the lot or lots or parcel of land upon which
such house or other building shall be situated.
   (C)   Unpaid charges.
      (1)   Whenever any person, firm or corporation shall fail to pay the
rates fixed herein, the water may be shut off and suit may be instituted by the
city for the collection of the same in any court of competent jurisdiction, or
the same may be reported to the City Assessor to be spread by him or her on the
next general city tax rolls, as a special tax or assessment upon the lot or
premises on which said unpaid water rates have become a lien.
      (2)   In case said unpaid sewage disposal charges are so spread by the
City Assessor, they shall be collected in the same manner as other city taxes.
No attempt to collect any sewage disposal charges by any process herein
provided shall invalidate the lien upon the lot or premises.
(Prior Code, § 38.1-18) (Ord. 673, passed 12-15-1980; Ord. 1093, passed 6-28-
2000; Ord. 1115, passed 6-4-2001; Ord. 1152, passed 6-17-2002; Ord. 1173,
passed 6-16-2003; Ord. 1195, passed 6-28-2004; Ord. 1227, passed 6-20-2005;
Ord. 1329, passed 6-28-2010; Ord. 1349, passed 6-27-2011; Ord. 1385, passed 6-
24-2013; Ord. 1400, passed 6-23-2014; Ord. 1421, passed 12-21-2015; Ord. 1427,
passed 6-27-2016; Ord. 1450, passed 6-19-2017; Ord. 1464, passed 6-25-2018;
Ord. 1476, passed 6-17-2019; Ord. 1488, passed 6-29-2020; Ord. 1515, passed 6-
21-2021; Ord. 1526, passed 6-27-2022; Ord. 1536, passed 7-10-2023; Ord. 1543,
passed 6-17-2024)
ILLICIT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION PROGRAM
§ 52.030 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide for the health, safety,
and general welfare of the citizens of the city through the regulation of non-
storm water discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) to
the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state law. This
subchapter establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants
into the MS4 in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process.
   (B)   The objectives of this subchapter are:
      (1)   To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal
separate storm sewer system by storm water discharges from any user;
      (2)   To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the municipal
separate storm sewer system; and
      (3)   To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection,
surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this
section.
(Ord. 1490, passed 6-29-2020)
§ 52.031 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. Employees or designees of the city designated
to enforce this section.
   CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY. Activities subject to NPDES construction permits.
Currently these include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of
one acre or more. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and
grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any material, including any substance, waste, or
combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical,
chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute
to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety,
property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported,
disposed of, or otherwise managed.
   ILLICIT CONNECTION. A physical connection to an MS4 that primarily conveys
non-storm water discharges other than uncontaminated groundwater; or a physical
connection not authorized or permitted by the local authority, where a local
authority requires authorization or a permit for physical connections.
   ILLICIT DISCHARGE. Any discharge to, or seepage into, an MS4 that is not
composed entirely of storm water or uncontaminated groundwater except
discharges pursuant to an NPDES permit.
   INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY. Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as
defined in 40 C.F.R. § 122.26(b)(14).
   MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4). Publicly-owned facilities by
which storm water is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to
any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets,
piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural
and human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage
structures.
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORM WATER
DISCHARGE PERMIT. A permit issued by Michigan Department of Environmental
Quality (MDEQ) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the
United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or
general area-wide basis.
   OUTFALL OR DISCHARGE POINT. Any location on the MS4 owned or operated by the
permittee that discharges directly to a surface water of the state, or any
location on the MS4 owned or operated by the permittee that discharges to any
other separate storm sewer system before discharging to a surface water of the
state.
   PERSON. Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or
as the owner’s agent.
   POLLUTANT. Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. POLLUTANTS may
include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other
automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes;
refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, and
accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables;
pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes;
sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal
wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or
structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
   PREMISES. Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether
improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
   STORM WATER. Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of
water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such
precipitation.
   SURFACE WATERS OF THE STATE. Waters defined consistent with Part 4 Rules
(Mich. Admin. Code R §§ 323.1041 through 323.1117) to mean all of the
following, but not including drainage ways and ponds used solely for wastewater
conveyance, treatment, or control:
      (1)   The Great Lakes and their connecting waters;
      (2)   All inland lakes;
      (3)   Rivers;
      (4)   Streams;
      (5)   Impoundments;
      (6)   Open drain; and
      (7)   Other surface bodies of water within the confines of the state.
   WASTEWATER. Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated storm
water, discharged from a facility.
(Ord. 1490, passed 6-29-2020)
§ 52.032 APPLICABILITY.
   This subchapter shall apply to all water entering the MS4 generated on any
developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by an authorized
enforcement agency.
(Ord. 1490, passed 6-29-2020)
§ 52.033 RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION.
   The city shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this
subchapter. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the authorized
enforcement agency may be delegated in writing by the City Engineer to persons
or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the
agency.
(Ord. 1490, passed 6-29-2020)
§ 52.034 ULTIMATE RESPONSIBILITY.
   The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this subchapter
are minimum standards; therefore this subchapter does not intend nor imply that
compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination,
pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants.
(Ord. 1490, passed 6-29-2020)
§ 52.035 DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   Prohibition of illicit discharges.
      (1)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the
municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) or surface waters of the state any
materials, including but not limited to pollutants or waters containing any
pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality
standards.
      (2)   The following discharges are excluded from this subchapter as long
as they have not been identified as a significant source of pollutants to the
MS4 or watercourse: Discharges or flows from:
         (a)   Firefighting activities;
         (b)   Water line flushing and potable water sources;
         (c)   Landscape irrigation runoff, lawn watering runoff, and
irrigation waters;
         (d)   Diverted stream flows and flows from riparian habitats and
wetlands;
         (e)   Rising groundwaters and springs;
         (f)   Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration and seepage;
         (g)   Uncontaminated pumped groundwater, except for groundwater
cleanups specifically authorized by NPDES permits;
         (h)   Foundation drains, water from crawl space pumps, footing drains,
and basement sump pumps;
         (i)   Air conditioning condensation;
         (j)   Waters from noncommercial car washing;
         (k)   Street wash water; and
         (l)   Dechlorinated swimming pool water from single, two, or three
family residences.
   (B)   Prohibition of illicit connections.
      (1)   The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of
illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited.
      (2)   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was
permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of
connection.
      (3)   A person is considered to be in violation of this section if the
person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection
to continue.
   (C)   Prohibition of direct dumping or disposal of materials into the MS4.
The direct dumping of materials or discharges into the MS4 is prohibited except
for those discharges excluded under prohibition of illicit discharges.
(Ord. 1490, passed 6-29-2020) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.036 SUSPENSION OF MS4 ACCESS.
   (A)   Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. The city
may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such
suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which
presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or
to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or waters of the state. If
the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency,
the city may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage
to the MS4 or waters of the state, or to minimize danger to persons.
   (B)   Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge.
      (1)   Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this subchapter
may have their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce
an illicit discharge. The City Engineer will notify a violator of the proposed
termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the City Engineer for
a reconsideration and hearing.
      (2)   A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to
premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the
City Engineer.
(Ord. 1490, passed 6-29-2020)
§ 52.037 INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY DISCHARGES.
   Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES storm
water discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof
of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the
city, prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4.
(Ord. 1490, passed 6-29-2020)
§ 52.038 MONITORING OF DISCHARGES.
   (A)   Applicability. This section applies to all facilities, industrial,
construction or residential, within the city.
   (B)   Access to facilities.
      (1)   The city shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject
to regulation under this subchapter as often as may be necessary to determine
compliance with this subchapter. If a discharger has security measures in force
which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its
premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access
to representatives of the authorized enforcement agency.
 
      (2)   Facility operators shall allow the city ready access to all parts
of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and
copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES permit to
discharge storm water, and the performance of any additional duties as defined
by state and federal law.
      (3)   The city shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility
such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the authorized enforcement
agency to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility’s storm water
discharge.
      (4)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the
operator at the written or oral request of the city and shall not be replaced.
The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the operator.
      (5)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the city access to a permitted
facility is a violation of a storm water discharge permit and of this section.
A person who is the operator of a facility with a NPDES permit to discharge
storm water associated with industrial activity commits an offense if the
person denies the authorized enforcement agency reasonable access to the
permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or
required by this section.
      (6)   If the city has been refused access to any part of the premises
from which storm water is discharged, and he or she is able to demonstrate
probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this subchapter, or
that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection
and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this subchapter or any
order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and
welfare of the community, then the authorized enforcement agency may seek
issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 1490, passed 6-29-2020)
§ 52.039 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Whenever the city finds that a person has violated a prohibition or
failed to meet a requirement of this section, the authorized enforcement agency
may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person.
Such notice may require without limitation:
      (1)   The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
      (2)   The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
      (3)   That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and
desist;
      (4)   The abatement or remediation of storm water pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property;
      (5)   Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs
bore by the city; and
      (6)   The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
   (B)   If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is
required, the notice shall set forth a deadline for up to 90 days from
discovery of the violation within which such remediation or restoration must be
completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to
remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work will be done by
a designated governmental agency or a contractor, and the expense thereof shall
be charged to the violator.
(Ord. 1490, passed 6-29-2020)
§ 52.040 APPEAL OF NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   (A)   Generally. Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the
determination of the authorized enforcement agency. The notice of appeal must
be received within 30 days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on
the appeal before the City Engineer, or his or her designee, shall take place
within 15 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision
of the City Engineer, or their designee, shall be final.
   (B)   Enforcement measures after appeal. If the violation has not been
corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation,
or, in the event of an appeal, within 90 days of the decision of the City
Engineer upholding the decision of the authorized enforcement agency, then
representatives of the authorized enforcement agency shall enter upon the
subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures
necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be
unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises
to refuse to allow the authorized enforcement agency, or designated contractor,
to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above.
   (C)   Cost of abatement of the violation. Within 90 days after abatement of
the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of
abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a
written protest objecting to the amount of the assessment within 30 days. If
the amount due is not paid within a timely manner as determined by the decision
of the city or by the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, the
charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall
constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. Any person
violating any of the provisions of this subchapter shall become liable to the
city by reason of such violation. The liability shall be paid in not more than
12 equal payments. Interest at the rate of 7% per annum shall be assessed on
the balance beginning on the first day following discovery of the violation.
(Ord. 1490, passed 6-29-2020)
§ 52.041 INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail
to comply with any of the requirements of this subchapter. If a person has
violated or continues to violate the provisions of this subchapter, the
authorized enforcement agency may petition for a preliminary or permanent
injunction restraining the person from activities which would create further
violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the
violation.
   (B)   In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized
by this subchapter, the authorized enforcement agency may impose upon a
violator alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling,
attendance at compliance workshops, creek cleanup, and the like.
(Ord. 1490, passed 6-29-2020) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.042 VIOLATIONS DEEMED A PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of
this subchapter is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is
declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the
violator’s expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel
the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
(Ord. 1490, passed 6-29-2020)
§ 52.043 REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   The remedies listed in this subchapter are not exclusive of any other
remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is
within the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative
remedies.
(Ord. 1490, passed 6-29-2020)
POST CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER RUNOFF CONTROLS
§ 52.055 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   It is hereby determined that land development projects and associated
increases in impervious cover alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds
and increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes, flooding, stream channel
erosion, and sediment transport and deposition. Stormwater runoff contributes
to increased quantities of water-borne pollutants. Stormwater runoff, soil
erosion and nonpoint source pollution can be controlled and minimized through
the regulation of stormwater runoff from development sites.
   (B)   Therefore, the City of Wyandotte establishes this set of water quality
and quantity policies applicable to all surface waters to provide reasonable
guidance for the regulation of stormwater runoff for the purpose of protecting
local water resources from degradation. It is determined that the regulation of
stormwater runoff discharges from land development projects and other
construction activities in order to control and minimize increases in
stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion, stream channel erosion, and
nonpoint source pollution associated with stormwater runoff is in the public
interest and will prevent threats to public health and safety.
(Ord. 1521, passed 2-7-2022)
§ 52.056 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish minimum stormwater management
requirements and controls to protect and safeguard the general health, safety,
and welfare of the public residing in watersheds within this jurisdiction. This
subchapter seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives:
   (A)   Minimize increases in stormwater runoff from any development located
in separated sewer areas and discharging stormwater to a watercourse in order
to reduce flooding, siltation, increases in stream temperature, and streambank
erosion and maintain the integrity of stream channels.
   (B)   Minimize increases in nonpoint source pollution caused by stormwater
runoff from any development located in separated sewer areas and discharging
stormwater to a watercourse which would otherwise degrade local water quality.
   (C)   Minimize the total annual volume of surface water runoff which flows
from any specific site during and following any development located in
separated sewer areas and discharging stormwater to a watercourse to not exceed
the pre-development hydrologic regime to the maximum extent practicable.
   (D)   Reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and nonpoint
source pollution, wherever possible, through stormwater management controls and
to ensure that these management controls are properly maintained and pose no
threat to public safety.
(Ord. 1521, passed 2-7-2022)
§ 52.057 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   This subchapter shall be applicable to all development located in
separated sewer areas and discharging stormwater to a watercourse, unless
eligible for an exemption or granted a waiver by the City of Wyandotte under
the specifications of §
52.062. The subchapter also applies to land development activities that are
smaller than the minimum applicability criteria if such activities are part of
a larger common plan of development that meets the following applicability
criteria, even though multiple separate and distinct land development
activities may take place at different times on different schedules.
   (B)   To prevent the adverse impacts of stormwater runoff, the city has
developed a set of performance standards that must be met at all development
sites. These standards apply to any construction activity disturbing one or
more acres of land. The following activities may be exempt from these
stormwater performance criteria:
      (1)   Construction of, and additions or modifications to, existing
single-family and two-family residential structures.
      (2)   Construction of, and additions or modifications to, existing
multiple unit residential structures that do not disturb more than one acre of
land, provided they are not part of a larger common development plan.
      (3)    Developments that do not disturb more than one acre of land,
provided they are not part of a larger common development plan.
      (4)   Repairs to any stormwater treatment practice deemed necessary by
the City of Wyandotte Department of Engineering and Building.
   (C)   When a site development plan is submitted that qualifies as a
redevelopment project as defined in §
52.060, unless the site development is exempt as described above, or receives a
waiver in accordance with §
52.062, decisions on permitting and on-site stormwater requirements shall be
governed by the Wayne County Stormwater Management Ordinance, Chapter 95
Stormwater Management of the Code of Ordinances of the Charter County of Wayne
as amended (Enrolled Ordinance No. 2021-526a (August 19, 2021)); and the Wayne
County Stormwater Management Administrative Rules, as amended, (Resolution No.
2021-526b (August 19, 2021)); and the most recent version of the Wayne County
Stormwater Standards Manual, which will be collectively referred to as the
Wayne County Stormwater Program.
(Ord. 1521, passed 2-7-2022)
§ 52.058 COMPATIBILITY WITH OTHER PERMIT AND ORDINANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   This subchapter is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any
other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law. The
requirements of this subchapter should be considered minimum requirements, and
where any provision of this subchapter imposes restrictions different from
those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of
law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective
standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take
precedence.
(Ord. 1521, passed 2-7-2022)
§ 52.059 DEVELOPMENT OF A STORMWATER DESIGN MANUAL.
   The Wayne County Stormwater Program contains specifications and standards,
including best management practices (BMP) which may be utilized by any
development required to implement this subchapter. The Wayne County Stormwater
Program may be updated and expanded from time to time, at the discretion of the
County of Wayne, based on improvements in engineering, science, monitoring and
local maintenance experience. Stormwater treatment practices that are designed
and constructed in accordance with these design and sizing criteria will be
presumed to meet the minimum water quality performance standards.
(Ord. 1521, passed 2-7-2022)
§ 52.060 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCELERATED EROSION. Erosion caused by development activities that exceed
the natural processes by which the surface of the land is worn away by the
action of water, wind, or chemical action.
   APPLICANT. A property owner or agent of a property owner who has filed an
application for a stormwater management permit.
   BUILDING. Any structure, either temporary or permanent, having walls and a
roof, designed for the shelter of any person, animal, or property, and
occupying more than 100 square feet of area.
   CHANNEL. A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks
that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water.
   DEDICATION. The deliberate appropriation of property by its owner for
general public use.
   DETENTION. The temporary storage of storm runoff in a stormwater management
practice with the goals of controlling peak discharge rates and providing
gravity settling of pollutants.
   DETENTION FACILITY. A detention basin or alternative structure designed for
the purpose of temporary storage of stream flow or surface runoff and gradual
release of stored water at controlled rates.
   DEVELOPER. A person who undertakes land disturbance activities.
   EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN. A plan that is designed to minimize the
accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during construction
activities.
   HOTSPOT. An area where land use or activities generate highly contaminated
runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in
stormwater.
   HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP (HSG). A Natural Resource Conservation Service
classification system in which soils are categorized into four runoff potential
groups. The groups range from A soils, with high permeability and little runoff
production, to D soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more
runoff.
   IMPERVIOUS COVER. Those surfaces that cannot effectively infiltrate rainfall
(e.g., building rooftops, pavement, sidewalks, driveways and the like).
   INDUSTRIAL STORMWATER PERMIT. A National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System permit issued to a commercial industry or group of industries which
regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges
or specifies on-site pollution control strategies.
   INFILTRATION. The process of percolating stormwater into the subsoil.
   INFILTRATION FACILITY. Any structure or device designed to infiltrate
retained water to the subsurface. These facilities may be above grade or below
grade.
   JURISDICTIONAL WETLAND. An area that is inundated or saturated by surface
water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a
prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation.
   LAND DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY. Any activity which changes the volume or peak
flow discharge rate of rainfall runoff from the land surface. This may include
the grading, digging, cutting, scraping, or excavating of soil, placement of
fill materials, paving, construction, substantial removal of vegetation, or any
activity which bares soil or rock or involves the diversion or piping of any
natural or man-made watercourse.
   LANDOWNER. The legal or beneficial owner of land, including those holding
the right to purchase or lease the land, or any other person holding
proprietary rights in the land.
   MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT. A legally recorded document that acts as a property
deed restriction, and which provides for long-term maintenance of stormwater
management practices.
   NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION. Pollution from any source other than from any
discernible, confined, and discrete conveyances, and shall include, but not be
limited to, pollutants from agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction,
subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources.
   ON-SITE FACILITY. A stormwater management measure located within the subject
property boundary described in the permit application for land development
activity.
   RECHARGE. The replenishment of underground water reserves.
   REDEVELOPMENT. Any construction, alteration or improvement exceeding one
acre in area where existing land use is high density commercial, industrial,
institutional or multi-family residential, and including projects less than one
acre that are part of a larger common plan of development or sale and discharge
to the permittee's MS4.
   STOP WORK ORDER. An order issued which requires that all construction
activity on a site be stopped.
   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT. The use of structural or non-structural practices
that are designed to reduce stormwater runoff pollutant loads, discharge
volumes, peak flow discharge rates and detrimental changes in stream
temperature that affect water quality and habitat.
   STORMWATER RETROFIT. A stormwater management practice designed for an
existing development site that previously had either no stormwater management
practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management
requirements of the site.
   STORMWATER RUNOFF. Flow on the surface of the ground, resulting from
precipitation.
   STORMWATER TREATMENT PRACTICES (STPS). Measures, either structural or
nonstructural, that are determined to be the most effective, practical means of
preventing or reducing point source or nonpoint source pollution inputs to
stormwater runoff and water bodies.
   WATER QUALITY VOLUME (WQv). The storage needed to capture and treat the
first one inch per the Wayne County Stormwater Standards Manual and current MS4
permit requirements.
   WATERCOURSE. A permanent or intermittent stream or other body of water,
either natural or man-made, which gathers or carries surface water.
(Ord. 1521, passed 2-7-2022)
§ 52.061 PERMIT PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Permit required.
      (1)   No landowner or developer shall receive any of the building,
grading or other permits required for land disturbance activities without first
meeting the requirements of this subchapter prior to commencing the proposed
activity.
      (2)   Site development plans shall be submitted to the City of Wyandotte
Department of Engineering and Building (City Engineer) for site plan review.
The City Engineer shall determine if the project meets the criteria of §
52.057, Applicability, and if so, the landowner or developer shall be directed
to obtain a permit for stormwater construction from the Wayne County
Construction Permit Office.
   (B)   Application requirements.
      (1)   Unless specifically excluded by this subchapter, any landowner or
developer desiring a permit for a land disturbance activity shall submit to the
Wayne County Construction Permit Office a permit application for stormwater
construction on a form provided for that purpose. The permit application must
be accompanied by the following, at a minimum, in order that the permit
application be considered: a stormwater management plan; a maintenance
agreement; and a non-refundable permit review fee as set by Wayne County.
      (2)   The stormwater management plan shall be prepared to meet the
requirements of Wayne County Stormwater Program and Section §
52.063 of this subchapter. The maintenance agreement, entered into with Wayne
County by the City of Wyandotte and the landowner or developer, shall be
prepared to meet the requirements of §
52.067 of this subchapter.
   (C)   Application review fees. The fee for review of any stormwater
construction permit application shall be as set forth by the County of Wayne.
   (D)   Application procedure.
      (1)   Applications shall be made in accordance with the Wayne County
Stormwater Program.
      (2)   A copy of this permit application shall be forwarded to the City
Engineer.
      (3)   If the permit application, final stormwater management plan and
maintenance agreement are approved by the County of Wayne, all appropriate land
disturbance activity permits shall be issued.
   (E)   Permit duration. Permits issued under this section shall be valid from
the date of issuance through the date the County of Wayne notifies the
permitholder that all stormwater management practices have passed the final
inspection required under permit condition.
(Ord. 1521, passed 2-7-2022) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.062 WAIVERS TO STORMWATER MANAGEMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Every applicant shall provide for stormwater management as required by
this subchapter, unless a written request is filed to waive this requirement.
Requests to waive the stormwater management plan requirements shall be
submitted to the City Engineer for approval.
   (B)   The minimum requirements for stormwater management may be waived in
whole or in part upon written request of the applicant, provided that at least
one of the following conditions applies:
      (1)   Provisions are made to manage stormwater by discharging all
stormwater runoff that is generated, from the new or expanded impervious
surfaces, to the City of Wyandotte's combined sewer system. The landowner or
developer shall provide a sealed engineering study that demonstrates that the
capacity of the existing combined sewer system will not be exceeded by the
calculated discharge from the new or expanded impervious areas by a 100-year
storm event.
      (2)   The City Engineer finds that meeting the minimum on-site management
requirements is not feasible due to the natural or existing physical
characteristics of a site in accordance with the Wayne County Stormwater
Program.
(Ord. 1521, passed 2-7-2022)
§ 52.063 GENERAL PERFORMANCE CRITERIA FOR STORMWATER MANAGEMENT.
   Unless judged by the City Engineer to be exempt or granted a waiver as
outlined in sections §§
52.057 and
52.062, the following performance criteria shall be addressed for stormwater
management at all sites:
   (A)   All site designs shall establish stormwater management practices to
control the peak flow rates of stormwater discharge associated with specified
design storms and reduce stormwater runoff. These practices should seek to
utilize pervious areas for stormwater treatment and to infiltrate stormwater
runoff from driveways, sidewalks, rooftops, parking lots, and landscaped areas
to the maximum extent practical to provide treatment for both water quality and
quantity.
   (B)   All stormwater runoff generated from new development shall not
discharge untreated stormwater directly into a jurisdictional wetland or local
water body without adequate treatment. Where such discharges are proposed, the
impact of the proposal on wetland functional values shall be assessed using a
method acceptable to the County of Wayne. In no case shall the impact on
functional values be any less than allowed by the Army Corp of Engineers (ACE)
or the Michigan Department of Environment, Great Lakes, and Energy.
   (C)   Annual groundwater recharge rates shall be maintained by promoting
infiltration through the use of structural and non-structural methods. At a
minimum, annual recharge from the post development site shall mimic the annual
recharge from pre-development site conditions.
   (D)   For all development, structural stormwater treatment practices shall
be designed to remove 80% of the average annual post development total
suspended solids load (TSS). It is presumed that a STP complies with this
performance standard if it is:
      (1)   Sized to capture the prescribed water quality volume (WQv), and
designed according to the specific performance criteria required by the Wayne
County Stormwater Program;
      (2)   Constructed properly; and
      (3)   Maintained regularly.
   (E)   For all development, to protect stream channels from degradation,
stormwater management practices shall be designed to meet the specific channel
protection criterion required by the Wayne County Stormwater Program.
   (F)   Stormwater discharges to critical areas with sensitive resources
(e.g., cold water fisheries, shellfish beds, swimming beaches, recharge areas,
water supply reservoirs) may be subject to additional performance criteria, or
may need to utilize or restrict certain stormwater management practices.
   (G)   Certain industrial sites are required to prepare and implement a
stormwater pollution prevention plan, and shall file a notice of intent (NOI)
under the provisions of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(NPDES) general permit. The stormwater pollution prevention plan requirement
applies to both existing and new industrial sites.
   (H)   Stormwater discharges from land uses or activities with higher
potential pollutant loadings, known as "hotspots," may require the use of
specific structural STPs and pollution prevention practices.
   (I)   Prior to design, applicants are required to consult with the Wayne
County Construction Permits office to determine if they are subject to
additional stormwater design requirements.
   (J)   The calculations for determining peak flows as found in the Wayne
County Stormwater Program shall be used for sizing all stormwater management
practices.
(Ord. 1521, passed 2-7-2022)
§ 52.064 BASIC STORMWATER MANAGEMENT DESIGN CRITERIA.
   (A)   Minimum control requirements.
      (1)   All stormwater management practices will be designed so that the
specific storm frequency storage volumes as identified in the Wayne County
Stormwater Program are met, unless the City Engineer grants the applicant a
waiver or the applicant is exempt from such requirements as outlined in §§
52.057 and
52.062.
      (2)   In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions warrant
greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the
City of Wyandotte reserves the right to impose any and all additional
requirements deemed necessary to control the volume, timing, and rate of
runoff.
   (B)   Site design feasibility.
      (1)   Stormwater management practices for a site shall be chosen based on
the physical conditions of the site.
      (2)   Among the factors that should be considered:
         (a)   Topography;
         (b)   Maximum drainage area;
         (c)   Depth to water table;
         (d)   Soils;
         (e)   Slopes;
         (f)   Terrain;
         (g)   Head; and
         (h)   Location in relation to environmentally sensitive features or
ultra-urban areas.
      (3)   Applicants shall consult the Wayne County Stormwater Program for
guidance on the factors that determine site design feasibility when selecting a
stormwater management practice.
   (C)   Conveyance issues.
      (1)   All stormwater management practices shall be designed to convey
stormwater to allow for the maximum removal of pollutants and reduction in flow
velocities. This shall include, but not be limited to:
         (a)   Maximizing of flow paths from inflow points to outflow points;
         (b)   Protection of inlet and outfall structures;
         (c)   Elimination of erosive flow velocities; and
         (d)   Providing of underdrain systems, where applicable.
      (2)   The Wayne County Stormwater Program shall provide detailed guidance
on the requirements for conveyance for each of the approved stormwater
management practices.
   (D)   Pretreatment requirements. Every stormwater treatment practice shall
have an acceptable form of water quality pretreatment, in accordance with the
pretreatment requirements found in Wayne County Stormwater Program. Certain
stormwater treatment practices, as specified in the Wayne County Stormwater
Program, are prohibited even with pretreatment, in the following circumstances:
      (1)   Stormwater is generated from highly contaminated source areas known
as "hotspots."
      (2)   Stormwater is carried in a conveyance system that also carries
contaminated, non- stormwater discharges.
      (3)   Stormwater is being managed in a designated groundwater recharge
area.
      (4)   Certain geologic conditions exist (e.g., karst) that prohibit the
proper pretreatment of stormwater.
   (E)   Treatment/geometry conditions. All stormwater management practices
shall be designed to capture and treat stormwater runoff according to the
specifications outlined in the Wayne County Stormwater Standards Manual. These
specifications will designate the water quantity and quality treatment criteria
that apply to an approved stormwater management practice.
   (F)   Landscaping plans required. All stormwater management practices must
have a landscaping plan detailing both the vegetation to be in the plan and how
and who will manage and maintain this vegetation. This plan must be prepared by
a registered landscape architect or soil conservation professional.
   (G)   Maintenance agreements. All stormwater treatment practices shall have
an enforceable operation and maintenance agreement to ensure the system
functions as designed. This agreement will include any and all maintenance
easements required to access and inspect the stormwater treatment practices,
and to perform routine maintenance as necessary to ensure proper functioning of
the stormwater treatment practice. In addition, a legally binding covenant
specifying the parties responsible for the proper maintenance of all stormwater
treatment practices shall be secured prior to issuance of any permits for land
disturbance activities.
(Ord. 1521, passed 2-7-2022)
§ 52.065 REQUIREMENTS FOR STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN APPROVAL.
   (A)   Stormwater management plan required for all developments.
      (1)   No application for development will be approved unless it includes
a stormwater management plan detailing in concept how runoff and associated
water quality impacts resulting from the development will be controlled or
managed. This plan must be prepared by a registered design professional and
include the general location and type of practices.
      (2)   The stormwater management plan(s) shall be referred for comment to
all other interested agencies, and any comments must be addressed in a final
stormwater management plan. This final plan must be signed by a licensed
professional engineer (PE), who will verify that the design of all stormwater
management practices will meet the submittal requirements set forth in the
Wayne County Stormwater Program. No building, grading, or sediment control
permit shall be issued until a satisfactory final stormwater management plan,
or a waiver thereof, shall have undergone a review and been approved by the
City Engineer after determining that the plan or waiver is consistent with the
requirements of this subchapter.
   (B)   Stormwater management concept plan requirements.
      (1)   A stormwater management concept plan shall be required with all
permit applications and will include sufficient information (e.g., maps,
hydrologic calculations and the like) to evaluate the environmental
characteristics of the project site, the potential impacts of all proposed
development of the site, both present and future, on the water resources, and
the effectiveness and acceptability of the measures proposed for managing
stormwater generated at the project site. The intent of this conceptual
planning process is to determine the type of stormwater management measures
necessary for the proposed project, and ensure adequate planning for management
of stormwater runoff from future development. To accomplish this goal the
following information shall be included in the concept plan:
         (a)   A map (or maps) indicating the location of existing and proposed
buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, structural stormwater management
and sediment control facilities. The map(s) will also clearly show proposed
land use with tabulation of the percentage of surface area to be adapted to
various uses; drainage patterns; locations of utilities, roads and easements;
the limits of clearing and grading; a written description of the site plan and
justification of proposed changes in natural conditions may also be required.
         (b)   Sufficient engineering analysis to show that the proposed
stormwater management measures are capable of controlling runoff from the site
in compliance with this subchapter and the specifications of the Wayne County
Stormwater Program.
         (c)   A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources at the
site and surrounding area as it exists prior to the commencement of the project
and a description of the watershed and its relation to the project site. This
description should include a discussion of soil conditions, forest cover,
topography, wetlands, and other native vegetative areas on the site. Particular
attention should be paid to environmentally sensitive features that provide
particular opportunities or constraints for development.
         (d)   A written description of the required maintenance burden for any
proposed stormwater management facility.
         (e)   The City Engineer may also require a concept plan to consider
the maximum development potential of a site under existing zoning, regardless
of whether the applicant presently intends to develop the site to its maximum
potential.
      (2)   For development or redevelopment occurring on a previously
developed site, an applicant shall be required to include within the stormwater
concept plan measures for controlling existing stormwater runoff discharges
from the site in accordance with the standards of this subchapter to the
maximum extent practicable.
   (C)   Final stormwater management plan requirements. After review of the
stormwater management concept plan, and modifications to that plan as deemed
necessary by the City Engineer, a final stormwater management plan must be
submitted for approval. The final stormwater management plan, in addition to
the information from the concept plan, shall include all of the information
required in the Wayne County Stormwater Program, and the following:
      (1)   Contact information. The name, address, and telephone number of all
persons having a legal interest in the property and the tax reference number
and parcel number of the property or properties affected.
      (2)   Topographic base map. A one inch = 200 feet topographic base map of
the site which extends a minimum of feet beyond the limits of the proposed
development and indicates existing surface water drainage including streams,
ponds, culverts, ditches, and wetlands; current land use including all existing
structures; locations of utilities, roads, and easements; and significant
natural and manmade features not otherwise shown.
      (3)   Calculations. Hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations for the
pre-development and post-development conditions for the design storms specified
in this subchapter. Such calculations shall include: (i) description of the
design storm frequency, intensity and duration; (ii) time of concentration;
(iii) soil curve numbers or runoff coefficients; (iv) peak runoff rates and
total runoff volumes for each watershed area; (v) infiltration rates, where
applicable; (vi) culvert capacities; (vii) flow velocities; and (viii) data on
the increase in rate and volume of runoff for the design storms referenced in
the Wayne County Stormwater Program. Documentation of sources for all
computation methods and field test results.
      (4)   Soils information. If a stormwater management control measure
depends on the hydrologic properties of soils (e.g., infiltration basins), then
a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report shall be based on on-site
boring logs or soil pit profiles. The number and location of required soil
borings or soil sits shall be determined based on what is needed to determine
the suitability and distribution of soil types present at the location of the
control measure.
      (5)   Maintenance and repair plan. The design and planning of all
stormwater management facilities shall include detailed maintenance and repair
procedures to ensure their continued function. These plans will identify the
parts or components of a stormwater management facility that need to be
maintained and the equipment and skills or training necessary. Provisions for
the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance
program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall
be included in the plan.
      (6)   Landscaping plan. The applicant must present a detailed plan for
management of vegetation at the site after construction is finished, including
who will be responsible for the maintenance of vegetation at the site and what
practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is
preserved. This plan must be prepared by a registered landscape architect or by
the soil conservation professional.
      (7)   Maintenance easements. The applicant must ensure access to all
stormwater treatment practices at the site for the purpose of inspection and
repair by securing all the maintenance easements needed on a permanent basis.
These easements will be recorded with the plan and will remain in effect even
with transfer of title to the property.
      (8)   Maintenance agreement. The applicant must execute an easement and
an inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of
land served by the on-site stormwater management measures in accordance with
the specifications of this subchapter.
      (9)   Erosion and sediment control plans for construction of stormwater
management measures. The applicant must prepare a soil erosion and sediment
control (SESC) plan for all construction activities related to implementing any
on-site stormwater management practices. The plan shall be submitted to the
City of Wyandotte Engineering and Building Department along with an SESC permit
application provided by the city. SESC permit will be approved and issued by
the City of Wyandotte Department of Engineering and Building.
      (10)   Other environmental permits. The applicant shall assure that all
other applicable environmental permits have been acquired for the site prior to
approval of the final stormwater design plan.
   (D)   Performance bond/security.
      (1)   The City Engineer may, at its discretion, require the submittal of
a performance security or bond prior to issuance of a permit in order to ensure
that the stormwater practices are installed by the permit holder as required by
the approved stormwater management plan. The amount of the installation
performance security shall be the total estimated construction cost of the
stormwater management practices approved under the permit. The performance
security shall contain forfeiture provisions for failure to complete work
specified in the stormwater management plan.
      (2)   The installation performance security shall be released in full
only upon submission of "as built plans" and written certification by a
registered professional engineer that the stormwater practice has been
installed in accordance with the approved plan and other applicable provisions
of this subchapter. The City Engineer will make a final inspection of the
stormwater practice to ensure that it is in compliance with the approved plan
and the provisions of this subchapter. Provisions for a partial pro-rata
release of the performance security based on the completion of various
development stages can be done at the discretion of the City Engineer.
(Ord. 1521, passed 2-7-2022)
§ 52.066 CONSTRUCTION INSPECTION.
   (A)   Notice of construction commencement.
      (1)   The applicant must notify the City Engineer in advance before the
commencement of construction. Regular inspections of the stormwater management
system construction shall be conducted by the staff of the Engineering and
Building Department or certified by a professional engineer or their designee.
All inspections shall be documented and written reports prepared that contain
the following information:
         (a)   The date and location of the inspection;
         (b)   Whether construction is in compliance with the approved
stormwater management plan;
         (c)   Variations from the approved construction specifications;
         (d)   Any violations that exist.
      (2)   If any violations are found, the property owner shall be notified
in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions.
No added work shall proceed until any violations are corrected and all work
previously completed has received approval by the City Engineer.
   (B)   As built plans. All applicants are required to submit actual "as
built" plans for any stormwater management practices located on-site after
final construction is completed. The plan must show the final design
specifications for all stormwater management facilities and must be certified
by a professional engineer. A final inspection by the City of Wyandotte
Engineering and Building Department is required before the release of any
performance securities can occur.
   (C)   Landscaping and stabilization requirements.
      (1)   Any area of land from which the natural vegetative cover has been
either partially or wholly cleared or removed by development activities shall
be revegetated within five days from the substantial completion of such
clearing and construction. The following criteria shall apply to revegetation
efforts:
         (a)   Reseeding must be done with an annual or perennial cover crop
accompanied by placement of straw mulch or its equivalent of sufficient
coverage to control erosion until such time as the cover crop is established
over 90% of the seeded area.
         (b)   Replanting with native woody and herbaceous vegetation must be
accompanied by placement of straw mulch or its equivalent of sufficient
coverage to control erosion until the plantings are established and are capable
of controlling erosion.
         (c)   Any area of revegetation must exhibit survival of a minimum of
75% of the cover crop throughout the year immediately following revegetation.
Revegetation must be repeated in successive years until the minimum 75%
survival for one year is achieved.
      (2)   In addition to the above requirements, a landscaping plan must be
submitted with the final design describing the vegetative stabilization and
management techniques to be used at a site after construction is completed.
This plan will explain not only how the site will be stabilized after
construction, but who will be responsible for the maintenance of vegetation at
the site and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative
cover is preserved. This plan must be prepared by a registered landscape
architect or by the soil conservation professional, and must be approved prior
to receiving a permit.
(Ord. 1521, passed 7-2-2022)
§ 52.067 MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR OF STORMWATER FACILITIES.
   (A)   Maintenance easement. Prior to the issuance of any permit that has a
stormwater management facility as one of the requirements of the permit, the
applicant or owner of the site must execute a maintenance easement agreement
that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of land served by the stormwater
management facility. The agreement shall provide for access to the facility at
reasonable times for periodic inspection by the City Engineer, or agent, and
for regular or special assessments of property owners to ensure that the
facility is maintained in proper working condition to meet design standards and
any other provisions established by this subchapter. The easement agreement
shall be recorded by the land owner with the Wayne County Register of Deeds.
   (B)   Maintenance covenants. Maintenance of all stormwater management
facilities shall be ensured through the creation of a formal maintenance
covenant that must be approved by the city and recorded by the landowner with
the Wayne County Register of Deeds prior to final plan approval. As part of the
covenant, a schedule shall be developed for when and how often maintenance will
occur to ensure proper function of the stormwater management facility. The
covenant shall also include plans for periodic inspections to ensure proper
performance of the facility between scheduled cleanouts.
   (C)   Requirements for maintenance covenants. All stormwater management
facilities must undergo, at the minimum, an annual inspection to document
maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of
this subchapter and accomplishment of its purposes. These needs may include:
removal of silt, litter and other debris from all catch basins, inlets and
drainage pipes, grass cutting and vegetation removal, and necessary replacement
of landscape vegetation. Any maintenance needs found must be addressed in a
timely manner, as determined by the City Engineer, and the inspection and
maintenance requirement may be increased as deemed necessary to ensure proper
functioning of the stormwater management facility.
   (D)   Inspection of stormwater facilities. Inspection programs may be
established on any reasonable basis, including but not limited to: routine
inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other
notice of possible violations; inspection of drainage basins or areas
identified as higher than typical sources of sediment or other contaminants or
pollutants; inspections of businesses or industries of a type associated with
higher than usual discharges of contaminants or pollutants or with discharges
of a type which are more likely than the typical discharge to cause violations
of state or federal water or sediment quality standards or the NPDES stormwater
permit; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under
environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to:
reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water,
groundwater, and material or water in drainage control facilities; and
evaluating the condition of drainage control facilities and other stormwater
treatment practices.
   (E)   Right-of-entry for inspection. When any new drainage control facility
is installed on private property, or when any new connection is made between
private property and a public drainage control system, sanitary sewer or
combined sewer, the property owner shall grant to the City Engineer the right
to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the
purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when it has
a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this subchapter is occurring
or has occurred, and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance
or correction of a violation of this subchapter.
   (F)   Records of installation and maintenance activities. Parties
responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management
facility shall make records of the installation and of all maintenance and
repairs, and shall retain the records, and pass them on to succeeding property
owners. These records shall be made available to the City Engineer during
inspection of the facility and at other reasonable times upon request.
   (G)   Failure to maintain practices. If a responsible party fails or refuses
to meet the requirements of the maintenance covenant, the city, after
reasonable notice, may correct a violation of the design standards or
maintenance needs by performing all necessary work to place the facility in
proper working condition. In the event that the stormwater management facility
becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the City Engineer shall
notify the party responsible for maintenance of the stormwater management
facility in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the responsible person shall
have 30 days to effect maintenance and repair of the facility in an approved
manner. After proper notice, the city may assess the owner(s) of the facility
for the cost of repair work and any penalties, and the cost of the work shall
be a lien on the property, or prorated against the beneficial users of the
property, and may be placed on the tax bill and collected as ordinary taxes by
the county.
§ 52.068 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Violations. Any development activity that is commenced or is conducted
contrary to this subchapter may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated
in a manner provided by law.
   (B)   Notice of violation. When the City Engineer determines that an
activity is not being carried out in accordance with the requirements of this
subchapter, it shall issue a written notice of violation to the owner of the
property. The notice of violation shall contain:
      (1)   The name and address of the owner or applicant;
      (2)   The address when available or a description of the building,
structure or land upon which the violation is occurring;
      (3)   A statement specifying the nature of the violation;
      (4)   A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the
development activity into compliance with this subchapter and a time schedule
for the completion of such remedial action;
      (5)   A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be
assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and
      (6)   A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to
the municipality by filing a written notice of appeal within 15 days of service
of notice of violation.
   (C)   Stop work orders. Persons receiving a notice of violation will be
required to halt all construction activities. This "stop work order" will be in
effect until the City Engineer confirms that the development activity is in
compliance and the violation has been satisfactorily addressed. Failure to
address a notice of violation in a timely manner can result in civil, criminal,
or monetary penalties in accordance with the enforcement measures authorized in
this chapter.
   (D)   Restoration of lands. Any violator may be required to restore land to
its undisturbed condition. In the event that restoration is not undertaken
within a reasonable time after notice, the City Engineer may take necessary
corrective action, the cost of which shall become a lien upon the property
until paid.
   (E)   Holds on occupation permits. Occupation permits will not be granted
until corrections to all stormwater practices have been made and accepted by
the City Engineer.
(Ord. 1521, passed 2-7-2022) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person or entity which violates any provision of §§
52.030 through
52.043 is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a
civil fine of $500 per day for each infraction, plus costs and expenses and any
other relief allowed by law.
   (B)   The authorized enforcement agency may recover all attorney’s fees
court costs and other expenses associated with enforcement of this section,
including sampling and monitoring expenses.
   (C)   In addition to, or as an alternative to any penalty provided herein or
by law, any person who violates the provisions of §§
52.055 through
52.068 shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction and may be ordered
to pay a civil fine of not more than $500. Such person shall be guilty of a
separate offense for each day during which the violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 1490, passed 6-29-2020; Ord. 1521, passed 2-7-2022)
CHAPTER 53: CABLE TELEVISION
Section
   
53.001   Short title
   
53.002   Definitions
   
53.003   System to be operated by Department of Municipal Service
   
53.004   Financing and purchase of system
   
53.005   Rates and charges
   
53.006   Disposition of funds
   
53.007   Administrative fees and charges
   
53.008   Accounts and reports
   
53.009   Unauthorized use of system
 
   
53.999   Penalty
§ 53.001 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Wyandotte Cable Television Ordinance”.
(Prior Code, § 8.1-1) (Ord. 705, passed 7-27-1981)
§ 53.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADMINISTRATIVE FEES AND CHARGES. Reasonable reimbursement to the city for
all services rendered by the various city departments and employees to the
cable television system and all reasonable direct and indirect costs and
expenses the city may incur as a result of the installation, operation,
maintenance, administration and/or use of the cable television system,
including, but not limited to, costs of police and fire protection, use of
streets, payment in lieu of taxes.
   CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM. A system of wires, antennas, lines, cables, towers,
waveguides or other conductors, converters, equipment and facilities, designed
and constructed for the purpose of producing, receiving, transmitting,
amplifying and distributing, audio, video and other forms of electronic or
electrical signals.
   CITY. The City of Wyandotte.
   INSTALLATION CHARGE. The amount to be charged to a subscriber for the
connection of the system from the feeder cable to the subscriber’s terminals.
   SUBSCRIBER. The recipient of the cable television service.
(Prior Code, § 8.1-2) (Ord. 705, passed 7-27-1981)
§ 53.003 SYSTEM TO BE OPERATED BY DEPARTMENT OF MUNICIPAL SERVICE.
   The Department of Municipal Service is charged and entrusted with the
construction, management, supervision and control of the cable television
system to be owned by the city. The Municipal Service Commission shall make and
enforce all necessary rules and regulations for the operation of the cable
television system.
(Prior Code, § 8.1-3) (Ord. 705, passed 7-27-1981)
§ 53.004 FINANCING AND PURCHASE OF SYSTEM.
   The city shall acquire said cable television system in a manner provided by
the City Charter as directed by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 8.1-4) (Ord. 705, passed 7-27-1981)
§ 53.005 RATES AND CHARGES.
   The Municipal Service Commission shall, from time to time, fix and cause to
be assessed the reasonable monthly rates and such installation charge as may be
fixed, to be paid by the subscribers to the cable television system. The
Commission may make, subject to the approval of Council, and enforce all
necessary rules and regulations for the collection of the monthly cable
television subscriber rates. The rates shall be promptly collected by and paid
to the Commission and all moneys so received shall be turned over when and as
collected, to the City Treasurer on daily balances and the City Treasurer shall
give duplicate receipts therefor; one of which shall be filed with the City
Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 8.1-5) (Ord. 705, passed 7-27-1981)
§ 53.006 DISPOSITION OF FUNDS.
   The money paid into the city treasury by the Municipal Service Commission
shall be deposited in a separate account and applied on the payment of
administrative fees and charges, and costs and expenses incurred by the cable
television system. The subscriber rates and installation charges determined by
the Commission shall be sufficient to pay the operating, administrative and
maintenance costs, charges and expenses of the cable television system.
(Prior Code, § 8.1-6) (Ord. 705, passed 7-27-1981)
§ 53.007 ADMINISTRATIVE FEES AND CHARGES.
   The Municipal Service Commission shall pay into the city’s General Fund on a
quarterly basis all administrative fees and charges which shall be computed on
a quarterly basis and submitted to said Commission for payment.
(Prior Code, § 8.1-7) (Ord. 705, passed 7-27-1981)
§ 53.008 ACCOUNTS AND REPORTS.
   The Commission shall make quarterly reports to the Council which reports
shall embrace an itemized statement of all the revenues and expenditures
relating to or connected with the cable television system and an accurate list
of all subscriber rates. This statement shall be certified by the Commission,
entered of record by the City Clerk and published in such manner as the Council
may direct. The Commission shall also make such other reports as the Council
may, from time to time, require. The Council shall cause all the accounts and
records of the Commission to be audited at least once a year and at such other
times as it shall see fit.
(Prior Code, § 8.1-8) (Ord. 705, passed 7-27-1981)
§ 53.009 UNAUTHORIZED USE OF SYSTEM.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      CABLE TELEVISION or CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM. A communications system
operating within the city which distributes cablecast, pay programs and/or
other signals and/or services by means of coaxial cable or other state-of-the-
art equipment installed on, over or under the public right-of-way in the city
that is owned and operated by the Department of Municipal Service of the city.
      CITY. The City of Wyandotte.
      DEPARTMENT. The Department of Municipal Service of the city.
      OPERATOR OF SUCH SYSTEM. The Department of Municipal Service of the city.
      PERSON. Any individual, person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company or organization of any kind.
      PREMIUM TELEVISION OR PREMIUM CABLE TELEVISION. A show, channel or
service for which a separate fee is charged such as pay television or security
service.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to make any physical connection to
the Department’s premium cable television system operating within the city that
is not expressly authorized by the operator of such system.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully damage, destroy,
remove, obstruct or interfere with any part of the Department’s premium cable
television system operating in the city without the express authorization of
the operator of such system.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to make any modification to system
equipment or to any system-connected equipment so as to induce any
uncompensated premium cable television system service or level of service for
which the operator has established a compensation rate without the express
authorization of the operator of such system.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person to obtain, by any means
whatsoever, any cable television signal from any cable television system
operating within the city without the express authorization of the operator of
such system.
(Prior Code, § 8.1-9) (Ord. 705, passed 7-27-1981) Penalty, see §
53.999
§ 53.999 PENALTY.
   Any person using any such signal, without authority of the operator of such
system, for the purpose of viewing, hearing or recording any show or service,
or any violation of any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $500 or by imprisonment for
not more than 90 days or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day of a
continuing violation may be charged and punished as a separate and distinct
offense.
(Prior Code, § 8.1-9) (Ord. 769, passed 6-25-1984)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
72.   PARKING AND STOPPING RULES
      
73.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
      
74.   MOTOR CARRIERS
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
70.001   Play streets
   
70.002   Riding on outside of moving vehicle
   
70.003   Driving with person outside moving vehicle
   
70.004   Getting out of parked vehicles
   
70.005   Unauthorized persons not to move vehicles
   
70.006   Pedestrians to use right half of crosswalk
   
70.007   Restricting noise levels in motor vehicles
   
70.008   Placement of traffic-control devices and towing and impoundment of
vehicles
   
70.009   Alleys; use regulated
   
70.010   Safety belt usage required
Michigan Vehicle Code
   
70.025   Adoption
   
70.026   Definition of “local authority”
   
70.027   Purpose
   
70.028   Issuance of citation
   
70.029   Repeal
School Buses
   
70.040   Short title
   
70.041   Painting and signs
   
70.042   Stopping for buses; resumption of motion, posted signs
   
70.043   Visibility of bus in stopped position
   
70.044   Divided highway
   
70.045   Flashing red lights; requirements; use
   
70.046   Front end mirror
   
70.047   Presumption, registered owner as driver; sufficiency of evidence
 
   
70.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.001 PLAY STREETS.
   Whenever signs are erected by authority of the Council indicating any street
or part thereof as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such
street or portion thereof, except drivers of vehicles having business thereon
or whose residences are within such closed area, and each driver shall exercise
the greatest care in driving upon any such street.
(Prior Code, § 35-1) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.002 RIDING ON OUTSIDE OF MOVING VEHICLE.
   No person shall ride upon, or attach himself or herself to, the outside of
any moving motor vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 35-2) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.003 DRIVING WITH PERSON OUTSIDE MOVING VEHICLE.
   No person shall drive any motor vehicle while any person is on, or has
attached himself or herself to, the outside of said vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 35-3) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.004 GETTING OUT OF PARKED VEHICLES.
   When a vehicle parks or comes to a stop parallel with the curb so far as
practicable, the driver or any other occupant thereof getting out of the
vehicle shall do so through the door or doors on the right-hand or curbside of
the vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 35-4) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.005 UNAUTHORIZED PERSONS NOT TO MOVE VEHICLES.
   No person, except a member of the Police or Fire Departments, while in the
performance of his or her duties, shall move any vehicle not owned by such
person or lawfully in his or her possession, except to clear the roadway.
(Prior Code, § 35-5) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.006 PEDESTRIANS TO USE RIGHT HALF OF CROSSWALK.
   Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of all
crosswalks.
(Prior Code, § 35-6) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.007 RESTRICTING NOISE LEVELS IN MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      COMBINATION VEHICLE. Any combination of truck, truck tractor, trailer,
semitrailer or pole trailer used upon the highways or streets in the
transportation of passengers or property.
      DECIBEL. A unit of sound level on a logarithmic scale measured relative
to the threshold of audible sound by the human ear, in compliance with American
National Standards Institute Standard S1.1-1960.
      DECIBELS ON THE A-WEIGHTED NETWORK or DBA. Decibels measured on the a-
weighted network of a sound level meter, as specified in American National
Standards Institute Standard S1.4-1971.
      EXHAUST SYSTEM. The system comprised of a combination of components which
provides for enclosed flow of exhaust gas from engine parts to the atmosphere.
      FAST METER RESPONSE. The meter ballistics of meter dynamic
characteristics as specified by American National Standard S1.4-1971.
      GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT RATING. The value specified by the manufacturer as
the loaded weight of a vehicle.
      MAXIMUM NOISE. The noise emitted from a vehicle during that manner of
operation which causes the highest DBA level possible from that vehicle.
      MUFFLER. A device for abating the sound of escaping gases of an internal
combustion engine.
      NOISE. Any sound.
      TOTAL NOISE. Noises radiating from a vehicle, but does not include noises
emitted from a horn, siren, bell or other similar device of an authorized
emergency vehicle.
   (B)   A motor vehicle, while being operated on a highway or street, shall be
equipped with an exhaust system in good working order to prevent excessive or
unusual noise and shall be equipped to prevent noise in excess of the limits
established in this section. For purposes of this section, a motor vehicle does
not include a special mobile equipment.
   (C)   A motor vehicle shall not be operated or driven on a highway or street
if the motor vehicle produces total noise exceeding one of the following limits
at a distance of 50 feet, except as provided in divisions (C)(2)(c) and (C)(3)
(c) below.
      (1)   A motor vehicle with a gross weight or gross vehicle weight rating
of 8,500 pounds or more, combination vehicle with gross weight or gross vehicle
weight ratings of 8,500 pounds or more:
         (a)   Ninety DBA if the maximum lawful speed on the highway or street
is greater than 35 mph;
         (b)   Eighty-two DBA if the maximum lawful speed on the highway is not
more than 35 mph; and
         (c)   Eighty-eight DBA under stationary run-up test.
      (2)   A motorcycle or a moped:
         (a)   Eighty-six DBA if the maximum lawful speed on the highway is
greater than 35 mph;
         (b)   Eighty-two DBA if the maximum lawful speed on the highway is not
more than 35 mph; and
         (c)   Ninety-five DBA under stationary run-up test at 75 inches.
      (3)   A motor vehicle or a combination of vehicles towed by a motor
vehicle not covered in divisions (C)(1) or (C)(2) above:
         (a)   Eighty-two DBA if the maximum lawful speed on the highway or
street is greater than 35 mph;
         (b)   Seventy-six DBA if the maximum lawful speed on the highway or
street is not more than 35 mph; and
         (c)   Ninety-five DBA under stationary run-up test 20 inches from the
end of the tailpipe.
   (D)   A dealer shall not sell or offer for sale for use upon a street or
highway in the state a new motor vehicle manufactured after 4-1-1978, which
produces a maximum noise exceeding the following limits:
      (1)   A motor vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating of 8,500 pounds
or more: 83 DBA;
      (2)   A motorcycle or moped: 83 DBA; and
      (3)   A motor vehicle not covered in divisions (D)(1) or (D)(2) above: 80
DBA.
   (E)   A person shall not operate a vehicle on a highway or street if the
vehicle has a defect in the exhaust system which affects sound reduction, is
not equipped with a muffler or other noise dissipative device, or is equipped
with a cutout, bypass, amplifier or a similar device.
   (F)   A person, either acting for himself or herself or as the agent or
employee of another, shall not sell, install, or replace a muffler or exhaust
part that causes the motor vehicle to which the muffler or exhaust part is
attached to exceed the noise limits established by this section or a rule
promulgated by the Department of State Highways and Transportation pursuant to
Public Act 306 of 1969, as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 24.201 to 24.315.
   (G)   A person shall not modify, repair, replace or remove a part of an
exhaust system causing the motor vehicle to which the system is attached to
produce noise in excess of the levels established by this section, or operate a
motor vehicle so altered on a street or highway.
   (H)   A dealer shall not sell a used or secondhand motor vehicle for use
upon a street or highway which is not in compliance with this section.
   (I)   If it is known that the noise level of a motor vehicle is in excess of
the DBA levels established in this section, that evidence shall be prima facie
evidence that the motor vehicle was producing excessive noise in violation of
this section.
   (J)   Test instrumentation and procedures used for implementation and
enforcement of this section shall substantially conform with applicable
standards and recommended practices established by the Society of Automotive
Engineers, Inc., and the American National Standards Institute, Inc. for the
measurement of motor vehicle sound levels. Rules establishing these test
procedures shall be promulgated by the Department of State Highways and
Transportation. The rules may provide for measurement other than the distance
specified in division (C) above; provided that, the decibel limits applied at
the other distances are adjusted accordingly, to meet the standards in division
(C) above. The rules shall be promulgated pursuant to Public Act 306 of 1969,
as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 24.201 to 24.315.
(Prior Code, § 35-7) (Ord. 681, passed 2-2-1981; Ord. 729, passed 4-26-1982)
Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.008 PLACEMENT OF TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES AND TOWING AND IMPOUNDMENT OF
VEHICLES.
   (A)   The city’s Police Department is authorized upon the request of either
the owner or the person in charge of the general operation and control of any
parking area within the city to place stop signs, yield signs or other traffic-
control devices in the parking area, and to place signs to prohibit, regulate,
restrict or limit the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles in specified
areas of the parking area.
   (B)   The city’s Police Department is authorized to remove and tow away, or
have removed or towed away by a commercial towing service, any motor vehicle
which is illegally operated, parked or stored in any place, including any
parking area, as prohibited by local ordinance, traffic-control order, state
law or traffic-control sign or a traffic-control device. Any motor vehicle
parked on any designated street during the hours when parking thereon is
prohibited may also be removed and towed away, as herein provided.
   (C)   Motor vehicles towed away pursuant to the provisions of this section
shall be stored and returned to the owner or operator of such vehicle upon
payment of the cost of removal and storage.
(Prior Code, § 35-8) (Ord. 773, passed 11-19-1984; Ord. 872, passed 10-30-1989)
§ 70.009 ALLEYS; USE REGULATED.
   (A)   An ALLEY is a minor thoroughfare (other than a street) which provides
a secondary means of ingress and egress to and from a property.
   (B)   All alleys in the city shall be closed to vehicular and pedestrian
traffic, except for the following exceptions:
      (1)   Any lawful use by persons who own or lease the property abutting
the alley (except as prohibited in division (B)(4) below);
      (2)   Employees, customers, clients or members of businesses, schools,
churches or any other type of organization that abuts the alley (except as
prohibited in division (B)(4) below);
      (3)   Commercial vehicles which make deliveries, load or unload such
vehicles for businesses or residents immediately abutting the respective alley
and subject to any license requirements as set forth in this section; and
      (4)   Person who have obtained a junk license from the city and who use
an alley for the purpose of picking up paper, metal or other materials
discarded by property owners or lessees who have property abutting the alley.
The person must have the junk license on his or her person when using the
alley.
   (C)   No person shall park a vehicle in an alley, except in the following
circumstances:
      (1)   Vehicles in the process of loading or unloading for property owners
or lessees who immediately abut the alley. The vehicles must be parked so as
not to obstruct other vehicles from passing; and
      (2)   Areas where parking of the vehicle is authorized by official signs
issued by the city.
   (D)   No alley in the city may be used as a drive-through for any type of
establishment that provides food and/or drink to its customers.
(Prior Code, § 35-9) (Ord. 864, passed 6-5-1989; Ord. 1323, passed 3-29-2010)
Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.010 SAFETY BELT USAGE REQUIRED.
   Each driver and front seat passenger of a motor vehicle operated on a street
or highway in the city shall wear a properly adjusted and fastened safety belt
(unless not required by state law); except that, a child less than four years
of age shall be protected by a child restraint system, as required by federal
law and state law (M.C.L.A. § 257.710d). Each driver of a motor vehicle
transporting a child four years of age or more, but less than 16 years of age
in the front seat of the motor vehicle, shall secure the child in a properly
adjusted and fastened safety belt. Enforcement of this section shall be
accomplished only as a secondary action whenever a driver of a motor vehicle
has been detained for a suspected violation of another ordinance or state law.
(Prior Code, § 35-10) (Ord. 923, passed 10-28-1991) Penalty, see §
70.999
MICHIGAN VEHICLE CODE
§ 70.025 ADOPTION.
   The current edition of the Michigan Motor Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300,
M.C.L.A. §§ 257.1 through 257.923, as amended, and all future amendments and
revisions to the Michigan Motor Vehicle Code, when they become effective, are
incorporated and adopted by reference. A complete copy of the Michigan Motor
Vehicle Code is available to the public at the office of the City Clerk in
compliance with state law.
(Prior Code, § 35-116) (Ord. 1176, passed 9-15-2003; Ord. 1248, passed 10-24-
2005; Ord. 1520, passed 12-20-2021)
§ 70.026 DEFINITION OF “LOCAL AUTHORITY”.
   Definition references in the Michigan Motor Vehicle Code to "local
authorities" shall be the City of Wyandotte, Michigan.
(Prior Code, § 35-117) (Ord. 1176, passed 9-15-2003; Ord. 1248, passed 10-24-
2005; Ord. 1520, passed 12-20-2021)
§ 70.027 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the Michigan Motor Vehicle Code and this subchapter is to
regulate the operation of vehicles, to provide for the regulation and use of
streets, highways, alleys and other places in the City of Wyandotte and to
provide penalties for violation of the code and ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 35-118) (Ord. 1248, passed 10-24-2005; Ord. 1520, passed 12-20-
2021)
§ 70.028 ISSUANCE OF CITATION.
   The officer who issues a citation under this subchapter shall mark the local
ordinance box on the citation and may make reference to the offense being
charged by writing a description of the offense and/or by citing the last three
numbers of the Michigan Motor Vehicle Code or by any other manner which would
reasonably inform the violator of the violation being cited.
(Prior Code, § 35-119) (Ord. 1248, passed 10-24-2005; Ord. 1520, passed 12-20-
2021)
§ 70.029 REPEAL.
   Those sections of the Uniform Traffic Code which are not inconsistent with
or which cover subject matters not included in the Michigan Vehicle Code shall
remain in full force and effect.
(Prior Code, § 35-120) (Ord. 1248, passed 10-24-2005)
SCHOOL BUSES
§ 70.040 SHORT TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Wyandotte School Bus
Ordinance”.
(Prior Code, § 35-81) (Ord. 783, passed 6-3-1985)
§ 70.041 PAINTING AND SIGNS.
   A school bus transporting pupils inside the city shall be painted and shall
contain signs on the back and front of the school bus as approved by the
state’s Transportation Department and the state’s Superintendent of Public
Instruction.
(Prior Code, § 35-82) (Ord. 783, passed 6-3-1985)
§ 70.042 STOPPING FOR BUSES; RESUMPTION OF MOTION, POSTED SIGNS.
   The driver of a vehicle overtaking or meeting a school bus in the city which
has stopped and is displaying two alternately flashing red lights located at
the same level shall bring the vehicle to a full stop not less than ten feet
from the school bus and shall not proceed until the school bus resumes motion
or the visual signals are no longer actuated. The driver of the school bus,
before resuming motion, shall deactivate flashing lights and permit stopped
traffic to proceed and shall, when resuming motion, proceed in a manner which
will allow congested traffic to disperse by keeping the bus as near to the
right side of the street or road as can be done with safety. Passengers
crossing the street or road upon being discharged from a school bus shall cross
in front of the stopped school bus. At an intersection where traffic is
controlled by an officer or a traffic stop-and-go signal, a vehicle need not be
brought to a full stop before passing a stopped school bus, but may proceed
past the school bus at a speed not greater than is reasonable and proper, but
not greater than ten mph and with due caution for the safety of passengers
being received or discharged from the school bus. This section shall also be
applicable to a school bus transporting passengers on a boundary street or road
in the city. This subchapter shall be enforceable when signs giving notice of
this subchapter are posted upon or at the entrance to the city as may be most
appropriate or sufficiently legible as to be seen by an ordinarily observant
person. The driver of a vehicle who fails to stop for a school bus as required
by this subchapter, who passes a school bus in violation of this subchapter, or
who fails to stop for a school bus in violation of this subchapter, is guilty
of a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 35-83) (Ord. 783, passed 6-3-1985)
§ 70.043 VISIBILITY OF BUS IN STOPPED POSITION.
   A school bus driver shall not stop the bus for the purpose of receiving or
discharging passengers, unless the bus is completely visible in its stopped
position to approaching or overtaking drivers of vehicles for a distance of at
least 400 feet.
(Prior Code, § 35-84) (Ord. 783, passed 6-3-1985)
§ 70.044 DIVIDED HIGHWAY.
   The driver of a vehicle upon a highway or roadway which has been divided
into two roadways by leaving an intervening space, or by a physical barrier, or
clearly indicated dividing sections so constructed as to impede vehicular
traffic, need not stop upon meeting a school bus which has stopped across the
dividing space, barrier or section.
(Prior Code, § 35-85) (Ord. 783, passed 6-3-1985)
§ 70.045 FLASHING RED LIGHTS; REQUIREMENTS; USE.
   A school bus transporting pupils inside the city, in addition to any other
equipment and distinctive marking required by law, shall be equipped with
signal lamps mounted as high and widely spaced laterally as practicable which
shall be capable of displaying to the front two alternately flashing red lights
located at the same level and to the rear two alternately flashing red lights
located at the same level. The lights shall have sufficient intensity to be
visible from a distance of not less than 500 feet in normal sunlight and shall
be actuated by the driver of the school bus when, but only when, the vehicle is
stopped and for a distance of at least 200 feet in advance of a stop for the
purpose of receiving or discharging school children.
(Prior Code, § 35-86) (Ord. 783, passed 6-3-1985)
§ 70.046 FRONT END MIRROR.
   A school bus shall be equipped with a mirror, convex in shape, at least
seven and one-half inches in diameter firmly mounted at hood or fender top
height in front of the bus. The mirror shall be located on either the left or
right side of the bus in a manner so that the seated driver may observe through
its use the road from the front bumper forward to the point where direct
observation is possible.
(Prior Code, § 35-87) (Ord. 783, passed 6-3-1985)
§ 70.047 PRESUMPTION, REGISTERED OWNER AS DRIVER; SUFFICIENCY OF EVIDENCE.
   In a proceeding for a violation of §
70.042 of this chapter, proof that the particular vehicle described in the
citation, complaint or warrant was in violation of §
70.042 of this chapter, together with proof that the defendant named in the
citation, complaint or warrant was, at the time of the violation, the
registered owner of the vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a presumption
that the registered owner of the vehicle was the driver of the vehicle at the
time of the violation.
(Prior Code, § 35-88) (Ord. 783, passed 6-3-1985)
§ 70.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   A person who violates §
70.007(D), (F) or (H) of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by
a fine of $100.
      (2)   A person who violates §
70.007(B), (C), (E) or (G) of this chapter is responsible for a civil
infraction.
(Prior Code, § 35-7)
   (C)   Any person who violates any provision of §
70.009 of this chapter is responsible for a municipal civil infraction and a
fine up to $500 and court costs.
(Prior Code, § 35-9)
   (D)    A person who violates §
70.010 of this chapter is responsible for a civil infraction and subject to a
fine not to exceed $100.
(Prior Code, § 35-10)
   (E)   The penalties provided by the Michigan Vehicle Code, as adopted in §
70.025 of this chapter, are adopted by reference; provided, however, that, the
city may not enforce any provision of the Michigan Vehicle Code for which the
maximum period of imprisonment is greater than 93 days.
(Prior Code, § 35-121)
   (F)   Except as otherwise provided in §
70.043 of this chapter, a person who violates §§
70.040 through
70.047 of this chapter is responsible for a civil infraction.
(Prior Code, § 35-89)
(Ord. 783, passed 6-3-1985; Ord. 864, passed 6-5-1989; Ord. 923, passed 10-28-
1991; Ord. 1176, passed 9-15-2003; Ord. 1248, passed 10-24-2005; Ord. 1323,
passed 3-29-2010; Ord. 1520, passed 12-20-2021)
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
Uniform Traffic Code
   
71.001   Adopted
   
71.002   Amendments
   
71.003   References in code
   
71.004   Notice to be published; copy on file
   
71.005   Scope
   
71.006   Motor Vehicle Insurance
 
   
71.999   Penalty
UNIFORM TRAFFIC CODE
§ 71.001 ADOPTED.
   The Uniform Traffic Code for cities, townships and villages, as amended,
originally promulgated by the director of state police on 2-14-1958, and
subsequently promulgated by the Director of the Department of State Police and
published in the 1979 edition of the Michigan Administrative Code, and the
amendments to such Uniform Traffic Code which were promulgated by the Director
of the Department of State Police, effective 1-27-1981, and published in
Quarterly Supplement No. 5 to the 1979 edition of the Michigan Administrative
Code, said supplement being published 5-15-1981, in accordance with Public Act
62 of 1956, and §§ 7, 9 and 153 of Public Act 380 of 1965, being M.C.L.A. §§
257.951, 16.107, 16.109 and 16.253, is hereby adopted by reference as in this
subchapter modified.
(Prior Code, § 35-23) (Ord. 647, passed 1-14-1980; Ord. 716, passed 10-5-1981)
§ 71.002 AMENDMENTS.
   The Uniform Traffic Code for cities, townships and villages is hereby
amended as set forth:
   (A)   Section 1.003a. shall be amended to read as follows:
      Sec.  1.003a. Bicycle path.
      “Bicycle path” means a portion of a street, highway, or sidewalk
separated from the roadway by an open, unpaved space, or by a barrier, and
established for the use of persons riding bicycles.
   (B)   Section 1.007b. shall be added to read as follows:
      Sec.  1.007b. Conviction.
      “Conviction” means a final conviction, the payment of a fine, a plea of
guilty or nolo contendere if accepted by the court, or a finding of guilt or
probate court order of disposition for a child found to be within the
provisions of Chapter XII of Act No. 288 of the Public Acts of 1939, being
Sections 712A.1 to 712A.28 of the Michigan Compiled Laws, on a traffic law
violation charge, regardless of whether the penalty is rebated or suspended.
   (C)   Section 1.010d. shall be added to read as follows:
      Sec. 1.010d. Former Section 625(1) or (2).
      “Former Section 625(1) or (2)” means Section 625(1) or (2) as amended by
Act No. 391 of the Public Acts of 1978, Act No. 515 of the Public Acts of 1980,
Act No. 309 of the Public Acts of 1982, or Act No. 109 of the Public Acts of
1987, as amended.
   (D)   Section 1.010e. shall be added as follows:
      Sec. 1.010e. Former Section 625b.
      “Former Section 625b” means Section 625b as amended by Act No. 285 of the
Public Acts of 1976, Act No. 515 of the Public Acts of 1980, Act No. 309 of the
Public Acts of 1982, or Act No. 109 of the Public Acts of 1987, as amended.
   (E)   Sec. 1.010f. shall be added to read as follows:
      Sec. 1.010f. Former Section 5.15(1), (2) or (5).
      “Former Section 5.15(1), (2) or (5)” means Section 5.15(1), (2) or (5) of
the Traffic Code of the City of Wyandotte, as amended through December 31,
1991.
   (F)   Section 1.010g. shall be added to read as follows:
      Sec. 1.010g. Former Section 5.15b(1), (3), or (4).
      “Former Section 5.15b(1), (3), or (4)” means Section 5.15b(1), (3), (4)
of the Traffic Code of the City of Wyandotte, as amended through December 13,
1991.
   (G)   Section 1.014a. shall be added to read as follows:
      Sec. 1.014a. Law of another state.
      “Law of another state” means a law or ordinance enacted by another state
or by a local unit of government in another state.
   (H)   Section 1.025b. shall be added to read as follows:
      Sec. 1.025b. Prosecuting attorney.
      “Prosecuting attorney” except as the context otherwise required, means
the attorney general, the prosecuting attorney of a county, or the attorney
representing a local unit of government, including the City of Wyandotte.
   (I)   Section 2.5a. shall be amended to read as follows:
      Sec. 2.5a. “Abandoned vehicle” defined; procedure for dealing with
abandoned vehicles.
      (1)    As used in this section, “abandoned vehicle” means a vehicle which
has remained on public property or private property for a period of forty-eight
(48) hours after a police department or other governmental agency designated by
the police department has affixed a written notice to the vehicle.
      (2)    If a vehicle has remained on public or private property for a
period of time so that it appears to the police department to be abandoned, the
police department shall do all of the following:
         (a)    Determine if the vehicle has been reported stolen.
         (b)    Affix a written notice to the vehicle. The written notice shall
contain the following information:
            (i)    The date and time the notice was affixed.
            (ii)    The name and address of the police department taking the
action.
            (iii)    The name and badge number of the police officer affixing
the notice.
            (iv)    The date and time the vehicle may be taken into custody and
stored at the owner’s expense or scrapped if the vehicle is not removed.
            (v)    The year, make, and vehicle identification number of the
vehicle, if available.
      (3)    If the vehicle is not removed within forty-eight (48) hours after
the date the notice was affixed, the vehicle is deemed abandoned and the police
department may have the vehicle taken into custody.
      (4)    A police department which has a vehicle taken into custody shall
do all of the following:
         (a)    Recheck to determine if the vehicle has been reported stolen.
         (b)    Within twenty-four (24) hours after taking the vehicle into
custody, enter the vehicle as abandoned into the law enforcement information
network.
         (c)    Within seven (7) days after taking the vehicle into custody,
send to the registered owner and secured party, as shown on the records of the
secretary of state, by first-class mail or personal service, notice that the
vehicle has been deemed abandoned. The form for the notice shall be furnished
by the secretary of state. Each notice form shall contain the following
information:
            (i)    The year, make, and vehicle identification number of the
vehicle if available.
            (ii)    The location from which the vehicle was taken into custody.
            (iii)    The date on which the vehicle was taken into custody.
            (iv) The name and address of the police department which had the
vehicle taken into custody.
            (v)    The business address of the custodian of the vehicle.
            (vi)    The procedure to redeem the vehicle.
            (vii)    The procedure to contest the fact that the vehicle has
been deemed abandoned or the reasonableness of the towing fees and daily
storage fees.
            (viii)    A form petition which the owner may file in person or by
mail with the specified court which requests hearing on the police department’s
action.
            (ix)    A warning that the failure to redeem the vehicle or to
request a hearing within twenty (20) days after the date of the notice may
result in the sale of the vehicle and the termination of all rights of the
owner and the secured party to the vehicle or the proceeds of the sale.
      (5)    The registered owner may contest the fact that the vehicle has
been deemed abandoned or the reasonableness of the towing fees and daily
storage fees by requesting a hearing. A request for a hearing shall be made by
filing a petition with the court specified in the notice within twenty (20)
days after the date of the notice. If the owner requests a hearing, the matter
shall be resolved after a hearing conducted pursuant to section 2.5e.
      An owner who requests a hearing may obtain release of the vehicle by
posting a towing and storage bond in an amount equal to the accrued towing and
storage fees with the court. The owner of a vehicle who requests a hearing may
obtain release of the vehicle by paying the towing and storage fees instead of
posting the towing and storage bond. If the court finds that the vehicle was
not properly deemed abandoned, the police department shall reimburse the owner
of the vehicle for the accrued towing and storage fees.
      (6)   If the owner does not request a hearing, he or she may obtain the
release of the vehicle by paying the accrued charges to the custodian of the
vehicle.
      (7)    If the owner does not redeem the vehicle or request a hearing
within twenty (20) days after the date of the notice, the secured party may
obtain the release of the vehicle by paying the accrued charges to the
custodian of the vehicle and the police department for its accrued costs.
      (8)    Not less than twenty (20) days after the disposition of the
hearing described in subsection (5) or, if a hearing is not requested, not less
than twenty (20) days after the date of the notice, the police department shall
offer the vehicle for sale at a public sale pursuant to section 2.5f.
      (9)    If the ownership of a vehicle which has been deemed abandoned
under this section cannot be determined either because of the condition of the
vehicle identification numbers or because a check with the records of the
secretary of state does not reveal ownership, the police department may sell
the vehicle at public sale pursuant to section 2.5f not less than thirty (30)
days after public notice of the sale has been published.
   (J)   Section 2.5b. is hereby adopted to read as follows:
      Sec. 2.5b. “Registered abandoned scrap vehicle” defined; procedure for
dealing with registered abandoned scrap vehicles.
      (1)    As used in this section:
         (a)    “Registered abandoned scrap vehicle” means a vehicle which
meets all of the following requirements:
            (i)    Is on public or private property.
            (ii)    Is seven (7) or more years old.
            (iii)    Is apparently inoperable or is extensively damaged, to the
extent that the cost of repairing the vehicle so that it is operational and
safe as required by MCLA 257.683 would exceed the fair market value of that
vehicle.
            (iv)    Is currently registered in the state of Michigan or
displays current year registration plates from another state.
            (v)    Is not removed within forty-eight (48) hours after a written
notice as described in section 2.5a(2)(b) is affixed to the vehicle.
         (b)    “Unregistered abandoned scrap vehicle” means a vehicle which
meets all of the following requirements:
            (i)    Is on public or private property.
            (ii)    Is seven (7) or more years old.
            (iii)    Is apparently inoperable or is extensively damaged, to the
extent that the cost of repairing the vehicle so that it is operational and
safe as required by MCLA 257.683 would exceed the fair market value of that
vehicle.
            (iv)    Is not currently registered in this state and does not
display current year registration plates from another state.
            (v)    Is not removed within forty-eight (48) hours after a written
notice as described in section 2.5a(2)(b) is affixed to the vehicle.
      (2)    A police department may have an unregistered abandoned scrap
vehicle taken into custody, in which case the police department shall do all of
the following:
         (a)    Determine if the vehicle has been reported stolen.
         (b)    Take two (2) photographs of the vehicle.
         (c)    Make a report to substantiate the vehicle as an unregistered
abandoned scrap vehicle. The report shall contain the following information:
            (i)    The year, make, and vehicle identification number if
available.
            (ii)    The date of abandonment.
            (iii)    The location of abandonment.
            (iv)    A detailed listing of the damage or the missing equipment.
            (v)    The reporting officer’s name and title.
            (vi)    The location where the vehicle is being held.
         (d)    Within twenty-four (24) hours after taking the vehicle into
custody, enter the vehicle into the law enforcement information network.
      (3)    Within twenty-four (24) hours, excluding Saturday, Sunday, and
legal holidays, after taking the vehicle into custody, the police department
shall complete a release form and release the vehicle to the towing service or
a used vehicle parts dealer or vehicle scrap metal processor, who shall then
transmit that release form to the secretary of state and apply for a
certificate of the title or a certificate of scrapping. Upon receipt of the
release form and application, the secretary of state shall issue a certificate
of title or a certificate of scrapping.
      (4)    The release form described in subsection (3) shall be furnished by
the secretary of state and shall include a certification executed by the
applicable police department when the abandoned scrap vehicle is released. The
certification shall state that the police department has complied with all the
requirements of subsection (2)(b) and (c).
      (5)    The secretary of state shall retain the records relating to an
abandoned scrap vehicle for not less than two (2) years. The two (2)
photographs taken pursuant to subsection (2)(b) shall be retained by the police
department for not less the two (2) years. After the certificate of scrapping
has been issued, a certificate of title for the vehicle shall not be issued
again.
      (6)    The police department may have a registered abandoned scrap
vehicle taken into custody, in which case the police department shall do all of
the following:
         (a)    Determine if the vehicle has been stolen.
         (b)    Take two (2) photographs of the vehicle.
         (c)    Make a report to substantiate the vehicle as a registered
abandoned scrap vehicle. The report shall contain the following information:
            (i)    The year, make, and vehicle identification number if
available.
            (ii)    The date of abandonment.
            (iii)    The location of abandonment.
            (iv)    A detailed listing of the damage or the missing equipment.
            (v)    The reporting officer’s name and title.
            (vi)    The location where the vehicle is being held.
         (d)    Within twenty-four (24) hours after taking the vehicle into
custody, enter the vehicle into the law enforcement information network.
         (e)    Within seven (7) days after taking the vehicle into custody,
send to the registered owner and secured party, as shown by the records of the
secretary of state, by first-class mail or personal service, notice that the
vehicle has been deemed abandoned. The form for the notice shall be furnished
by the secretary of state. Each notice form shall contain the following
information:
            (i)    The year, make, and vehicle identification number of the
vehicle if available.
            (ii)    The location from which the vehicle was taken into custody.
            (iii)    The date on which the vehicle was taken into custody.
            (iv)    The name and address of the police department which had the
vehicle taken into custody.
            (v)    The business address of the custodian of the vehicle.
            (vi)    The procedure to redeem the vehicle.
            (vii)    The procedure to contest the fact that the vehicle has
been deemed abandoned or the reasonableness of the towing fees and daily
storage fees.
            (viii)    A form petition which the owner may file in person or by
mail with the specified court which requests a hearing on the police
department’s action.
            (ix)    A warning that the failure to redeem the vehicle or to
request a hearing within twenty (20) days after the date of the notice may
result in the termination of all rights of the owner and the secured party to
the vehicle.
      (7)    The registered owner of a registered abandoned scrap vehicle may
contest the fact that the vehicle has been deemed abandoned or the
reasonableness of the towing fees and daily storage fees by requesting a
hearing. A request for a hearing shall be made by filing a petition with the
court specified in the notice within twenty (20) days after the date of the
notice. If the owner requests a hearing, the matter shall be resolved after a
hearing conducted pursuant to section 2.5e. An owner who requests a hearing may
obtain release of the vehicle by posting a towing and storage bond with the
court in an amount as determined by the court. The owner of a vehicle who
requests a hearing may obtain release of the vehicle by paying the towing and
storage fees instead of posting the towing and storage bond. If the court finds
that the vehicle was not properly deemed abandoned, the police department shall
reimburse the owner of the vehicle for the accrued towing and storage fees.
      (8)    If the owner does not request a hearing, he or she may obtain the
release of the vehicle by paying the accrued charges to the custodian of the
vehicle.
      (9)   If the owner does not redeem the vehicle or request a hearing
within twenty (20) days after the date of the notice, the secured party may
obtain the release of the vehicle by paying the accrued charges to the
custodian of the vehicle.
      (10)    Not less than twenty (20) days after the disposition of the
hearing described in subsection (7) or, if a hearing is not requested, not less
than twenty (20) days after the date of the notice described in subsection (6)
(e), the police department shall follow the procedures established in
subsections (3) to (5).
   (K)   Section 2.5c. is hereby adopted to read as follows:
      Sec. 2.5c. Removal of vehicle from private property at direction of
person other than owner or police department; procedure.
      (1)    When a vehicle is removed from private property at the direction
of a person other than the registered owner of the vehicle or the police
department, the custodian of the vehicle immediately shall notify the police
department from whose jurisdiction the vehicle was towed. The custodian shall
supply that information which is necessary for the police department to enter
the vehicle into the law enforcement information network.
      (2)    Upon receipt of the notification described in subsection (1), the
police department immediately shall do all of the following:
         (a)    Determine if the vehicle has been reported stolen.
         (b)    Enter the vehicle into the law enforcement information network.
      (3)    The owner of the vehicle removed as described in subsection (1)
may obtain release of the vehicle by paying the accrued towing and storage fees
to the custodian of the vehicle. Upon release of the vehicle, the custodian
shall notify the police department of the disposition of the vehicle.
      (4)    If the vehicle described in subsection (1) is not claimed by the
owner within seven (7) days after the police department has been notified by
the custodian that it has been taken into custody, the vehicle is deemed
abandoned and the procedures prescribed in section 2.5a(4)(c) to (9) shall
apply.
   (L)   Section 2.5d is hereby adopted to read as follows:
      Sec. 2.5d. Immediate removal of certain vehicle from public property.
      (1)    A police department or a governmental agency designated by the
police department may provide for the immediate removal of a vehicle from
public or private property to a place of safekeeping at the expense of the
registered owner of the vehicle in any of the following circumstances:
         (a)    If the vehicle is in such a condition that the continued
operation of the vehicle upon the highway would constitute an immediate hazard
to the public.
         (b)    If the vehicle is parked or standing upon the highway in such a
manner as to create an immediate public hazard or an obstruction of traffic.
         (c)    If a vehicle is parked in a posted tow away zone.
         (d)    If there is reasonable cause to believe that the vehicle or any
part of the vehicle is stolen.
         (e)    If the vehicle must be seized to preserve evidence of a crime,
or when there is reasonable cause to believe that the vehicle was used in the
commission of a crime.
         (f)    If removal is necessary in the interest of public safety
because of fire, flood, storm, snow, natural or man-made disaster, or other
emergency.
         (g)    If the vehicle is hampering the use of private property by the
owner or person in charge of that property or is parked in a manner which
impedes the movement of another vehicle.
      (2)    An police department which authorizes the removal of a vehicle
under subsection (1) shall do all of the following:
         (a)    Check to determine if the vehicle has been reported stolen.
         (b)    Within twenty-four (24) hours after removing the vehicle, enter
the vehicle into the law enforcement information network if the vehicle has not
been redeemed. This subdivision does not apply to a vehicle that is removed
from the scene of a motor vehicle traffic accident.
         (c)    If the vehicle has not been redeemed within ten (10) days after
moving the vehicle, send to the registered owner and the secured party as shown
by the records of the secretary of state, by first-class mail or personal
service a notice that the vehicle has been removed; however, if the police
department informs the owner or operator of the vehicle of the removal and the
location of the vehicle within twenty-four (24) hours after the removal, and if
the vehicle has not been redeemed within thirty (30) days and upon complaint
from the towing service, the police department shall send the notice within
thirty (30) days after the removal. The notice shall be by a form furnished by
the secretary of state. The notice form shall contain the following
information:
            (i)    The year, make, and vehicle identification number of the
vehicle.
            (ii)    The location from which the vehicle was taken into custody.
            (iii)    The date on which the vehicle was taken into custody.
            (iv)    The name and address of the police department which had the
vehicle taken into custody.
            (v)    The location where the vehicle is being held.
            (vi)    The procedure to redeem the vehicle.
            (vii)    The procedure to contest the fact that the vehicle was
properly removed or the reasonableness of the towing and daily storage fees.
            (viii)    A form petition which the owner may file in person or by
mail with the specified court which requests hearing on the police department’s
action.
            (ix)    A warning that the failure to redeem the vehicle or to
request a hearing within twenty (20) days after the date of the notice may
result in the sale of the vehicle and the termination of all rights of the
owner and the secured party to the vehicle or the proceeds of the sale or to
both the vehicle and the proceeds.
      (3)    The registered owner may contest the fact that the vehicle was
properly removed or the reasonableness of the towing fees and daily storage
fees by requesting a hearing. A request for a hearing shall be made by filing a
petition with the court specified in the notice within twenty (20) days after
the date of the notice. If the owner requests a hearing, the matter shall be
resolved after a hearing conducted pursuant to section 2.5e. An owner who
requests a hearing may obtain release of the vehicle by posting a towing and
storage bond with the court in an amount equal to the accrued towing and
storage fees. The owner of a vehicle who requests a hearing may obtain release
of the vehicle by paying the towing and storage fees instead of posting the
towing and storage bond. If the court finds that the vehicle was not properly
removed, the police department shall reimburse the owner of the vehicle for the
accrued towing and storage fees.
      (4)    If the owner does not request a hearing, he or she may obtain the
release of the vehicle by paying the accrued charges to the custodian of the
vehicle.
      (5)    If the owner does not redeem the vehicle or request a hearing
within twenty (20) days, the secured party may obtain the release of the
vehicle by paying the accrued charges to the custodian of the vehicle prior to
the date of the sale.
      (6)    Not less than twenty (20) days after the disposition of the
hearing described in subsection (3), or if a hearing is not requested, not less
than twenty (20) days after the date of the notice described in subsection (2)
(c), the police department shall offer the vehicle for sale at a public sale
unless the vehicle is redeemed. The public sale shall be held pursuant to
section 2.5f.
      (7)    If the ownership of a vehicle which has been removed under this
section cannot be determined either because of the condition of the vehicle
identification numbers or because a check with the records of the secretary of
state does not reveal ownership, the police department may sell the vehicle at
public sale pursuant to section 2.5f not less than thirty (30) days after
public notice of the sale has been published.
   (M)   Section 2.5e. is hereby adopted to read as follows:
      Sec. 2.5e. Hearings; findings.
      (1)    Upon receipt of a petition prescribed in sections 2.5a, 2.5b, 2.5c
or 2.5d, signed by the owner of the vehicle which has been taken into custody,
the court shall do both of the following:
         (a)    Schedule a hearing within thirty (30) days for the purpose of
determining whether the police department acted properly.
         (b)    Notify the owner and the police department of the time and
place of the hearing.
      (2)    At the hearing specified in subsection (1) the police department
shall have the burden of showing by a preponderance of the evidence that it has
complied with the requirements of this act in processing the abandoned vehicle
or vehicle removed pursuant to section 2.5d.
      (3)    After the hearing the court shall make a decision which shall
include one or more of the following:
         (a)    A finding that the police department complied with the
procedures established for the processing of an abandoned vehicle or a vehicle
removed under section 2.5d, and an order providing a period of twenty (20) days
after the decision for the owner to redeem the vehicle. If the owner does not
redeem the vehicle within twenty (20) days, the police department shall dispose
of the vehicle pursuant to section 2.5b or 2.5f.
         (b)    A finding that the police department did not comply with the
procedures established for the processing of an abandoned vehicle or a vehicle
removed pursuant to section 2.5d. After making such a finding, the court shall
issue an order directing that the vehicle immediately be released to the owner,
and that the police department is responsible for the accrued towing and
storage charges.
         (c)    A finding that the towing and daily storage fees were
reasonable.
         (d)    A finding that the towing and daily storage fees were
unreasonable and issue an order directing an appropriate reduction.
   (N)   Section 2.5f is hereby adopted to read as follows:
      Sec. 2.5f. Public sale for abandoned vehicles.
      (1)    A public sale for a vehicle which has been deemed abandoned under
section 2.5a or 2.5c or removed under section 2.5d shall be conducted in the
following manner:
         (a)   It shall be under the control of the police department or agent
of the police department.
         (b)   It shall be open to the public and consist of open auction
bidding or bidding by sealed bids. If sealed bids are received, the person
submitting the bid shall receive a receipt for the bid from the police
department or agent of the police department.
         (c)   Except as provided by sections 2.5a(9) and 2.5d(7), it shall be
held not less than five (5) days after public notice of the sale has been
published.
         (d)   The public notice shall be published at least once in a
newspaper having a general circulation within the county in which the vehicle
was abandoned. The public notice shall give a description of the vehicle for
sale and shall state the time, date, and location of the sale.
      (2)    The money received from the public sale of the vehicle shall be
applied in the following order of priority:
         (a)    Towing and storage charges.
         (b)    Expenses incurred by the police department.
         (c)    To the secured party, if any, in the amount of the debt
outstanding on the vehicle.
         (d)    Remainder to the owner. A reasonable attempt shall be made to
mail the remainder to the registered owner. If delivery of the remainder cannot
be accomplished, the remainder shall become the property of the unit of
government that the police department represents.
      (3)    If there are no bidders on the vehicle, the police department may
do one of the following:
         (a)    Turn the vehicle over to the towing firm to satisfy charges
against the vehicle.
         (b)    Obtain title to the vehicle for the police department or the
unit of government the police department represents, by doing the following:
            (i)    Paying the towing and storage charges.
            (ii)    Applying for title to the vehicle.
            (iii)    Hold another public sale pursuant to subsection (1).
      (4)    A person who acquires ownership of a vehicle under subsection (1)
or (3), which vehicle has been designated as a distressed vehicle, shall make
application for a salvage certificate of title within fifteen (15) days after
obtaining the vehicle.
      (5)    Upon disposition of the vehicle, the police department shall
cancel the entry into the law enforcement information network.
   (O)   Section 3.2a. shall be amended to read as follows:
      Sec. 3.2a. Failure to stop upon police signal; violation as misdemeanor;
penalty.
      (1)    If a driver of a motor vehicle is given a visual or audible signal
by hand, voice, emergency light, or siren by a police officer who is acting in
the lawful performance of his or her duty and who is directing the driver to
bring his or her motor vehicle to a stop and the driver wilfully fails to obey
such direction by increasing his or her speed, extinguishing his or her lights,
or otherwise attempting to flee or elude the officer, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. The officer who gives the signal shall be in uniform. A police
vehicle that is driven at night shall be adequately identified as an official
police vehicle.
      (2)    Any person convicted under this section shall be punishable by
imprisonment for not more than one year, or a fine not to exceed one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00), or both.
   (P)   Section 4.21. shall be amended to read as follows:
      Sec. 4.21. Bicycle paths; vehicles prohibited; violation of a
misdemeanor.
      (1)    A person shall not operate a vehicle on or across a bicycle path,
except to enter or leave adjacent property.
      (2)    A person shall not park a vehicle on a bicycle path.
      (3)    A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (Q)   Section 5.4. shall be amended to read as follows:
      Sec. 5.4. Involvement in accident resulting in injury, stopping,
misdemeanor.
      (1)    The driver of a vehicle who knows or who has reason to believe
that he has been involved in an accident upon either public or private
property, when the property is open to travel by the public, resulting in
injury to a person shall immediately stop his vehicle at the scene of the
accident and shall remain there until the requirements of section 5.4a of this
code are fulfilled.
      (2)    A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (R)   Section 5.15. shall be amended to read as follows:
      Sec. 5.15. Persons under the influence of intoxicating liquor or
controlled substance; operating motor vehicles; punishments; prior convictions;
payments of costs; plea bargains; special verdicts.
      (1)    A person, whether licensed or not, shall not operate a vehicle
upon a highway or other place open to the general public or generally
accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of
vehicles, within this city if either of the following applies:
         (a)   The person is under the influence of intoxicating liquor, a
controlled substance, or a combination of intoxicating liquor and a controlled
substance.
         (b)    The person has an alcohol content of 0.10 grams or more per 100
milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine.
      (2)    The owner of a vehicle or a person in charge or in control of a
vehicle shall not authorize or knowingly permit the vehicle to be operated upon
a highway or other place open to the general public or generally accessible to
motor vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of motor vehicles,
within this city by a person who is under the influence of intoxicating liquor,
a controlled substance, or a combination of intoxicating liquor and a
controlled substance or who has an alcohol content of 0.10 grams or more per
100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of
urine.
      (3)    A person, whether licensed or not, shall not operate a vehicle
upon a highway or other place open to the general public or generally
accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of
vehicles, within this city when, due to the consumption of intoxicating liquor,
a controlled substance, or a combination of intoxicating liquor and a
controlled substance, the person’s ability to operate the vehicle is visibly
impaired. If a person is charged with violating subsection (1), a finding of
guilty under this subsection may be rendered.
      (4)    A person who is less than twenty-one (21) years of age, whether
licensed or not, shall not operate a vehicle upon a highway or other place open
to the general public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an
area designated for the parking of vehicles, within this city if the person has
any bodily alcohol content. As used in this subsection, “any bodily alcohol
content” means either of the following:
         (a)    An alcohol content of not less than 0.02 grams or more than
0.07 grams per one hundred (100) milliliters of blood, per two hundred ten
(210) liters of breath, or per sixty-seven (67) milliliters of urine.
         (b)    Any presence of alcohol within a person’s body resulting from
the consumption of intoxicating liquor, other than consumption of intoxicating
liquor as a part of a generally recognized religious service or ceremony.
      (5)    A person who operates a vehicle in violation of subsection (1),
(3), or (4), while another person who is less than sixteen (16) years of age is
occupying the vehicle is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for
not more than ninety-three (93) days or a fine of not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) or both. The judgment of sentence may impose the sanction
permitted under section 5.15n of this ordinance. If the violation occurs within
seven (7) years of a prior conviction or within ten (10) years of two (2) or
more prior convictions, the court shall, unless the vehicle is ordered
forfeited under section 11, order vehicle immobilization under section 5.62b of
this ordinance in the judgment of sentence. This section does not prohibit a
person from being charged with, convicted of, or punished for a violation of
subsection (1), (3), or (4), that is committed by the person while violating
this subsection. However, points shall not be assessed under section 320a for
both a violation of subsection (1), (3), or (4), and a violation of this
subsection for conduct arising our of the same transaction.
      (6)    If a person is convicted of violating subsection (1), all of the
following apply;
         (a)    Except as otherwise provided in subdivisions (b), the person is
guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by one (1) or more of the following:
            (i)    Community service for not more than forty-five (45) days.
            (ii)    Imprisonment for not more than ninety-three (93) days.
            (iii)    A fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
         (b)    If the violation occurs within seven (7) years of a prior
conviction, the person shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than two
hundred dollars ($200.00) or more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and one
(1) or more of the following:
            (i)    Imprisonment for not less than five (5) days or more than
ninety-three (93) days. Not less than forty-eight (48) hours of the term of
imprisonment imposed under this subparagraph shall be served consecutively.
            (ii)    Community service for not less than thirty (30) days or
more than ninety (90) days.
         (c)    A term of imprisonment imposed under subdivision (b)(ii) shall
not be suspended.
         (d)    In the judgment of sentence under subdivision (a), the court
may order vehicle immobilization as provided in section 5.62b of this
ordinance. In the judgment of sentence under subdivision (b), the court shall,
unless the vehicle is ordered forfeited under section 11, order vehicle
immobilization as provided in section 13 5.62b of this ordinance.
         (e)    In the judgment of sentence under subdivision (b), the court
may impose the sanction permitted under section 5.15n of this ordinance.
      (7)    A person who is convicted of violating subsection (2) is guilty of
a crime a follows:
         (a)    A misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than
ninety-three (93) days or a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00)
or more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or both.
      (8)    If a person is convicted of violating subsection (3), all of the
following apply:
         (a)    Except as otherwise provided in subdivision (b), the person is
guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by one (1) or more of the following:
            (i)    Community service for not more than forty-five (45) days.
            (ii)    Imprisonment for not more than ninety-three (93) days.
            (iii)    A fine of not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00).
         (b)    If the violation occurs within seven (7) years of one (1) prior
conviction, the person shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than two
hundred dollars ($200.00) or more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and one
(1) or more of the following:
            (i)    Imprisonment for not less than five (5) days or more than
ninety-three (93) days. Not less than forty-eight (48) hours of the term of
imprisonment imposed under this subparagraph shall be served consecutively.
            (ii)    Community service for not less than thirty (30) days or
more than ninety (90) days.
         (c)    A term of imprisonment imposed under subdivision (b), shall not
be suspended.
         (d)    In the judgment of sentence under subdivision (a), the court
may order vehicle immobilization as provided in section 5.62b of this
ordinance. In the judgment of sentence under subdivision (b) the court shall,
unless the vehicle is ordered forfeited under section 5.15n of this ordinance,
order vehicle immobilization as provided in section 5.62b.
         (e)    In the judgment of sentence under subdivision (b) the court may
impose the sanction permitted under section 5.15n of this ordinance.
      (9)    If a person is convicted of violating subsection (4), all of the
following apply:
         (a)    Except as otherwise provided in subdivision (b), the person is
guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by 1 or both of the following:
            (i)    Community service for not more than forty-five (45) days.
            (ii)    A fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00).
         (b)    If the violation occurs within seven (7) years of one (1) or
more prior convictions, the person may be sentenced to one (1) or more of the
following:
            (i)    Community service for not more than sixty (60) days.
            (ii)    A fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
            (iii)    Imprisonment for not more than ninety-three (93) days.
      (10)    In addition to imposing the sanctions prescribed under this
section, the court may order the person to pay the costs of the prosecution
under the code of criminal procedure, 1927 PA 175, MCL 760.1 to 776.22, and
costs under the cost recovery ordinance of the city.
      (11)    A person sentenced to perform community service under this
section shall not receive compensation and shall reimburse the state or city
for the cost of supervision incurred by the state or city as a result of the
person’s activities in that service.
      (12)    If the prosecuting attorney intends to seek an enhanced sentence
under this ordinance or sanction under section 5.15n of this ordinance or
section 5.62b of this ordinance based upon the defendant having one (1) or more
prior convictions, the prosecuting attorney shall include on the complaint and
information, or an amended complaint and information, filed in district court,
a statement listing the defendant’s prior convictions.
      (13)    If a person is charged with a violation of subsection (1), (3),
or (5), or section 5.15m of this ordinance, the court shall not permit the
defendant to enter a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to a charge of violating
subsection (4) in exchange for dismissal of the original charge. This
subsection does not prohibit the court from dismissing the charge upon the
prosecuting attorney’s motion. A prior conviction shall be established at
sentencing by one (1) or more of the following:
      (a) An abstract of conviction.
         (b)    A copy of the defendant’s driving record.
         (c)    An admission by the defendant.
      (14)    Except as otherwise provided in subsection (16), if a person is
charged with operating a vehicle while under the influence of a controlled
substance or a combination of intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance in
violation of this ordinance, the court shall require the jury to return a
special verdict in the form of a written finding or, if the court convicts the
person without a jury or accepts a plea of guilty or nolo contendere, the court
shall make a finding as to whether the person was under the influence of a
controlled substance or a combination of intoxicating liquor and a controlled
substance at the time of the violation.
      (15)    Except as otherwise provided in subsection (16), if a person is
charged with operating a vehicle while his or her ability to operate the
vehicle was visibly impaired due to his or her consumption of a controlled
substance or a combination of intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance in
violation of this ordinance, the court shall require the jury to return a
special verdict in the form of written finding or, if the court convicts the
person without a jury or accepts a plea of guilty or nolo contendere, the court
shall make a finding as to whether, due to the consumption of a controlled
substance or a combination of intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance,
the person’s ability to operate a motor vehicle was visibly impaired at the
time of the violation.
      (16)    A special verdict described in subsection (14) and (15) is not
required if a jury is instructed to make a finding solely as to either of the
following:
         (a)    Whether the defendant was under the influence of a controlled
substance or a combination of intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance at
the time of the violation.
         (b)    Whether the defendant was visibly impaired due to his or her
consumption of a controlled substance or a combination of intoxicating liquor
and a controlled substance at the time of violation.
         (17)    If a jury or court finds under subsection (14), (15) or (16)
that the defendant operated a motor vehicle under the influence of or while
impaired due to the consumption of a controlled substance or a combination of a
controlled substance and an intoxicating liquor, the court shall do both of the
following:
         (a)    Report the finding to the secretary of state.
         (b)    On a form or forms prescribed by the state court administrator,
forward to the department of state police a record that specifies the penalties
imposed by the court, including any term of imprisonment, and any sanction
imposed under section 5.15n or section 5.62b of this ordinance.
      (18)    Except as otherwise provided by law, a record described in
subsection (17)(b) is a public record and the department of state police shall
retain the information contained on that record for not less than seven (7)
years.
      (19)    In a prosecution for a violation of subsection (4), the defendant
bears the burden of proving that the consumption of intoxicating liquor was a
part of a generally recognized religious service or ceremony by a preponderance
of the evidence.
      (20)    Subject to subsection (22) as used in this section, “prior
conviction” means a conviction for any of the following, whether under a law of
this state, a local ordinance substantially corresponding to a law of this
state, or a law of another state substantially corresponding to a law of this
state:
         (a)    Except as provided in subsection (21), a violation or attempted
violation of MCL 257.625(1), (3), (4), (5), (6), or (7), section 625m, former
section 625(1) or (2), or former section 625b.
         (b)    Negligent homicide, manslaughter, or murder resulting from the
operation of a vehicle or an attempt to commit any of those crimes.
      (21)    Except for purposes of the enhancement described in subsection
(9)(b), only one (1) violation or attempted violation of MCL 257.625(6), a
local ordinance substantially corresponding to subsection (6), or a law of
another state substantially corresponding to subsection (6) may be used as a
prior conviction.
      (22)    If two (2) or more convictions described in subsection (20) are
convictions for violations arising out of the same transaction, only one (1)
conviction shall be used to determine whether the person has a prior
conviction.
   (S)   Section 5.15a. shall be amended as follows
      Sec. 5.15a. Driving under influence of intoxicating liquor or controlled
substance; warrantless arrests; preliminary chemical breath analysis,
administration; evidence, presumptions.
      (1)    A peace officer may arrest a person without a warrant under either
of the following circumstances:
         (a)    The peace officer has reasonable cause to believe the person
was, at the time of an accident in this city, the operator of a vehicle
involved in the accident and was operating the vehicle in violation of section
(1) of this ordinance.
         (b)    The person is found in the driver’s seat of a vehicle parked or
stopped on a highway or street within this city if any part of the vehicle
intrudes into the roadway and the peace officer has reasonable cause to believe
the person was operating the vehicle in violation of section 5.15 of this
ordinance.
      (2)    A peace officer who has reasonable cause to believe that a person
was operating a vehicle upon a public highway or other place open to the public
or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the
parking of vehicles, within this city and that the person by the consumption of
intoxicating liquor may have affected his or her ability to operate a vehicle,
or reasonable cause to believe that a person was operating a commercial motor
vehicle within the city while the person’s blood, breath, or urine contained
any measurable amount of alcohol or while the person had any detectable
presence of intoxicating liquor, or reasonable cause to believe that a person
who is less than twenty-one (21) years of age was operating a vehicle upon a
public highway or other place open to the public or generally accessible to
motor vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of vehicles,
within this city while the person had any bodily alcohol content as that term
is defined in section 5.15(4) of this ordinance may require the person to
submit to a preliminary chemical breath analysis. The following provisions
apply with respect to a preliminary chemical breath analysis administered under
this subsection:
         (a)    A peace officer may arrest a person based in whole or in part
upon the results of a preliminary chemical breath analysis.
         (b)    The results of a preliminary chemical breath analysis are
admissible in a criminal prosecution for a crime enumerated in section 5.15c of
this ordinance or in an administrative hearing for one (1) or more of the
following purposes:
            (i)    To assist the court or hearing officer in determining a
challenge to the validity of an arrest. This subparagraph does not limit the
introduction of other competent evidence offered to establish the validity of
an arrest.
            (ii)    As evidence of the defendant’s breath alcohol content, if
offered by the defendant to rebut testimony elicited on cross-examination of a
defense witness that the defendant’s breath alcohol content was higher at the
time of the charged offense than when a chemical test was administered under
subsection (6).
            (iii)    As evidence of the defendant’s breath alcohol content, if
offered by the prosecution to rebut testimony elicited on cross-examination of
a prosecution witness that the defendant’s breath alcohol content was lower at
the time of the charged offense than when a chemical test was administered
under subsection (6).
         (c)    A person who submits to a preliminary chemical breath analysis
remains subject to the requirements of sections (4), (5), (6), and (7) of this
ordinance for purposes of chemical tests described in those sections.
         (d)    Except as provided in subsection (5), a person who refuses to
submit to a preliminary chemical breath analysis upon a lawful request by a
peace officer is responsible for a civil infraction.
      (3)    A peace officer shall use the results of a preliminary chemical
breath analysis conducted pursuant to this section to determine whether to
order a person out-of-service under section 319d. A peace officer shall order
out-of-service as required under section 319d a person who was operating a
commercial motor vehicle and who refuses to submit to a preliminary chemical
breath analysis as provided in this section. This section does not limit use of
other competent evidence by the peace officer to determine whether to order a
person out-of-service under section 319d.
      (4)    A person who was operating a commercial motor vehicle and who is
requested to submit to a preliminary chemical breath analysis under this
section shall be advised that refusing a peace officer’s request to take a test
described in this section is a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not
more that ninety-three (93) days or a fine of not more than one hundred dollars
($100.00), or both, and will result in the issuance of a 24-hour out-of-service
order.
      (5)    A person who was operating a commercial motor vehicle and who
refuses to submit to a preliminary chemical breath analysis upon a peace
officer’s lawful request is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment
for not more than ninety-three (93) days or a fine of not more than one hundred
dollars ($100.00), or both.
      (6)    The following provisions apply with respect to chemical tests and
analysis of a person’s blood, urine, or breath, other than preliminary chemical
breath analysis:
         (a)    The amount of alcohol or presence of a controlled substance or
both in a driver’s blood or urine or the amount of alcohol in a person’s breath
at the time alleged as shown by chemical analysis of the person’s blood, urine,
or breath is admissible into evidence in any civil or criminal proceeding.
         (b)    A person arrested for a crime described in section 5.15c(1) of
this ordinance shall be advised of all of the following:
            (i)    If he or she takes a chemical test of his or her blood,
urine, or breath administered at the request of a peace officer, he or she has
the right to demand that a person of his or her own choosing administer one (1)
of the chemical tests.
            (ii)    The results of the test are admissible in a judicial
proceeding as provided under this ordinance and will be considered with other
admissible evidence in determining the defendant’s innocence or guilt.
            (iii)    He or she is responsible for obtaining a chemical analysis
of a test sample obtained pursuant to his or her own request.
            (iv)    If he or she refuses the request of a peace officer to take
a test described in subparagraph (i), a test shall not be given without a court
order, but the peace officer may seek to obtain a court order.
            (v)    Refusing a peace officer’s request to take a test described
in subparagraph (i) will result in the suspension of his or her operator’s or
chauffeur’s license and vehicle group designation or operating privilege and in
the addition of six (6) points to his or her driver record.
         (c)    A sample or specimen of urine or breath shall be taken and
collected in a reasonable manner. Only a licensed physician, or an individual
operating under the delegation of a licensed physician under section 16215 of
the public health code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.16215, qualified to withdraw blood
and acting in a medical environment, may withdraw blood at a peace officer’s
request to determine the amount of alcohol or presence of a controlled
substance or both in the person’s blood, as provided in this subsection.
Liability for a crime or civil damages predicated on the act of withdrawing or
analyzing blood and related procedures does not attach to a licensed physician
or individual operating under the delegation of a licensed physician who
withdraws or analyzes blood or assists in the withdrawal or analysis in
accordance with this ordinance unless the withdrawal or analysis is performed
in a negligent manner.
         (d)    A chemical test described in this subsection shall be
administered at the request of a peace officer having reasonable grounds to
believe the person has committed a crime described in section 5.15c(1) of this
ordinance. A person who takes a chemical test administered at a peace officer’s
request as provided in this section shall be given a reasonable opportunity to
have a person of his or her own choosing administer one (1) of the chemical
tests described in this subsection within a reasonable time after his or her
detention. The test results are admissible and shall be considered with other
admissible evidence in determining the defendant’s innocence or guilt. If the
person charged is administered a chemical test by a person of his or her
choosing, the person charged is responsible for obtaining a chemical analysis
of the test sample.
         (e)    If, after an accident, the driver of a vehicle involved in the
accident is transported to a medical facility and a sample of the driver’s
blood is withdrawn at that time for medical treatment, the results of a
chemical analysis of that sample are admissible in any civil or criminal
proceeding to show the amount of alcohol or presence of a controlled substance
or both in the person’s blood at the time alleged, regardless of whether the
person had been offered or had refused a chemical test. The medical facility or
person performing the chemical analysis shall disclose the results of the
analysis to a prosecuting attorney who requests the results for use in a
criminal prosecution as provided in this subdivision. A medical facility or
person disclosing information in compliance with this subsection is not civilly
or criminally liable for making the disclosure.
         (f)    If, after an accident, the driver of a vehicle involved in the
accident is deceased, a sample of the decedent’s blood shall be withdrawn in a
manner directed by the medical examiner to determine the amount of alcohol or
the presence of a controlled substance, or both, in the decedent’s blood. The
medical examiner shall give the results of the chemical analysis of the sample
to the law enforcement agency investigating the accident and that agency shall
forward the results to the department of state police.
         (g)    The department of state police shall promulgate uniform rules
in compliance with the Administrative Procedures Act of 1969, 1969 PA 306, MCL
24.201 to 24.328, for the administration of chemical tests for the purposes of
this section. An instrument used for a preliminary chemical breath analysis may
be used for a chemical test described in this subsection if approved under
rules promulgated by the department of state police.
      (7)    The provisions of subsection (6) relating to chemical testing do
not limit the introduction of any other admissible evidence bearing upon the
question of whether a person was impaired by, or under the influence of,
intoxicating liquor or a controlled substance, or a combination of intoxicating
liquor and a controlled substance, or whether the person had an alcohol content
of 0.10 grams or more per one hundred (100) milliliters of blood, per two
hundred ten (210) liters of breath, or per sixty-seven (67) milliliters of
urine, or if the person is less than twenty-one (21) years of age, whether the
person had any bodily alcohol content within his or her body. As used in this
section, “any bodily alcohol content” means either of the following:
         (a)    An alcohol content of not less than 0.02 grams or more than
0.07 grams per one hundred (100) milliliters of blood, per two hundred ten
(210) liters of breath, or per sixty-seven (67) milliliters of urine.
         (b)    Any presence of alcohol within a person’s body resulting from
the consumption of intoxicating liquor, other than consumption of intoxicating
liquor as a part of a generally recognized religious service or ceremony.
      (8)    If a chemical test described in subsection (6) is administered,
the test results shall be made available to the person charged or the person’s
attorney upon written request to the prosecution, with a copy of the request
filed with the court. The prosecution shall furnish the results at least two
(2) days before the day of the trial. The prosecution shall offer the test
results as evidence in that trial. Failure to fully comply with the request
bars the admission of the results into evidence by the prosecution.
      (9)    Except in a prosecution relating solely to a violation of section
(1)(b) or 5.15(4) of this ordinance the amount of alcohol in the driver’s
blood, breath, or urine at the time alleged as shown by the chemical analysis
of the person’s blood, breath, or urine gives rise to the following
presumptions:
         (a)    If there were at the time 0.07 grams or less of alcohol per one
hundred (100) milliliters of the defendant’s blood, per two hundred ten (210)
liters of the defendant’s breath, or per sixty-seven (67) milliliters of the
defendant’s urine, it is presumed that the defendant’s ability to operate a
motor vehicle was not impaired due to the consumption of intoxicating liquor
and that the defendant was not under the influence of intoxicating liquor.
         (b)    If there were at the time more than 0.07 grams but less than
0.10 grams of alcohol per one hundred (100) milliliters of the defendant’s
blood, per two hundred ten (210) liters of the defendant’s breath, or per
sixty-seven (67) milliliters of the defendant’s urine, it is presumed that the
defendant’s ability to operate a vehicle was impaired within the provisions of
section 5.15(3) of this ordinance due to the consumption of intoxicating
liquor.
         (c)    If there were at the time 0.10 grams or more of alcohol per one
hundred (100) milliliters of the defendant’s blood, per two hundred ten (210)
liters of the breath, or per sixty-seven (67) milliliters of the defendant’s
urine, it is presumed that the defendant was under the influence of
intoxicating liquor.
      (10) A person’s refusal to submit to a chemical test as provided in
subsection (6) is admissible in a criminal prosecution for a crime described in
section 5.15c(1) of this ordinance only to show that a test was offered to the
defendant, but not as evidence in determining the defendant’s innocence or
guilt. The jury shall be instructed accordingly.
   (T)   Section 5.15b. shall be amended as follows:
      Sec. 5.15b. Misdemeanor violations, arraignment; pretrial conference;
time limits, exceptions; adjudication, dismissal; sentencing, screening and
assessment.
      (1)    A person arrested for a misdemeanor violation of section 5.15(1),
(3), or (4) or section 5.15m of this ordinance shall be arraigned on the
citation, complaint, or warrant not more than fourteen (14) days after the
arrest for the violation or, if an arrest warrant is issued or reissued, not
more than fourteen (14) days after the issued or reissued arrest warrant is
served, whichever is later. The court shall not dismiss a case or impose any
other sanction for a failure to comply with this time limit. The time limit
does not apply to a violation joined with a felony charge.
      (2)    The court shall schedule a pretrial conference between the
prosecuting attorney, the defendant, and the defendant’s attorney in each case
in which the defendant is charged with a misdemeanor violation of section 5.15
(1), (3), (4), or section 5.15m. The pretrial conference shall be held not more
than thirty-five (35) days after the person’s arrest for the violation or, if
an arrest warrant is served, whichever is later. If the court has only one (1)
judge who sits in more than one (1) location in that district, the pretrial
conference shall be held not more than forty-two (42) days after the person’s
arrest for the violation or, if an arrest warrant is issued or reissued, not
more than forty-two (42) days after the date the issued or reissued arrest
warrant is served, whichever is later. The court shall not dismiss a case or
impose any other sanction for a failure to comply with the applicable time
limit. The 35- and 42-day time limits do not apply to a violation joined with a
felony charge. The court shall order the defendant to attend the pretrial
conference and may accept a plea by the defendant at the conclusion of the
pretrial conference. The court may adjourn the pretrial conference upon the
motion of a party for good cause shown. Not more than one (1) adjournment shall
be granted to a party, and the length of an adjournment shall not exceed
fourteen (14) days.
      (3)    Except for delay attributable to the unavailability of the
defendant, a witness, or material evidence or due to an interlocutory appeal or
exceptional circumstances, but not a delay caused by docket congestion, the
court shall finally adjudicate, by a plea of guilty or nolo contendere, entry
of a verdict, or other final disposition, a case in which the defendant is
charged with a misdemeanor violation of section 5.15(1), (3), (4) or section
5.15m of this ordinance within seventy-seven (77) days after the person is
arrested for the violation or, if an arrest warrant is issued or reissued, not
more that seventy-seven (77) days after the date the issued or reissued arrest
warrant is served, whichever is later. The court shall not dismiss a case or
impose any other sanction for a failure to comply with this time limit. The 77-
day time limit does not apply to a violation joined with a felony charge.
      (4)    Before accepting a plea of guilty or nolo contendere under section
5.15(1), (2), (3), or (4) of this ordinance the court shall advise the accused
of the maximum possible term of imprisonment and the maximum possible fine that
may be imposed for the violation and shall advise the defendant that the
maximum possible license sanctions that my be imposed will be based upon the
master driving record maintained by the secretary of state under section 204a.
      (5)    Before imposing sentence for a violation of section 5.15(1), (3),
(4), of this ordinance, the court shall order the person to undergo screening
and assessment by a person or agency designated by the office of substance
abuse services to determine whether the person is likely to benefit from
rehabilitative services, including alcohol or drug education and alcohol or
drug treatment programs. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, the
court may order the person to participate in and successfully complete one (1)
or more appropriate rehabilitative programs as part of the sentence. If the
person has one (1) or more prior convictions, the court shall order the person
to participate in and successfully complete one (1) or more appropriate
rehabilitative programs as part of the sentence. The person shall pay for the
costs of the screening, assessment, and rehabilitative services.
      (6)    If the judgment and sentence are appealed to circuit court, the
court may ex parte order the secretary of state to stay the suspension,
revocation, or restricted license issued by the secretary of state pending the
outcome of the appeal.
   (U)   Section 5.15c. shall be amended to read as follows:
      Sec.5.15c. Consent to chemical tests; exceptions; administration of
tests.
      (1)    A person who operates a vehicle upon a public highway or other
place open to the general public or generally accessible to motor vehicles,
including an area designated for the parking of vehicles, within this city is
considered to have given consent to chemical tests of his or her blood, breath,
or urine for the purpose of determining the amount of alcohol or presence of a
controlled substance or both in his or her blood or urine or the amount of
alcohol in his or her breath in all of the following circumstances:
         (a)    If the person is arrested for a violation of section 5.15(1),
(3), (4), (5) of this ordinance or section 5.15a(5) of this ordinance or
section 5.15m of this ordinance.
         (b)    If the person is arrested for felonious driving, negligent
homicide, manslaughter, or murder resulting from the operation of a motor
vehicle, and the peace officer had reasonable grounds to believe the person was
operating the vehicle while impaired by or under the influence of intoxicating
liquor or a controlled substance or a combination of intoxicating liquor and a
controlled substance, or while having an alcohol content of 0.10 grams or more
per one hundred (100) milliliters of blood, per two hundred ten (210) liters of
breath, or per sixty-seven (67) milliliters of urine, or if the person is less
that twenty-one (21) years of age while having any bodily alcohol content. As
used in this subdivision, “any bodily alcohol content” means either of the
following:
            (i)    An alcohol content of not less than 0.02 grams or more than
0.07 grams per one hundred (100) milliliters of blood, per two hundred ten
(210) liters of breath, or per sixty-seven (67) milliliters of urine.
            (ii)    Any presence of alcohol within a person’s body resulting
from the consumption of intoxicating liquor, other than consumption of
intoxicating liquor as part of a generally recognized religious service or
ceremony.
      (2)    A person who is afflicted with hemophilia, diabetes, or a
condition requiring the use of an anticoagulant under the direction of a
physician is not considered to have given consent to the withdrawal of blood.
      (3)    The tests shall be administered as provided in section 5.15a(6) of
this ordinance.
   (V)   Section 5.15d. shall be amended to read as follows:
      Sec. 5.15d. Refusal to submit to chemical tests; report.
      (1)    If a person refuses the request of a peace officer to submit to a
chemical test offered pursuant to section 5.15a(6) of this ordinance, a test
shall not be given without a court order, but the officer may seek to obtain
the court order.
      (2)    A written report shall immediately be forwarded to the secretary
of state by the peace officer. The report shall state that the officer had
reasonable grounds to believe that the person had committed a crime described
in section 5.15c(1) of this ordinance and that the person had refused to submit
to the test upon the request of the peace officer and had been advised of the
consequences of the refusal. The form of the report shall be prescribed and
furnished by the secretary of state.
   (W)   Section 5.15e. shall be amended to read as follows:
      Sec. 5.15e. Refusal to submit to chemical tests; written notice by
officer, form; request for hearing.
      (1)    If a person refuses to submit to a chemical test pursuant to
section 5.15d of this ordinance, the peace officer shall immediately notify the
person in writing that within fourteen (14) days of the date of the notice the
person may request a hearing as provided in section 5.15f of this ordinance.
The form of the notice shall be prescribed and furnished by the secretary of
state.
      (2)    The notice shall specifically state that failure to request a
hearing within fourteen (14) days will result in the suspension of the person’s
license or permit to drive. The notice shall also state that there is not a
requirement that the person retain counsel for the hearing, though counsel
would be permitted to represent the person at the hearing.
   (X)   Section 5.15f. shall be amended to read as follows:
      Sec. 5.15f. Refusal to submit to chemical tests; sanctions when hearing
not requested; hearing; record; review.
      (1)    If a person who refuses to submit to a chemical test pursuant to
section 5.15d of this ordinance does not request a hearing within fourteen (14)
days after the date of notice pursuant to section 5.15e of this ordinance the
secretary of state shall impose the following license sanctions:
         (a)    If the person was operating a vehicle other than a commercial
motor vehicle, suspend or deny the person’s operator’s or chauffeur’s license
or permit to drive, or nonresident operating privilege, for 5.15e months or,
for a second or subsequent refusal within seven (7) years, for one (1) year. If
the person is a resident without a license or permit to operate a vehicle in
the state, the secretary of state shall not issue the person a license or
permit for six (6) months or for a second or subsequent refusal within seven
(7) years, for one (1) year.
         (b)    If the person was operating a commercial motor vehicle, for the
first refusal, suspend all vehicle group designations on the person’s
operator’s or chauffeur’s license or permit or nonresident privilege to operate
a commercial motor vehicle or, if the person is a resident without a license or
permit to operate a commercial motor vehicle in the state, not issue the person
an operator’s or chauffeur’s license with vehicle group designations, for one
(1) year.
         (c)    If the person was operating a commercial motor vehicle, for a
second or subsequent refusal that occurred in a separate incident from and
within ten (10) years of a prior refusal, revoke all vehicle group designations
on the person’s operator’s or chauffeur’s license or permit or nonresident
privilege to operate a commercial motor vehicle or, if the person is a resident
without a license or permit to operate a commercial motor vehicle in the state,
not issue the person an operator’s or chauffeur’s license with vehicle group
designations, for not less than ten (10) years and until the person is approved
for the issuance of a vehicle group designation.
         (d)    If the person was operating a commercial motor vehicle and was
arrested for an offense enumerated in section 5.15c(1) of this ordinance other
than a violation of section 5.15a(5) or section 5.15m of this ordinance, impose
the license sanction described in subdivision (a) and the license sanction
described in subdivision (b) or (c), as applicable.
      (2)    If a hearing is requested, the secretary of state shall hold the
hearing in the same manner and under the same conditions as provided in section
322. Not less than five (5) days’ notice of the hearing shall be mailed to the
person requesting the hearing, to the peace officer who filed the report under
section 5.15d of this ordinance, and if the prosecuting attorney requests
receipt of the notice, to the prosecuting attorney of the city where the arrest
was made. The hearing officer may administer oaths, issue subpoenas for the
attendance of necessary witnesses, and grant a reasonable request for an
adjournment. Not more than one (1) adjournment shall be granted to a party and
the length of an adjournment shall not exceed fourteen (14) days. A hearing
under this subsection shall be scheduled to be held within forty-five (45) days
after the date of arrest for the violation. The hearing officer shall not
impose any sanction for a failure to comply with these time limits.
      (3)    Except for delay attributable to the unavailability of the
defendant, a witness, or material evidence, or due to an interlocutory appeal
or exceptional circumstances, but not a delay caused by docket congestion, a
hearing shall be finally adjudicated within seventy-seven (77) days after the
date of arrest. The hearing officer shall not impose any sanction for a failure
to comply with this time limit.
      (4)    The hearing shall cover only the following issues:
         (a)    Whether the peace officer had reasonable grounds to believe
that the person had committed a crime described in section 5.15c(1) of this
ordinance or section 625c(1).
         (b)    Whether the person was placed under arrest for a crime
described in section 5.15c(1) of this ordinance or section 625c(1).
         (c)    If the person refused to submit to the test upon the request of
the officer, whether the refusal was reasonable.
         (d)    Whether the person was advised of the rights under section
5.15a(6) of this ordinance.
      (5)    A person shall not order a hearing officer to make a particular
finding on any issue enumerated in subsection (4)(a) to (d).
      (6)    The hearing officer shall make a record of a hearing held pursuant
to this section. The record shall be prepared and transcribed in accordance
with section 86 of the administrative procedures act of 1969. Act No. 306 of
the Public Acts of 1969, being MCL 24.286. Upon notification of the filing of a
petition for judicial review pursuant to section 323 and not less than ten (10)
days before the matter is set for review, the hearing officer shall transmit to
the court in which the petition was filed the original or a certified copy of
the official record of the proceedings. Proceedings at which evidence was
presented need not be transcribed and transmitted if the sole reason for review
is to determine whether the court will order the issuance of a restricted
license. The parties to the proceedings for judicial review may stipulate that
the record be shortened. A party unreasonably refusing to stipulate to a
shortened record may be taxed by the court in which the petition is filed for
the additional costs. The court may permit subsequent corrections to the
record.
      (7)    If the person who requested a hearing does not prevail, the
secretary of state shall impose the following license sanctions after the
hearing:
         (a)    If the person was operating a vehicle other than a commercial
motor vehicle, suspend or deny issuance of a license or driving permit or a
nonresident operating privilege of the person for six (6) months or, for a
second or subsequent refusal within seven (7) years, for one (1) year. If the
person is a resident without a license or permit to operate a vehicle in the
state, the secretary of state shall not issue the person a license or permit
for six (6) months or, for a second or subsequent refusal within seven (7)
years, for one (1) year. The person may file a petition in the circuit court of
the county in which the arrest was made to review the suspension or denial as
provided in section 323.
         (b)    If the person was operating a commercial motor vehicle, impose
the sanction prescribed under subsection (1)(b) or (1)(c), as applicable. The
person may file a petition in the circuit court of the county in which the
arrest was made to review the suspension or denial as provided in section 323.
         (c)    If the person was operating a commercial motor vehicle and was
arrested for an offense enumerated in section 5.15c of this ordinance other
than a violation of section 5.15a(5) or section 5.15m of this ordinance, impose
the license sanctions described in subdivision (1)(a) and (b).
      (8)    If the person who requested the hearing prevails, the peace
officer who filed the report under section 5.15d of this ordinance may, with
the consent of the prosecuting attorney, file a petition in the circuit court
of the county in which the arrest was made to review the determination of the
hearing officer as provided in section 323.
      (9)    When it has been finally determined that a nonresident’s privilege
to operate a vehicle in the state has been suspended or denied, the department
shall give notice in writing of the action taken to the motor vehicle
administrator of the state of the person’s residence and of each state in which
he or she has a license to operate a motor vehicle.
   (Y)   Section 5.15g. shall be amended to read as follows:
      Sec. 5.15g. Chemical tests; results; duties of peace officer;
confiscation of license; temporary license.
      (1)    If a person refuses a chemical test offered pursuant to section
5.15a(6) of this ordinance, or submits to the chemical test or a chemical test
is performed pursuant to a court order and the test reveals an unlawful alcohol
content, the peace officer who requested the person to submit to the test shall
do all of the following:
         (a)    On behalf of the secretary of state, immediately confiscate the
person’s license or permit to operate a motor vehicle and, if the person is
otherwise eligible for a license or permit, issue a temporary license or permit
to the person. The temporary license or permit shall be on a form provided by
the secretary of state.
         (b)    Except as provided in subsection (2), immediately do all of the
following:
            (i)    Forward a copy of the written report of the person’s refusal
to submit to a chemical test required under section 5.15d of the ordinance to
the secretary of state.
            (ii)    Notify the secretary of state by means of the law
enforcement information network that a temporary license or permit was issued
to the person.
            (iii)    Destroy the person’s driver’s license or permit.
      (2)    If a person submits to a chemical test offered pursuant to section
5.15a(6) of this ordinance that requires an analysis of blood or urine and a
report of the results of that chemical test is not immediately available, the
peace officer who requested the person to submit to the test shall comply with
subsection (1)(a) pending receipt of the test report. If the report reveals an
unlawful alcohol content, the peace officer who requested the person to submit
to the test shall immediately comply with subsection (1)(b). If the report does
not reveal an unlawful alcohol content, the peace officer who requested the
person to submit to the test shall immediately notify the person of the test
results and immediately return the person’s license or permit by first-class
mail to the address given at the time of arrest.
      (3)    A temporary license or permit issued under this section is valid
for one (1) of the following time periods:
         (a)    If the case is not prosecuted, for ninety (90) days after
issuance or until the person’s license or permit is suspended pursuant to
section 5.15f of this ordinance, whichever occurs earlier. The prosecuting
attorney shall notify the secretary of state if a case referred to the
prosecuting attorney is not prosecuted. The arresting law enforcement agency
shall notify the secretary of state if a case is not referred to the
prosecuting attorney for prosecution.
         (b)    If the case is prosecuted, until the criminal charges against
the person are dismissed, the person pleads guilty or nolo contendere to or is
found guilty of or acquitted of those charges, or the person’s license or
permit is suspended pursuant to section 5.15f of this ordinance, whichever
occurs earlier.
      (4)    As used in this section, “unlawful alcohol content” means any of
the following, as applicable:
         (a)    If the person tested is less than twenty-one (21) years of age,
0.02 grams or more of alcohol per one hundred (100) milliliters of blood, per
two hundred ten (210) liters of breath, or per sixty-seven (67) milliliters of
urine.
         (b)    If the person tested was operating a commercial motor vehicle
within this state, 0.04 grams or more of alcohol per one hundred (100)
milliliters of blood, per two hundred ten (210) liters of breath, or per sixty-
seven (67) milliliters of urine.
         (c)    If the person tested is not a person described in subdivision
(a) or (b), 0.10 grams or more of alcohol per one hundred (100) milliliters of
blood, per two hundred ten (210) liters of breath, or sixty-seven (67)
milliliters of urine.
   (Z)   Section 5.15l. shall be added to read as follows.
      Sec. 5.15l. Court ordered ignition interlock devices; warning label,
tampering, etc.; violations; definition.
      (1)   The manufacturer of an ignition interlock device shall design a
warning label, and the person who had an ignition interlock device shall
promptly affix that label to each ignition interlock device upon installation.
The label shall contain a warning that any person tampering, circumventing, or
otherwise misusing the device is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as provided
by law.
      (2)    A person who has an ignition interlock device installed and whose
driving privilege is restricted shall not request or solicit any other person
to blow into an ignition interlock device or to start a vehicle equipped with
the device for the purpose of providing the person whose driving privilege is
restricted with an operable vehicle.
      (3)    A person shall not blow into an ignition interlock device or start
a motor vehicle equipped with the device for the purpose of providing an
operable vehicle to a person who has an interlock device installed and whose
driving privilege is restricted.
      (4)    A person shall not tamper with or circumvent the operation of an
ignition interlock device.
      (5)    A person who violates subsection (2), (3), or (4) is guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than ninety-three (93) days
or a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or both.
      (6)    As used in this ordinance, “ignition interlock device” or “device”
means an alcohol concentration measuring device that prevents a motor vehicle
from being started at any time without first determining through a deep lung
sample the operator’s breath alcohol level. The system shall be calibrated so
that the motor vehicle may not be started if the breath alcohol level of the
operator, as measured by the test, reaches a level of 0.025 grams per two
hundred ten (210) liters of breath.
      (7)    The city or its officers, employees, or agents are not liable in
any claim or action that may arise, directly or indirectly, out of any act or
omission by a manufacturer, installer, or servicing agent of an ignition
interlock device that results in damage to persons or property.
      (8)    A person shall not sell, lease, install, or monitor in a vehicle
in this city an ignition interlock device unless the ignition interlock device
manufacturer and provider carries liability insurance covering product
liability, including, but not limited to, insurance to indemnify the Department
of State of Michigan and any person injured as a result of a design defect or
the calibration or removal of the ignition interlock device or a
misrepresentation about the ignition interlock device. The insurance required
by this subsection shall be in an amount of not less that one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) per incident.
      (9)    The provider of insurance described in this section may cancel the
insurance upon thirty (30) days’ written notice to the Department of State of
Michigan and is not liable for a claim arising from an event that occurs after
the effective date of cancellation made in compliance with this section.
      (10)    An ignition interlock device shall be serviced according to
manufacturer’s standards. Service shall include, but not be limited to,
physical inspection of the device and vehicle for tampering, calibration of the
device, and monitoring of the data contained within the device’s memory. Only
authorized employees of the manufacturer or the Department of State of Michigan
may observe the installation of a device. Reasonable security measures must be
taken to prevent the customer from observing the installation of a device or
obtaining access to installation materials.
   (AA)   Section 5.15m. shall be added to read as follows:
      Sec. 5.15m. Commercial motor vehicle drivers; operation of a vehicle
while intoxicated, blood alcohol limits; warrantless arrest; violation,
penalty.
      (1)   A person, whether licensed or not, who has an alcohol content of
0.04 grams or more but not more than 0.07 grams per one hundred (100)
milliliters of blood, per two hundred ten (210) liters of breath, or per sixty-
seven (67) milliliters of urine shall not operate a commercial motor vehicle
within this city.
      (2)    A peace officer may arrest a person without a warrant under either
of the following circumstances:
         (a)    The peace officer has reasonable cause to believe that the
person was, at the time of an accident, the driver of a commercial motor
vehicle involved in the accident and was operating the vehicle in violation of
this section.
         (b)    The person is found in the driver’s seat of a commercial motor
vehicle parked or stopped on a highway or street within this city if any part
of the vehicle intrudes into the roadway and the peace officer has reasonable
cause to believe the person was operating the vehicle in violation of this
section.
      (3)    Except as otherwise provided in subsections (4) and (5), a person
who is convicted of a violation of this ordinance is guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by imprisonment for not more than ninety-three (93) days or a fine
of not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00), or both, together with costs
of the prosecution.
      (4)    A person who violates this ordinance within seven (7) years of one
(1) prior conviction may be sentenced to imprisonment for not more than ninety-
three (93) days or a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or
both.
      (5)    A term of imprisonment imposed under subsection (4) shall not be
suspended.
      (6)    Subject to subsection (8), as used in this section, “prior
conviction” means a conviction for any of the following, whether under a law of
this state, a local ordinance substantially corresponding to a law of this
state, or a law of another state substantially corresponding to a law of this
state:
         (a)    Except as provided in subsection (7), a violation or attempted
violation of this section, section 5.15(1), (3), (4) or (5) of this ordinance,
former section 625(1) or (2), or former section 625b of the motor vehicle code.
         (b)    Negligent homicide, manslaughter, or murder resulting from the
operation of a vehicle or an attempt to commit any of those crimes.
      (7)    Only one (1) violation or attempted violation of section 5.15(4)
of this ordinance, or 625(6), or a local ordinance substantially corresponding
to section 625(6), or a law of another state substantially corresponding to
section 625(6) may be used as a prior conviction.
      (8)    If two (2) or more convictions described in subsection (6) are
convictions for violations arising out of the same transaction, only one (1)
conviction shall be used to determine whether the person has a prior
conviction.
   (BB)   Section 5.15n. shall be added to read as follows:
      Sec. 5.15n. Violation of section 5.15 of this ordinance; penalties with
regard to vehicle used in the offense; notice; forfeiture or return, seizure of
vehicle; filing claim of interest; sale of seized vehicle, disposal of
proceeds, priority; concealment to avoid forfeiture, violation, penalty.
      (1)    Except as otherwise provided in this section and in addition to
any other penalty provided for in this ordinance, the judgment of sentence for
a conviction for a violation of section 5.15(1)(a) or (b) of this ordinance, a
violation of section 5.15(3) of this ordinance as described in section 5.15(6)
(b) of this ordinance, a violation of section 5.15(3) of this ordinance
described in section 5.15(8)(b) of this ordinance, or a violation of 904(4) or
(5) (felony), may require one (1) of the following with regard to the vehicle
used in the offense if the defendant owns the vehicle in whole or in part or
leases the vehicle:
         (a)    Forfeiture of the vehicle if the defendant owns the vehicle in
whole or in part.
         (b)    Return of the vehicle to the lessor if the defendant leases the
vehicle.
      (2)    The vehicle may be seized pursuant to an order of seizure issued
by the court having jurisdiction upon a showing of probable cause that the
vehicle is subject to forfeiture or return to the lessor.
      (3)    The forfeiture of a vehicle is subject to the interest of the
holder of a security interest who did not have prior knowledge of or consent to
the violation.
      (4)    Within fourteen (14) days after the defendant’s conviction for a
violation described in subsection (1), the prosecuting attorney may file a
petition with the court for the forfeiture of the vehicle or to have the court
order return of a leased vehicle to the lessor. The prosecuting attorney shall
give notice by first-class mail or other process to the defendant and his or
her attorney, to all owners of the vehicle, and to any person holding a
security interest in the vehicle that the court may require forfeiture or
return of the vehicle.
      (5)    If a vehicle is seized before disposition of the criminal
proceedings, a defendant who is an owner or lessee of the vehicle may move the
court having jurisdiction over the proceedings to require the seizing agency to
file a lien against the vehicle and to return the vehicle to the owner or
lessee pending disposition of the criminal proceedings. The court shall hear
the motion within seven (7) days after the motion is filed. If the defendant
establishes at the hearing that he or she holds the legal title to the vehicle
or that he or she has a leasehold interest and that it is necessary for him or
her or a member of his or her family to use the vehicle pending the outcome of
the forfeiture action, the court may order the seizing agency to return the
vehicle to the owner of lessee. If the court orders the return of the vehicle
to the owner or lessee, the court shall order the defendant to post a bond in
an amount equal to the retail value of the vehicle, and shall also order the
seizing agency to file a lien against the vehicle.
      (6)    Within fourteen (14) days after notice by the prosecuting attorney
is given under subsection (4), the defendant, an owner, lessee, or holder of a
security interest may file a claim of interest in the vehicle with the court.
Within twenty-one (21) days after the expiration of the period for filing
claims, but before or at sentencing, the court shall hold a hearing to
determine the legitimacy of any claim, the extent of any co-owner’s equity
interest, the liability of the defendant to any co-lessee, and whether to order
the vehicle forfeited or returned to the lessor. In considering whether to
order forfeiture, the court shall review the defendant’s driving record to
determine whether the defendant has multiple convictions under section 625 or a
local ordinance substantially corresponding to section 625, or this ordinance,
or multiple suspensions, restrictions, or denials under section 904, or both,
or section 5.62a of this ordinance. If the defendant has multiple convictions
under section 625 or this ordinance or multiple suspensions, restrictions, or
denials under section 904, or section 5.62a of this ordinance, or both, that
factor shall weigh heavily in favor of forfeiture.
      (7)    If a vehicle is forfeited under this section, the unit of
government that seized the vehicle shall sell the vehicle and dispose of the
proceeds in the following order of priority:
         (a)    Pay any outstanding security interest of a secured party who
did not have prior knowledge of or consent to the commission of the violation.
         (b)   Pay the equity interest of a co-owner who did not have prior
knowledge of or consent to the commission of the violation.
         (c)    Satisfy any order of restitution entered in the prosecution for
the violation.
         (d)    Pay the claim of each person who shows that he or she is a
victim of the violation to the extent that the claim is not covered by an order
of restitution.
         (e)    Pay any outstanding lien against the property that has been
imposed by a governmental unit and any cost recovery owing to the city under
the city ordinance.
         (f)    Pay the proper expenses of the proceedings for forfeiture and
sale, and storage, including, but not limited to, expenses incurred during the
seizure process and expenses for maintaining custody of the property,
advertising, and court costs.
         (g)    The balance remaining after the payment of items (a) through
(f) shall be distributed by the court having jurisdiction over the forfeiture
proceedings to the unit or units of government substantially involved in
effecting the forfeiture. Seventy-five (75) percent of the money received by a
unit of government under this subdivision shall be used to enhance enforcement
of the criminal laws and twenty-five (25) percent of the money shall be used to
implement the Crime Victim’s Rights Act. 1985 PA 87, MCL 780.751 to 780.834. A
unit of government receiving money under this subdivision shall report annually
to the department of management and budget the amount of money received under
this subdivision that was used to enhance enforcement of the criminal laws and
the amount that was used to implement the Crime Victim’s Rights Act. 1985 PA
87, MCL 780.751 to 780.834.
      (8)    The court may order the defendant to pay to a co-lessee any
liability determined under subsection (6). The order may be enforced in the
same manner as a civil judgment.
      (9)    The return of a vehicle to the lessor under this section does not
affect or impair the lessor’s rights or the defendant’s obligations under the
lease.
      (10)    A person who knowingly conceals, sells, gives away, or otherwise
transfers or disposes of a vehicle with the intent to avoid forfeiture or
return of the vehicle to the lessor under this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than ninety-three (93) days
or a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or both.
      (11)    The failure of the court or prosecutor to comply with any time
limit specified in this section does not preclude the court from ordering
forfeiture of a vehicle or its return to a lessor, unless the court finds that
the owner or claimant suffered substantial prejudice as a result of that
failure.
      (12)    The forfeiture provisions of this section do not preclude the
prosecuting attorney from pursuing a forfeiture proceeding under any other law
of this state or a local ordinance substantially corresponding to this section.
      Definitions
      (1)    Reference to section numbers in this ordinance (other than those
referring to sections of this ordinance) refer to the corresponding section
number found in the State of Michigan Motor Vehicle Code being MCL 257.1 et
seq. unless otherwise indicated.
      (2)    City means the City of Wyandotte.
      (3)    State or this state means the State of Michigan.
   (CC)   Section 5.62a. shall be amended to read as follows:
      Sec. 5.62a. Operator’s or chauffeur’s license or registration,
suspension, revocation or denial; penalty for operation of vehicle; subsequent
offenses.
      (1)    A person whose operator’s or chauffeur’s license or registration
certificate has been suspended or revoked and who has been notified as provided
in MCL 257.212 of that suspension or revocation, whose application for license
has been denied, or who has never applied for a license, shall not operate a
motor vehicle upon a highway or other place open to the general public or
generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the
parking of motor vehicles, within the City of Wyandotte.
      (2)    A person shall not knowingly permit a motor vehicle owned by the
person to be operated upon a highway or other place open to the general public
or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the
parking of vehicles, within the City of Wyandotte by a person whose license or
registration certificate is suspended or revoked, whose application for license
has been denied, or who has never applied for a license, except as permitted
under the laws of the State of Michigan.
      (3)    A person who violates subsection (1) or (2) is guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable for a first violation, by imprisonment for not more than
ninety-three (93) days or a fine of not more than five hundred dollars
($500.00), or both. Unless the vehicle was stolen or used with the permission
of a person who did not knowingly permit an unlicensed driver to operate the
vehicle, the registration plates of the vehicle shall be canceled by the
secretary of state upon notification by a peace officer.
      (4)    A person shall not knowingly permit a motor vehicle owned by the
person to be operated upon a highway or other place open to the general public
or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the
parking of vehicles, within the City of Wyandotte, by a person whose license or
registration certificate is suspended or revoked, whose application for license
has been denied, or who has never been licensed except as permitted by the laws
of the State of Michigan.
      (5)    Before a person is arraigned before a district court magistrate or
judge on a charge of violating this ordinance, the arresting officer shall
obtain the person’s driving record from the secretary of state and shall
furnish the record to the court. The driving record of the person may be
obtained from the secretary of state’s computer information network.
      (6)    This section does not apply to a person who operates a vehicle
solely for the purpose of protecting human life or property if the life or
property is endangered and summoning prompt aid is essential.
      (7)    A person whose vehicle group designation is suspended or revoked
and who has been notified as provided by MCL 257.212 of that suspension or
revocation, or whose application for a vehicle group designation has been
denied as provided by state law, or who has never applied for a vehicle group
designation and who operates a commercial motor vehicle within the City of
Wyandotte, except as permitted under state law, while any of those conditions
exist is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable, except as otherwise provided in
this section, by imprisonment for not less than three (3) days or more than
ninety-three (93) days or a fine of not more than one hundred dollars
($100.00), or both.
      (8)    If a person has a second or subsequent suspension or revocation
under this ordinance within seven (7) years as indicated on the person’s
Michigan driving record, the court shall proceed as provided in section 5.62b
of this ordinance.
      (9)    For purposes of this ordinance, a person who never applied for a
license includes a person who applied for a license, was denied, and never
applied again.
      (10)    When a peace officer detains the driver of a motor vehicle for a
violation of a law of the state of Michigan or of this ordinance for which
vehicle immobilization is required, the peace officer shall do all of the
following:
         (a)    Immediately confiscate the vehicle’s registration plate and
destroy it.
         (b)    Issue a temporary vehicle registration plate for the vehicle in
the same form prescribed by the secretary of state for temporary registration
plates issued under MCL 257.226 or 257.226b.
         (c)    Place the temporary vehicle registration plate on the vehicle
in the manner required by the secretary of state.
         (d)    Notify the secretary of state through the law enforcement
information network in a form prescribed by the secretary of state that the
registration plate was confiscated and destroyed, and a temporary plate was
issued. A temporary vehicle registration plate issued under this ordinance is
valid until the charges against the person are dismissed, the person pleads
guilty or nolo contendere to those charges, or the person is found guilty of or
is acquitted of those charges.
      (11)    A court shall order a vehicle immobilized under section 13 5.62b
of this ordinance by the use of any available technology approved by the court
that locks the ignition, wheels, or steering of the vehicle or otherwise
prevents any person from operating the vehicle or otherwise prevents any person
from operating the vehicle or that prevents the defendant from operating the
vehicle. If a vehicle is immobilized under this ordinance, the court may order
the vehicle stored at a location and in manner considered appropriate by the
court. The court may order the person convicted to pay the cost of immobilizing
and storing the vehicle.
         (a)    A vehicle subject to immobilization under this ordinance may be
sold during the period of immobilization, but shall not be sold to a person who
is exempt from paying a use tax under section 3(3)(a) of the Use Tax Act, 1937
PA 94, MCL 205.93, without a court order.
         (b)    A defendant who is prohibited from operating a motor vehicle by
vehicle immobilization shall not purchase, lease, or otherwise obtain a motor
vehicle during the immobilization period.
         (c)    A person shall not remove, tamper with, or bypass or attempt to
remove, tamper with, or bypass a device that he or she knows or has reason to
know has been installed on a vehicle by court order for vehicle immobilization
or operate or attempt to operate a vehicle that he or she knows or has reason
to know has been ordered immobilized.
         (d)    A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by imprisonment for not more than ninety-three (93) days or a fine
of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), or both.
         (e)    To the extent that this ordinance regarding the storage or
removal of vehicles conflicts with an order of immobilization issued by the
court, the local ordinance is preempted.
         (f)    If a peace officer stops a vehicle that is being operated in
violation of an immobilization order, the vehicle shall be impounded pending an
order of a court of competent jurisdiction.
         (g)    The court shall require the defendant or a person who provides
immobilization services to the court under this ordinance to certify that a
vehicle ordered immobilized by the court is immobilized as required.
   (DD)   Sec. 5.62a. Detention of driver; vehicle immobilization; temporary
vehicle registration plate.
      (1)    When a peace officer detains the driver of a motor vehicle for a
violation of this ordinance for which vehicle immobilization is required, the
peace officer shall do all of the following:
         (a)    Immediately confiscate the vehicle’s registration plate and
destroy it.
         (b)    Issue a temporary vehicle registration plate for the vehicle in
the same form prescribed by the secretary of state for temporary registration
plates issued under MCL 257.226a.
         (c)    Place the temporary vehicle registration plate on the vehicle
in the manner required by the secretary of state.
         (d)    Notify the secretary of state through the law enforcement
information network in a form prescribed by the secretary of state that the
registration plate was confiscated and destroyed, and a temporary plate was
issued.
      (2)    A temporary vehicle registration plate issued under this section
is valid for one hundred (100) days unless extended by the court.
   (EE)   Section 5.62b. shall be amended to read as follows:
      Sec. 5.62b. Vehicle immobilization, violations of Section 5.15(1)(a)(b)
or 5.15(3), or 5.15(5), suspension, revocation, or denial of license, prior
suspensions.
      (1)    For a violation of section 5.15(1)(a)(b) or 5.15(3), or 5.15(5)
the following apply:
         (a)    The court may order vehicle immobilization for not less than 24
days or more than one hundred eighty (180) days.
         (b)    For a second violation of section 5.15(1)(a), (b) or 5.15(3) or
5.15(5) or any similar state law violation in any combination as found in MCL
257.625, arising out of separate incidents, the court shall order vehicle
immobilization for not less than twenty-four (24) days or more than one hundred
eighty (180) days.
         (c)    For a third or subsequent violation of sections 5.15(1) (a),
(b), 5.15(3) or 5.15(5) or any similar state law violations in any combination
as found in MCL 257.625, arising out of separate incidents, the court shall
order vehicle immobilization for not less than six (6) months or more than
three (3) years.
      (2)    For a suspension, revocation, or denial under section 5.62a of
this ordinance, the following apply:
         (a)    For one (1) prior suspension, revocation, or denial under
section 5.62a of this ordinance or similar state law violations in any
combination as found in MCL 257.904, arising out of separate incidents, within
the past seven (7) years, the court may order vehicle immobilization for not
more than one hundred eighty (180) days.
         (b)    For any combination of two (2) or three (3) prior suspensions,
revocations, or denials under section 5.62a of this ordinance or similar state
law as found in MCL 257.904 in any combination within the past seven (7) years,
the court shall order vehicle immobilization for not less than ninety (90) days
or more than one hundred eighty (180) days.
         (c)    For any combination of four (4) or more prior suspensions,
revocations or denials under section 5.62a of this ordinance or similar state
law as found in MCL 257.904 in any combination within the past seven (7) years,
the court shall order vehicle immobilization for not less than one (1) year or
more than three (3) years.
      (3)    The defendant shall provide to the court the vehicle
identification number and registration plate number of the vehicle involved in
the violation.
      (4)    The court shall not order vehicle immobilization under this
ordinance if the defendant is not the owner or lessee of the vehicle operated
during the violation unless the owner or lessee knowingly permitted the vehicle
to be operated in violation of section 5.15(2) of this ordinance or section
5.62a(2) of this ordinance regardless of whether a conviction resulted.
      (5)    An order required to be issued under this section shall not be
suspended.
      (6)    If a defendant is ordered imprisoned for the violation for which
immobilization is ordered, the period of immobilization shall begin at the end
of the period of imprisonment.
      (7)    This section does not apply to any of the following:
         (a)    A suspension, revocation, or denial based on a violation of the
Support and Parenting Time Enforcement Act, 1982 PA 295, MCL 552.601 to
552.650.
         (b)    For a suspension, revocation, or denial under section 14 5.62a
of this ordinance, an individual who has no currently effective suspension or
denial under section 321a or who has one (1) currently effective suspension or
denial under section 321a but has never violated a condition of that suspension
or denial, and who has no other suspensions or revocations or denials under
this ordinance or under state law.
         (c)    A vehicle that is registered in another state or that is a
rental vehicle.
         (d)    Any of the following:
            (i)    A violation of chapter II of the Motor Vehicle Code.
            (ii)    A violation of chapter V of the Motor Vehicle Code.
            (iii)    A violation for failure to change address.
            (iv)    A parking violation.
            (v)    A bad check violation.
            (vi)    An equipment violation.
            (vii)    A pedestrian, passenger, or bicycle violation, other than
a violation of section 703(1) or (2) of the Michigan liquor control code of
1998, 1998 PA 58, MCL 436.1703, or a local ordinance substantially
corresponding to section 703(1) or (2) of the Michigan liquor control code of
1998, 1998 PA MCL 436.1703, or section 624a or 624b or a local ordinance
substantially corresponding to section 624a or 624b.
            (viii)    A violation of a local ordinance substantially
corresponding to a violation described in subparagraphs (i) to (vii).
      (8)    As used in this section, “vehicle immobilization” means requiring
the motor vehicle involved in the violation immobilized in a manner provided in
section 5.62a(11) of this ordinance.
   (FF)   Sec. 5.62b. Impounding of motor vehicle; time; impoundment order,
execution, content; expenses, removal, storage; disposal upon abandonment.
      (1)    When a person is convicted of an offense under section 5.62a(1) or
(2) or for operating a motor vehicle while his or her license to operate a
motor vehicle is suspended, revoked, or denied, the court shall order the motor
vehicle, if it is owned in whole or in part or leased by that person, impounded
for not less than a period the court orders but not more than one hundred
twenty (120) days from the date of judgment.
      (2)    When a person is convicted of an offense punishable under section
5.62a(1) or (2) for operating a motor vehicle while his or her license to
operate a motor vehicle is suspended, revoked, or denied, the court may order
the motor vehicle, if it is owned in whole or in part or leased by that person,
impounded for not more than one hundred twenty (120) days from the date of
judgment.
      (3)    An order for the impounding of a motor vehicle issued pursuant to
this section is valid throughout the state. Any peace officer may execute the
impoundment order. The order shall include the implied consent of the owner of
the vehicle to the storage for insurance coverage purposes.
      (4)    The owner of a motor vehicle impounded pursuant to this section is
liable for expenses incurred in the removal and storage of the vehicle whether
or not the vehicle is returned to him or her. The vehicle shall be returned to
the owner only if the owner pays the expenses for removal and storage. If
redemption is not made or the vehicle is not returned as provided in this
section within thirty (30) days after the time set in the impoundment order for
return of the vehicle, the vehicle shall be considered an abandoned vehicle and
disposed of as provided in section MCL 257.252a or the city’s local ordinance
substantially corresponding to that section.
      (5)   This section does not affect the rights of a conditional vendor,
chattel mortgagee, or lessor of a motor vehicle registered in the name of
another person as owner who becomes subject to this ordinance.
   (GG)   Section 5.69. shall be amended to read as follows:
      Sec. 5.69. License plates required.
      A person shall not operate or park on the streets of this governmental
unit any vehicle which is required to be registered pursuant to the Act, unless
the vehicle bears valid registration plates issued for it. A person who
violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. The plates shall
be attached and displayed in the following manner:
         (a)   Registration plates issued for a motor vehicle shall be attached
to the motor vehicle, one in the front and one in the rear. If one plate is
issued for a motor vehicle, the plate shall be attached to the rear of the
vehicle. The registration plate issued for a trailer, trailer-coach,
motorcycle, or moped shall be attached to the rear of the trailer, trailer-
coach, motorcycle or moped. If an adhesive tab is issued for a motor vehicle,
other than a truck tractor, the tab shall be affixed to the rear registration
plate of the motor vehicle. An adhesive tab issued for a truck tractor shall be
affixed to the front registration plate.
         (b)    Each registration plate shall at all times be securely fastened
in a horizontal position to the vehicle for which the plate is issued so as to
prevent the plate from swinging. The plate shall be attached at a height of not
less than twelve (12) inches from the ground, measured from the bottom of the
plate, in a place and position which is clearly visible. The plate shall be
maintained free from foreign materials and in a clearly legible condition.
         (c)    Registration plates or the expiration date on the registration
plates shall be of a different color designated by the secretary of state with
a marked contrast between the color of the registration plates and the numerals
or letters on the plates. The secretary of state may provide distinctive
registration plates for vehicles.
         (d)    A person shall not attach a name plate, insignia, or
advertising device to a motor vehicle registration plate.
   (HH)   Section 5.70. shall be amended to read as follows:
      Sec. 5.70. Registration certificate.
      The certificate of registration shall at all times be carried in the
vehicle to which it refers or shall be carried by the person driving or in
control of such vehicle who shall display the same upon demand of a police
officer. A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil
infraction.
   (II)   Section 6.12. shall be amended to read as follows:
      Sec. 6.12. Use of bicycle paths when provided.
      (1)    Where a usable and designated bicycle path is provided adjacent to
a street, highway, or roadway, a bicycle rider shall use that path and shall
not use the street, highway or roadway.
      (2)    The City Engineer’s office shall designate bicycle paths
established by the placement of appropriate signs.
      (3)    A bicycle for purposes of this section only is defined as every
device propelled by human power upon which a person may ride and shall include
unicycles and tricycles.
      (4)   The parent of a child or the guardian of a ward shall not authorize
or knowingly permit the child or ward to violate the provisions of this
section.
      (5)    When a sidewalk is also designated as a bicycle path, the
pedestrian shall have the right-of-way.
      (6)    Any person violating the provisions of this section is responsible
for a civil infraction.
   (JJ)   Section 8.10, Stopping, Standing and Parking, shall be amended to add
subsection (u) as follows:
         (u)    Within seven (7) feet of the center line of a public or private
driveway approach when said driveway approach is fourteen (14) feet or less in
width.
(Prior Code, § 35-24) (Ord. 647, passed 1-14-1980; Ord. 669, passed 10-20-1980;
Ord. 676, passed 12-15-1980; Ord. 677, passed 1-12-1981; Ord. 687, passed 3-9-
1981; Ord. 716, passed 10-5-1981; Ord. 736, passed 7-26-1982; Ord. 744, passed
3-14-1983; Ord. 747, passed 4-19-1983; Ord. 751, passed 8-29-1983; Ord. 1080,
passed 9-27-1999)
§ 71.003 REFERENCES IN CODE.
   (A)   References in the Uniform Traffic Code for Michigan cities, townships
and villages to governmental unit shall mean the “City of Wyandotte”.
   (B)   As used in such Uniform Traffic Code, the term “traffic engineer”
shall mean the “Police and Fire Commission”.
(Prior Code, § 35-25) (Ord. 647, passed 1-14-1980; Ord. 716, passed 10-5-1981)
§ 71.004 NOTICE TO BE PUBLISHED; COPY ON FILE.
   The City Clerk shall publish this subchapter in the manner required by law
and shall at the same time publish a supplementary notice setting forth the
purpose of said Uniform Traffic Code and of the fact that a complete copy of
the code is available at the office of the Clerk for inspection by the public
during regular business hours.
(Prior Code, § 35-26) (Ord. 647, passed 1-14-1980; Ord. 716, passed 10-5-1981)
§ 71.005 SCOPE.
   The presumptions of arrest and citation contained in the Uniform Traffic
code adopted by the city shall apply to all provisions of this subchapter,
whether or not such provisions amend the Uniform Traffic Code.
(Prior Code, § 35-28)
§ 71.006 MOTOR VEHICLE INSURANCE.
   (A)   The owner or registrant of a motor vehicle required to be registered
in the State of Michigan shall maintain security (insurance) for payment of
benefits under personal protection insurance, property protection insurance,
and residual liability insurance as required by law including all provisions of
Chapter 31 of the Insurance Code of 1956, as amended (MCLA 500.3101 to
500.3179). Security (insurance) shall only be required to be in effect during
the period the motor vehicle is driven or moved upon a highway.
   (B)   A nonresident owner or registrant of a motor vehicle or motorcycle not
registered in this state shall not operate or permit the motor vehicle or
motorcycle to be operated in this state for an aggregate of more than 30 days
in any calendar year unless he or she continuously maintains security
(insurance) for the payment of benefits pursuant to this section and state law.
   (C)   An owner or registrant of a motor vehicle or motorcycle with respect
to which security (insurance) is required, who operates the motor vehicle or
motorcycle or permits it to be operated upon a public highway in this state,
without having in full force and effect security (insurance) complying with
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor. A person who operated a motor vehicle
or motorcycle upon a public highway in this state with the knowledge that the
owner or registrant does not have security (insurance) in full force and effect
is guilty of a misdemeanor. A person convicted of a misdemeanor under this
section shall be fined not less than $200 nor more than $500, imprisoned for
not more than 93 days.
   (D)   The failure of a person to produce evidence that a motor vehicle or
motorcycle has in full force and effect security (insurance) complying with
this section on the date of the issuance of the citation, creates a rebuttal
presumption in a prosecution under division (C) that the motor vehicle or
motorcycle did not have in full force and effect security (insurance) complying
with this section on the date of the issuance of the citation.
   (E)   An owner or operator of a motor vehicle or motorcycle who fails to
produce evidence of security (insurance) on request under this section or the
provisions of the Motor Vehicle Code or the provisions of the State of Michigan
Insurance Code is responsible for a civil infraction.
(Prior Code, § 35-29) (Ord. 654, passed 7-21-1980; Ord. 685, passed 3-2-1981;
Ord. 729, passed 4-26-1982; Ord. 1535, passed 6-5-2023)
§ 71.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Any provision of §§
71.001 through
71.002 of this chapter which describes an act or omission which constitutes a
civil infraction under the terms of the Michigan Vehicle Code, being Public Act
300 of 1949, as amended, shall be processed as a civil infraction and any
person found to have committed a civil infraction may be ordered to pay a civil
fine of not more than $100 and costs in accordance with § 907 of the Michigan
Vehicle Code, being Public Act 300 of 1949, as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 257.1
through 257.923.
      (2)   All parking tickets issued under the provisions of the Uniform
Traffic Code as adopted by the city shall require a mandatory minimum fine for
any parking infraction in the sum of $25, except for overtime parking as
prohibited by § 8.10(r), in which case the mandatory minimum fine shall be $10.
   (C)   Any person violating §
71.006(A)-(D) is guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (D)   Any person violating §
71.006(E) is responsible for a civil infraction.
(Prior Code, § 35-27) (Ord. 647, passed 1-14-1980; Ord. 711, passed 9-21-1981;
Ord. 1049, passed 6-15-1998; Ord. 1535, passed 6-5-2023)
 
CHAPTER 72: PARKING AND STOPPING RULES
Section
General Provisions
   
72.001   Parking at entrances to buildings
   
72.002   Parking in front of residences or in developed business area
   
72.003   Parking on city streets and parking in residential areas
   
72.004   Parking on private property
   
72.005   Parkway parking
   
72.006   Parking in alleys
   
72.007   Parking in areas marked with an “X”
   
72.008   Parking restrictions in Wyandotte General Hospital parking lots
   
72.009   Circling and looping prohibited in drive-in restaurants and parking
lots
   
72.010   Mandatory minimum parking fines
   
72.011   Parking on lawn extension
   
72.012   Restriction on parking of certain motor vehicles on Biddle Avenue and
on the south side of Perry Place east of Biddle Avenue to the Detroit River
   
72.013   Double parking
Disabled Parking
   
72.025   Definitions
   
72.026   Restricted use of disabled parking space
   
72.027   Disabled parking space required
   
72.028   Disabled parking space provided in private parking areas
   
72.029   Municipal parking lots; parking areas owned by the city
   
72.030   Disabled parking spaces provided in on-street parking
Parking During Snow Emergencies
   
72.045   Declaration of snow emergency
   
72.046   Parking restrictions
   
72.047   Posted parking prohibitions
   
72.048   Towing of vehicles
   
72.049   Mandatory minimum parking fines
 
   
72.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 72.001 PARKING AT ENTRANCES TO BUILDINGS.
   (A)   Special “no parking” spaces may be provided and established by
compliance with the following conditions.
      (1)   Any owner or occupant of a building adjacent to a street or alley,
desiring “no parking” space immediately in front of a shopping entrance to such
building, shall make application to the Police and Fire Commission, setting
forth all relevant information and stating the number of feet desired for such
purposes.
      (2)   The Commission shall have authority to grant or refuse such
application at its discretion, or to grant the same subject to such
restrictions or limitations as it may determine is required for the public
safety.
      (3)   In case such application is granted, the Commission shall issue to
the applicant a permit or certificate setting forth the location of such “no
parking” space, the number of feet frontage fixed and such other limitations as
may be pertinent. Such permit may, at any time, be withdrawn or further limited
by the Commission.
   (B)   To enforce the provisions of such permit, the holder of same shall
have the right to place “no parking” signs on the sidewalk, marking the limits
of such “no parking” space. Such signs shall be the exact size, character and
description required by the Commission, but shall be provided at the expense of
the permit holder and shall bear the number of the permit issued by the
Commission. No person shall park or allow any vehicle to stop or remain
standing in any such special “no parking” space, except for the purpose of
taking on or discharging passengers or loading or unloading merchandise.
(Prior Code, § 35-44) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.002 PARKING IN FRONT OF RESIDENCES OR IN DEVELOPED BUSINESS AREA.
   (A)   Parking permits shall be issued by the Police Department, Records
Bureau, to a resident living in a residential zoned district, or a resident
living in the developed business area, as defined by §
190.324 of this code of ordinances, for the fee of $5. This permit allows said
resident permission to park his or her automobile in a restricted parking area
or street, or a public parking lot located in the developed business area;
provided, the parking lot is not closed or being used for any special event.
Permits issued for the developed business area are limited to one permit per
resident, and permits issued in a residential zoned district are limited to one
permit per 20 feet of lot frontage. Residents shall make application to the
Police Records Bureau setting forth all relevant information required by the
Records Bureau, including a valid state driver’s license indicating the
resident’s current address. Parking permits are valid as long as the resident
maintains residency at the address for which the permit was granted. Parking
permits are valid only as long as the ordinance remains in effect or until
amended.
   (B)   The Records Bureau shall have the authority to grant a parking permit
in the form of a suitable permit indicating the date of issuance, the
residential street and signed by the Chief of Police. The holder shall then
place the permit in the right corner of the windshield of his or her
automobile; provided, however, that, such permit shall not grant the holder any
privilege to park in any area where or when parking is prohibited; and,
provided further that, no permit shall be issued to anyone residing in a
multiple dwelling, except in the discretion of the Police and Fire Commission
with regard to the number of residential units and the available space for
parking, fronting such residence.
(Prior Code, § 35-45) (Ord. 934, passed 3-2-1992; Ord. 1053, passed 10-19-1998;
Ord. 1285, passed 8-13-2007) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.003 PARKING ON CITY STREETS AND PARKING IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS.
   (A)   The following vehicles may be parked on any city street; provided,
said vehicle (with attachment when allowed) does not exceed 22 feet in length
and is moved after 48 hours:
      (1)   Automobile;
      (2)   Motorcycle;
      (3)   Pickup truck without attachment such as a snow plow blade, tow bar
or the like, not exceeding one-ton hauling capacity;
      (4)   Pickup truck with living quarters or other attachments which do not
exceed the width of the pickup cap; and
      (5)   Non-commercial passenger vans or recreation type vehicles which do
not exceed 22 feet in length or 80 inches in width or 80 inches in height.
   (B)   Other vehicles may be permitted to park on any city street for the
purpose of loading and unloading or the making of emergency repairs for a
period not exceeding one hour, or at the written direction of a police officer
or ordinance officer for a period not exceeding 24 hours.
   (C)   (1)   No more than one of the following type vehicles may be parked on
residential lots, exclusive of the driveway area of the premises, if properly
licensed and registered and owned by the property occupant:
         (a)   Automobile;
         (b)   Motorcycle; and
         (c)   Pickup truck.
      (2)   Such parking and storage of said vehicles (other than as permitted
in the driveway area of the premises) may not be between the front lot line and
nearest line of any residential building on said lot. Any vehicle under this
section may only be parked or stored on a hard surface (such as concrete,
blacktop or other comparable surfaces, but not gravel).
   (D)   (1)   No more than two of the following type vehicles may be parked
and/or stored in permitted areas on residential lots and they shall not be
subject to the length, height and width limits set forth in this section:
         (a)   Recreational type vehicles including travel trailers;
         (b)   Non-recreational type vehicles including travel trailers;
         (c)   Motor homes (but not converted buses);
         (d)   Boats with trailers; and
         (e)   Snowmobiles with trailers.
      (2)   Such parking and storage of said vehicles is allowed only in a rear
yard. The rear yard shall be as defined in
Ch. 159 of this code of ordinances and is an open space extending the full
width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between
the rear lot line and the nearest line of the main building. Any vehicle under
this section may only be parked or stored on a hard surface (such as concrete,
blacktop or other comparable surfaces, but not gravel). Any other vehicle not
described above must be housed in a garage when not in use.
      (3)   The city may grant a variance from the requirements of this
division (D) as follows:
         (a)   If a property owner or occupier of the property upon receiving
notice from the city as set forth in the section entitled “enforcement”
believes he or she cannot comply with the requirements of this section, an
application in writing shall be made with the City Engineer’s office within 21
days of receiving the notice from the city. The application shall include the
required application fee and be supplemented with a drawing of the lot in
question showing the lot dimensions and all setbacks from the neighboring
property lines to aid the Zoning Board panel described in division (D)(3)(b)
below in the analysis of the requested variance. The application fee shall be
$50 and this may be adjusted from time to time by Council resolution.
         (b)   The request for a variance, for purposes of this division (D)
only, shall be reviewed by a panel consisting of three or more members from the
Zoning Board of Appeals and, when acting in this capacity, shall be referred to
as the “Appeal Board”. Notice of a public hearing to consider the variance
shall be sent to the immediate neighboring property owners on each side of the
lot in question (including the rear lot neighbor) and to any other neighboring
lot owner that the Engineer’s office finds that the front or side yard view of
the property owner may be adversely affected.
         (c)   Following the public hearing, the Zoning Board panel shall
decide the best location for the parking and storage of the recreational
vehicle, in accordance with the standards below. The Zoning Board panel in
making its decision shall consider the purpose of this division (D) and may
establish requirements or conditions that will secure substantially the
objectives and requirements of this division (D). The Zoning Board panel shall
state the reasons for its finding or decision.
         (d)   The decision on a variance request shall be based on a finding
that practical difficulties result from compliance with specific provisions of
this division (D). In making its finding, the Zoning Board panel shall take
into account the lot configuration where the vehicle is to be parked and
stored, the proximity of neighboring residential homes and how their front or
side yard view may be obstructed by the vehicle, the objections, if any, of the
adjacent property owners, and whether the vehicle has been parked and/or stored
in the location requested by the application prior to adoption of this division
(D). No variance shall be granted unless the Appeal Board panel finds that:
            1.   There are special circumstances or conditions affecting said
property such that the strict application of the provisions of this division
(D) would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his or her land;
            2.   The variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment
of a substantial property right of the petitioner;
            3.   The vehicle in question is owned by the owner, tenant or
individual who lives at the premises in question and is not being stored for a
person who lives at a different location;
            4.   There is no other practical location on the applicant’s
property to park and store the vehicle in order to meet the purpose of this
division (D); and
            5.   The applicant had been parking or storing the vehicle at such
location at the time of the adoption of this division (D). The applicant bears
the burden of proof on this issue.
      (4)   In no instance shall a vehicle covered by this division (D) be
allowed in the front yard and no more than two of the vehicles covered by this
division (D) may be parked and/or stored on a property.
      (5)   If a complaint is received by the city by an immediate neighbor
concerning the possible violation of this division (D), it will be referred to
a code enforcement officer for inspection. If the code enforcement officer,
upon inspection, finds that the provision of this division (D) is being
violated the offending property owner and/or tenant shall be notified by letter
with a copy of this division (D) and directed to correct the situation in 21
days. If the violator fails to correct the violation or appeal to the City
Engineer’s office in a timely manner, a civil infraction shall be issued to the
violator.
   (E)   Notwithstanding anything elsewhere above in this section to the
contrary, the following vehicles are expressly prohibited from being parked on
any residential lots:
      (1)   Semi-trucks;
      (2)   Buses;
      (3)   Cube trucks/van style vehicles;
      (4)   Stake trucks;
      (5)   Wreckers;
      (6)   Dump trucks; and
      (7)   Other commercial type vehicles.
   (F)   Any permitted vehicles of the type described in divisions (C) and (D)
above owned by the property occupant may be parked or stored on the residential
lot subject to the requirements set forth above in divisions (C) and (D) above
and subject to the following conditions.
      (1)   Vehicles parked or stored shall not have fixed connections to
electricity, water, gas or sanitary sewer facilities, and at no time shall said
vehicle be used for living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes.
      (2)   All vehicles must be kept in good repair and carry a valid
registration plate. Good repair shall mean the vehicle is operable and meets
all of the safety requirements of the Uniform Traffic Code and Michigan Vehicle
Code.
   (G)   No person shall spill or drain any wastewater or liquid waste of any
kind from any vehicle upon the ground or upon any paved area.
   (H)   No person shall remove or cause to be removed the wheels or tires from
any vehicle, except for the purpose of repair which shall be limited to 72
hours, nor shall any person elevate, block or stabilize any such vehicle other
than with jacks designed, provided and intended for such purpose.
   (I)   Any member of the Police Department or ordinance officer of the city
shall have the authority to enter and inspect at any reasonable time any
premises upon which the vehicles are parked, used or occupied for the purpose
of ascertaining that the owner, operator or occupant thereof is complying with
all statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations in such cases made and
provided.
(Prior Code, § 35-46) (Ord. 987, passed 11-14-1994; Ord. 989, passed 3-20-1993;
Ord. 1049, passed 6-15-1998; Ord. 1097, passed 9-25-2000; Ord. 1249, passed 10-
24-2005; Ord. 1250, passed 12-5-2005) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.004 PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle on any private
property without the express or implied consent, authorization or ratification
of the owner, holder, occupant, lessee, agent or trustee of such property.
(Prior Code, § 35-47) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.005 PARKWAY PARKING.
   (A)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle on that portion of the
highway located between the property lot lines and the curb, or edge of
roadway, without a permit from the Police and Fire Commission and in compliance
with this section.
   (B)   Permits for parking in business areas shall be issued only for the
accommodation of the general public, and shall not be granted for the sole
purpose of providing vehicle storage or display space for use by the applicant
or other person. The following requirements shall be observed.
      (1)   Angle parking may be permitted where the space between the
established curbline and the outside edge of the sidewalk is not less than 15
feet; perpendicular parking may be permitted where said space is not less than
30 feet. The degree of angle parking shall not be less than 30 degrees.
      (2)   No person shall park within 20 feet of a crosswalk. Permits shall
not be issued if a hazard due to the parking in close proximity of
intersections, commercial driveways or alleys is created.
      (3)   The applicant, upon receipt of a permit, and before parking in the
permitted space, shall grade and construct curb and surfacing in accordance
with the design and specifications of the City Engineer.
   (C)   (1)   On paved streets in the residential areas, no person shall park
a vehicle between the curb and sidewalk, except on a paved driveway apron of
sufficient length to prevent the vehicle from overhanging either the sidewalk
or the curbline.
      (2)   Permits shall not be issued if a hazard due to the parking in close
proximity of intersections, commercial driveways or alley entrances is created.
   (D)   (1)   As traffic conditions change, indicating that angle parking may
be creating a hazard in an area, the Commission may prohibit angle parking and
may require that the parking be parallel.
      (2)   In the event of a major highway change, the permit shall be
cancelled forthwith and no liability for recovery of installation costs shall
attach to the city therefor.
(Prior Code, § 35-48) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.006 PARKING IN ALLEYS.
   No person shall park a vehicle in a public alley nor shall he or she stop or
stand a vehicle in a public alley if such stopping or standing shall obstruct
passing by other vehicles; provided that, a commercial vehicle may load or
unload in a public alley, but shall not obstruct other vehicles from passing.
(Prior Code, § 35-49) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.007 PARKING IN AREAS MARKED WITH AN “X”.
   Any person who parks any vehicle at any time upon any street in areas marked
with an “X” separating adjacent parallel parking spaces is responsible for a
civil infraction.
(Prior Code, § 35-50) (Ord. 682, passed 2-23-1981) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.008 PARKING RESTRICTIONS IN WYANDOTTE GENERAL HOSPITAL PARKING LOTS.
   (A)   Pursuant to the request of those persons in charge of the general
operation and control of the parking lots of Wyandotte General Hospital, the
following restrictions are to be enforced in the parking lots of Wyandotte
General Hospital:
      (1)   No motor vehicle shall be parked or left standing in the hospital
lots between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any day, subject to the
following exceptions:
         (a)   Motor vehicles of authorized hospital personnel;
         (b)   Motor vehicles of authorized visitors to the hospital may park
in all hospital lots, except for Lot E during said hours;
         (c)   Motor vehicles of emergency personnel; and
         (d)   Motor vehicles of resident boathouse owners and their guests may
park in Lot E only.
      (2)   Only the following motor vehicles are authorized to park in the
emergency room parking lot:
         (a)   Motor vehicles of emergency room patients and persons
accompanying emergency room patients; and
         (b)   Motor vehicles of the Police and Fire Departments and other
emergency vehicles transporting patients to or from the emergency rooms.
      (3)   No hospital employee shall park in the visitor parking Lots B and C
during the posted hours for said lots.
   (B)   Any motor vehicle left standing or parking in violation of this
section may be towed away at the owner’s expense.
   (C)   The city’s Police Department shall have signs erected in the hospital
parking lots which set forth these parking restrictions.
   (D)   Any person violating this section is responsible for a civil
infraction and the citation issued may be served by attaching the copy of the
citation to the motor vehicle.
   (E)   (1)   The Chief of Police may authorize personnel of Henry Ford
Wyandotte Hospital and the Wyandotte School District, respectively, to issue
and serve citations for the violation of a city ordinance involving the parking
or standing of a motor vehicle in all Henry Ford Wyandotte Hospital and the
Wyandotte School District parking lots.
      (2)   This section in no way prevents personnel of the city’s Police
Department from enforcing any city ordinance in the Hospital and Wyandotte
School District parking lots.
   (F)   In any proceeding for a violation of this section relating to the
standing or parking of a motor vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle
described in the civil infraction citation was parked in violation of this
section, together with proof that the person named in the citation was at the
time of such parking the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute in
evidence a presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle was the person
who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where such civil infraction
occurred.
(Prior Code, § 35-51) (Ord. 672, passed 12-8-1980; Ord. 1032, passed 3-24-1997)
Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.009 CIRCLING AND LOOPING PROHIBITED IN DRIVE-IN RESTAURANTS AND PARKING
LOTS.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall use a motor vehicle to enter upon, drive
through, traverse, circle, loop, block any traffic aisle or otherwise use the
premises of a drive-in restaurant or fast food chain restaurant for purposes
other than the purchasing and/or consuming of food products or beverages sold
by such drive-in restaurant or fast food chain restaurant.
      (2)   Anyone violating this division (A) is responsible for a civil
infraction.
   (B)   (1)   No person shall use a motor vehicle to enter upon, drive
through, traverse, circle, loop, block any traffic aisle or otherwise use the
premises of a public or privately-owned parking lot in the city for purposes
other than obtaining a parking space in said parking lot.
      (2)   Anyone violating this division (B) is responsible for a civil
infraction.
   (C)   The city’s Police Department is hereby authorized to enforce the
provisions of this section.
(Prior Code, § 35-52) (Ord. 768, passed 6-11-1984) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.010 MANDATORY MINIMUM PARKING FINES.
   All parking tickets issued under the provisions of this subchapter shall
require a mandatory minimum fine for any parking infraction in the sum of $25.
(Prior Code, § 35-53) (Ord. 1049, passed 6-15-1998)
§ 72.011 PARKING ON LAWN EXTENSION.
   No person shall drive upon, park or stand any vehicle between the curb or
curb line and the lot line nearest the street, said area being commonly known
as the lawn extension, whether or not any sidewalk or curb is actually in place
on such street.
(Prior Code, § 35-54) (Ord. 1049, passed 6-15-1998) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.012 RESTRICTION ON PARKING OF CERTAIN MOTOR VEHICLES ON BIDDLE AVENUE AND
ON THE SOUTH SIDE OF PERRY PLACE EAST OF BIDDLE AVENUE TO THE DETROIT RIVER.
   (A)   Parking of motor vehicle prohibited. No motor vehicle with a GVW in
excess of 10,000 pounds shall park on Biddle Avenue between Emmons Boulevard
and Pennsylvania Road and on the south side of Perry Place east of Biddle
Avenue to the Detroit River in the city at any time, except as otherwise
provided in this section.
   (B)   Exceptions to prohibition of parking vehicles. The following parking
of vehicles are permitted and shall not be considered a violation of this
section:
      (1)   Any vehicle which is temporarily parked for the purpose of, or
while engaged in, the expeditious loading or unloading in the normal course of
business;
      (2)   Any vehicle which is parked for the purpose of making an
expeditious delivery of a product in the normal course of business;
      (3)   Any motor vehicle which is stopped for the expeditious loading or
unloading of passengers;
      (4)   Any vehicle involved in lawful construction activity on Biddle
Avenue;
      (5)   Any emergency vehicle which is involved in an emergency run; and
      (6)   (a)   Any other lawful purpose after first obtaining a written
permit from the city’s Police Department.
         (b)   Before issuing the permit, the Police Department shall
investigate the requested use to determine that it will not encumber traffic or
pose a potential danger or hazard to traffic or any neighboring properties.
(Prior Code, § 35-55) (Ord. 1219, passed 2-7-2005) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.013 DOUBLE PARKING.
   A vehicle may not be parked on the roadway side of a vehicle stopped or
parked at the edge or curb of a street or in any manner which would block or
impede the use of a street or alley. A person who violates this section is
responsible for a civil infraction.
(Ord. 1528, passed 9-26-2022)
DISABLED PARKING
§ 72.025 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DISABLED PARKING SPACE. A parking space 12 feet wide and marked off in
traffic yellow paint and with a sign located approximately six feet above grade
inscribed with the international wheelchair symbol or a reasonable facsimile
thereof shall identify the disabled space.
   PARKING AREA. An area used by the public as a means of access to and egress
from, and for the free parking of motor vehicles by patrons of a shopping
center, business, factory, hospital, institution or similar building or
location.
   SHOPPING CENTER. A minimum area of three acres of land on which there is
located one or more stores or business establishments and where there is
provided a parking area.
(Prior Code, § 35-61) (Ord. 708, passed 8-3-1981)
§ 72.026 RESTRICTED USE OF DISABLED PARKING SPACE.
   No driver shall be permitted to use a disabled parking space, except those
vehicles which display prominently a certificate issued by the Michigan
Department of State under the provisions of M.C.L.A. § 257.675(5) or who
displays special registration plates pursuant to M.C.L.A. § 257.803d.
(Prior Code, § 35-62) (Ord. 708, passed 8-3-1981) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.027 DISABLED PARKING SPACE REQUIRED.
   Every shopping center within the geographical boundaries or under the
jurisdiction of the city shall provide disabled parking spaces in numbers to
conform with the requirements of § 2 of Public Act 1 of 1966, as amended, being
M.C.L.A. § 125.1352.
(Prior Code, § 35-63) (Ord. 708, passed 8-3-1981) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.028 DISABLED PARKING SPACE PROVIDED IN PRIVATE PARKING AREAS.
   The city, upon the request of either the owner or the person in charge of
the general operation and control of any parking area, shall:
   (A)   Provide for the designation of disabled parking spaces in the parking
area, designate traffic lanes and regulate traffic by means of traffic-control
signals or signs to facilitate use of the parking area for the disabled with
the costs of said service to be paid for by the requesting owner or person in
charge; and
   (B)   Provide for the towing away and/or impoundment of a vehicle, not
properly identified as a disabled, as defined in §
72.026 of this chapter, by the Police Department.
(Prior Code, § 35-64) (Ord. 708, passed 8-3-1981)
§ 72.029 MUNICIPAL PARKING LOTS; PARKING AREAS OWNED BY THE CITY.
   (A)   It shall be the policy of the city to provide in any parking area
under its jurisdiction, disabled parking spaces in numbers to conform with the
requirements of § 2 of Public Act 1 of 1966, as amended, being M.C.L.A. §
125.1352 and to conform to any regulations and/or guidelines issued under that
statute.
   (B)   Any resurfacing, repair or new construction of municipal parking areas
or structures, erected subsequent to the enactment of this subchapter shall be
maintained in compliance with the requirements of Michigan Building Code as
they relate to disabled parking.
(Prior Code, § 35-65) (Ord. 708, passed 8-3-1981)
§ 72.030 DISABLED PARKING SPACES PROVIDED IN ON-STREET PARKING.
   It shall be the policy of the city to provide disabled parking spaces on the
street:
   (A)   In front of the residence of a disabled person upon the disabled
person’s request and showing of necessity to the city’s Police Department; and
   (B)   Adjacent to buildings and areas under the jurisdiction of the city
where there is otherwise insufficient off-street disabled spaces provided.
(Prior Code, § 35-66) (Ord. 708, passed 8-3-1981)
PARKING DURING SNOW EMERGENCIES
§ 72.045 DECLARATION OF SNOW EMERGENCY.
   Whenever the Mayor or his or her designee finds, on the basis of falling
snow, sleet or freezing rain, or on the basis of a forecast by the United
States Weather Bureau or other weather service of snow, sleet or freezing rain
that weather conditions will make it necessary that motor vehicle traffic be
expedited and that parking on certain designated streets or areas within the
city shall be prohibited or restricted for snow plowing and other purposes, he
or she or his or her designee shall declare a snow emergency and have this
information broadcast by the local television and/or radio stations for public
broadcast, or by loudspeakers or other broadcasting equipment, or by signs or
personal notification. The snow emergency shall remain in effect for those
streets and areas so designated within the city for the period of time set by
the Mayor or his or her designee or until the particular street or area has
become substantially clear of snow and ice from curb to curb for the length of
the entire block, whichever occurs first. “Designated streets” shall include
any street which has a snow emergency sign, or which has been announced ass a
designated street by public broadcast, loudspeaker, mailing or personal
notification.
(Prior Code, § 35-73) (Ord. 738, passed 9-20-1982)
§ 72.046 PARKING RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Once a snow emergency is declared, parking shall be prohibited on
those streets and areas so designated under §
72.045 of this chapter until the snow emergency is terminated by announcement
or until the particular street has become substantially clear of snow and ice
from curb to curb for the length of the entire block.
   (B)   Any owner of a motor vehicle which is parked on a designated city
street scheduled for snow removal during the snow emergency shall be
responsible for a civil infraction.
(Prior Code, § 35-74) (Ord. 738, passed 9-20-1982) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.047 POSTED PARKING PROHIBITIONS.
   Notice of the parking prohibition during a snow emergency shall be posted by
appropriate signs on all major streets which lead into the city, and shall
indicate that the prohibition applies to all those designated city streets
which are scheduled for snow removal in the city.
(Prior Code, § 35-75) (Ord. 738, passed 9-20-1982)
§ 72.048 TOWING OF VEHICLES.
   Any motor vehicle which is parked or left abandoned on any city street in
violation of this subchapter may, at the direction of the Mayor or his or her
designee, be towed and impounded by the Police Department and no person shall
recover any such motor vehicle without first paying for the cost of removal and
storage. Any payments required by this section shall not be construed as a
penalty so as to preclude prosecution for the civil infraction.
(Prior Code, § 35-76) (Ord. 738, passed 9-20-1982) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.049 MANDATORY MINIMUM PARKING FINES.
   All parking tickets issued under the provisions of this subchapter shall
require a mandatory minimum fine for any parking infraction in the sum of $25.
(Prior Code, § 35-77) (Ord. 1049, passed 6-15-1998)
§ 72.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Any person who violates any provision of §
72.003 of this chapter is responsible for a municipal civil infraction and
shall pay a fine and costs (including all direct and indirect expenses incurred
by the city) not to exceed $500 payable to the city’s General Fund. Failure to
answer a citation or notice to appear constitutes a misdemeanor.
      (2)   In addition to the fines and costs that are required under division
(B)(1) above, any vehicle that is parked or stored in violation of §
72.003 of this chapter on a residential lot is deemed to be illegally parked
and may be removed or towed away by the city’s Police Department in conformance
with the abandoned vehicle ordinance of the city. Any towing and storage fees
will be the owner’s responsibility once the vehicle is towed and shall be paid
before the vehicle is released.
(Prior Code, § 35-46)
   (C)   Any person found responsible under §
72.009 of this chapter shall be assessed a minimum fine of $25.
(Prior Code, § 35-52)
   (D)   Any person who violates §
72.012 of this chapter is responsible for a civil infraction. In addition to
any fines and costs that may be assessed, any vehicle parked in violation of §
72.012 of this chapter may be removed or towed away by the city’s Police
Department. Any towing and storage fees will be the owner’s responsibility once
the vehicle is towed and shall be paid before the motor vehicle is released.
(Prior Code, § 35-55)
   (E)   Unauthorized use of a disabled parking space by a vehicle not
identified as required under §
72.026 of this chapter shall be subject to towing away and impoundment at the
owner’s expense and liability. A mandatory minimum fine of $100 shall be
assessed for any parking infraction under §
72.026 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 35-67)
(Ord. 708, passed 8-3-1981; Ord. 768, passed 6-11-1984; Ord. 987, passed 11-14-
1994; Ord. 989, passed 3-20-1993; Ord. 1049, passed 6-15-1998; Ord. 1097,
passed 9-25-2000; Ord. 1219, passed 2-7-2005; Ord. 1249, passed 10-24-2005;
Ord. 1250, passed 12-5-2005)
CHAPTER 73: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
Bicycles
   
73.001   Responsibility of parents and guardians
   
73.002   Rental agencies
   
73.003   “U” turns
   
73.004   Parking
   
73.005   Bicycle registration
Quadricycles
   
73.020   Definition
   
73.021   License
   
73.022   License application
   
73.023   Insurance requirements
   
73.024   Alcohol prohibited
   
73.025   Prohibited operation; location
   
73.026   Operation
   
73.027   License fee
 
   
73.999   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate bicycles, see M.C.L.A. § 257.606(a)8
BICYCLES
§ 73.001 RESPONSIBILITY OF PARENTS AND GUARDIANS.
   No parent of any child, nor guardian of any ward, shall authorize or
knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of
this traffic code.
(Prior Code, § 6-1) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.002 RENTAL AGENCIES.
   A rental agency shall not rent or offer any bicycle for rent unless the
bicycle is registered and a license tag is attached thereto as provided herein
and such bicycle is equipped with the lamps and other equipment required by law
and ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 6-2) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.003 “U” TURNS.
   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or
“U” turn is permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall disobey the
direction of any such sign, except where such person dismounts from the bicycle
to make any such turn, in which event such person shall then obey the
regulations applicable to pedestrians.
(Prior Code, § 6-3) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.004 PARKING.
   No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway
against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or
against a building or at the curb, in such manner as to afford the least
obstruction to pedestrian traffic.
(Prior Code, § 6-4) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.005 BICYCLE REGISTRATION.
   (A)   Required. No person, who resides within the city, shall ride or propel
a bicycle on any street or upon any public path set aside for the exclusive use
of bicycles, unless such bicycle has been registered with the Chief of Police.
(Prior Code, § 6-26)
   (B)   Application. A person desiring to register a bicycle shall make
application to the Chief of Police.
(Prior Code, § 6-27)
   (C)   Fee. A bicycle registration fee of $1 shall be paid to the police
department upon applicant’s receipt of the registration certificate and license
tag.
(Prior Code, § 6-28)
   (D)   Issuance and records.
      (1)   The Chief of Police, upon receiving proper application therefor, is
authorized to issue a registration certificate and bicycle license which shall
become the permanent registration number and license number of the vehicle so
long as the license remains legible. Whenever a license becomes illegible,
application and fees as provided in a new registration shall apply.
      (2)   The Chief of Police shall not issue a registration certificate or
license for any bicycle when he or she knows or has reasonable ground to
believe that the applicant is not the owner of or entitled to the possession of
such bicycle.
      (3)   The Chief of Police shall keep a record of the number of each
registration certificate and license, the date issued, the name and address of
the person to whom issued and the number on the frame of the bicycle for which
issued, and shall keep a record of all bicycle registration fees collected by
him or her. The Police Department may place numbers on the frames of bicycles
which shall be peculiar to the city.
(Prior Code, § 6-29)
   (E)   License tag.
      (1)   The Chief of Police, upon registering a bicycle, shall also issue a
license tag bearing the license number assigned to the bicycle, the name of the
city and shall contain the word “permanent”.
      (2)   The Chief of Police shall cause such license tag to be firmly
attached to the rear mudguard of the bicycle for which issued, in such position
as to be plainly visible from the rear.
      (3)   No person shall remove a license tag from a bicycle, except in the
event the bicycle is dismantled or is no longer operated upon any street or
public bicycle path in the city.
(Prior Code, § 6-30)
   (F)   Inspection of bicycles. The Chief of Police, or an officer assigned
such responsibility, shall inspect each bicycle before licensing the same, and
shall refuse a license for any bicycle which he or she determines is in unsafe
mechanical condition.
(Prior Code, § 6-31)
   (G)   Transfer of ownership. Upon the sale or other transfer of ownership of
a registered and licensed bicycle, the new owner, upon proper application and
payment of a transfer fee of $0.25, shall have the existing registration
certificate and license number transferred to his or her name.
(Prior Code, § 6-32)
Penalty, see §
73.999
QUADRICYCLES
§ 73.020 DEFINITION.
   A QUADRICYCLE is a vehicle that satisfies the following:
   (A)   A vehicle that has fully operative pedals for propulsion which would
permit the operation entirely by human power;
   (B)   The vehicle has at least four wheels and is operated in a manner
similar to a bicycle;
   (C)   The vehicle has at least two seats for passengers;
   (D)   The vehicle is designed to be occupied by a driver and powered
exclusively by passengers providing pedal power to the drive train of the
vehicle or with the additional assistance of a motor capable of propelling the
vehicle even when it is not being pedaled; and
   (E)   The vehicle is used for commercial or non-commercial purposes.
(Prior Code, § 6-40) (Ord. 1459, passed 1-22-2018)
§ 73.021 LICENSE.
   No person or entity shall operate a quadricycle in the city without a
license issued by the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 6-41) (Ord. 1459, passed 1-22-2018) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.022 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   A person or entity who operates a quadricycle in the city shall submit an
application with the following requirements:
   (A)   The applicant’s name, address, telephone number and email;
   (B)   A copy of a current insurance certificate providing coverage for
bodily injury and property damage liability with a minimum combined single
limit of $2,000,000 for all persons injured or for property damage;
   (C)   Proof of ownership of the quadricycle; and
   (D)   An executed hold harmless agreement in a form provided by the city
which indemnifies and holds the city harmless from all claims arising from the
operation of the quadricycle.
(Prior Code, § 6-42) (Ord. 1459, passed 1-22-2018)
§ 73.023 INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   No person shall operate a quadricycle without bodily injury and
property damage liability insurance with a minimum combined single limit of
$2,000,000 for all persons injured or for property damage.
   (B)   The city shall be named as an additional insured party.
(Prior Code, § 6-43) (Ord. 1459, passed 1-22-2018) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.024 ALCOHOL PROHIBITED.
   No operator or occupant of a quadricycle may transport, possess or consume
alcoholic liquor on a quadricycle.
(Prior Code, § 6-44) (Ord. 1459, passed 1-22-2018) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.025 PROHIBITED OPERATION; LOCATION.
   A quadricycle is prohibited in the following locations:
   (A)   The central business district (as designated in Ch. 159 of this code
of ordinances) in the city; and
   (B)   All sidewalks and crosswalks in the city.
(Prior Code, § 6-45) (Ord. 1459, passed 1-22-2018) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.026 OPERATION.
   A quadricycle must comply with the following rules.
   (A)   A quadricycle may only be operated between one-half hour after sunrise
and one-half hour before sunset.
   (B)   The quadricycle shall be equipped with a lamp on the front that emits
a white light visible from a distance at least 500 feet to the front and with a
red reflector on the rear that shall be visible from all distances from 100
feet to 600 feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful lower beams of
head lamps on a motor vehicle.
   (C)   The quadricycle shall be operated in the traffic lane closest to the
curb and shall pull over to permit faster moving traffic to pass safely.
   (D)   The quadricycle shall be equipped with a rearview mirror to permit the
operator to observe traffic behind the quadricycle.
   (E)   A quadricycle may only be parked on a street where parking is
permitted or parking lot.
   (F)   A quadricycle may not be operated at a speed in excess of 25 mph.
   (G)   The driver/operator of a quadricycle shall obey all the traffic laws
applicable to the driver/operator of a motor vehicle and in accordance with all
provisions of the Motor Vehicle Code, except as otherwise stated above.
(Prior Code, § 6-46) (Ord. 1459, passed 1-22-2018) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.027 LICENSE FEE.
   The license fee under this subchapter shall be $100. The City Council may
amend the fee amount by resolution.
(Prior Code, § 6-47) (Ord. 1459, passed 1-22-2018)
§ 73.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   A violation of §
73.024 of this chapter is a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 6-44)
      (2)   Any violation of any provision of §§
73.020 through
73.027 of this chapter (other than § 73.024 of this chapter) is a civil
infraction.
(Prior Code, § 6-48)
(Ord. 1459, passed 1-22-2018)
CHAPTER 74: MOTOR CARRIERS
Section
   
74.001   Definitions
   
74.002   Safety and warning equipment
   
74.003   Qualifications of truck and truck tractor operators
   
74.004   Operator and equipment standards
   
74.005   Property transportation facilities; operation and maintenance
   
74.006   State’s Motor Carrier Safety Act; applicability
   
74.007   Local prosecution
   
74.008   Violations generally
   
74.009   Vehicle safety inspection program
   
74.010   Motor carrier fuel tax
   
74.011   Gross vehicle weight, size and general requirements
   
74.012   Maximum width; exceptions
   
74.013   Projecting loads on passenger-type vehicles
   
74.014   Height and length of vehicles; connection assemblies for combinations
   
74.015   Mobile homes; length, width and height
   
74.016   Spilling load on highways; vehicles carrying logs and tubular products
   
74.017   Trailers towed by passenger vehicle; attachment
   
74.018   Wheel and axle load restrictions; violations
   
74.019   Flammable liquids; transportation restrictions
   
74.020   Information to be painted or attached to certain vehicles
   
74.021   Stopping vehicles for weighing; fines; failure to stop
   
74.022   Non-conforming vehicles; special permits
   
74.023   Certain commercial vehicles on posted highways prohibited
   
74.024   Enforcement jurisdiction
   
74.025   Violations
 
   
74.999   Penalty
§ 74.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AXLE. The common axis of rotation of one or more wheels whether power driven
or freely rotating, and whether in one or more segments and regardless of the
number of wheels carried thereon.
   CITY. The City of Wyandotte, State of Michigan.
   COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE. A bus, school bus, vehicles constructed or used
for the transportation of goods, wares or merchandise, and/or other motor
vehicles, other than a mobile home, having a gross vehicle weight rating of
26,001 or more pounds, a motor vehicle towing a vehicle with a gross vehicle
weight rating of more than 10,000 pounds, a motor vehicle carrying hazardous
material and on which is required to be posted a placard as defined and
required under 49 C.F.R. parts 100 to 199. A COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE does not
include a vehicle used exclusively to transport personal possessions or family
members for non-business purposes.
   GROSS WEIGHT. The weight of a vehicle without a load, plus the weight of any
load thereon.
   GROSS COMBINATION WEIGHT RATING or GCWR. The value specified by the
manufacturer as the loaded weight of a combination vehicle. In the absence of a
value specified by the manufacturer, GCWR will be determined by adding gross
vehicle weight rating “GVWR” of the power unit and the total weight of the
towed unit and any load on that unit.
   GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT RATING or GVWR. The value specified by the manufacturer
as the loaded weight of a single vehicle.
   HIGHWAY or STREET. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for
purposes of vehicular travel, notwithstanding that they may be temporarily
closed or travel restricted for the purpose of construction, maintenance,
repair or reconstruction.
   LOCAL AUTHORITIES. The Chief of Police or his or her designee.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every motor vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle
which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires, but
not operated upon rails.
   PERSON. Every natural person, partnership, firm, association, company,
syndicate or corporation, and any receiver, trustee, conservator or officer
having jurisdiction and control of property by virtue of a law or by
appointment of a court.
   TRUCK. A motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the
transportation of property.
   TRUCK TRACTOR. A motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other
vehicles and not constructed to carry a load other than a part of the weight of
the vehicle and load being drawn.
(Prior Code, § 22.1-1) (Ord. 885, passed 7-16-1990)
§ 74.002 SAFETY AND WARNING EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   Flares, pot torches, fire extinguishers and other warning equipment
for tracks, truck tractors and buses.
         (a)   A person shall not operate a motor truck, of a gross weight of
more than 10,000 pounds, truck tractor, bus or a truck regardless of weight
when carrying hazardous materials on which a placard is required to be posted
pursuant to 49 C.F.R. parts 100 to 199, upon a highway outside the corporate
limits of municipalities unless there shall be carried in the vehicle the
following equipment, except as provided in division (A)(2) below:
            1.   At least three flares or three red electric lanterns each of
which shall be capable of being seen and distinguished at a distance of 500
feet under normal atmospheric conditions at nighttime, and which are capable of
operating continuously for not less than 12 hours;
            2.   At least three red burning fusees, unless red electric
lanterns are carried. A fusee shall be capable of burning at least 15 minutes;
            3.   At least two red cloth flags, not less than 12 inches square,
with standards to support same; and
            4.   A fire extinguisher that is properly filled and located so
that it is readily accessible for use. The fire extinguisher shall be securely
mounted on the vehicle. The fire extinguisher shall be designed, constructed
and maintained to permit a determination of whether it is fully charged and in
proper operating condition. The fire extinguisher shall have an extinguishing
agent that does not need protection from freezing.
         (b)   A person shall not operate at the time and under the conditions
stated in division (A)(1) above, a motor vehicle used in the transportation of
inflammable liquids, bulk or transporting compressed inflammable gasses unless
there shall be carried in the vehicle three red electric lanterns meeting the
requirements stated in division (A)(1)(a) above and there shall not be carried
in the vehicle any flares, fusees or signal produced by a flame.
         (c)   In the alternative, it shall be deemed a compliance with this
subchapter if the person operating a motor vehicle described in this subchapter
carries in the vehicle three portable reflector units on standards of type
approved by the Commissioner. A portable reflector unit shall not be approved
unless it is so designed and constructed that it will reflect red light clearly
visible for a distance of at least 300 feet under normal atmospheric conditions
at nighttime when directly in front of the lawful upper beams of head lamps.
         (d)   In lieu of the equipment requirements of division (A)(1)(a)
above, the following equipment may be carried: three directional emergency
reflective triangles without self-contained energy sources. Each of the three
sides of the triangular portion of the warning device shall not be less than 17
and not more than 22 inches long, and not less than two and not more than three
inches wide. Each face of the triangular portion shall have an outer border of
orange fluorescent material.
         (e)   A warning device, when erected on a horizontal concrete surface,
and subjected to a horizontal wind of 40 mph in any direction for three
minutes, shall not slide more than three inches from its initial position. A
warning device shall be carried in the vehicle in an opaque protective reusable
container.
      (2)   Every device shall be erected and replaced in its container without
the use of tools. Warning devices shall be in conformance with Federal Motor
Vehicle Safety Standard No. 125.
(Prior Code, § 22.1-10)
   (B)   Stopping; placement of flashers and warning devices; disabled
vehicles.
      (1)   When a motor truck of a gross weight in excess of 10,000 pounds,
truck tractor, trailer, semi-trailer, pole trailer, bus or a truck regardless
of weight when carrying hazardous materials on which a placard is required to
be posted pursuant to 49 C.F.R. parts 100 to 199, is stopped upon the traveled
portion of a highway or the shoulder of a highway for any cause, other than
necessary traffic stops, the driver of the stopped vehicle shall immediately
flash the two front and two rear turn signals simultaneously as a vehicular
traffic hazard warning and shall continue the flashing until he or she places
the warning devices required by this subchapter. The flashing signals shall be
used during the time the warning devices are picked up for storage before
movement of the vehicle.
      (2)   The flashing lights may be used at other times while a vehicle is
stopped in addition to, but not in place of, the following warning devices
required by this subchapter:
         (a)   Except as provided in division (B)(1)(b) below, when a vehicle
described in this section is stopped upon the traveled portion of a highway or
the shoulder of a highway for any cause, other than necessary traffic stops,
the driver shall, as soon as possible, but not later than ten minutes, place
the warning devices with which his or her vehicle is equipped. The warning
devices shall be placed in the following manner:
            1.   One at the traffic side of the stopped vehicle, within ten
feet of the front or rear of the vehicle;
            2.   One at a distance of approximately 100 feet from the rear of
the stopped vehicle or load, in the center of the traffic lane or shoulder
occupied by the vehicle and facing traffic approaching the rear of the vehicle;
and
            3.   One at a distance of approximately 100 feet from the front of
the stopped vehicle, in the center of the traffic lane or shoulder occupied by
the vehicle and facing oncoming traffic in the opposite lane.
         (b)   The following special rules apply to the placement of warning
devices.
            1.   If a vehicle is stopped within 500 feet of a curve, crest of a
hill, or other obstruction to view, the driver shall place the warning signals
required by division (B)(1)(a) above in the direction of the obstruction to
view at a distance of 100 feet to 500 feet from the stopped vehicle so as to
afford ample warning to other users of the highway.
            2.   If a vehicle is stopped upon the traveled portion or the
shoulder of a divided or one-way highway, the driver shall place the warning
devices required by division (B)(1)(a) above so that one warning device is at a
distance of 200 feet and one warning device is at a distance of 100 feet in the
direction of approaching traffic. The devices shall be placed in the center of
the lane or shoulder occupied by the vehicle. The driver shall place one
warning device at the traffic side of the vehicle within ten feet of the rear
of the vehicle.
            3.   If gasoline or any other flammable liquid, combustible liquid
or gas seeps or leaks from a fuel container or a vehicle stopped upon a
highway, an emergency warning signal producing a flame shall not be lighted or
placed unless it is lighted or placed at a distance from the liquid or gas
which assures that a fire explosion will not occur.
(Prior Code, § 22.1-11)
   (C)   Antisplash devices. A commercial vehicle, except a truck tractor
traversing between terminals at a speed of not to exceed 25 mph, and a
combination of a commercial vehicle and trailer or semi-trailer, when used on a
highway shall be so constructed or equipped, or so operated, as to prevent
water or other road surface substances from being thrown from the rear wheels
of the vehicle or combination at tangents exceeding 22.5 degrees measured from
the road surface. If a flap type device is used, it shall not have attached any
type of lamp, breakable reflective material or reflecting buttons; nor may the
device extend beyond the 96-inch maximum width of the vehicle or combination.
(Prior Code, § 22.1-12)
   (D)   Fuel systems on trucks and other vehicles.
      (1)   This section applies to systems for containing and supplying fuel
for the operation of a truck over 10,000 pounds, truck tractor, road tractor or
bus or for the operation of auxiliary equipment installed on, or used in
connection with, any of these vehicles.
      (2)   A fuel system shall be located on the vehicle so that:
         (a)   No part of the system extends beyond the widest part of the
vehicle;
         (b)   No part of a fuel tank is forward of the front axle of a power
unit;
         (c)   Fuel spilled vertically from a fuel tank while it is being
filled does not contact any part of the exhaust or electrical systems of the
vehicle, except the fuel level indicator assembly;
         (d)   Fill pipe openings are located outside the vehicle’s passenger
compartment and its cargo compartment; and
         (e)   A fuel line does not extend between a towed vehicle and the
vehicle that is towing it while the combination of vehicles is in motion.
      (3)   A fuel tank shall be securely attached to the vehicle in a
workmanlike manner.
      (4)   A fuel system shall not supply fuel gravity or syphon feed directly
to the carburetor or injector.
      (5)   If a fuel system includes a selection control valve which is
operable by the driver to regulate the flow of fuel from two or more fuel
tanks, the valve shall be installed so that either of the following conditions
exists:
         (a)   The driver may operate it while watching the roadway and without
leaving his or her driving position; and
         (b)   The driver shall stop the vehicle and leave his or her seat in
order to operate the valve.
      (6)   A fuel line, which is not completely enclosed in a protective
housing, shall not extend more than two inches below the fuel tank or its sump.
Diesel fuel crossover, return and withdrawal lines which extend below the
bottom of the tank or sump shall be protected against damage from impact. A
fuel line shall be:
         (a)   Long enough and flexible enough to accommodate normal movements
of the parts to which it is attached without incurring damage; and
         (b)   Secured against chafing, kinking or other causes of mechanical
damage.
      (7)   When pressure devices are used to force fuel from a fuel tank, a
device which prevents the flow of fuel from the fuel tank if the fuel feed line
is broken shall be installed in the fuel system.
(Prior Code, § 22.1-13)
   (D)   Inspections of equipment and vehicles; check lanes.
      (1)   Equipment on vehicles as required under this subchapter shall be
maintained as provided in this subchapter. A uniformed police officer may on
reasonable cause shown stop a vehicle to perform an inspection and, if any
defects in equipment are found, may issue an appropriate citation to the driver
and order the driver to have the defects repaired immediately. During the
course of such an inspection, the officer may also issue a citation for any
applicable equipment defects specified in the Uniform Traffic Code of the city.
In the case of an accident, a police officer may make an inspection of the
vehicles involved in the accident.
      (2)   The city’s Police Department may operate a temporary check lane
within its limits for the purpose of detecting defective equipment or other
violations of the law governing the use of public highways by motor vehicles,
operators and chauffeurs. Such check lanes must be operated with the express
authorization of the Director of the Department of State Police under the
direct supervision of a designated representative of the Director.
(Prior Code, § 22.1-14)
(Ord. 885, passed 7-16-1990) Penalty, see §
74.999
§ 74.003 QUALIFICATIONS OF TRUCK OR TRUCK TRACTOR OPERATORS.
   A person shall not drive, and an individual, partnership, association,
corporation or his, her or their lessees or receivers appointed by any court,
shall not employ, engage, hire or contract for hire any person to operate,
drive or maintain any truck, truck tractor or trailer unless the person meets
the qualifications set forth by the Department of State Police.
(Prior Code, § 22.1-20) (Ord. 885, passed 7-16-1990)
§ 74.004 OPERATOR AND EQUIPMENT STANDARDS.
   An individual, partnership, association, corporation or his, her or their
lessees or receivers appointed by any court shall not operate any truck, truck
tractor or trailer or permit any person to drive any truck, truck tractor or
trailer which does not meet driver or operator safety standards, safety
standards for equipment and devices on trucks, truck tractors or trailers and
the loading and unloading thereof as set forth in rules promulgated by the
Department of State Police.
(Prior Code, § 22.1-21) (Ord. 885, passed 7-16-1990)
§ 74.005 PROPERTY TRANSPORTATION FACILITIES; OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE.
   An individual, partnership, association, corporation or his, her or their
lessees or receivers appointed by any court shall not operate or maintain any
facility used in connection with the transportation of property by any truck,
truck tractor or trailer which facility does not meet safety standards for the
operation and maintenance of such facility as set forth in the rules
promulgated by the Department of State Police.
(Prior Code, § 22.1-22) (Ord. 885, passed 7-16-1990)
§ 74.006 STATE’S MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY ACT; APPLICABILITY.
   The rules and regulations, and amendments thereto, promulgated by the
Department of State Police pursuant to the state’s Motor Carrier Safety Act
(Public Act 181 of 1963, as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 480.11 et seq.) are
incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein.
(Prior Code, § 22.1-23) (Ord. 885, passed 7-16-1990)
§ 74.007 LOCAL PROSECUTION.
   When any provision of this subchapter or a rule promulgated and incorporated
under §
74.006 of this chapter has been violated, the offense may be prosecuted in any
municipality through which the motor vehicle, driver or operator implicated was
situated or passed when the offense was committed.
(Prior Code, § 22.1-24) (Ord. 885, passed 7-16-1990)
§ 74.008 VIOLATIONS GENERALLY.
   (A)   Any driver or operator who violates this subchapter or rule
promulgated under §
74.006 of this chapter, or any owner or user of any truck, truck tractor or
trailer, or any officer or agent of any individual, partnership, corporation or
association or their lessees or receivers appointed by any court which is the
owner or user of any vehicle, who requires or permits the driver or operator to
operate or drive any truck, truck tractor or trailer in violation of this
subchapter or a rule promulgated under §
74.006 of this chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor for each violation.
   (B)   A peace officer, upon reasonable cause to believe that a motor vehicle
is being operated in violation of this subchapter or a rule promulgated
pursuant to §
74.006 of this chapter, may stop the motor vehicle and inspect the motor
vehicle. If a violation is found, the officer may issue a notice to appear for
that violation.
(Prior Code, § 22.1-25) (Ord. 885, passed 7-16-1990)
§ 74.009 VEHICLE SAFETY INSPECTION PROGRAM.
   (A)   (1)   The local authority may establish and maintain a voluntary motor
carrier vehicle safety inspections program.
      (2)   This program may include the placing of inspection stickers on
vehicles which successfully pass all criteria established for this program. Any
motor carrier which is authorized by the local authority to perform self-
inspections and affix stickers issued by the local authority shall comply with
all requirements agreed to in writing, as set forth by the local authority. The
authority to participate in the local authority vehicle safety self-inspection
program may be revoked for any authorized self-inspecting motor carrier that is
in violation of the requirements set forth by the local authority.
   (B)   The local authority may assess a fee to cover administrative costs of
the motor carrier self-inspection safety program. However, the fee shall not
exceed $1 per vehicle.
   (C)   Motor carriers not covered by the self-inspection program which
request to participate in the program may request from the local authority a
vehicle safety inspection of any truck, truck tractor or trailer. Those
participating motor carriers may be assessed an inspection fee of up to $5 for
the administration of this subchapter, for each motor vehicle, trailer or a
combination of trailers inspected.
(Prior Code, § 22.1-26) (Ord. 885, passed 7-16-1990)
§ 74.010 MOTOR CARRIER FUEL TAX.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      AXLE. Any two or more load-carrying wheels mounted in a single transverse
vertical plane.
      COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE. A road tractor, or a truck tractor or a truck
having more than two axles, if the road tractor or truck tractor is propelled
by motor fuel. COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE shall not include a road tractor or
truck or truck tractor owned by a farmer and used in connection with the
farmer’s farming operation and not used for hire, except if the vehicle bears
out of state registration plates from a state that does not give similar
treatment to vehicles from the state.
      COMMISSIONER. The state’s Commissioner of Revenue.
      DEPARTMENT. The Revenue Division of the Department of Treasury.
      MOTOR CARRIER. A person who operates or causes to be operated a
commercial motor vehicle on a public road or highway in the city.
      MOTOR FUEL. Diesel motor fuel as defined by Public Act 150 of 1927, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 207.1001 et seq., as amended.
      NON-PROFIT, PRIVATE, PAROCHIAL, DENOMINATION OR PUBLIC SCHOOL, COLLEGE OR
UNIVERSITY. An elementary, secondary or postsecondary educational facility.
      PERSON. A natural person, partnership, firm, association, joint stock
company, syndicate or corporation, and any receiver, trustee, conservator or
officer, other than a unit of government, having jurisdiction and control of
property by virtue of law or by appointment of a court.
      PUBLIC ROADS OR HIGHWAYS. A road, street or place maintained by and/or
located in this city and generally open to use by the public as a matter of
right for the purpose of vehicular travel, notwithstanding that they may be
temporarily closed or travel restricted for the purpose of construction,
maintenance, repair or reconstruction.
      ROAD TRACTOR. A motor vehicle designed and used for drawing other
vehicles, but not constructed to carry any load either independently or as a
part of the weight of the vehicle or load being drawn.
      TRUCK. A motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the
transportation of property.
      TRUCK TRACTOR. A motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing
other vehicles and not constructed to carry a load other than a part of the
weight of the vehicle and load being drawn.
(Prior Code, § 22.1-30)
   (B)   Motor carrier license.
      (1)   No person shall act as a motor carrier in the city unless the
person is the holder of an unrevoked license issued by the Department.
      (2)   The license shall be affixed to the right-hand side of the cab of
every commercial vehicle while it is being operated in the city by a licensed
motor carrier.
(Prior Code, § 22.1-31)
   (C)   Trip permit.
      (1)   A motor carrier may obtain a trip permit which shall authorize an
unlicensed motor carrier to operate one specific commercial motor vehicle in
the city for a period of five consecutive days, beginning and ending on the
dates specified on the face of the permit.
      (2)   The trip permit shall be issued instead of a license only if the
motor carrier operates on public roads or highways in the city not more than
three times in one calendar year.
      (3)   The trip permit may be obtained from the Department by application
in the same manner as a license, or may be made available by contacting the
Department by telegram or similar transmission. The cost of a telegram or
similar transmission shall be the responsibility of the motor carrier
requesting the trip permit.
(Prior Code, § 22.1-32)
(Ord. 885, passed 7-16-1990)
§ 74.011 GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT, SIZE AND GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Promulgation and incorporation of rules by reference. The state’s
Transportation Department, pursuant to Public Act 1306 of 1969, being M.C.L.A.
§§ 24.201 et seq., as amended, has promulgated rules permitting and regulating
the operation of a vehicle of size or weight which exceeds the size or weight
limitations in this section. The above rules and regulations are hereby
incorporated by reference into the provisions of this section.
(Prior Code, § 22.1-40)
   (B)   Exceptions. The provisions of this section governing size, weight and
load shall not apply to fire apparatus, or to an implement of husbandry
incidentally moved upon a highway, or to a vehicle operated under the terms of
a special permit issued as provided in this section.
(Prior Code, § 22.1-41)
   (C)   Permissible truck routes generally. It shall be unlawful for any
truck, whether loaded on unloaded, weighing more than 10,000 pounds as
determined by its certificate of registration, to be operated or parked on any
street in the city, except those streets herein after designated as
“permissible truck routes”; except that, such vehicles may be operated thereon
for the purpose of delivering or picking up materials or merchandise and then
only by entering such street at the nearest intersection thereafter; excepted,
further, that, trucks operated by the city in connection with the rendering of
necessary service to the residents of the city may be operated on any streets
in the city. On streets designated as permissible truck routes, other parking
restrictions notwithstanding, no truck shall park at any time, except while
loading and unloading, and such times shall in no event exceed one hour.
(Prior Code, § 22.1-43)
   (D)   List of streets. The streets hereinabove referred to as “permissible
truck routes” are hereby designated as follows: Biddle Avenue (West Jefferson);
Fort Road (M-85); Ford Avenue (Northline); Eureka Road; Pennsylvania Road; and
Quarry Road.
(Prior Code, § 22.1-44)
   (E)   Posting. All streets intersecting with the hereinabove designated
“permissible truck routes” (except the intersection of two designated
permissible truck routes) shall be conspicuously posted “No Trucks Except for
Local Delivery” or appropriate signs. It shall be unlawful for trucks weighing
more than 10,000 pounds to park or operate upon those streets when signs are
erected giving notice thereof, unless they qualify as exceptions as provided in
division (C) above.
(Prior Code, § 22.1-45)
(Ord. 885, passed 7-16-1990; Ord. 911, passed 7-22-1991) Penalty, see §
74.999
§ 74.012 MAXIMUM WIDTH; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   The total outside width of a vehicle or the load on a vehicle shall
not exceed 96 inches, except as otherwise provided in this section.
   (B)   A person may operate or move an implement of husbandry of any width on
a highway as required for normal farming operations without obtaining a special
permit for an excessively wide vehicle or load under §
74.022 of this chapter. The operation or movement of the implement of husbandry
shall be in a manner so as to minimize the interruption of traffic flow. A
person shall not operate or move an implement of husbandry to the left of the
center of the roadway from a half hour after sunset to a half hour before
sunrise, when his or her vision is obstructed, at a curve, upon a hill or at
any time that visibility is substantially diminished. A person operating or
moving an implement of husbandry shall follow all traffic regulations.
   (C)   The total outside width of the load of a vehicle hauling concrete
pipe, agricultural products or unprocessed logs, pulpwood or wood bolts shall
not exceed 108 inches.
   (D)   Except as provided in division (B) above, when pneumatic tires, in
substitution for the same type or other type of tires, have been or are placed
upon a vehicle in operation on a highway, the maximum width from the outside of
one wheel and tire to the outside of the opposite wheel and tire shall not
exceed 102 inches, but the outside width of the body of the vehicle or the load
on the vehicle shall not exceed 96 inches.
   (E)   The total outside width of a bus shall not exceed 102 inches.
   (F)   A vehicle shall not extend beyond the centerline of a state trunkline
highway, except when legally authorized by law.
   (G)   The Director of the State Transportation Department, a county road
commission or the Chief of Police may designate a highway as a highway on which
a person may operate a vehicle or vehicle combination the operation of which
would otherwise be prohibited by this subchapter. The outside width of the
vehicle or of each vehicle in the vehicle combination shall not exceed 102
inches, including the load on the vehicle. However, the agency making that
designation may require that the owner or lessee of the vehicle or of each
vehicle in the vehicle combination secure a permit before the operation of the
vehicle or vehicle combination is allowed. This division (G) does not restrict
the issuance of a special permit for the operation of a permit, the operation
of a vehicle or vehicle combination. This division (G) does not permit the
operation of a vehicle or vehicle combination described in §
74.019 of this chapter carrying a load described in those sections, if the
operation would otherwise result in a violation of those sections.
(Prior Code, § 22.1-50) (Ord. 885, passed 7-16-1990) Penalty, see §
74.999
§ 74.013 PROJECTING LOADS ON PASSENGER-TYPE VEHICLES.
   A passenger-type vehicle shall not be operated on a highway with a load
carried on the vehicle extending beyond the line of the fenders on the left
side of the vehicle, nor extending more than six inches beyond the line of the
fenders on the right side of the vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 22.1-51) (Ord. 885, passed 7-16-1990) Penalty, see §
74.999
§ 74.014 HEIGHT AND LENGTH OF VEHICLES; CONNECTION ASSEMBLIES FOR COMBINATIONS.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) below, a vehicle unloaded or with
load shall not exceed a height of 13 feet six inches. The owner of a motor
vehicle which collides with a lawfully established bridge or viaduct shall be
liable for all damage and injury resulting from a collision caused by the
height of the vehicle, whether the clearance of the bridge or viaduct is posted
or not.
   (B)   A truck, truck tractor, semi-trailer or trailer manufactured on or
after 7-27-1978 shall not be used to transport flammable liquids, in bulk,
having a flashpoint at or below 70°F, if the truck, truck tractor, semi-trailer
or trailer exceed 11 feet, eight and one-half inches in height. However, safety
equipment and those appurtenances which are required by state law, when added
to a vehicle, may cause the vehicle height to exceed 11 feet, eight and one-
half inches, but shall not cause the vehicle height to exceed 13 feet, six
inches. A person who violates this division (B) is guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (C)   A vehicle, except a truck tractor, trailer or semi-trailer, including
load, or articulated buses operated by a local public transit system funded by
Public Act 51 of 1951, being M.C.L.A. §§ 247.651 to 247.674, shall not exceed a
total length of 40 feet. The total length of a semi-trailer operating in a
truck tractor and semi-trailer combination shall not exceed 53 feet, including
load. All semi-trailers longer than 50 feet shall have a wheelbase of 40.5
feet, plus or minus one-half foot, measured from the kingpin coupling to the
center of the rear axles or to the center of the tandem axle assembly if
equipped with two axles. Articulated buses operated by a local public transit
system funded by Public Act 51 of 1951 may operate with a maximum length of 65
feet. A combination of truck tractor, semi-trailer and trailer, or truck and
semi-trailer, or trailer, or a combination of truck tractor and two semi-
trailers, including load, shall not exceed a total overall length of 59 feet,
except as provided for on routes designated and approved by the state’s
Transportation Department and by local authorities with respect to highways
under their jurisdiction on which a person may operate a combination of a truck
tractor and two semi-trailers with no limit on the overall combination length,
if the length of each semi-trailer or trailer including load does not exceed
28.5 feet. The state’s Transportation Department and local authorities with
respect to highways under their jurisdiction may designate highways where the
overall length of a truck and trailer or semi-trailer shall not exceed 65 feet.
A truck tractor and semi-trailer combination with a semi-trailer length longer
than 50 feet shall not be allowed to operate with more than two axles on the
semi-trailer. All truck tractor and semi-trailer combinations with a semi-
trailer length longer than 50 feet shall travel exclusively on highways
designated by the appropriate road authority. The local authorities shall have
the option of prohibiting stops within its jurisdiction unless the stop occurs
along appropriately designated routes, or is necessary for emergency purposes
or to reach shippers, receivers, warehouses and terminals along designated
routes. A trailer or semi-trailer in actual and lawful use in this state on 12-
1-1982 may be operated in the state for the life of the vehicle in a
combination with other vehicles in actual and lawful use in the state on 12-1-
1982, if the combination was of legal length under the law of the state
immediately preceding 1-24-1984. In calculating the length of a trailer or
semi-trailer under this division (C), the length shall be based on the cargo-
carrying portion of the vehicle only, including load. A truck tractor or other
motor vehicle shall not haul more than one trailer and semi-trailer or more
than two semi-trailers in combination at any one time, except that a farm
tractor may haul two wagons or trailers or garbage and refuse haulers may,
during daylight hours, haul up to four trailers for garbage and refuse
collection purposes, not exceeding in any combination a total length of 55 feet
at a speed of not to exceed 15 mph. In determining the length of a vehicle or a
vehicle combination under this division (C), the length shall not be considered
to include safety and energy conservation devices including, but not be limited
to, impact absorbing bumpers, rear view mirrors, turn signals, lamps, marker
lamps, steps and handholds for entry and egress, flexible fender extensions,
mud flaps or splash and spray suppressant devices; load induced tire bulge;
refrigeration or heating units; or air compressors. A device shall be excluded
from a determination of length only if it is not designed or used for the
carrying of cargo.
   (D)   If a combination of two semi-trailers is pulled by a truck or truck
tractor, a fifth wheel connecting assembly which conforms with motor carrier
safety rules promulgated by the Department of State Police pursuant to the
Motor Carrier Safety Act of 1963, Public Act 181 of 1963, as amended, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 480.11 to 480.21, shall be used on each semi-trailer.
   (E)   A train of vehicles or a vehicle operated alone shall not carry a load
extending more than three feet beyond the front of the train of vehicles or
vehicle.
   (F)   A motor vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer whose frame or body extends
more than 36 inches beyond the rear of its rear axle and is more than 30 inches
above the roadway shall not be operated on the highways unless equipped with a
fender or bumper on the extreme rear of the frame or body. The bumper shall
extend downward from the rear of the frame or body to within 30 inches of the
roadway and be of substantial construction. In addition to the requirements of
division (G) below, no vehicle which is required by federal law to have an
underride guard of not more than 22 inches above the roadway shall be operated
upon the highways of the state without such an underride guard.
   (G)   A truck tractor and semi-trailer combination with a semi-trailer
length longer than 50 feet whose frame or body extends more than 36 inches
beyond the rear of its rear axle and is more than 30 inches above the roadway
shall not be operated on the highways unless equipped with an underride guard
on the extreme rear of the frame or body. The underride guard shall meet all of
the following requirements:
      (1)   Provide a continuous horizontal beam having a maximum ground
clearance of 22 inches, as measured with the vehicle empty and on level ground;
and
      (2)   Extend to within four inches of the lateral extremities of the
trailer on both left and right sides.
   (H)   A truck tractor and semi-trailer combination with a semi-trailer
length longer than 50 feet shall not be operated on the highways at the times
specified unless equipped with the lighting requirements listed in the Michigan
Motor Vehicle Code (MMVC), being M.C.L.A. §§ 257.684, 257.688, 257.697, and
257.698.
      (1)   Two side marker lamps which display an amber light, one each side
of the semi- trailer, located at one-half the distance from the front to the
rear of the semi-trailer;
      (2)   Two reflectors which reflect an amber light, one on each side of
the semi-trailer located at one-half the distance from the front to the rear of
the semi-trailer; and
      (3)   Two clearance lamps, one on each side of the semi-trailer, located
at one-half the distance from the front to the rear and as near to the top of
the semi-trailer as practicable.
   (I)   A lamp required under division (H) above shall be lighted at the times
specified in the Michigan Motor Vehicle Code (MMVC), being M.C.L.A. § 257.684
and shall be visible when lighted at a distance of 500 feet from the side of
the semi-trailer on which it is mounted. A reflector required under division
(H) above shall be visible at the times specified in the Michigan Motor Vehicle
Code (MMVC), being M.C.L.A. § 257.684 from all distances from 50 to 500 feet
from the semi-trailer when directly in front of lawful upper beams of
headlamps.
   (J)   (1)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this subchapter, a
person may operate a combination of truck tractor, semi-trailer and trailer, or
truck tractor and semi-trailer or trailer designed and used exclusively to
transport assembled motor vehicles or bodies, recreational vehicles or boats,
which does not exceed a total length of 65 feet.
      (2)   The load on the combination of vehicles may extend an additional
three feet beyond the front and four feet beyond the rear of the combination of
vehicles. Retractable extensions used to support and secure the load that do
not extend beyond the allowable overhang for the front and rear shall not be
included in determining the length of a loaded vehicle or combination of
vehicles.
   (K)   A combination of vehicles shall not have more than 11 axles.
   (L)   (1)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this subchapter, a
number of motor vehicles, wholly or partially assembled, may be transported
over the highways in combination, utilizing one tow bar or three saddle mounts
with full mount mechanisms and utilizing the motive power of one of the
vehicles in combination. The combination shall not exceed the maximum length of
65 feet for the transportation of assembled motor vehicles, and the vehicles in
the combination shall be adequately and securely fastened together in
compliance with regulations of the state and of any federal agency having
jurisdiction over the transportation. If motor vehicles are towed by means of
triple saddle mounts, the towed vehicles shall have brakes acting on all wheels
which are in contact with the roadway.
      (2)   A combination exceeding 55 feet in length may be operated only on
highways and routes approved and designated for that operation by the state’s
Transportation Department and by local authorities with respect to highways
under their jurisdiction.
   (M)   The total gross weight of a truck tractor semi-trailer and trailer
combination or a truck trailer and two semi-trailers combination which exceeds
59 feet in length shall not exceed a ratio of 400 pounds per engine net
horsepower delivered to clutch or its equivalent specified in the SAE handbook
published by the Society of Automotive Engineers, Inc., (1977).
(Prior Code, § 22.1-52) (Ord. 885, passed 7-16-1990) Penalty, see §
74.999
§ 74.015 MOBILE HOMES; LENGTH, WIDTH AND HEIGHT.
   (A)   (1)   A person shall not operate a towing vehicle, having attached a
mobile home having a body length in excess of 45 feet and having a combined
length of over 60 feet, a realistic body width of over 100 inches at base rail,
and a height of over 12.5 feet on the highways. However, the jurisdictional
authority may issue permits to mobile home transport companies or to mobile
home manufacturers or dealers, for the movement, in the ordinary course of
their business, or mobile homes to width of 14-1/3 feet, plus normal
appurtenances not to exceed six inches; of mobile homes to a realistic body
length of 80 feet and having a combined length of 95 feet; of combinations of
prebuilt housing modules or mobile homes having a total length of not to exceed
80 feet and having a combined length of 95 feet; of prebuilt housing modules or
mobile homes to a width of 14-1/3 feet, plus an eave not to exceed two feet in
width; or of prebuilt housing modules or mobile homes to a width of 16 feet
moved in the upper peninsula of the state; over all highways, including
interstate and defense highways.
      (2)   Special permits for the movement of prebuilt homes, whose width
including two feet exceeds 14 feet and are transported on interstate highways,
may be issued on a single trip basis only in accordance with §
74.022 of this chapter. A prebuilt housing module home whose width including an
eave of two feet exceeds 14 feet shall be moved only on the lane furthest to
the right of the operator of the vehicle moving the module or mobile home and
shall be moved in a manner so that the eave portion of the module or mobile
home shall overhang on the shoulder of the highway on which the module or
mobile home is moved. The permit shall provide the days and the times of day,
but not on Saturdays, Sundays, holidays or the noon before until the noon after
a holiday, during which the movement shall take place. The permit shall be
issued only upon condition that the permittee comply with permit requirements
and limitation of law, to ensure the operation of a mobile home under permit in
a manner which will not impede traffic on the highways and with safety in the
movement of a mobile home, and only at a safe speed and when the pavement is
not slippery. A mobile home that is 14 or more feet in width shall not be moved
when the wind velocity exceeds 25 mph. On units exceeding 80 feet in overall
combination length, of 12 feet in overall width, the permit shall provide that
the mobile home be equipped with two flashing amber lights on the rear of the
mobile home and one flashing amber light on the top of the towing vehicle.
Signs with the words “oversize load” shall be displayed on the front bumper of
the towing vehicle and the back of the mobile home. The signs shall be of
durable material, in good condition, with black lettering on interstate yellow
background. Each letter shall be of block lettering not less than 12 inches
high at the front and not less than 16 inches high at the rear of the unit.
      (3)   A vehicle escort shall be required on those roads where the State
Police consider escort vehicles necessary for highway safety. The distance
between mobile home axle centers shall not be less than 34 inches. The axles
and tires shall meet standards established by the state’s Transportation
Department. This section shall not grant or give authority to the state’s
Transportation Department that did not exist on 5-1-1982 in accordance with § 1
of Pub. Law No. 85-767, 23 U.S.C. § 127.
   (B)   As used in this section, MOBILE HOME means a prebuilt housing module
or a home which is designed to be transported by a motor vehicle upon a public
highway and designed, equipped, and used for sleeping, eating and living
quarters, or is intended to be used for these purposes.
(Prior Code, § 22.1-53) (Ord. 885, passed 7-16-1990) Penalty, see §
74.999
§ 74.016 SPILLING LOAD ON HIGHWAY; VEHICLES CARRYING LOGS AND TUBULAR PRODUCTS.
   (A)   A person shall not drive or move a vehicle, except a vehicle carrying
logs or tubular products, on a highway unless the vehicle is so constructed or
loaded as to prevent its contents from dropping, sifting, leaking, blowing off,
except for hay or straw, or otherwise escaping from the vehicle. The tailgate,
faucets and taps on a vehicle shall be securely closed to prevent spillage
during transportation whether the vehicle is loaded or empty, and the vehicle
shall not have any holes or cracks through which material can escape. Any
highway maintenance vehicle engaged in either ice or snow removal shall be
exempt from this section.
   (B)   Actual spillage of material on the highway or proof of that spillage
is not necessary to prove a violation of this section.
   (C)   A vehicle carrying a load, other than logs or tubular products, which
is not completely enclosed shall meet either of the following requirements:
      (1)   Have the load covered with firmly secured canvas or a similar type
of covering; and
      (2)   Have the load securely fastened to the body or the frame of the
vehicle with binders of adequate number and of adequate breaking strength to
prevent the dropping off or shifting of the load.
   (D)   A company or individual who loads or unloads a vehicle or causes it to
be loaded or unloaded, with knowledge that it is to be driven on a public
highway, in a manner so as to cause a violation of division (A) above shall be
prima facie liable for a violation of this section.
   (E)   A person shall not operate a motor vehicle carrying logs or tubular
products on a highway unless the following conditions are met.
      (1)   If the logs or tubular products are loaded crosswise or at right
angles to the side of the vehicle, the load of logs or tubular products shall
be securely fastened to the body or frame of the vehicle with not less than two
binders which are secured to the frame at each end of the load and pass over
the load so that the frame and binders completely encircle the load.
      (2)   If the vehicle is a truck or trailer carrying logs which has a
loading surface more than 33 feet in length and the logs are loaded crosswise
or at right angles to the side of the vehicle, the vehicle shall be equipped
with a center partition located approximately one-half the distance from the
front to the rear of the loading surface of the truck or trailer. The center
partition shall be either a center mounted hydraulic loader or a center set of
stakes, and shall be pinned, bolted or otherwise securely fastened to the
frame. The load shall be secured as required by division (E)(1) above and, in
addition, the two lengthwise tie downs shall be attached or threaded through
the center partition at a level not less than one foot below the load height.
      (3)   If the logs or tubular products are loaded lengthwise of the
vehicle, obliquely or parallel to the sides, with metal stakes and pockets, the
load of logs or tubular products shall be secured as follows:
         (a)   With two tie downs from frame to frame for every tier;
         (b)   So that not more than one-half the diameter of the top log or
tubular product extends higher than the stake tops;
         (c)   With two cross-chains per tier if the load extends more than
five feet above the loading surface; and
         (d)   So that every ten linear feet, and any remaining fraction
thereof, has not less than one tie down from frame to frame.
      (4)   If the logs or tubular products are loaded lengthwise of the
vehicle, obliquely or parallel to the sides, with permanent metal gusseted
bunks, the load of logs or tubular products shall be secured as follows:
         (a)   With two tie downs from frame to frame for every tier;
         (b)   So that not more than one-half the diameter of the top log
extends higher than the stake tops; and
         (c)   So that every ten linear feet, and any remaining fraction
thereof, has not less than one tie down from frame to frame.
      (5)   The tie downs, cross-chains, stakes and other materials used to
secure loads of logs or tubular products as required under divisions (E)(1) to
(E)(4) above shall meet the following minimum requirements:
         (a)   Chain shall be of steel and shall be of a strength not less than
five-sixteenths of an inch in diameter “transport”, which is embossed with a
grade 70, or not less than three-eighths of an inch in diameter “high test”,
which is embossed with a grade stamp representative of grade 40. Chain shall
not be repaired by welding, wire or cold shuts;
         (b)   Wire rope shall be of improved plow steel and not less than
three-eighths of an inch in diameter;
         (c)   Webbing strap shall be not less than three inches in width and
shall have a minimum breaking strength of 14,000 pounds;
         (d)   Metal stakes shall be of sufficient strength to hold and contain
the load; and
         (e)   Connecting links and hooks shall be at least as strong as the
tie down material used.
   (F)   Divisions (D) and (E) above shall not apply to a person operating a
vehicle to transport seasonal agricultural commodities at the time of harvest
or for farmers operating their own trucks in the normal operation of the farm.
However, a person operating a vehicle to transport seasonable agricultural
commodities at the time of the harvest in the normal operation of the farm who
violates divisions (A) or (D) above is guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (G)   Division (C)(1) above shall not apply to a motor vehicle transporting
items of a load which because of their weight will not fall off the moving
vehicle and which have their centers of gravity located at least six inches
below the top of the enclosure nor to a motor vehicle carrying metal which
because of its weight and density is so loaded as to prevent it from dropping
or falling off the moving vehicle.
   (H)   Division (C)(1) shall not apply to motor vehicles and other equipment
engaged in work upon the surface of a highway or street in a designated work
area.
   (I)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      CROSS-CHAIN. A chain which extends through the load of logs or tubular
products and is connected at each end to a side stake.
      LOGS. Sawlogs, pulpwood or tree length poles.
      TIE DOWN. A high strength material which is used to secure the load of
logs or tubular products to the frame or the bed of the vehicle.
      TIER. A vehicle pile or stack of logs or tubular products.
(Prior Code, § 22.1-54) (Ord. 885, passed 7-16-1990)
§ 74.017 TRAILERS TOWED BY PASSENGER VEHICLE; ATTACHMENT.
   (A)   A passenger vehicle shall not be driven upon a highway drawing or
having attached to the passenger vehicle more than one vehicle or trailer.
   (B)   The drawbar or other connection between two vehicles, one of which is
towing or drawing the other on a highway, shall not exceed 15 feet in length
from one vehicle to the other. If the connection consists of a chain, rope or
cable, there shall be displayed upon the connection of a red flag or other
signal or cloth not less 12 inches both in length and width.
   (C)   A vehicle or trailer drawn by a motor-propelled vehicle shall be so
attached to the vehicle with forms of coupling devices which will prevent the
vehicle or trailer from being deflected more than six inches from the path of
the towing vehicle’s wheels. The vehicle or trailer shall also be connected to
the towing vehicle, by suitable safety chains or devices, one on each side of
the coupling and at the extreme outer edge of the vehicle and each chain or
device and connection used shall be of sufficient strength to haul the trailer
when loaded.
(Prior Code, § 22.1-55) (Ord. 885, passed 7-16-1990) Penalty, see §
74.999
§ 74.018 WHEEL AND AXLE LOAD RESTRICTIONS; VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   The maximum axle load shall not exceed the number of pounds designated
in the following provisions which prescribe the distance between axles.
      (1)   When the axle spacing is nine feet or more between axles, the
maximum axle load shall not exceed 18,000 pounds for vehicles equipped with
high pressure pneumatic or balloon tires.
      (2)   When the axle spacing is less than nine feet between two axles, but
more than three and one-half feet, the maximum axle load shall not exceed
13,000 pounds for high pressure pneumatic or balloon tires.
      (3)   When axles are spaced less than three and one-half feet apart, the
maximum axle load shall not exceed 9,000 pounds per axle.
      (4)   Divisions (A)(1), (A)(2) and (A)(3) above shall be known as the
normal loading maximum.
   (B)   When normal loading is in effect, the state’s Transportation
Department and local authorities with respect to highways under their
jurisdiction may designate certain highways, or sections of those highways,
where bridges and road surfaces are adequate for heavier loading, which
designation may be revised as needed, on which the maximum tandem axle assembly
loading shall not exceed 16,000 pounds for any axle of the assembly, if there
is no other axle within nine feet of any axle of the assembly.
   (C)   (1)   Except as provided in division (H) below, on a legal combination
of vehicles, only one tandem axle assembly shall be permitted on the designated
highways at the gross permissible weight of 16,000 pounds per axle, if there is
no other axle within nine feet of any axle of the assembly and if no other
tandem axle assembly in the combination of vehicles exceeds a gross weight of
13,000 pounds per axle.
      (2)   When a maximum gross weight of a combination of vehicles with load
does not exceed 72,280 pounds, two tandem axle assemblies shall be permitted on
the designated highways at a gross permissible weight of 16,000 pounds per
axle, if there is no other axle within nine feet of any axle of the assembly.
   (D)   The normal size of tires shall be the rated size as published by the
manufacturers, and the maximum wheel load permissible for any wheel shall not
exceed 700 pounds per inch of width of tire.
   (E)   During the months of March, April and May in each year, the maximum
axle load allowable on concrete pavements, or pavement with a concrete base,
shall be reduced by 25% from the maximum axle load as specified in this
section, and the maximum axle loads allowable on all other types of roads
during these months shall be reduced by 35% from the maximum axle loads as
specified. The maximum wheel load shall not exceed 525 pounds per inch of tire
width on concrete and concrete base or 450 pounds per inch of tire width on all
other roads during the period the seasonal road restrictions are in effect.
   (F)   The state’s Transportation Department, or a local authority, with
respect to highways under its jurisdiction, may suspend the restrictions
imposed by this section when and where in its discretion, conditions of the
highways or the public health, safety and welfare so warrant, and may impose
the restricted loading requirements of this section on designated highways at
any other time that the conditions of the highway may require.
   (G)   (1)   For the purpose of enforcement of this subchapter, the gross
vehicle weight of a single vehicle and load or a combination of vehicles and
loads shall be determined by weighing individual axles or groups of axles, and
the total weight on all axles shall be the gross vehicle weight.
      (2)   In addition, the gross axle weight shall be determined by weighing
individual axles or by weighing a group of axles and dividing the gross weight
of the group of axles by the number of axles in the group. Pursuant to division
(H) below, the overall gross weight on a group of two or more axles shall be
determined by weighing individual axles or several axles and the total weight
of all the axles in the group shall be the overall gross weight of the group.
   (H)   The loading maximum in this division (H) shall apply to interstate
highways and the state’s Transportation Department, or a local authority with
respect to highways under its jurisdiction, may designate a highway, for the
operation of vehicles having a gross vehicle weight of not more than 80,000
pounds which are subject to the following load maximums:
      (1)   Twenty thousand pounds on any one axle, including all enforcement
tolerances;
      (2)   A tandem axle weight of 34,000 pounds, including all enforcement
tolerances; and
      (3)   An overall gross weight on a group of two or more consecutive axles
equaling:
         W + 500 LN + 12N + 36
            N-1
      where:
      W   =   overall gross weight on a group of two or more consecutive axles
to the nearest 500 pounds;
      L   =   distance in feet between the extreme of a group of two or more
consecutive axles; and
      N   =   number of axles in the group under consideration; except that,
two consecutive sets of tandem axles may carry a gross load of 34,000 pounds
each if the first and last axles are not less than 36 feet apart. The gross
vehicle weight shall not exceed 80,000 pounds, including all enforcement
tolerances. Except for five-axle truck tractor, semi-trailer combinations
having two consecutive sets of tandem axles, vehicles having a gross weight in
excess of 80,000 pounds or in excess of the vehicle gross weight determined by
application of the formula in this division (H) shall be subject to the maximum
axle loads of divisions (H)(1), (H)(2) and (H)(3) above. As used in this
division (H), TANDEM AXLE WEIGHT means the total weight transmitted to the road
by two or more consecutive axles, the centers of which may be included between
parallel transverse vertical planes spaced more than 409 inches, but not more
than 96 inches apart extending across the full width of the vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 22.1-56) (Ord. 885, passed 7-16-1990)
§ 74.019 FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS; TRANSPORTATION RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this subchapter, a truck
tractor pulling a semi- trailer and trailer combination or a truck tractor
pulling two semi-trailers shall not transport, except between the hours of
midnight to 6:00 a.m. on routes and at times designated by the state’s Fire
Safety Board, a flammable liquid, in bulk, which has a flashpoint at or below
70°F within a county having a population of 600,000 or more. In addition, a
truck, a truck pulling a trailer or a truck tractor pulling a semi-trailer
shall not transport, except between the hours of midnight to 6:00 a.m. on
routes and at times designated by the state’s Fire Safety Board, a flammable
liquid, in bulk, which has a flashpoint at or below 70°F, in a quantity of more
than 9,000 gallons within a county having a population of 600,000 or more. The
exceptions provided by this division (A) for transport on routes designated by
the state’s Fire Safety Board shall be construed to permit that transport only
for the purpose of picking up or delivering a flammable liquid at a supply
depot.
   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a truck, truck
pulling a trailer, truck tractor pulling a semi-trailer, a truck tractor
pulling a semi-trailer and trailer combination, or a truck tractor pulling two
semi-trailers shall not transport a flammable liquid, in bulk, which has a
flashpoint at or below 70°F within the city, unless the truck, truck and
trailer combination, truck tractor and semi- trailer combination, truck tractor
semi-trailer and trailer combination or truck tractor and two semi-trailer
combinations meet safety standards as determined by the state’s Fire Safety
Board.
   (C)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a truck pulling a
trailer, a truck tractor pulling semi-trailer and trailer combination, or a
truck tractor pulling two semi-trailers shall not transport a flammable liquid,
in bulk, which has a flashpoint at or below 70°F within the city. This division
(C) took effect until 11-1-1990.
   (D)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section other than
divisions (C) above and (E) below, a truck with water capacity of more than
9,500 gallons, a truck tractor pulling a semi-trailer with a water capacity of
more than 9,500 gallons, a truck pulling a trailer, a truck tractor pulling a
semi- trailer and trailer combination, or a truck tractor pulling two semi-
trailers shall not transport a flammable liquid, in bulk, which has a
flashpoint at or below 70°F in the city, unless the existing manhole or
inspection ports of each truck, semi-trailer or trailer in the vehicle
combination has been equipped with devices which are capable of withstanding
the forces caused by an internal pressure of 50 pounds per square inch, applied
and held at least 50 milliseconds, and then released to two pounds per square
inch, without having any residual venting of flammable liquid during the
subsequent two pounds per square inch condition.
   (E)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a truck or a
truck tractor pulling a semi-trailer, a semi-trailer and trailer and trailer
combination, or two semi-trailers shall not transport a flammable liquid, in
bulk, which has a flashpoint at or below 70°F in the city, if the truck or
semi- trailer, a semi-trailer and trailer combination, or two semi-trailers are
manufactured after 7-1-1982, or was manufactured before 7-1-1982, but was not a
vehicle registered in the state by the Secretary of State at any time between
1-1-1985 and 10-1-1985, unless the truck or the semi-trailer, a semi-trailer
and trailer combination, or two semi-trailers have a water capacity of less
than 13,800 gallons.
   (F)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, a truck or truck
tractor pulling a semi-trailer shall not transport a flammable liquid in bulk,
which has a flashpoint at or below 70°F in a quantity of more than 13,400
gallons. This division (F) shall took effect on 11-1-1990.
   (G)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a truck or truck
tractor pulling a trailer or semi-trailer, a semi-trailer or trailer
combination or two semi-trailers shall not transport flammable liquid, in bulk,
which has a flashpoint at or below 70°F in a quantity of more than 13,400
gallons unless the owner of the truck, truck tractor pulling the trailer, semi-
trailer, combination semi- trailer or two semi-trailers files with the
Department of State Police within 60 days after the effective date of this
subchapter a notarized statement that the truck or truck tractor pulling a
trailer or semi- trailer, semi-trailer and trailer combination, or two semi-
trailers did transport a flammable liquid, in bulk, having a flashpoint at or
below 70°F, at any time between 3-1-1985 and 10-1-1985. Attached to the
notarized statement shall be one of the following:
      (1)   A copy of the bill of lading containing the date the flammable
liquid was transported and the permanent identification number of the trailer
or semi-trailer in which the flammable liquid was transported; and
      (2)   A copy of the daily log prepared by the driver of the vehicle
transporting the flammable liquid which contains the date the flammable liquid
was transported and the permanent identification number of the trailer or semi-
trailer in which the flammable liquid was transported.
   (H)   This section shall be enforced only by a police officer.
(Prior Code, § 22.1-57) (Ord. 885, passed 7-16-1990) Penalty, see §
74.999
§ 74.020 INFORMATION TO BE PAINTED OR ATTACHED TO CERTAIN VEHICLES.
   (A)   (1)   All motor trucks or truck tractors, except as provided in
division (C) below, of more than 5,000 pounds registered weight and all towing
or platform bed wrecker road service vehicles in operation upon the public
highways of the city shall have the name, city and state or the registered logo
or emblem of the registered owner of the vehicle and lessee of the vehicle if
the vehicle is being operated under lease, painted or permanently attached on
each side of the cab on a motor truck or truck tractor in letters of not less
than three inches in height, not lower than the bottom edge of the door; except
that, motor trucks with closed van bodies may place the information on each
side of the van body not lower than the bottom edge of the cab door.
      (2)   This information shall be in sharp color contrast to the
background.
   (B)   Except for towing or platform bed wrecker road service vehicles, the
identification requirements of division (A) above may be met through the use of
removable devices which meet the requirements of division (A) above. These
devices shall be of durable construction and securely attached to each side of
the motor truck or truck tractor. The removable devices shall be attached so
that the identification is in a horizontal position.
   (C)   This section shall not apply to trucks eligible for and equipped with
farm license plates.
(Prior Code, § 22.1-58) (Ord. 885, passed 7-16-1990)
§ 74.021 STOPPING VEHICLES FOR WEIGHING; FINES; FAILURE TO STOP.
   (A)   A police officer having reason to believe that the weight of a vehicle
and load is unlawful may require the driver to stop and submit to a weighing of
the vehicle by either portable or stationary scales approved and sealed by the
department of agriculture as a legal weighing device, and may require that the
vehicle be driven to the nearest weighing station of the state’s Transportation
Department for the purpose of allowing an officer to determine whether the
conveyance is loaded in conformity with this subchapter.
   (B)   (1)   When the officer, upon weighing a vehicle and load determines
that the weight is unlawful, the officer may require the driver to stop the
vehicle in a suitable place and remain standing until that portion of the load
is shifted or removed as necessary to reduce the gross axle weight of the
vehicle to the limit permitted under this subchapter. All material unloaded as
provided under this division (B)(1) shall be cared for by the owner or operator
of the vehicle at the risk of the owner or operator. A judge or magistrate
imposing a civil fine and costs under this section which are not paid in full
immediately or for which a bond is not immediately posted in double the amount
of the civil fine and costs shall order the driver or owner to move the vehicle
at the driver’s own risk to a place of safekeeping within the jurisdiction of
the judge or magistrate, inform the judge or magistrate in writing of the place
of safekeeping and keep the vehicle until the fine and costs are paid or
sufficient bond is furnished or until the judge or magistrate is satisfied that
the fine and costs will be paid. The officer who has determined, after weighing
a vehicle and load, that the weight is unlawful, may require the driver to
proceed to a judge or magistrate within the city. If the judge or magistrate is
satisfied that the probable civil fine and costs will be paid by the owner or
lessee, the judge or magistrate may allow the driver to proceed, after the load
is made legal. If the judge or magistrate is not satisfied that the owner or
lessee, after a notice and a right to be heard on the merits is given, will pay
the amount of the probable civil fine and costs, the judge or magistrate may
order the vehicle to be impounded until trial on the merits is completed under
conditions set forth in this section for the impounding of vehicles after the
civil fine and costs have been imposed.
      (2)   Removal of the vehicle, and forwarding care or preservation of the
load shall be under the control of and at the risk of the owner or driver.
Vehicles impounded shall be subject to a lien, subject to a prior valid bona
fide lien of prior record, in the amount of the civil fine and costs and if the
civil fine and costs are not paid within 90 days after the seizure, the judge
or magistrate shall certify the unpaid judgment to the prosecuting attorney of
the city or county in which the violation occurred, who shall proceed to
enforce the lien by foreclosure sale in accordance with procedure authorized in
the case of chattel mortgage foreclosure.
   (C)   An owner of a vehicle or a lessee of the vehicle of an owner-operator,
or other person, who causes or allows a vehicle to be loaded and driven or
moved on a highway, when the weight of that vehicle violates §
74.018 of this chapter is responsible for a civil infraction and shall pay a
civil fine in an amount equal to $0.03 per pound for each pound of excess load
over 1,000 pounds when the excess is 2,000 pounds or less; $0.06 per pound of
excess load when the excess is over 2,000 pounds, but not more 3,000 pounds;
$0.09 per pound for each pound of excess load when the excess is over 3,000
pounds, but not over 4,000 pounds; $0.12 per pound for each pound of excess
load when the excess is over 4,000 pounds, but not over 5,000 pounds; $0.15 per
pound for each pound of excess load when the excess is over 5,000 pounds, but
not over 10,000 pounds; and $0.20 per pound for each pound of excess load when
the excess is over 10,000 pounds. However, the court shall have discretionary
power as to the amount of the civil fine within the schedule provided by this
division (C), and may impose the civil fine provided in § 907(3) of the state’s
Motor Vehicle Act (being M.C.L.A. § 257.907(3)), hereby adopted by reference,
for a civil infraction where, at the time of the violation, either the motor
vehicle, and semi-trailer or trailer did not exceed the total weight which
would be lawful for each unit by a proper distribution of the load upon the
various axles supporting each unit.
   (D)   A driver or owner of a vehicle, truck or truck tractor, truck or truck
tractor with other vehicles in combination, or special mobile equipment who
knowingly fails to stop at or who knowingly bypasses any scales or weighing
station is guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (E)   A driver or owner of a vehicle who knowingly fails to stop when
requested or ordered to do so by a police officer authorized to require the
driver to stop and submit to a weighing of the vehicle and load by means of a
portable scale, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 22.1-59) (Ord. 885, passed 7-16-1990) Penalty, see §
74.999
§ 74.022 NON-CONFORMING VEHICLES; SPECIAL PERMITS.
   (A)   Local authorities with respect to highways under their jurisdiction,
upon application in writing and good cause being shown, may issue a special
permit in writing authorizing the applicant to operate or remove a vehicle of
combination of vehicles of a size or weight of a vehicle or load exceeding the
maximum specified in this article or otherwise not in conformity with this
subchapter upon a highway under the jurisdiction of the authority granting the
permit and for the maintenance of which the authority is responsible.
   (B)   The application for a special permit shall be on a form prescribed by
the authority and shall specifically describe the vehicle or vehicles and load
to be operated or moved and the particular highways upon which the permit to
operate is required.
   (C)   Local authorities with respect to highways under their jurisdiction
may issue special permits authorizing the operation upon a highway of traction
engines or tractors having movable tracks with transverse corrugations upon the
periphery of those movable tracks or farm tractors or other farm machinery, the
operation of which upon a highway would otherwise be prohibited under this
subchapter.
   (D)   A permit shall specify the trip or trips and date or dates for which
it is to be valid and the authority granting the permit may restrict or
prescribe conditions of operation of the vehicle or vehicles, if necessary, to
protect the safety of the public or to ensure against undue damage to the road
foundations, structures or installations, and may require a reasonable
inspection fee and other security as may be considered necessary to compensate
for damages caused by the movement. A permit may be issued on an annual basis.
   (E)   A person may transport telephone, telegraph or electric poles of a
greater length than otherwise authorized over the highways in the construction,
maintenance or repair of telephone, telegraph or electric lines, if a permit is
first secured from the local authority having jurisdiction of the highways.
   (F)   A person may transport concrete pipe of a greater width than otherwise
authorized over highways, if a permit for each project is first secured from
the local authority having jurisdiction of the highways.
   (G)   A permit issued under this section shall be carried in the vehicle or
combination of vehicles to which it refers and shall be open to inspection by a
police officer. A person shall not violate any of the terms or conditions of
the special permit.
(Prior Code, § 22.1-60) (Ord. 885, passed 7-16-1990) Penalty, see §
74.999
§ 74.023 CERTAIN COMMERCIAL VEHICLES ON POSTED HIGHWAYS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Local authorities with respect to highways under their jurisdiction,
except state trunkline highways, by ordinance or resolution, may do any of the
following:
      (1)   Prohibit the operation of trucks or other commercial vehicles on
designated highways or streets;
      (2)   Impose limitations as to the weight of trucks or other commercial
vehicles on designated highways or streets; and
      (3)   Provide that only certain highways or streets may be used by trucks
or other commercial vehicles.
   (B)   (1)   Any prohibitions, limitations or truck route designations
established under division (A) above shall be designated by appropriate signs
placed on the highways or streets.
      (2)   The design and placement of the sign shall be consistent with the
requirements of the Uniform Traffic Code.
(Prior Code, § 22.1-61) (Ord. 885, passed 7-16-1990)
§ 74.024 ENFORCEMENT JURISDICTION.
   The city police may exercise authority and powers outside the city when they
are enforcing this subchapter on a street or highway which is on the boundary
of the city, the same as if they were in the city.
(Prior Code, § 22.1-62) (Ord. 885, passed 7-16-1990)
§ 74.025 VIOLATIONS.
   Any police officer having reason to believe that the load, weight, height or
length of a vehicle or a load is in violation of any provision of this
subchapter, which violation constitutes a misdemeanor, or otherwise as provided
in this subchapter may require the driver to stop and the officer may
investigate, weigh or measure the vehicle or the load. If, after personally
investigating, weighing or measuring, the officer determines that the load,
weight or height of a vehicle or load are in violation of the requirements of
this subchapter, the officer may temporarily detain the driver of the vehicle
for purposes of making a record of vehicle check, may make an arrest for the
violation and may proceed as otherwise provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 22.1-63) (Ord. 885, passed 7-16-1990)
§ 74.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   (a)   Except as otherwise stated, any person, individual,
partnership, association, corporation or their lessees or receivers appointed
by any court found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined in an amount not
exceeding $500, plus costs, or be imprisoned for a period of not exceeding 90
days, or be both so fined and imprisoned and assessed costs in the discretion
of the court.
         (b)   In addition to the penalty provided in division (B)(1)(a) above,
the court may order any person, individual, partnership, association,
corporation or their lessees or receivers appointed by any court who has been
found guilty of a misdemeanor under this chapter to make full or partial
restitution to any victim of the defendant’s course of conduct which gave rise
to the conviction, including any unit of government, public department or
agency.
         (c)   Except as otherwise provided, any person, individual,
partnership, association, corporation or their lessees or receivers appointed
by any court who have been determined to be responsible or responsible “with
explanation” for a civil infraction under this chapter while driving a
commercial motor vehicle, as defined herein, shall be ordered to pay a civil
fine of not more than $250, plus the cost of the action as set out in division
(B)(1)(e) below.
         (d)   Except as otherwise provided, any person, individual,
partnership, association, corporation or their lessees or receivers appointed
by any court determined to be responsible or responsible “with explanation” for
a civil infraction under this chapter shall be ordered to pay a civil fine of
not more than $100, plus costs as provided in division (B)(1)(e) below.
         (e)   If a civil fine is ordered to be paid under divisions (B)(1)(c)
or (B)(1)(d) above, the judge, District Court referee or District Court
magistrate shall summarily tax and determine the costs of the action, which
shall not be limited to the costs taxable in ordinary civil actions, and may
include all expenses, direct and indirect, to which the plaintiff has been put
in connection with the civil infraction, up to the entry of judgment. Costs
shall not be ordered in excess of $100. Except as otherwise provided by law,
costs shall be payable to the General Fund of the plaintiff.
(Prior Code, § 22.1-71)
      (2)   (a)   The provisions of §
74.002 of this chapter shall apply to any individual, partnership, association,
corporation or their lessees or receivers appointed by any court who operate,
drive, cause to be driven or maintain any truck, truck tractor or trailer
within the limits of the city.
         (b)   A violation of any provision of §
74.002 of this chapter shall constitute a civil infraction, and the violator
shall be ordered to pay a civil fine of not more than $250 per violation, plus
costs as specified in division (B)(1)(e) above.
(Prior Code, § 22.1-15)
      (3)   (a)   A person who makes a false statement or return, who refuses
or neglects to make a statement or return required by §
74.010 of this chapter, who engages in business in the city as a motor carrier
without being a holder of an unrevoked license to engage in this business as
provided in §
74.010 of this chapter, or who in any way violates §
74.010 of this chapter, except as specifically provided by §
74.010 of this chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not
more than $100, or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both.
         (b)   In addition to the penalties imposed by division (B)(3)(a)
above, the Department shall receive the license of a licensee who has been
convicted under this division (B)(3).
(Prior Code, § 22.1-33)
      (4)   (a)   Violation of general provisions of this chapter a
misdemeanor. Unless specifically declared to be a civil infraction, it is a
misdemeanor for a person to drive or move or for the owner to cause or permit
to be driven or moved on a highway a vehicle or vehicles of a size or weight
exceeding the limitations stated in §
74.011 of this chapter or otherwise in violation of this chapter, and the
maximum size and weight specified in §
74.011 of this chapter shall be lawful throughout the city.
(Prior Code, § 22.1-42)
         (b)   Violations; penalties. Persons who violate provisions of §
74.011(C) and (E) of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable
by a fine of not more than $500 or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days or
both.
(Prior Code, § 22.1-46)
      (5)   A person who violates §
74.012 of this chapter is responsible for a civil infraction. The owner of the
vehicle may be charged with a violation of §
74.012 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 22.1-50)
      (6)   A person who violates §
74.013 of this chapter is responsible for a civil infraction.
(Prior Code, § 22.1-51)
      (7)   Except as provided in §
74.014(B) of this chapter, a person who violates §
74.014 of this chapter is responsible for a civil infraction. The owner of the
vehicle may be charged with a violation of §
74.014 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 22.1-52)
      (8)   A person who violates §
74.015 of this chapter is responsible for a civil infraction. The owner of the
vehicle may be charged with a violation of §
74.015 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 22.1-53)
      (9)   A person who violates §
74.016 of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not
more than $500 or imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both.
(Prior Code, § 22.1-54)
      (10)   A person who violates §
74.017 of this chapter is responsible for a civil infraction.
(Prior Code, § 22.1-55)
      (11)   Any person who violates §
74.018 of this chapter is responsible for a civil infraction, with fines and
costs to be imposed as set forth in §
74.021(C) of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 22.1-56)
      (12)   (a)   The owner or driver of a vehicle which transports a
flammable liquid in violation of §
74.019(A) through (G) of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by
a fine of not more than $500 or imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or
both.
         (b)   Except as provided in division (B)(12)(a) above, a person who
violates §
74.019 of this chapter is responsible for a civil infraction.
(Prior Code, § 22.1-57)
      (13)   A person who violates §
74.020 of this chapter is responsible for a civil infraction.
(Prior Code, § 22.1-58)
      (14)   A person who violates §
74.022 of this chapter is responsible for a civil infraction.
(Prior Code, § 22.1-60)
      (15)   A person who violates a prohibition, limitation or truck route
designation established pursuant to §
74.023(A) of this chapter is responsible for a civil infraction.
(Prior Code, § 22.1-61)
(Ord. 885, passed 7-16-1990; Ord. 911, passed 7-22-1991)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   DOWNRIVER CENTRAL ANIMAL CONTROL
      
91.   FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
      
92.   HAZARDOUS AND TOXIC MATERIALS
      
93.   FIREWORKS
      
94.   HEALTH AND SAFETY; NUISANCES
      
95.   MARINE SAFETY
      
96.   SPECIAL CITY EVENTS
      
97.   PARKS, RECREATION AND CITY-OWNED PROPERTY
      
98.   UNMANNED AIRCRAFT
      
99.   ALARM SYSTEMS
      
100.   WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
CHAPTER 90: DOWNRIVER CENTRAL ANIMAL CONTROL
Section
General Provisions
   
90.001   Purpose and title
   
90.002   Definitions
   
90.003   Licensing
   
90.004   Animal care standards
Chief Animal Control Officer
   
90.015   Hiring; requirements
   
90.016   Duties and authority
   
90.017   Enforcement
   
90.018   Impounding, redeeming and adopting animals
   
90.019   Quarantine of animal
   
90.020   Dead animals
Rules and Regulations
   
90.035   Keeping and location
   
90.036   Goats and swine prohibited
   
90.037   Birds; feeding, disturbing, coloring and sale
   
90.038   Poisoning animals
   
90.039   Number of animals
   
90.040   Kennel and domesticated animal lodging facility
   
90.041   Animals prohibited
Violations and Prohibitions Generally
   
90.055   Animals at large
   
90.056   Biting animals
   
90.057   Living on property
   
90.058   Vehicles
   
90.059   Barking dogs
   
90.060   Leash law
   
90.061   Animal waste; disposal
   
90.062   Health hazards or nuisances created by animals
Dangerous and Potentially Dangerous Dogs
   
90.075   Purpose and intent
   
90.076   Definitions
   
90.077   Determination of a potentially dangerous dog
   
90.078   Determination of a dangerous dog
   
90.079   Transfer of ownership or possession
   
90.080   Removal of classification
 
   
90.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.001 PURPOSE AND TITLE.
   The city, as a member of the Downriver Central Animal Control Agency (DCACA)
through adoption of an interlocal agreement, deeming it advisable in the
interest of protecting the public health and safety and welfare and to regulate
and control the conduct, keeping and care of animals, does hereby adopt the
following revised animal control chapter, which is to be enforced by the Animal
Control Officer’s/employee’s of the Downriver Central Animal Control Agency,
under the direction of the Chief Animal Control Officer. This chapter shall be
known as the “Downriver Central Animal Control Agency Ordinance”.
(Prior Code, § 4-1) (Ord. 1370, passed 9-17-2012)
§ 90.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONMENT. Leaving an animal unattended for more than 24 hours, releasing
the animal upon public highways or public or private lands, or failure to
provide proper or adequate food, water, exercise, shelter or medical care.
   ANIMAL. A mammal, bird, fish, reptile, ferret, snake, turtle, horse,
mollusk, crustacean or any other vertebrate other than a human being.
   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER. Any person employed by member cities for the purpose
of enforcing this chapter or state statutes pertaining to animals, and all
persons and deputies employed to act in the same or a similar manner.
   ANIMAL CONTROL SHELTER. A facility designated or recognized by the Downriver
Central Animal Control Agency, county or state for the purpose of impounding
and/or caring for animals, including a contract service provider, such as a
local animal protection shelter, which may include a humane society.
   AT LARGE. Except when hunting, an animal which is not on the premises of the
owner and not under the control of a person either by leash, cord, chain or
otherwise.
   CHIEF ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER. The person employed by the member cities for
the purpose of enforcing this chapter or state statutes pertaining to animals
who is responsible for the supervision of the Animal Control Officer’s/
employee’s and maintaining all required records.
   CONTINUOUS BARKING. Barking, howling or yelping for a period of time which
disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood.
   DANGEROUS ANIMAL. Any animal which bites or attacks a person or an animal,
but does not include the following:
      (1)   An animal that bites or attacks a person or animal that is
trespassing on the property of the animal’s owner;
      (2)   An animal that bites or attacks a person or animal as a result of
being provoked, tormented, tortured or receiving cruel treatment by that person
or animal; or
      (3)   An animal that is responding in a manner that an ordinary and
reasonable person would conclude was designed to protect a person if that
person is engaged in lawful activity or is the subject of an assault or
battery, or to protect itself or another animal.
   DOG. Any member of the species “Canis Familiaries”.
   DOMESTICATED COMPANION ANIMAL. An animal that has traditionally, through a
long association with humans, lived in a state of dependence upon humans or has
been traditionally kept as a household pet, including, but not limited to:
dogs; cats; hamsters; gerbils; guinea pigs; ferrets; mice; rabbits; parakeets;
parrots; cockatiels; cockatoos; canaries; love birds; finches; and tropical
fish.
   DOMESTICATED COMPANION ANIMAL LODGING FACILITY. An establishment where
domesticated companion animals are kept or confined for the purpose of
providing training, breeding, boarding, sale or day care or extended sheltering
and includes kennels.
   ENCLOSURE. Secure confinement indoors or secure confinement in a locked pen,
a structure with secure sides, top and bottom, or a yard which is suitable to
prevent the entry of young children, and is designed to prevent the dog or
animal from escaping from the owner’s property.
   FOWL. Chickens, roosters, ducks, turkeys, pheasants, goose, quail, grouse,
partridge and pigeons but excludes the following in door birds: parrot, canary,
finch, cockatiel and parakeet.
   HUNTING. Allowing a dog to range freely within the sight or sound of its
owner while in the course of pursuing legal game.
   KENNEL. An establishment wherein or whereon three or more dogs are confined
and kept for sale, boarding, breeding, training purposes.
   MEMBER CITIES. Allen Park, Southgate and Wyandotte and any city which may
join the DCACA in the future.
   NEGLECT. Failure to comply with the minimum requirements for animal care set
forth in this chapter.
   OWNER. Any adult person who owns or resides on the property where the animal
lives, every person having a right of property in the animal, an authorized
agent of the person having a right, every person who has an apparent authority
to have a right of property in the animal, every person who keeps or harbors
the animal or has it in his or her care, custody or control.
   PERSON. Any adult individual, corporation, society, co-partnership, limited
partnership, limited liability company, association or any other entity.
   PROVOKE. To perform an act or omission that an ordinary and reasonable
person would conclude is likely to precipitate a bite or attack by an animal.
   QUARANTINE. A state of enforced isolation, to detain in or exclude by
QUARANTINE, to isolate from normal relations or communication. An animal that
has bitten shall be kept in QUARANTINE at the Animal Shelter or can be approved
for HOME QUARANTINE, per the decision of the Animal Control Officer or his or
her designee.
   RABID SUSPECTED ANIMAL. Any animal which shows symptoms suggestive of
rabies.
   SERIOUS INJURY. Permanent, serious disfigurement, serious impairment of
health or serious impairment of a bodily function of a person. Any dog bite
requiring stitches to the victim (person or animal) is prima facie evidence of
a SERIOUS INJURY.
   SHELTER. Adequate protection from the elements and weather conditions
suitable for the age, species and physical condition of the animal so as to
maintain the animal in a state of good health. SHELTER, for livestock, includes
structures or natural features such as trees or topography. SHELTER, for a dog,
includes one or more of the following:
      (1)   The residence of the dog’s owner or other individual;
      (2)   A doghouse that is an enclosed structure with a roof and of
appropriate dimensions for the breed and size of the dog. The doghouse shall
have dry bedding when the outdoor temperature is, or is predicted to drop
below, freezing; and
      (3)   A structure, including a garage, barn or shed, that is sufficiently
insulated and ventilated to protect the dog from exposure to extreme
temperatures or, if not sufficiently insulated and ventilated, contains a
doghouse as provided under division (2) above that is accessible to the dog.
   SUITABLE LEASH. Both:
      (1)   The dog is attached to a leash that is not more than ten feet in
length (provided, the dog has not been determined to be “potentially
dangerous”) and of such material that the leash is capable of restraining and
does restrain the type and size of dog to which it is attached; and
      (2)   Such a leash is continuously held by a person who is reasonably
able to and does restrain and prohibit the dog from being out of the person’s
physical control. A leashed dog that chases a person or domesticated animal a
greater distance than ten feet, or that bites a person or domesticated animal,
constitutes prima facie evidence that such dog is not kept on a suitable leash.
   TORMENT. An act or omission that causes unjustifiable pain, suffering and
distress to a dog or animal, or causes mental and emotional anguish in the dog
or animal as evidenced by its altered behavior, for a purpose such as sadistic
pleasure, coercion or punishment that an ordinary and reasonable person would
conclude is likely to precipitate the bite or attack.
(Prior Code, § 4-2) (Ord. 1370, passed 9-17-2012; Ord. 1492, passed 8-31-2020;
Ord. 1497, passed 9-28-2020; Ord. 1499, passed 10-26-2020)
§ 90.003 LICENSING.
   (A)    All dogs and cats must be licensed with the city. The annual fee is
$10, which covers January 1 through December 31.
   (B)   Application for a license shall be made to the Wyandotte Police
Department Records Bureau or City Clerk and shall state the breed, sex, age,
color and marking of the animal and the name and address of the applicant. The
application shall be accompanied by a certificate of a licensed veterinarian
showing that the animal has been vaccinated against rabies. Any application
made to the City Clerk, as described herein, shall be forthwith forwarded to
the Wyandotte Police Department Records Bureau for retention and reference
information.
(Prior Code, § 4-3) (Ord. 1370, passed 9-17-2012; Ord. 1531, passed 12-19-2022)
§ 90.004 ANIMAL CARE STANDARDS.
   (A)   Adequate care. Every owner or caregiver of an animal shall be required
to provide the animal with the minimum standard of care set forth in this
chapter, which means the provision of sufficient food, water, shelter, sanitary
conditions, exercise and veterinary medical attention in order to maintain an
animal in a state of good health.
   (B)   Food and water. Every owner or caregiver of an animal shall provide,
on a daily basis, the animal with sufficient good and wholesome food and
(potable) water.
   (C)   Cleanliness. Every owner or caregiver of animals shall keep all
animals in a clean, sanitary and healthy manner and not confined so as to be
forced to stand, sit or lie in their own excrement.
   (D)   Shelter. Every owner or caregiver of animals shall provide all animals
with a proper shelter.
   (E)   Veterinary care. The owner or caregiver of a diseased or injured
animal shall provide the animal with appropriate veterinary (medical) care and
shall segregate the diseased animal from other animals to prevent transmittal
of disease.
   (F)   Abuse. No person shall beat, cruelly treat, improperly tether,
torment, overload, overwork or otherwise abuse an animal.
   (G)   Abandonment and neglect. No owner or caregiver of an animal shall
abandon or neglect any animal. An animal is deemed abandoned and/or neglected
if the owner or caregiver fails to properly maintain the animal.
   (H)   Poison. No person shall expose any known poisonous substance, whether
mixed with food or not, so that the poisonous substance may be eaten by any
animal; provided that, it shall not be unlawful for a person to expose on his
or her property common rat poison mixed only with vegetable substances.
   (I)   Disfigurement. No person, except a licensed veterinarian, shall crop
an animal’s ears or dock an animal’s tail.
   (J)   Housing conditions for multi-animal housing.
      (1)   Housing facilities for animals shall be structurally sound and
shall be maintained in good repair, to protect the animals from illness or
injury, to contain the animals and to restrict the entrance of other animals.
      (2)   Every building or enclosure where animals are maintained shall be
constructed of material that can be easily cleaned and shall be kept in a clean
and sanitary condition. The building shall be properly ventilated to prevent
drafts and to remove odors. Heating and cooling shall be provided as required,
according to the physical needs of the animals, with sufficient light to allow
observation of animals and sanitation.
      (3)   All animal rooms, cages, kennels and runs shall be of sufficient
size to provide all animals with adequate room for exercise and general proper
accommodations.
      (4)   All animal rooms, cages, kennels and runs shall provide all animals
with proper shelter and protection from the weather at all times, including,
but not limited to, a minimum of a roofed, three-sided structure of suitable
size. All animals must be provided with an area protected from the elements so
as to provide a dry, clean area for the animals to rest.
      (5)   No person shall fail to provide an animal with adequate shelter.
   (K)   Other conditions. No animal shall be left without proper attention and
care for more than 24 consecutive hours.
   (L)   Tethering of dogs.
      (1)   TETHERING means the practice of securing a dog to a stationary
object by means of a metal chain or coated steel cable or other similar means
for keeping a dog restrained in its movement. TETHERING does not mean walking a
dog on a leash, or for temporary grooming, or other professional service.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for a person to:
         (a)   Continuously tether a dog for more than three hours during any
24-hour period;
         (b)   Tether a dog on a tether made of anything but a coated steel
cable;
         (c)   Use a tether or any assembly or attachments thereto to tether a
dog that shall weigh more than 10% of the animal’s body weight, or due to
weight, inhibit the free movement of the animal within the area tethered;
         (d)   Tether a dog on anything, except a buckle-type collar or
harness. It is unlawful to tether a dog on a choke chain or around the dog’s
neck, or tethered to training collars such as choke or pinch-style collars, or
in such a manner as to cause injury, strangulation or entanglement of the dog
on fences, trees or other human-made or natural obstacles;
         (e)   Tether a dog without access to shade when sunlight is likely to
cause overheating;
         (f)   Tether a dog and fail to provide appropriate shelter to provide
insulation and protection against cold and dampness when the atmospheric
temperature falls below 40°F;
         (g)   Tether a dog without securing its food and water supply so that
it cannot be tipped over by the tether;
         (h)   Tether a dog in an open area where it can be teased by persons
or an open area that does not provide the dog protection from attack by other
animals;
         (i)   Tether a dog in an area composed entirely of bare earth subject
to becoming wet and muddy in the event of precipitation, and without any dry
surface area or cover for protection;
         (j)   Tether a dog less than four months of age;
         (k)   Tether more than one dog to a single tether;
         (l)   Tether a dog to a stationary object which would allow a dog to
come within five feet of any property line;
         (m)   Tether a dog without a swivel attachment on both ends; or
         (n)   Tether a dog on a tether more than ten feet in length.
      (3)   The Animal Control Officer, or his or her designee, may, in his or
her discretion, temporarily order a more restrictive tethering requirement if
circumstances require and it is not detrimental to the health, safety or
welfare of the dog.
(Prior Code, § 4-5) (Ord. 1370, passed 9-17-2012) Penalty, see §
90.999
CHIEF ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER
§ 90.015 HIRING; REQUIREMENTS.
   A Chief Animal Control Officer shall be hired by the Downriver Central
Animal Control Agency and shall serve as the head of the Animal Control
Officer’s/employee’s; provided, however, that the Chief Animal Control Officer
and all Animal Control Officers shall have and meet the minimum requirements
contained in M.C.L.A. § 287.289b.
(Prior Code, § 4-4) (Ord. 1370, passed 9-17-2012)
§ 90.016 DUTIES AND AUTHORITY.
   The Chief Animal Control Officer and his or her designees shall have the
following duties and authority.
   (A)   The Chief Animal Control Officer is authorized to investigate any
complaints of violations of this chapter or state laws regarding animals.
   (B)   The Chief Animal Control Officer may promptly seize, take up and place
in the Animal Shelter, or contracted services provider, including a state-
licensed humane society, animals being kept or harbored or found running at
large any place within Downriver Central Animal Control Agency contrary to the
provisions of this chapter or the statutes of the state.
   (C)   The Chief Animal Control Officer and his or her designees shall be
properly certified with the state as required in Public Act 339, § 29b, of
1919, being M.C.L.A. § 287.289b, as amended (the Dog Law). They shall have the
legal authority and duty to issue appearance tickets, citations or summonses to
those persons acting contrary to the provisions of this chapter or state laws
relating to animals.
   (D)   The Chief Animal Control Officer or a duly recognized service provider
under contract with Downriver Central Animal Control Agency may, under the
guidelines for holding periods and notification set forth in state statutes,
dispose of impounded animals which are not claimed by the legal owner, by one
of the following methods:
      (1)   Adoption by an individual person who meets adoption criteria for
the animal;
      (2)   Humane euthanasia under M.C.L.A. § 287.279(a); or
      (3)   Release to a duly recognized service provider to Downriver Central
Animal Control Agency, such as a licensed humane society, animal protection
shelter or an approved 503-C Rescue group. Note: the state guidelines for
holding periods do not apply to animals that are sick or injured to the extent
that the holding period would cause the animal to suffer. This section also
does not apply to any animal that is voluntarily signed over to the animal
control shelter by its owner. In both of these cases no minimum holding period
is required before disposing of the animal.
   (E)   The Chief Animal Control Officer and his or her designees shall
maintain a record of when the animal was acquired, under what circumstances,
copies of any required notices and the disposition of the animal. Regulations
regarding the adoption of animals and boarding and other charges shall be
posted in a conspicuous place at the animal control shelter.
   (F)   The Chief Animal Control Officer and his or her designees shall
dispose of the bodies of all animals destroyed at the animal control shelter or
elsewhere in Downriver Central Animal Control Agency in a manner approved by
the state.
   (G)   (1)   The Chief Animal Control Officer and his or her designees shall
promptly investigate all animal bite cases involving human injury and shall
search out and attempt to discover the animal involved. If the Chief Animal
Control Officer finds the animal responsible for the bite, he or she shall
quarantine the animal for examination for disease in accordance with the
applicable provisions of this chapter and the statutes of the state.
      (2)   The Chief Animal Control Officer shall also seize and impound any
rabies-suspected animal and cause the animal to be quarantined for examination.
   (H)   The Chief Animal Control Officer and his or her designees shall make
efforts to locate and determine the number of all unlicensed dogs (or other
animals required to be licensed) in the Downriver Central Animal Control
Agency.
   (I)   The Chief Animal Control Officer and his or her designees shall have
the duty to inspect any kennel, a license for which has been issued, and shall
have the duty to suspend the license if conditions exist which are unhealthy or
inhumane to the animals kept in the kennel, pending correction of such
conditions; and, further, shall have the duty to revoke the license if such
conditions are not corrected within a reasonable period of time.
   (J)   The Chief Animal Control Officer and his or her designees shall have
the duty to investigate complaints of animals alleged to be treated cruelly or
kept in violation of this chapter, and may seek a court order to seize, take up
and impound any animal that has been subject to such cruelty, abandonment or
neglect.
   (K)   The Chief Animal Control Officer and his or her designees shall have
such other duties relating to the enforcement of this chapter as the Police
Chief may from time to time provide.
(Prior Code, § 4-4) (Ord. 1370, passed 9-17-2012)
§ 90.017 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Chief Animal Control Officer in enforcing the provisions of this chapter
and the statutes of the state pertaining to animals may make complaints to the
city’s Prosecuting Attorney and to the District Court in regard to any
violations of this chapter. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere or
hinder any Animal Control Officers in the performance of their duties.
(Prior Code, § 4-4) (Ord. 1370, passed 9-17-2012) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.018 IMPOUNDING, REDEEMING AND ADOPTING ANIMALS.
   (A)   General. The Chief Animal Control Officer and his or her designees may
humanely seize and impound at the animal control shelter any domesticated
companion animal or livestock found running at large. If the animal is non-
vicious or non-dangerous and its owner can be ascertained and is available, the
Chief Animal Control Officer may return the animal to its owner and may cite
the owner of the animal for any violation that has occurred. The Chief Animal
Control Officer may also seize and impound any animal that is, within his or
her reasonable discretion, subject to abuse, cruelty, abandonment or neglect,
by the quickest and most reasonable means available and may cite the owner with
a violation of this chapter and/or applicable state laws.
   (B)   Notification of owner. Immediately after impounding an animal, if the
owner of the animal can be identified by collar, license, tag or by other
means, the Chief Animal Control Officer shall notify the owner about the
animal’s impoundment by first class mail or telephone. The Chief Animal Control
Officer shall inform the owner of the steps necessary to regain custody of the
animal. The Chief Animal Control Officer or a duly recognized service provider
under contract with Downriver Central Animal Control Agency or the DCACA may
dispose of impounded animals which are not claimed within the state statutory
holding periods in a manner set forth by the terms of this chapter.
   (C)   Redeeming impounded animals. An owner may redeem an animal from
impoundment by executing a sworn statement of ownership, furnishing a license
and tag and paying all expenses associated with the seizure and impoundment of
the animal. The Chief Animal Control Officer shall not knowingly release any
impounded animal to an owner who has been convicted of animal cruelty,
abandonment, neglect or other related criminal violations of state law or of
this chapter without a court order.
   (D)   Impoundment by citizens. Any citizen shall immediately contact the
Downriver Central Animal Control Agency and county animal control with a
description of the animal and location where found and must turn over the
animal to animal control. Animal control may allow the animal to remain with
the citizen if an owner is located or known. It shall be unlawful for any
person to refuse to deliver any lost/stray animal in their possession to an
Animal Control Officer upon request.
   (E)   Adoption of impounded animals.
      (1)   A person who wishes to adopt an impounded animal that has not been
redeemed by its owner must sign an adoption agreement that contains a sworn
statement that he or she will own and keep the animal in accordance with the
terms of this chapter and state laws.
      (2)   If the animal has not been sterilized, the sworn statement must
also provide that the adopted animal will be sterilized in accordance with
Public Act 287 of 1919, being M.C.L.A. §§ 287.261 through 287.290.
      (3)   The sworn statement must also provide that the animal will not be
used for fighting or other illegal activity and will not be subjected to, sold
or otherwise used for medical or other testing or experimentation.
      (4)   Any person adopting an impounded animal must pay shelter, boarding
and other charges associated with the seizure and impoundment of the animal
prior to the release of the animal. Such charges shall be posted conspicuously
at the animal control shelter. Any subsequent failure to follow any of the
terms of the adoption agreement shall be a violation of this chapter.
      (5)   The Chief Animal Control Officer shall not knowingly adopt an
animal to a person who has been convicted of animal cruelty, abandonment,
neglect or other related criminal violations of state law or of this chapter
without a court order. The Chief Animal Control Officer may decline to adopt an
animal if other circumstances exist, which, in the opinion of the Chief Animal
Control Officer would endanger the health, safety or welfare of people or
animals.
(Prior Code, § 4-4) (Ord. 1370, passed 9-17-2012) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.019 QUARANTINE OF ANIMAL.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   The owner of any domesticated companion animal that bites a person
or other animal shall immediately quarantine the biting animal for a minimum of
ten days at the Downriver Central Animal Shelter or may be approved for home
quarantine which is at the sole discretion of the Animal Control Officer.
      (2)   If the owner of the biting animal fails to surrender the animal, or
if the owner of the biting animal cannot be identified or found, then the Chief
Animal Control Officer may take possession of the domesticated companion animal
and quarantine it at the animal control shelter or animal protection shelter
until the expiration of the ten-day period. The owner shall be responsible for
all expenses incurred for the quarantine.
      (3)   At the expiration of the ten-day period, if the owner shows
satisfactory evidence that the domesticated companion animal is not suffering
from rabies, and pays the requisite expenses, the Chief Animal Control Officer
shall release the domesticated companion animal to its owner. Any violation of
the home quarantine agreement or failure to bring the animal to the Animal
Shelter or veterinarian in the required time is in violation of this chapter.
      (4)   The Chief Animal Control Officer may immediately humanely destroy
the domesticated companion animal that has bitten if the animal is determined
by a veterinarian to be suffering from rabies or upon request of the owner.
      (5)   In such cases, following the humane destruction of the domesticated
companion animal, the Chief Animal Control Officer shall immediately send a
sample specimen to the state’s Department of Public Virology Laboratory in
Lansing, Michigan.
   (B)   Animals that are not domesticated. If an animal that is not
domesticated bites a person or other animal, and there is no identifiable
owner, then the Chief Animal Control Officer shall if possible, humanely
confine for quarantine and/or destroy the animal and immediately send the
animal or sample specimen to the state’s Department of Public Health Virology
Laboratory in Lansing, Michigan.
(Prior Code, § 4-4) (Ord. 1370, passed 9-17-2012) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.020 DEAD ANIMALS.
   It shall be unlawful for an owner or caregiver, or person possessing an
animal, to do any of the following:
   (A)   To allow the carcass of a dead animal to be left unattended and not
properly disposed of; and/or
   (B)   To put any dead animal, or part of the carcass of any dead animal,
into any lake, sewer, river, creek, pond, roadway, street, alley, lane or lot
or any other area not designed for said purpose.
(Prior Code, § 4-4) (Ord. 1370, passed 9-17-2012) Penalty, see §
90.999
RULES AND REGULATIONS
§ 90.035 KEEPING AND LOCATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, within 500 feet of any
dwelling, street, alley or public place, any animal, bird or fowl, except a
parrot, canary, finch, cockatiel and parakeet if kept indoors as commonly kept
or housed as household pets. Fowl shall not be considered household pets and
are subject to the restrictions of this section.
(Prior Code, § 4-15) (Ord. 1370, passed 9-17-2012; Ord. 1492, passed 8-31-2020;
Ord. 1499, passed 10-26-2020) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.036 GOATS AND SWINE PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep live goats or swine on any
premises within the city.
(Prior Code, § 4-16) (Ord. 1370, passed 9-17-2012) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.037 BIRDS; FEEDING, DISTURBING, COLORING AND SALE.
   (A)   Pigeons. It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, keeps, cares
for or controls any pigeons:
      (1)   To allow them to perch or linger on the buildings or property of
others, or to allow them to become a nuisance to the buildings or properties of
others in the vicinity;
      (2)   To breed, keep or care for pigeons for commercial or market
purposes;
      (3)   To fail to maintain the places in which the pigeons are kept in a
clean, sanitary and orderly manner and in a condition comparable to neighboring
buildings;
      (4)   To fail to place all scrapings and pigeon manure in a covered
receptacle, which is to be kept in such manner as to prevent any malodorous or
offensive condition to exist and to prevent any nuisance to arise therefrom;
      (5)   To keep more than 40 pigeons; and/or
      (6)   To fail to summon and call the pigeons solely by inaudible means,
such as by use of flags or a silent whistle.
(Prior Code, § 4-17)
   (B)   Unauthorized feeding of birds, pigeons and seagulls. 
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to feed pigeons or seagulls in
any manner anywhere within the city.
      (2)   Bird food or feeding shall be proscribed as set forth herein. Bird
feeders can be placed in the rear yard in containers, either hanging from trees
or from a ground pole, that must be at least 48 inches high if placed on a deck
or porch, or 56 inches if located on the ground. The location of the feeder
shall be at least ten feet from the lot boundary or property line.
      (3)   Bird feed or other edible debris that can be consumed by birds or
animals shall not be allowed to accumulate on the ground.
      (3)   The number of feeders allowed in any rear yard must not cause a
disturbance to owners of adjacent properties either by excessive noise from the
large number of birds attracted to the feeder or the constant (daily) deposit
of fecal matter from birds using the feeders on adjacent property.
      (5)   Any complaints about excessive feeding or the use or placement of
feeders will be directed to the Police Department. Upon determination the
complaint has a sufficient factual basis, the Police Department shall perform
an inspection of the property site to determine whether such feeders are
violating provisions of this section and/or are creating a public nuisance in
accordance with Chapter 94 of this title and should be eliminated, reduced in
number, or otherwise removed. Upon such a determination being made, the
necessary corrective action shall be taken by the owner or occupant of the
property upon which the violation occurs.
(Prior Code, § 4-18)
   (C)   Disturbing birds prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to
willfully injure, molest or disturb in any way any birds or the nest, eggs,
young or brood of any such birds; provided, however, that, the foregoing
provision shall not apply to any birds declared by any law or ordinance to be
“pests”.
(Prior Code, § 4-19)
   (D)   Coloring birds prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to
artificially color, spray or paint any bird or fowl or to sell, offer for sale
or otherwise dispose of any such colored bird or fowl.
(Prior Code, § 4-20)
   (E)   Sale, display and the like of baby rabbits, chicks, ducklings and the
like.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any persons to sell, offer for sale,
barter or give away any baby rabbit, baby chick or baby duckling, or other baby
fowl or poultry, as a pet, novelty prize or premium, whether dyed, colored or
otherwise artificially treated, or in their natural state.
      (2)   This section shall not prohibit the display or sale of baby
rabbits, baby chicks or baby ducklings, or other baby fowl or poultry, in
proper hutches or brooder facilities, by hatcheries or stores engaged in the
business of selling the same to be raised for commercial purposes.
(Prior Code, § 4-21)
(Ord. 1370, passed 9-17-2012; Ord. 1495, passed 9-14-2020) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.038 POISONING ANIMALS.
   It shall be unlawful to throw or deposit poisoned meat, or any poison or
harmful substances, in any street, alley or public place, or on any private
premises within the city, for the purpose of destroying any dog, bird, fowl or
other animal.
(Prior Code, § 4-22) (Ord. 1370, passed 9-17-2012) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.039 NUMBER OF ANIMALS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, family, or occupant of any
structure in the city to own, keep, or possess, harbor, board or shelter more
than:
      (1)   Two dogs; or
      (2)   Four domesticated companion animals in total combination provided
that there shall be no more than two dogs in said combination, which are four
months of age or older, except as provided in division (B) and (C) below.   
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any licensed
veterinarian or technician specializing and trained in the medical treatment or
medical observation of domesticated companion animals.
   (C)   The provisions of this section do not apply to a licensed kennel or
domesticated companion animal lodging facility.
(Prior Code, § 4-23) (Ord. 1370, passed 9-17-2012; Ord. 1497, passed 9-28-2020)
Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.040 KENNEL AND DOMESTICATED ANIMAL LODGING FACILITY.
   (A)   No person or entity shall establish or maintain any kennel on any
property owned, leased or occupied by him or her in the city, unless:
      (1)   The kennel is used by a licensed veterinarian or technician
specializing and trained in the medical treatment or medical observation of
dogs; or
      (2)   A licensed kennel under the laws of the state.
   (B)   A domesticated companion animal lodging facility shall be allowed in
conformance with this section, the Zoning Code, and the code of ordinances.
   (C)   Any person or entity establishing, maintaining or operating a
domesticated companion animal lodging facility and/or kennel shall comply with
§§
90.055 through
90.062 and
90.999 of this chapter.
   (D)   A kennel and domesticated companion animal lodging facility are
required to have a person on site who is responsible for the care, control and
supervision of the animals at all times.
   (E)   The animal control officer authorized to act in the city may inspect
any kennel or domesticated companion animal lodging facility at all reasonable
times.
   (F)   No domesticated companion animal lodging facility may be approved for
operation until compliance with this section, the Zoning Code and this code of
ordinances as confirmed by the Engineering and Building Department.
(Prior Code, § 4-24) (Ord. 1370, passed 9-17-2012; Ord. 1497, passed 9-28-2020)
Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.041 ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   No person or entity shall own, possess, maintain, keep, board or harbor any
wild animal, wild domestic hybrid animal, an animal that would cause a nuisance
because of odor, noise, or pose a danger to the public, or any other animal
that is not a domesticated companion animal within the city.
(Ord. 1497, passed 9-28-2020) Penalty, see §
90.999
VIOLATIONS AND PROHIBITIONS GENERALLY
§ 90.055 ANIMALS AT LARGE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner, or any other person having the
possession, care, custody or control thereof, to permit any animal to run at
large upon the public streets, walks, parks or other public places within the
city, unless such animal is attached to a suitable leash of sufficient strength
to restrain such animal in such manner as to be kept under the control of the
person accompanying it.
   (B)   It shall further be unlawful for the owner, or any other person having
the possession, care, custody or control thereof, to permit any animal to go
upon any private property within the city, without the permission of the owner
or occupant of such private property.
(Prior Code, § 4-6) (Ord. 1370, passed 9-17-2012) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.056 BITING ANIMALS.
   If an animal bites a person or another animal that was not provoked, the
bite will be assessed to determine severity.
(Prior Code, § 4-6) (Ord. 1370, passed 9-17-2012) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.057 LIVING ON PROPERTY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of a dog to permit said animal to
be restrained on property where no responsible person is residing.
   (B)   The exception to this section is when a dog is being used as a guard
dog at a facility that is occupied during normal business hours.
(Prior Code, § 4-6) (Ord. 1370, passed 9-17-2012) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.058 VEHICLES.
   No person shall transport or leave any animal in a vehicle in such a way as
to endanger the animal’s health, safety or welfare, including, but not limited
to, dangerous temperatures, lack of air, food, water or proper care.
(Prior Code, § 4-6) (Ord. 1370, passed 9-17-2012) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.059 BARKING DOGS.
   No owner of a dog shall permit continuous barking which disturbs another
person.
(Prior Code, § 4-6) (Ord. 1370, passed 9-17-2012) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.060 LEASH LAW.
   No dog, cat or other pets shall be permitted in any public park or land
without said animal being restrained on a suitable leash. A waste bag or
suitable container must be on said person to pick up deposited animal waste and
deposit it immediately in a trash receptacle.
(Prior Code, § 4-6) (Ord. 1370, passed 9-17-2012) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.061 ANIMAL WASTE; DISPOSAL.
   (A)   Any person owning or having charge, control, care and/or custody of
any animal shall maintain in a sanitary manner the structure or enclosure or
yard within which such animal is kept. Excreta shall be removed from the
structure or enclosure on a daily basis and deposited in a sanitary manner into
a proper receptacle.
   (B)   Any person running or walking or having charge, control and/or custody
of any animal shall immediately remove and dispose of, in a sanitary manner,
any excreta deposited by said animal on the private property of another or on
any public walk, street, grassy area, recreational area or other municipally-
owned or controlled property.
   (C)   No person owning or having control of property within the city shall
accumulate excreta or permit excreta to lie on said property for any reason,
regardless of its source.
(Prior Code, § 4-6) (Ord. 1370, passed 9-17-2012) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.062 HEALTH HAZARDS OR NUISANCES CREATED BY ANIMALS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner, or any other person having the
possession, care, custody or control of any animal to own, possess, harbor,
shelter or keep any kind of animal that unreasonably annoys humans, endangers
the life or health of other animals or person, substantially interferes with
the rights of citizens, other than their owners, to enjoyment of life or
property or that creates a public nuisance.
   (B)   The term PUBLIC NUISANCE ANIMAL shall mean and include, but is not
limited to, any animal that:
      (1)   Causes fouling of the air by odor and thereby creates unreasonable
annoyance or discomfort to neighbors or others in close proximity to the
premises where the animal is kept or harbored;
      (2)   Causes unsanitary conditions in enclosures or surroundings where
the animal is kept or harbored;
      (3)   Is offensive or dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare
by virtue of the number and/or types of animals maintained; or
      (4)   Allow for or permit to be allowed the continuous barking of a dog.
(Prior Code, § 4-6) (Ord. 1370, passed 9-17-2012) Penalty, see §
90.999
DANGEROUS AND POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS
§ 90.075 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   It is the intent of the city to protect the health and safety of the public
against the risks that dangerous and potentially dangerous dogs pose to persons
and other animals in the city. Further, it is the intent of the city to afford
dog owners due process when the owner’s animal is classified as a dangerous or
potentially dangerous dog.
(Prior Code, § 4-7) (Ord. 1370, passed 9-17-2012)
§ 90.076 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DANGEROUS DOG. A dog that bites or attacks a person or causes a serious
injury to a person or domestic animal, or a dog that bites or attacks and
causes serious injury or death to another dog or domestic animal while the
other dog or domestic animal is on the property or under the control of its
owner. However, a DANGEROUS DOG does not include any of the following:
      (1)   A dog that bites or attacks a person who is knowingly trespassing
on the property of the dog’s owner;
      (2)   A dog that bites or attacks a person who provokes or torments the
dog; or
      (3)   A dog that is responding in a manner that an ordinary and
reasonable person would conclude was designed to protect a person if that
person is engaged in a lawful activity or is the subject of an assault.
   POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG. A dog that poses a threat to public safety as
demonstrated by any of the following behaviors:
      (1)   Causing an injury to a person or domestic animal that is less
severe than a serious injury;
      (2)   Without provocation, chasing or menacing a person or domestic
animal in an aggressive manner; or
      (3)   Running at large and picked up or impounded by an animal control
agency three or more times within any 12-month period.
(Prior Code, § 4-7) (Ord. 1370, passed 9-17-2012)
§ 90.077 DETERMINATION OF A POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG.
   (A)   Upon receipt of a complaint and after conducting an investigation, the
Animal Control Officer is authorized to make a determination whether a dog is a
potentially dangerous based upon the factors listed in §
90.076 of this chapter and shall present findings and a recommendation to the
Prosecuting Attorney for the city requesting issuance of a summons and
complaint if he or she determines the dog to be potentially dangerous.
   (B)   Upon a sworn complaint that a dog is potentially dangerous and the dog
has met any of the behavioral criteria listed in §
90.076 of this chapter, a District Court shall issue a summons to the owner
ordering him or her to appear to show cause why the owner should not be
required to comply with the following:
      (1)   Register the dog with DCACA as a potentially dangerous dog and pay
a registration fee of $75 annually;
      (2)   Maintain the dog at all times in a proper enclosure;
      (3)   Post the premises where the dog is kept with a clearly visible sign
warning that the dog on the premises is potentially dangerous to others. The
lettering on the sign shall be visible for a distance of 40 feet or more; and
      (4)   Must have affixed on collar at all times on animal a dangerous dog
tag obtained at the DCACA Animal Shelter.
   (C)   (1)   Upon the filing of a sworn complaint, the court or magistrate
shall order the owner to immediately turn the dog over to the DCACA, an
incorporated humane society, a licensed veterinarian or a boarding kennel, at
the owner’s option, to be retained by them until a hearing is held and a
decision is made for the disposition of the dog. The owner shall notify the
person who retains the dog under this section of the complaint and order. The
expense of the boarding and retention of the dog is to be borne by the owner.
The dog may not be returned to the owner until it has a current rabies
vaccination, a license as required by ordinance, and upon order of the court
that the dog should be returned.
      (2)   After a hearing, the magistrate or court shall order compliance
with the following provisions if it is determined that the dog is potentially
dangerous:
         (a)   Register the dog with DCACA as a potentially dangerous dog and
pay a registration fee of $75 annually;
         (b)   Maintain the dog at all times in a proper enclosure;
         (c)   Post the premises where the dog is kept with a clearly visible
sign warning that the dog on the premises is potentially dangerous to others.
The lettering on the sign shall be visible for a distance of 40 feet or more;
and
         (d)   Must wear a dangerous dog tag, available at the DCACA Shelter,
on collar at all times.
   (D)   If the dog is found to be a potentially dangerous dog, it shall be a
violation to:
      (1)   Keep a potentially dangerous dog without a valid certificate of
registration required by this section;
      (2)   Permit a potentially dangerous dog to be outside a proper enclosure
unless the potentially dangerous dog is under the control of a responsible
person and restrained by a chain or leash, not exceeding four feet in length;
      (3)   Fail to notify the DCACA or Police Department immediately if the
potentially dangerous dog is on the loose, is unconfined, has attacked another
domestic animal, has attacked a human being, has died, has been sold or has
been given away. If the potentially dangerous dog has been sold or given away,
the owner shall also provide the Animal Control Officer with the name, address
and telephone number of the new owner of the potentially dangerous dog; and
      (4)   Fail to surrender the potentially dangerous dog to the Animal
Control Officer for safe confinement pending a disposition of the case when
there is a reason to believe that the potentially dangerous dog poses a threat
to public safety; or failure to comply with any special security or care
requirements for a potentially dangerous dog that the Animal Control Officer
may determine is necessary for public safety.
(Prior Code, § 4-7) (Ord. 1370, passed 9-17-2012) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.078 DETERMINATION OF A DANGEROUS DOG.
   (A)   Upon receipt of a complaint and after conducting an investigation, the
Animal Control Officer is authorized to make a determination whether a dog is
dangerous based upon the factors listed in §
90.076 of this chapter and shall present findings and a recommendation to the
Prosecuting Attorney for the city requesting issuance of a summons and
complaint if he or she determines the dog to be dangerous.
   (B)   Upon a sworn complaint that a dog is dangerous and the dog has caused
serious injury or death to a person or has caused serious injury or death to an
animal, a District Court shall issue a summons to the owner ordering him or her
to appear to show cause why the animal should not be destroyed.
   (C)   (1)   Upon the filing of a sworn complaint as provided in division (B)
above, a record of the location of the dog, once it is determined, shall be
placed on record with the court of jurisdiction, the court or magistrate shall
order the owner to immediately turn the dog over to the DCACA, an incorporated
humane society, a licensed veterinarian or a boarding kennel, at the owner’s
option, to be retained by them until a hearing is held and a decision is made
for the disposition of the dog.
      (2)   The owner shall notify the person who retains the dog under this
section of the complaint and order.
      (3)   The expense of the boarding and retention of the dog is to be borne
by the owner. The dog may not be returned to the owner until it has a current
rabies vaccination, a license as required by ordinance and upon order of the
court that the dog should be returned.
   (D)   After a hearing, the magistrate or court shall order the destruction
of the dog, at the expense of the owner, if the dog is found to be a dangerous
dog that caused serious injury or death to a person or animal. After a hearing,
the court may order the destruction of the dog, at the expense of the owner, if
the court finds the dog is a dangerous animal that did not cause serious injury
or death to a person, but is likely in the future to cause serious injury or
death to a person or in the past has been adjudicated a dangerous dog.
   (E)   If the court or magistrate finds that a dog is a dangerous dog, but
has not caused serious injury or death to a person or animal (and does not
order destruction of the dog as set forth above), the court or magistrate shall
order the owner of that dog to do one or more of the following:
      (1)   If the dog that has been found to be dangerous dog is of the canis
familiaris species, have an identification number tattooed upon the animal or
inject a microchip, at the owner’s expense, by or under the supervision of a
licensed veterinarian. The identification number shall be assigned to the dog
by the state’s Department of Agriculture and shall be noted in its records
pursuant to Public Act 309 of 1939, being M.C.L.A. § 287.308 and Public Act 426
of 1988, being M.C.L.A. §§ 287.321 through 287.323. The identification number
shall be tattooed on the upper inner left rear thigh of the animal by means of
indelible or permanent ink;
      (2)   Take specific steps, such as escape proof fencing or enclosure,
including a top or roof, to ensure that the animal cannot escape or non-
authorized individuals cannot enter the premises;
      (3)   Have the animal sterilized;
      (4)   Obtain and maintain liability insurance coverage sufficient to
protect the public from any damage or harm caused by the dog;
      (5)   Take any other action appropriate to protect the public; and
      (6)   Must have affixed on dogs collar at all times a dangerous dog tag
obtained at the DCACA Animal Shelter.
   (F)   If the court after a hearing determines the dog is not dangerous, but
determines the dog is a potentially dangerous dog, then the provisions of this
section concerning a potentially dangerous dog shall apply.
(Prior Code, § 4-7) (Ord. 1370, passed 9-17-2012)
§ 90.079 TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR POSSESSION.
   (A)   Upon the transfer of ownership or possession of any dangerous dog or
potentially dangerous dog, the transferor shall immediately provide DCACA and
the Police Chief with the name, address and telephone numbers of the new owner
of the dog and the effective date of the transfer.
   (B)   Any transferee of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall
be presumed to have notice of the dog’s classifications as such.
(Prior Code, § 4-7) (Ord. 1370, passed 9-17-2012)
§ 90.080 REMOVAL OF CLASSIFICATION.
   The owner of a dog that has been determined to be a potentially dangerous
dog shall be given the opportunity to request that the classification of the
dog as a potentially dangerous dog should be reconsidered and removed, which
request may be granted by the District Court or Animal Control Officer, as
applicable, if the owner demonstrates that the dog has been incident free for
two years, the dog and owner have successfully completed obedience training,
the dog has been issued and maintained a canine good citizenship certificate by
a certified tester pursuant to the standards of the American Kennel Club and
the owner has complied in all respects with the provisions of this chapter and
any applicable court orders.
(Prior Code, § 4-7) (Ord. 1370, passed 9-17-2012)
§ 90.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   A violation of any of this chapter is a municipal civil infraction and
subjects the responsible party to a civil fine of not less than $25 and not
more than $500 and all other sanctions permitted by law for a municipal civil
infraction. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, §§ 4-8, 4-25)
   (B)   A person found responsible for violating §
90.004(L) of this chapter shall be deemed responsible for a municipal civil
infraction in the amount of $100 per day. Any person found liable for violating
§
90.004(L) of this chapter three or more times in a one-year time span shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 4-5)
   (C)   Any person who violates §
90.037(B)(1) of this chapter is responsible for a municipal civil infraction
and subject to a fine in an amount of $500. This prohibition does not apply to
pigeons kept in coops or cages.
   (D)   For any violation of §
90.037, a civil infraction citation shall issue with the first offense
resulting in a fine of $75, a second offense shall result in a fine of $100 and
a third offense shall result in a fine of $125. Failure to pay any fine shall
result in an appearance-only ticket which may result in a fine and the
imposition of costs incurred by the city.
(Prior Code, § 4-18)
   (D)   Per §
90.056 of this chapter, if it is a minor bite (single, shallow puncture wound
or a single wound, plus scrapes and bruises), requiring minimal or no doctor’s
treatment, the owner shall pay a minimum fine of $100. If it is a moderate bite
(single deep puncture wound, multiple shallow puncture wounds), requiring
medical care, the owner shall pay a minimum fine of $250. If it is a serious
bite (multiple deep puncture wounds), or requiring stitches, or loss of tissue
or facial bites or requiring hospitalization, the owner shall pay a minimum
fine of $500.
(Prior Code, § 4-6)
(Ord. 1370, passed 9-17-2012; Ord. 1495, passed 9-14-2020)
CHAPTER 91: FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Section
Fire Code
   
91.001   Adoption of 2015 International Fire Code
   
91.002   Amendments
Rules and Prohibitions
   
91.015   Christmas trees; disposition
   
91.016   False fire alarms
   
91.017   Interference with firefighting equipment
   
91.018   Reward
   
91.019   Fire plugs; obstruction
   
91.020   Smoking in bed
   
91.021   Smoking in theaters
   
91.022   Open fire and emergency exits
   
91.023   Fire pits and recreational fires
 
   
91.999   Penalty
Charter reference:
   Power to provide for fire prevention regulations, see § 4
Statutory reference:
   State Fire Prevention Act, see M.C.L.A. §§ 29.1 et seq.
FIRE CODE
§ 91.001 ADOPTION OF 2015 INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/84f314df5911a4b8d75bf8da219d5dc254290259/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4401.png]Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new
legislation (Ord. 1556, effective 7-14-2025). The text of the amendment will be
incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
   A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the City
Clerk, being marked and designated as the 2015 International Fire Code,
including Appendix B (Fire-Flow Requirements for Buildings), C (Fire Hydrant
Locations and Distribution), D (Fire Apparatus Access Roads), E (Hazard
Categories), F (Hazard Ranking) and I (Fire Protection System Non-Complaint
Conditions), as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby
adopted as the Fire Code of the city for regulating and governing the
safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from
the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices,
and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings
and premises, as herein provided; and providing for the issuance of permits and
collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of such International Fire Code on file in the
office of the City Clerk are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof
as if fully set out in this chapter with the additions, insertions, deletions
and changes, if any, prescribed in §
91.002 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 11-26) (Ord. 1125, passed 7-16-2001; Ord. 1378, passed 12-10-
2012; Ord. 1405, passed 11-10-2014; Ord. 1447, passed 4-10-2017)
§ 91.002 AMENDMENTS.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/84f314df5911a4b8d75bf8da219d5dc254290259/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4401.png]Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new
legislation (Ord. 1556, effective 7-14-2025). The text of the amendment will be
incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
   The following sections of the 2015 International Fire Code are amended to
read as follows.
   (A)   Section 101.1.
   These regulations shall be known as the Fire Code of the City of Wyandotte,
Michigan, hereinafter referred to as “this code”.
   (B)   Section 109.2. Owner/occupant responsibility.
   Correction and abatement of violations of this code shall be the
responsibility of the owner, or the owner’s authorized agent, where an occupant
creates, or allows to be created, hazardous conditions in violation of this
code, the occupant shall be held responsible for the abatement of such
hazardous conditions and in the event of an emergency situation arising from
the failure to abate will be liable for all reasonable costs incurred by the
city in dealing with said emergency.
   (C)   Section 109.4. Violation penalties.
   Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply
with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, alter, repair or do
work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the
fire code official, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this
code, shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction whether by
admission or by court determination and is subject to all of the following
fines and costs:
      A)   A civil fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and not
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00); and
      B)   The Judge or Magistrate shall summarily tax and determine the costs
of the action (which are not limited to the costs taxable in ordinary civil
actions.) and may include all expenses direct and indirect, to which the city
has been put in connection with the municipal civil infraction, up to the entry
of judgment, expenses include but are not limited to: Time of authorized city
official, time of city attorney, witness and mileage fees and postage. Costs
may not be less than nine dollars ($9.00) or more than five hundred dollars
($500.00). Costs shall be payable to the city general fund except as otherwise
provided by law.
      C)   Each day that a violation of this code continues after due notice
has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
   (D)   Section 111.4. Failure to Comply.
   Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop
work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a
violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less than
twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(Prior Code, § 11-27) (Ord. 1125, passed 7-16-2001; Ord. 1378, passed 12-10-
2012; Ord. 1405, passed 11-10-2014; Ord. 1447, passed 4-10-2017)
RULES AND PROHIBITIONS
§ 91.015 CHRISTMAS TREES; DISPOSITION.
   Any person engaged in selling Christmas trees within the limits of the city
shall, at the close of the selling season, remove all unsold trees, branches
and other debris incidental to such sales.
(Prior Code, § 11-1) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.016 FALSE FIRE ALARMS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person willfully or designedly to give, assist
in giving, countenance or request or cause to be given any false alarm of fire
in any manner; provided, however, that, this section shall not apply to members
of the Fire Department or any person in making tests or repairs under the
direction of the Fire Chief.
(Prior Code, § 11-2) Penalty, see §
91.999
Cross-reference:
   Alarm Systems, see
Ch. 99
§ 91.017 INTERFERENCE WITH FIREFIGHTING EQUIPMENT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to damage, injure, molest, remove or
otherwise interfere with any firefighting apparatus or equipment of the city.
(Prior Code, § 11-3) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.018 REWARD.
   The city shall pay a reward of $50 for information causing the apprehension
of any person violating or attempting to violate §§
91.016 or
91.017 of this chapter, to be paid upon conviction of such person.
(Prior Code, § 11-4)
§ 91.019 FIRE PLUGS; OBSTRUCTION.
   No person shall place any object within 15 feet of any fire plug, nor
otherwise obstruct same.
(Prior Code, § 11-5) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.020 SMOKING IN BED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in bed in hospitals,
nursing homes or other places of danger designated by the Chief of the Fire
Department.
   (B)   In each sleeping room where something is prohibited by division (A)
above, a plainly written notice shall be posted stating same.
(Prior Code, § 11-6) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.021 SMOKING IN THEATERS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke or light a match while
attending any performance in any theater or motion picture house, or in any
other auditorium used therefor in the city, or for any person maintaining or
operating any theater or motion picture show to permit any person to smoke
while attending a performance.
(Prior Code, § 11-7) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.022 OPEN FIRE AND EMERGENCY EXITS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to open, or cause to be opened, any door
or either or both of a set of double doors when a sign “Fire and Emergency Exit
Only” is posted on said door or doors or in close proximity thereto.
(Prior Code, § 11-8) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.023 FIRE PITS AND RECREATIONAL FIRES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      FIRE PIT. A self-contained commercial model designated as a fire pit
which is designed for the burning of wood. This would include an outdoor
fireplace, chimenea and other similar type models.
      RECREATIONAL FIRE. A fire burning outdoors in a commercially available
fire pit which must be equipped with a fire screen. A RECREATIONAL FIRE does
not include a ground fire pit.
(Prior Code, § 11-9)
   (B)   Regulations for recreational fire.
      (1)   A recreational fire is permissible only if conducted pursuant to
all regulations of this section.
      (2)   (a)   A recreational fire must be located a minimum of ten feet
from any structure, lot line, public way (road or sidewalk).
         (b)   Only dry seasoned fire wood is to be burned. It is not
permissible to burn trash, grass clippings, brush, construction debris or any
other material.
         (c)   Only small, controllable fires are authorized.
         (d)   A fire is to be attended at all times by responsible adult.
         (e)   A means for extinguishment of the fire must be readily available
(i.e., garden hose, fire extinguisher).
         (f)   No fire is permitted that creates excessive smoke or an
offensive odor.
(Prior Code, § 11-10)
(Ord. 1379, passed 12-17-2012) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Any person who violates §
91.023(B) of this chapter is responsible for a municipal civil infraction and
subject to a fine not to exceed $500 and court costs.
      (2)   In addition to a municipal civil infraction, any violation of §
91.023(B) of this chapter constitutes a nuisance and shall be abated
immediately by the person responsible for the fire. If the person fails to
abate the nuisance, the Police or Fire Department are authorized to abate said
nuisance and the person responsible for the fire shall be responsible to pay a
cost recovery to the city in accordance with the rates set for a Level III
response cost for a motor vehicle accident response.
(Prior Code, § 11-10)
(Ord. 1379, passed 12-17-2012)
CHAPTER 92: HAZARDOUS AND TOXIC MATERIALS
Section
Environmental Cost Recovery
   
92.001   Cost recovery for emergency incidents involving hazardous/toxic
materials or hazardous/dangerous conditions
   
92.002   Fire Chief’s decision; appeal procedures
   
92.003   Cost recovery for motor vehicle accident response
ENVIRONMENTAL COST RECOVERY
§ 92.001 COST RECOVERY FOR EMERGENCY INCIDENTS INVOLVING HAZARDOUS/TOXIC
MATERIALS OR HAZARDOUS/DANGEROUS CONDITIONS.
   (A)   The Fire Department shall have the power and authority to recover all
costs and expenses incurred in conjunction with emergency incidents occurring
within the city involving hazardous/toxic materials or hazardous/dangerous
conditions. Such costs and expenses shall include, but not be limited to,
abatement, disposal, clean-up, removal and remedial activities, including any
related third-party costs and expenses necessary to ensure the safety of the
city and its citizens. Any such costs and expenses shall be the sole
responsibility of the individual, owner and/or operator of the facility,
property vehicle, container, discarded material, solid waste or hazardous/toxic
material causing or contributing to the emergency incident including pollution
of the environment. All assessments for said costs and expenses against such
responsible parties shall be paid to the City Treasurer within 30 calendar days
of the date of assessment, unless approval for other arrangements is granted by
the city in cases of hardship or unless an appeal is filed as set forth in §
92.002 of this chapter.
   (B)   As used herein, HAZARDOUS/TOXIC MATERIALS shall be defined to include
those materials listed under 42 U.S.C. § 9601(14) of the Comprehensive
Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA), 42 U.S.C. §§
9601 et seq.
   (C)   The Fire Chief or his or her designee shall have the responsibility to
investigate the emergency incident and to determine its source and cause. The
Fire Chief or his or her designee shall make a written report detailing all of
the circumstances surrounding the emergency incident and the type of hazardous/
toxic materials or the nature of the hazardous/dangerous conditions involved
therein, calculating the reasonable costs and expenses incurred in conjunction
with the remedial activities as specified in this subchapter.
   (D)   The Fire Chief shall review the recommendations of his or her designee
and determine whether the emergency incident involved the presence of
hazardous/toxic materials or hazardous/dangerous conditions and what reasonable
costs and expenses, if any, are to be assessed against each responsible
individual, owner and/or operator.
   (E)   The findings and determinations of the Chief of the Fire Department
shall be in writing and shall itemize all reasonable costs and expenses
incurred in conjunction with the remedial activities specified.
(Prior Code, § 11-65) (Ord. 1007, passed 2-12-1996)
§ 92.002 FIRE CHIEF’S DECISION; APPEAL PROCEDURES.
   (A)   In the case of any assessment by the Chief of the Fire Department,
pursuant to this subchapter, to which any individual, owner or operator
directly and adversely affected thereby takes exception, such person or entity
may appeal the findings and determinations of the Chief of the Fire Department
to the City Council for a decision or modification of such action.
   (B)   Such appeal shall be in writing and taken within ten days of such
action by filing the notice of appeal with the Chief of the Fire Department and
the Council, specifying the grounds thereof, accompanied by such fee as may be
established in such cases by rule or regulation.
   (C)   The Chief of the Fire Department or his or her designee shall
forthwith transmit to the City Council all of the documents constituting the
record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
   (D)   The City Council shall select a reasonable time and place for the
hearing of the appeal and give public notice thereof, as well as special notice
thereof to said individual, owner or operator.
   (E)   An appeal taken pursuant to this section shall stay all proceedings in
furtherance of the action appealed from until the City Council renders its
decision, unless the Fire Chief certifies to the City Council after the notice
of appeal has been filed with his or her office that, by reason of the facts
stated in the certificate, a stay would cause irreparable harm or prejudice to
the individual, owner or operator who has appealed the assessment.
   (F)   The City Council shall, in writing and within a reasonable time after
said hearing, affirm, modify or rescind the action of the Chief of the Fire
Department appealed from.
   (G)   The findings and determinations of the City Council shall constitute
the final and binding decision under this section and shall not be subject to
further review.
(Prior Code, § 11-66) (Ord. 1007, passed 2-12-1996)
§ 92.003 COST RECOVERY FOR MOTOR VEHICLE ACCIDENT RESPONSE.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      LEVEL I RESPONSE. A minor vehicle accident response which would require
an engine to respond to the scene to assist and would require minimal
involvement of Fire Department personnel. The response could include clearing
of road hazards and would typically require 60 minutes of time or less on the
scene.
      LEVEL II RESPONSE. This would involve a moderate vehicle accident
response which would require an engine to respond to the scene to assist in the
situation. It could involve the clean-up of spills and debris removal and
extrication and typically would require 60 minutes of time or less on the
scene.
      LEVEL III RESPONSE. Vehicle accidents that require extended (over one
hour) extrication, hazardous materials or any other situation requiring Fire
Department personnel for multiple engine/truck companies or rescue vehicle;
victim entrapment with heavy rescue and/or extended extraction operations;
could require removing or mitigating hazardous material incident, combating a
working fire and would require over one hour of time on the scene.
   (B)   The owner, driver and named insured party of any motor vehicle shall
be responsible to pay the following cost recovery to the city when the city’s
Fire Department responds to a motor vehicle accident or any other event
involving a motor vehicle which requires a response by the Fire Department:
      (1)   The sum of $500 for a Level I response;
      (2)   The sum of $750 for a Level II response; and
      (3)   The billing submitted by the city’s Fire Department in accordance
with the city’s Fire Department Equipment and Personnel Rate Schedule set forth
in division (C) below.
   (C)   City Fire Department Equipment and Personnel Rate Schedule:
      (1)   Level III response cost.
Equipment Rate
Equipment                                               Rate
Ambulance                                               $160/hour
Arson Task Force truck                                  $210/hour
City-owned equipment                                    Act 51 rates
City-owned/rented warming/cooling shelter               Cost, plus 10%
Command vehicle                                         $105/hour
Dive Team truck                                         $210/hour
Emergency response truck #1                             $315/hour
Emergency response truck #2                             $315/hour with Decon
Extrication                                             $250/hour
Fire Department engine                                  $315/hour
Fire Department ladder/platform aerial                  $630/hour
Heavy equipment/rented                                  Cost, plus 10%
Miscellaneous receipts for supplies                     Cost, plus 10%
Mutual aid trailer                                      $105/hour
Police car                                              $105/hour
Special device (other) (i.e., crash truck, foam device) $630/hour
Specialty equipment                                     $105/hour
Utility vehicle                                         $105/hour
Utility vehicle staged                                  $50/hour
 
      (2)   Personnel utilized at incident.
Personnel Rate
Personnel                                                    Rate
Command officers                                             $60/hour
Firefighters                                                 $50/hour
Incident Commander, fire or police                           $100/hour
Miscellaneous personnel (other)                              Cost
Outside contractors; personnel, equipment, disposal (towing, Cost
hazardous material clean-up and the like)
Police officers                                              $50/hour
Specialist trained personnel                                 $80/hour
Technician trained personnel                                 $80/hour
 
   (D)   All cost recovery amounts shall be paid to the City Treasurer within
30 calendar days of the date of the mailing of the cost recovery assessment to
the responsible party, unless approval for other arrangements is granted by the
city in cases of hardship or unless an appeal is filed in a manner as set forth
in §
92.002 of this chapter.
   (E)   Failure of the payment by the responsible person of the cost recovery
assessment in a timely manner constitutes a municipal civil infraction.
(Prior Code, § 11-67) (Ord. 1243, passed 9-26-2005)
CHAPTER 93: FIREWORKS
Section
   
93.001   Definitions
   
93.002   Prohibited fireworks and devices
   
93.003   Minors
   
93.004   Public property
   
93.005   Private property
   
93.006   Other ordinances; conflict
   
93.007   Cost recovery
   
93.008   Prohibited use
   
93.009   Permit, bond for fireworks display
   
93.010   Disposal of unfired fireworks
   
93.011   Manufacture prohibited
   
93.012   Dangerous conditions
 
   
93.999   Penalty
Charter reference:
   Power of city to regulate fireworks, see § 4
Statutory reference:
   Fireworks, see M.C.L.A. §§ 28.451 et seq.
§ 93.001 DEFINITIONS.
   Except as otherwise provided, other terms used in this chapter shall have
the meaning ascribed to them in the Act, or, if not defined in the Act, under
the APA standards. For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
   ACT. The state’s Fireworks Safety Act, Public Act 256 of 2011, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 28.451 et seq. and any amendments to the Act which may be from time
to time adopted.
   APA STANDARD 87-1. 2001 APA Standard 87-1, Standard for Construction and
Approval for Transportation of Fireworks, Novelties and Theatrical
Pyrotechnics, published by the American Pyrotechnics Association of Bethesda,
Maryland.
   ARTICLES PYROTECHNIC. The pyrotechnic devices for professional use that are
similar to consumer fireworks in chemical composition and construction, but not
intended for consumer use, that meet the weight limits for consumer fireworks,
but are not labeled as such, and that are classified as UN0431 or UN0432 under
49 C.F.R. § 172.101.
   CONSUMER FIREWORKS. Fireworks devices that are designed to produce visible
effects by combustion, that are required to comply with the construction,
chemical composition and labeling regulations promulgated by the United States
Consumer Product Safety Commission under 16 C.F.R. parts 1500 and 1507, and
that are listed in the APA Standard 87-1, 3.1.2, 3.1.3 or 3.5. CONSUMER
FIREWORKS does not include low-impact fireworks.
   DISPLAY FIREWORKS. Large fireworks devices that are explosive materials
intended for use in fireworks displays and designed to produce visible or
audible effects by combustion, deflagration or detonation as provided in 27
C.F.R. § 555.11, 49 C.F.R. part 172 and APA Standard 87-1, 4.1.
   FIREWORK or FIREWORKS. Any composition or device, except for a starting
pistol, a flare gun or a flare, of non-toxic or non-explosive emissions,
designed for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by
combustion, deflagration or detonation. FIREWORKS, as used in this chapter,
shall include consumer fireworks, low-impact fireworks, articles pyrotechnic,
display fireworks and special effects.
   LOW-IMPACT FIREWORKS. Ground and handheld sparkling devices as that phrase
is defined under APA Standard 87-1, 3.1, 3.1.1.1 to 3.1.1.8 and 3.5.
   MINOR. An individual who is less than 18 years of age.
   NOVELTIES. The term as defined under APA Standard 87-1, 3.2, 3.2.1, 3.2.2,
3.2.3, 3.2.4 and 3.2.5 and all of the following:
      (1)   Toy plastic or paper caps for toy pistols in sheets, strips, rolls
or individual caps containing not more than 0.25 of a grain of explosive
content per cap, in packages labeled to indicate the maximum explosive content
per cap;
      (2)   Toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, toy trick noisemakers and toy
guns in which toy caps as described in division (1) above are used, that are
constructed so that the hand cannot come in contact with the cap when in place
for the explosion and that are not designed to break apart or be separated so
as to form a missile by the explosion;
      (3)   Filter sparklers in paper tubes not exceeding one-eighth inch in
diameter;
      (4)   Toy snakes not containing mercury, if packed in cardboard boxes
with not more than 12 pieces per box for retail sale and if the manufacturer’s
name and quantity contained in each box are printed on the box; and
      (5)   Toy smoke devices.
   PERSON. Any individual, agent, legal representative, association, charitable
organization, church, non-profit organization, unincorporated organization,
labor organization, partnership, limited liability company, corporation or any
legal entity or commercial organization. An individual shall include a minor,
as defined in this chapter.
   SKY LANTERN. Any device such as the placement of a candle in the bottom of a
small bag which then causes the device to go into the air (similar to a hot air
balloon) or any other similar type of device.
(Prior Code, § 11-51) (Ord. 1366, passed 7-23-2012; Ord. 1475, passed 4-29-
2019)
§ 93.002 PROHIBITED FIREWORKS AND DEVICES.
   (A)   Consumer fireworks. A person shall not ignite, discharge or use
consumer fireworks, except on the following days after 11:00 a.m.:
      (1)   December 31 until 1:00 a.m. on January 1;
      (2)   The Saturday and Sunday immediately preceding Memorial Day until
11:45 p.m. on each of those days;
      (3)   June 29 to July 4 until 11:45 p.m. on each of those days;
      (4)   July 5, if that date is a Friday or Saturday, until 11:45 p.m.; and
      (5)   The Saturday and Sunday immediately preceding Labor Day until 11:45
p.m. on each of those days.
   (B)   Low-impact fireworks. Low-impact fireworks may not be used, ignited or
discharged during the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m., and may not otherwise
be discharged in violation of the Act, this section or in such a manner that it
violates any other ordinance of the city.
   (C)   Illegal fireworks. Any use, possession or discharge of any fireworks
that is prohibited and/or not approved by the state or the state’s Fire
Marshal, or that which contains a prohibited chemical, component, compound or
composition under the APA 87-1 Standard, or any federal or state law or
regulation, is prohibited at all times and places, regardless of how it is
labeled.
   (D)   Sky lanterns. A sky lantern may not be used or released within the
city and sky lanterns are prohibited by federal regulations within 30 miles of
any international airport.
(Prior Code, § 11-52) (Ord. 1366, passed 7-23-2012; Ord. 1384, passed 6-24-
2013; Ord. 1475, passed 4-29-2019) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.003 MINORS.
   (A)   A minor shall not use, discharge or ignite any consumer fireworks, at
any time, nor on any day, including national holidays, the day before and the
day after a national holiday.
   (B)   A minor shall not use, discharge or ignite any low-impact fireworks
unless under the supervision of a parent or legal guardian, and the use,
discharge and ignition is within permitted hours, and does not violate the
provisions of the Act, this chapter or in such a manner that it violates any
other ordinance of the city.
(Prior Code, § 11-53) (Ord. 1366, passed 7-23-2012; Ord. 1475, passed 4-29-
2019) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.004 PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (A)   No person shall at any time or on any day, use, discharge or ignite
any fireworks, including consumer fireworks, and low-impact fireworks in public
parks.
   (B)   No fireworks, including consumer fireworks, and low-impact fireworks
shall be discharged, used, or ignited on any public property, including public
streets, schools, sidewalks, easements and rights-of-way.
(Prior Code, § 11-54) (Ord. 1366, passed 7-23-2012; Ord. 1475, passed 4-29-
2019) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.005 PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   A person shall not ignite, discharge or use any fireworks, including
consumer fireworks on church property or the property of another person without
that organization’s or person’s express permission to use those fireworks on
those premises.
   (B)   The person using the fireworks bears the burden of proof of showing he
or she received express permission to use the fireworks at that location and
must be able to present such proof to any peace officer upon request.
(Prior Code, § 11-55) (Ord. 1366, passed 7-23-2012; Ord. 1475, passed 4-29-
2019) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.006 OTHER ORDINANCES; CONFLICT.
   (A)   Any person who ignites, discharges or uses any fireworks, including
consumer fireworks must do so in such a manner that it will not result in the
violation of any other ordinance of the city.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the enforcement of city
ordinances or other laws of the state at any time or on any day regardless of
whether the conduct or offense is incidental to the use, discharge or ignition
of the fireworks.
(Prior Code, § 11-56) (Ord. 1366, passed 7-23-2012; Ord. 1475, passed 4-29-
2019) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.007 COST RECOVERY.
   (A)   Any costs the city incurs to respond and/or remediate any damage to
public or private property or injury to another person shall be paid by any
person responsible for the damage or injury.
   (B)   The city may pursue any legal remedies to collect such costs.
(Prior Code, § 11-57) (Ord. 1366, passed 7-23-2012; Ord. 1475, passed 4-29-
2019)
§ 93.008 PROHIBITED USE.
   (A)   No person shall use consumer fireworks or low-impact fireworks while
under the influence of alcoholic liquor, a controlled substance or a
combination of alcoholic liquor and a controlled substance.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR. The term as defined in § 1d of the Michigan Vehicle
Code, Public Act 300 of 1949, being M.C.L.A. § 257.1d.
      CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. The term as defined in § 8b of the Michigan Vehicle
Code, Public Act 300 of 1949, being M.C.L.A. § 257.8b.
(Prior Code, § 11-58) (Ord. 1366, passed 7-23-2012; Ord. 1475, passed 4-29-
2019) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.009 PERMIT, BOND FOR FIREWORKS DISPLAY.
   (A)   (1)   The Chief of the Fire Department shall have power to adopt
reasonable rules and regulations for the granting of permits for supervised
public displays of fireworks by organizations authorized by the City Council.
Every such display shall be handled by a competent operator approved by the
Chief of Police and the Chief of the Fire Department, and shall be of such a
character, and so located, discharged or fired, as in the opinion of the Chief
of the Fire Department or his or her authorized agent, after proper inspection
so that it will not be hazardous to property or endanger any person.
      (2)   Applications for permits shall be made in writing at least 21 days
in advance of that date of the display. After such privilege shall have been
granted, sale, possession, use and distribution of fireworks for such display
shall be lawful for that purpose only. No permit granted hereunder shall be
transferable.
(Prior Code, § 11-59)
   (B)   The permittee shall furnish a bond or liability insurance which
includes the city as an additional insured in an amount deemed adequate by the
City Council for the payment of all damages which may be caused either to a
person or to a property by reason of the permitted display, and arising from
any acts of the permittee, his or her agents, employees or subcontractors.
(Prior Code, § 11-60)
(Ord. 1366, passed 7-23-2012; Ord. 1475, passed 4-29-2019)
§ 93.010 DISPOSAL OF UNFIRED FIREWORKS.
   Any fireworks that remain unfired after the display is concluded shall be
immediately disposed in a way safe for the particular type of fireworks
remaining.
(Prior Code, § 11-61) (Ord. 1366, passed 7-23-2012; Ord. 1475, passed 4-29-
2019) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.011 MANUFACTURE PROHIBITED.
   The manufacture of fireworks is prohibited within the city.
(Prior Code, § 11-62) (Ord. 1366, passed 7-23-2012; Ord. 1475, passed 4-29-
2019) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.012 DANGEROUS CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Subject to division (D) below, if the state’s Fire Marshal or the
commanding officer of the city’s Fire Department, or a firefighter in uniform
acting under the orders and directions of the commanding officer determines a
dangerous condition exists, the state’s Fire Marshal, the commanding officer of
the city’s Fire Department, or the firefighter in uniform acting under the
orders and direction of the commanding officer upon finding an emergency
condition dangerous to persons or property, may take all necessary steps and
prescribe all necessary restrictions and requirements to protect persons and
property until the dangerous condition is abated.
   (B)   Subject to division (D) below, the state’s Fire Marshal, the
commanding officer of the city’s Fire Department, or a firefighter in uniform
acting under the orders and directions of the commanding officer, responding to
a fire or emergency call, who, upon arriving at the scene of a fire or
emergency, finds a condition dangerous to persons or property, may take all
necessary steps and requirements to protect persons and property until the
dangerous condition is abated.
   (C)   The state’s Fire Marshal or the commanding officer of the city’s Fire
Department, or a firefighter in uniform acting under the orders and direction
of the commanding officer, may investigate causes and effects related to
dangerous conditions.
   (D)   If the environmental concerns based on the Department of Natural
Resources Fire Division criteria are elevated to extreme fire conditions or if
the environmental concerns based on the Department of Natural Resources Fire
Division criteria are elevated to very high for 72 consecutive hours, the
commanding officer of the city’s Fire Department, in consultation with the
Department of Natural Resources, has the authority to enforce a no burning
restriction that includes a ban on the ignition, discharge and use of consumer
fireworks within the city. If a no burning restriction is instituted under this
division (D), the commanding officer of the city’s Fire Department enforcing
the restriction shall ensure that adequate notice of the restriction is
provided to the public.
   (E)   Not more than 24 hours after the fire condition is downgraded from
extreme or very high fire condition, the commanding officer of the city’s Fire
Department that enforced a no burning restriction that included a ban on the
ignition, discharge and use of consumer fireworks shall lift the restriction
and inform the public that the restriction has been lifted in the same manner
that the restriction was announced or made known to the public.   
(Prior Code, § 11-63) (Ord. 1475, passed 4-29-2019)
§ 93.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any section of this chapter is responsible for
a municipal civil infraction.
(Prior Code, § 11-64)
   (B)   A fine of $1,000 shall be imposed for each violation of §
93.002(A) of this chapter. The remitting of $500 of the fine collected under §
93.002(A) of this chapter to the city’s Police Department.
(Prior Code, § 11-52)
(Ord. 1366, passed 7-23-2012; Ord. 1475, passed 4-29-2019)
CHAPTER 94: HEALTH AND SAFETY; NUISANCES
Section
General Provisions
   
94.001   Definition
   
94.002   Illustrative enumeration
   
94.003   General prohibition
   
94.004   Notice to abate; contents; service of notice
   
94.005   Abatement by city
   
94.006   City’s costs declared lien or special assessment
   
94.007   Rodent-proofing
Unreasonable Use of Property
   
94.020   Unreasonable use in residential neighborhood
   
94.021   Definitions
Noxious Weeds and Tall Grass
   
94.035   Definition
   
94.036   Growth prohibited
   
94.037   Removal
   
94.038   Notice to comply
   
94.039   Access to premises
   
94.040   Accounts of expenditures
   
94.041   Collection of expenses; procedure
Air Pollution
   
94.055   Short title
   
94.056   Definitions
   
94.057   Air contaminants, water vapor, smoke and the like
   
94.058   Dust, fly ash; standard for measuring
   
94.059   Dwellings; applicability of provisions
   
94.060   Smoke indicator; exception
   
94.061   Fuel-burning equipment; installation and operation; sealing
   
94.062   Existing stack or chimney; abatement
   
94.063   Fees
   
94.064   Inspector; duties and powers
 
   
94.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 94.001 DEFINITION.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the word NUISANCE is hereby defined as
the doing of an unlawful act, or omitting to perform a duty, or the suffering
or permitting of any condition or thing to be or exist, which act, omission,
condition or thing either:
   (A)   Injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of others;
   (B)   Offends decency;
   (C)   Is offensive to the senses;
   (D)   Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs or tends to obstruct or renders
dangerous for passage any public or private street, highway, sidewalk, stream,
ditch or drainage;
   (E)   In any way renders other persons insecure in life or the use of
property; or
   (F)   Essentially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life and
property, or tends to depreciate the value of a person’s property or the
property of others.
(Prior Code, § 24-1) (Ord. 955, passed 9-21-1992)
§ 94.002 ILLUSTRATIVE ENUMERATION.
   The maintaining, using, placing, depositing, leaving or permitting to be or
remain on any public or private property of any of the following items,
conditions or actions are hereby declared to be and constitute a nuisance;
provided, however, this enumeration shall not be deemed or construed to be
conclusive, limiting or restrictive:
   (A)   Noxious weeds or other rank vegetation;
   (B)   Accumulation of inoperable motor vehicles, rubbish, trash, refuse,
junk and other abandoned materials, metals, lumber or other things;
   (C)   Any condition which provides harborage for rats, mice, snakes and
other vermin;
   (D)   Any building or other structure which is in such a dilapidated
condition that it is unfit for human habitation, or kept in such an unsanitary
condition that it is a menace to the health of people residing in the vicinity
thereof, or presents a more than ordinarily dangerous fire hazard in the
vicinity where it is located;
   (E)   All unnecessary or unauthorized noises and annoying vibrations,
including animal noises;
   (F)   All disagreeable or obnoxious odors and stenches, as well as the
conditions, substances or other causes which give rise to the emission or
generation of such odors and stenches;
   (G)   The carcasses of animals or fowl not disposed of within a reasonable
time after death;
   (H)   The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake, canal or
body of water by sewage, dead animals, creamery, industrial wastes or other
substances;
   (I)   Any building, structure or other place or location where any activity
which is in violation of local, state or federal law is conducted, performed or
maintained;
   (J)   Any accumulation of stagnant water permitted or maintained on any lot
or piece of ground;
   (K)   Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas, soot or cinders, in unreasonable
quantities;
   (L)   The keeping or confinement of livestock or fowl so situated that foul
odors are emitted onto the property of others;
   (M)   Any drawing, inscription, design, scribbling, motto, picture,
pictograph or design, including those commonly known as graffiti; and
   (N)   Any tree located on public or private property which may interfere
with power lines or utilities, or which may pose a danger or threat to
neighboring properties, or which is in such a condition that it may interfere
or cause damage to neighboring properties, or which trees may be dead, damaged
or diseased, or that harbor rodents or other such animals.
(Prior Code, § 24-2) (Ord. 955, passed 9-21-1992; Ord. 1275, passed 10-23-2006)
§ 94.003 GENERAL PROHIBITION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, permit, maintain or allow the
creation or maintenance of a nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 24-3) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.004 NOTICE TO ABATE; CONTENTS; SERVICE OF NOTICE.
   (A)   General. Whenever a nuisance is found to exist within the city or
within the city’s extraterritorial jurisdiction, the Health Officer or some
other duly designated officer of the city shall give written notice to the
owner or occupant of the property upon which such nuisance exists or upon the
person causing or maintaining the nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 24-4)
   (B)   Contents of notice. The notice to abate a nuisance issued under the
provisions of this subchapter shall contain:
      (1)   An order to abate the nuisance or to request a hearing within a
stated time, which shall be reasonable under the circumstances;
      (2)   The location of the nuisance, if the same is stationary;
      (3)   A description of what constitutes the nuisance;
      (4)   A state of acts necessary to abate the nuisance; and
      (5)   A statement that if the nuisance is not abated as directed and no
request or hearing is made within the prescribed time, the city will abate such
nuisance and assess the cost thereof against such person.
(Prior Code, § 24-5)
   (C)   Service of notice. The notice to abate a nuisance shall be served as
any other legal process may be served pursuant to law.
(Prior Code, § 24-6)
§ 94.005 ABATEMENT BY CITY.
   Upon the failure of the person upon whom notice to abate a nuisance was
served pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter to abate the same, the
Health Officer or other duly designated office of the city shall proceed to
abate such nuisance and shall prepare a statement of costs incurred in the
abatement thereof. The District Court may enter an order permitting the city or
its agents or representatives to enter upon the private property of another for
the purpose of abating such nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 24-7) (Ord. 1275, passed 10-23-2006)
§ 94.006 CITY’S COSTS DECLARED LIEN OR SPECIAL ASSESSMENT.
   (A)   Any and all costs incurred by the city in the abatement of a nuisance
under the provisions of this subchapter shall constitute a lien against the
property upon which such nuisance existed, which lien shall be filed, proven
and collected as provided for by law. Notice of such lien shall be to all
persons from the time of its recording and shall bear interest at the legal
rate thereafter until satisfied.
   (B)   Alternatively, such costs may be collected as a special assessment
pursuant to the Charter.
(Prior Code, § 24-8)
§ 94.007 RODENT-PROOFING.
   (A)   This section is to provide for the eradication of vermin infestation
on all existing and new buildings and structures including all accessory
buildings and structures.
   (B)   The following requirements shall be met.
      (1)   Foundation wall openings shall be appropriately covered with an
approved rat- proofing material such as metal plates, grills, grates or mesh of
0.035-inch minimum thickness, with openings not exceeding one-fourth inch.
      (2)   Foundation and exterior wall sealing shall be provided on all
annular spaces around pipes, electric cables, conduits or other openings in the
walls by closing such openings with cement mortar, concrete masonry or non-
corrosive metal.
      (3)   Doors on which metal protection has been applied shall be hinged so
as to be free swinging. The maximum clearance between any closed door, door
jambs and sills shall not be greater than three-eighths inch.
      (4)   All windows and other openings in exterior walls within two feet
above the existing ground shall be covered with screens.
      (5)   All new and existing accessory structures, 200 square feet or less,
not provided with a continuous foundation, shall be provided with either a
minimum four-inch wide by 24-inch deep concrete ratwall or grade floor of
concrete a minimum of four inches thick. All new and existing accessory
structures 201 to 400 square feet and under ten feet in height to the midpoint
of the roof shall be required to have a minimum four-inch wide by 24-inch deep
concrete ratwall. All new accessory structures 201 to 400 square feet in area
with a roof height greater than ten feet to the midpoint of the roof shall
require a minimum six-inch wide by 42-inch deep concrete foundation. All
existing accessory structures 201 to 400 square feet in area with a roof height
greater than ten feet to the midpoint of the roof shall require a minimum four-
inch wide by 24-inch deep concrete ratwall. All new accessory structures 401
square feet or greater shall require a minimum six-inch wide by 42-inch deep
concrete foundation. All existing accessory structures 401 square feet or
greater shall require a minimum four-inch wide by 24-inch deep concrete
ratwall. Regardless of size, all new brick or block accessory structures are
required to have a minimum eight-inch wide by 42-inch deep foundation. All
residential dwellings, commercial or industrial buildings, regardless of the
size, shall be provided with a foundation as required for structural support.
Where a pier foundation system is utilized and a continuous 42-inch deep
foundation system is not provided, a minimum four-inch wide by 24-inch deep
concrete ratwall shall be constructed between the pier foundations for all new
and existing accessory structures.
(Prior Code, § 24-9) (Ord. 1139, passed 3-11-2002; Ord. 1486, passed 11-3-2003)
Penalty, see §
93.999
UNREASONABLE USE OF PROPERTY
§ 94.020 UNREASONABLE USE IN RESIDENTIAL NEIGHBORHOOD.
   It is a violation of this subchapter for any person to store in a motor
vehicle, truck, trailer or any other similar type of vehicle, solid waste,
debris, yard waste, hazardous materials, scrap metal, recyclable items, old
appliances, used items, such as tires or any other type of scrap or junk or
unsightly material on any street, or driveway, or yard in a residential
neighborhood. It is hereby declared that violation of this subchapter makes the
violator responsible for a municipal civil infraction. Proof that the defendant
is the owner of any motor vehicle, truck or trailer described in the citation
creates in evidence a presumption that the vehicle’s registered owner was the
person responsible for the unreasonable use of property. If the motor vehicle,
truck or trailer involved is leased, the lessee and not the owner is presumed
to be responsible for the unlawful use; provided, the owner furnishes proof
that said vehicle or trailer was in the possession or custody of the lessee at
the time of the offense.
(Prior Code, § 24-36) (Ord. 1193, passed 6-14-2004) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.021 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   JUNK AND SCRAP. Includes, but is not limited to: old, used, stripped,
junked, recyclable scrap metal; old appliances, tires, refrigerators, toilets,
hot water heaters, bathtubs or any other similar type of implements; equipment
or personal property which is considered unsightly, or interferes with the
comfortable enjoyment of life and property, or tends to depreciate the value of
a person’s property or the property of others.
   SOLID WASTE, YARD WASTE, DEBRIS, HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Includes, but is not
limited to: cut grass and weeds; tree branches; composted materials; petroleum
products (stored or leaking); cooking grease and by-products; domestic rubbish;
dead animals; industrial waste or by- products.
(Prior Code, § 24-37) (Ord. 1193, passed 6-14-2004)
NOXIOUS WEEDS AND TALL GRASS
§ 94.035 DEFINITION.
   As used in this subchapter, NOXIOUS WEEDS shall be defined to include: grass
and weeds exceeding eight inches in height, Canada thistle (Circium arvense);
dodders (any species of Cuscuta); mustards (charlock, black mustard and Indian
mustard, species of Brassica or Sinapis); wild carrot (Daucus carota); bindweed
(Convolvulus arvensis); perennial sowthistle (Sonchus arvensis); hoary alyssum
(Berteroa incana); ragweed (Ambrosia elatior 1.) and poison ivy (Rhus
Toxicodendron); poison sumac (Toicodendron vernix), and noxious weeds as
defined in the state law of Michigan.
(Prior Code, § 14-31) (Ord. 730, passed 5-10-1982; Ord. 1552, passed 3-24-2025)
§ 94.036 GROWTH PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee, tenant, occupant, agent or other
person having control of any lot or land, either public or private, occupied or
vacant, within the city, to allow thereon or on any portion thereof or on the
abutting or adjoining one-half of the public street or alley immediately
adjacent to said lot or land, the presence of:
   (A)   Noxious weeds;
   (B)   Other weeds or grass exceeding eight inches in height; and
   (C)   Wild growing brush or underbrush exceeding eight inches in height.
(Prior Code, § 14-32) (Ord. 730, passed 5-10-1982; Ord. 1552, passed 3-24-2025)
Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.037 REMOVAL.
   In any case in which the owner, lessee, tenant, occupant, agent or other
person having control or management of any lot or land within the city, allows
thereon any weeds, brush, grass or underbrush in violation of § 94.036 of this
chapter, the City Engineer may assign employees or a city contractor to enter
upon such land and to destroy such weeds, brush, underbrush and to remove such
tall grass by spraying, cutting or other methods.
(Prior Code, § 14-33) (Ord. 730, passed 5-10-1982; Ord. 1552, passed 3-24-2025)
§ 94.038 NOTICE TO COMPLY.
   (A)   The City Engineer and/or City Clerk shall give notice to the person
responsible for land within the city each year prior to May 1 by publishing in
a newspaper having general circulation within the city declaring the provisions
of the ordinance requiring maintenance of the property and that the city may
cut and remove weeds and grass exceeding the height restrictions as many times
as is necessary and the owner or other responsible party shall be charged with
all expenses incurred by the city. The notice shall also provide that failure
to reimburse the city expenses will result in the expenses being a lien against
the property and will be specially assessed against their real property tax
bill.
   (B)   Prior to the city cutting of or removing the weeds or tall grass, the
city will provide written notice of a violation of this subchapter to the owner
or other responsible party by either personal service or posting of the
premises or the vacant lot.
   (C)   Failure of the city to give the notice does not constitute a defense
to an action to enforce the payment of the expenses incurred or any lien
against the property.
(Ord. 1552, passed 3-24-2025)
§ 94.039 ACCESS TO PREMISES.
   The City Engineer and his or her authorized representatives shall be granted
free access to and from any lot or land for the purpose of investigation and
work necessary to accomplish the destruction, removal or cutting of said weeds,
brush and grass.
(Prior Code, § 14-34) (Ord. 730, passed 5-10-1982; Ord. 1552, passed 3-24-2025)
§ 94.040 ACCOUNTS OF EXPENDITURES.
   The City Engineer shall keep an accurate account of the city’s entire
expenses (including administrative costs) incurred in destroying growths of
noxious and injurious weeds, brush, underbrush or grass and the cutting of
grass with respect to each lot or parcel of land entered upon therefor, and
shall make a sworn statement of said account and deliver the same to the City
Clerk. The Clerk shall present all such accounts to the Council not later than
the third Thursday in December of each year in which such labor is performed.
The Council shall audit and, if correct, allow such accounts and order the same
paid from the General Fund of the city. The sworn statement of the Engineer
shall give the date or dates which such noxious or injurious weeds, brush,
underbrush or grass exceeding the height restrictions were cut, destroyed and
removed, and the owner and description of the land involved, the cost of such
labor and administrative costs.
(Prior Code, § 14-35) (Ord. 730, passed 5-10-1982; Ord. 1552, passed 3-24-2025)
§ 94.041 COLLECTION OF EXPENSES; PROCEDURE.
   (A)   After said accounts have been audited, allowed and paid as above
provided, it shall be the duty of the City Clerk to certify them forthwith to
the City Assessor.
   (B)   If the expenditure has not been paid, all expenditures represented by
said accounts shall be severally spread upon the tax roll next in preparation,
levied on the land on which such expenditures were made, be a lien and
collected in the same manner as other city taxes and paid into the General Fund
of the city.
(Prior Code, § 14-36) (Ord. 730, passed 5-10-1982; Ord. 1552, passed 3-24-2025)
AIR POLLUTION
§ 94.055 SHORT TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Wyandotte Air
Pollution Prevention Ordinance”.
(Prior Code, § 30.1-21) (Ord. 775, passed 12-3-1984)
§ 94.056 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AIR CONTAMINANT. A dust, fume, fly ash, gas, mist, odor, smoke, soot vapor
or any combination thereof.
   AIR POLLUTION. The presence in the outdoor atmosphere of air contaminants in
quantities, of characteristics and under conditions and circumstances and of a
duration which are or can become injurious to human health or welfare, to
animal life, to plant life or to property, or which interferes with the
enjoyment of life and property in the city and excludes all aspects of
employer-employee relationships as to health and safety hazards. With respect
to any mode of transportation, nothing in this subchapter shall be inconsistent
with the federal regulations, emission limits, standards or requirements on
various modes of transportation.
   DUST. Gas-borne and air-borne particles larger than ten microns in mean
diameter.
   DUST-SEPARATING EQUIPMENT. An apparatus or device for separating solid
matter from the gas medium in which it is carried.
   FLY ASH. Fine solid particles, consisting mostly of incombustible material,
that are entrained in and carried by the gaseous products of combustion.
   FUEL-BURNING EQUIPMENT. A furnace incinerator, refuse-burning equipment,
boiler, chimney, flue, stack or any other apparatus, device, mechanism or
structure used in or in connection with the process of burning fuel or other
combustible material, but does not include an internal combustion engine or a
vehicle.
   FUME. Gaseous products of combustion of such character as to create an
unclean, destructive, offensive or unhealthful condition.
   INSPECTOR. The city official appointed by resolution of the City Council or
the person performing the duties of his or her office who is responsible for
the enforcement of this subchapter and any regulations promulgated thereunder.
   INTERNAL COMBUSTION ENGINE. An engine or turbine in which combustion of a
gaseous, liquid or pulverized solid fuel takes place within one or more
cylinders or combustion chambers.
   PERSON. Any individual, person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
   REGULATIONS. The regulations promulgated by the inspector pursuant to this
subchapter.
   SMOKE. Small gas-borne particles consisting essentially of carbonaceous
material in sufficient number to be observable.
   SOOT. Agglomerated particles consisting essentially of carbonaceous
material.
   STACK or CHIMNEY. Include a flue, conduit or other opening arranged for
emitting gases into the open air.
   VEHICLE. Includes a roller, derrick, crane, pile driver, trencher, portable
hoisting engine, tar kettle or other apparatus which is not ordinarily
permanently installed in one location, but is used at various places over a
wide area.
(Prior Code, § 30.1-22) (Ord. 775, passed 12-3-1984)
§ 94.057 AIR CONTAMINANTS, WATER VAPOR, SMOKE AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   Notwithstanding the provisions of any other city ordinance or rule, a
person shall not cause or permit the emission of an air contaminant or water
vapor in quantities that cause, alone or in reaction with other air
contaminants, either of the following:
      (1)   Injurious effects to human health or safety, animal life, plant
life of significant economic value or property in the city; and
      (2)   Unreasonable interference with the comfortable enjoyment of life
and property in the city.
   (B)   No person shall, cause, suffer or allow to be discharged or emitted
from any fuel-burning equipment, internal combustion engine, vehicle, outside
open fire, or premises, any air contaminant or water vapor or any combination
thereof or other solid or gaseous product of combustion in violation of
division (A) above.
   (C)   No person shall cause or allow the escape or emission from any stack
into the open air of any air contaminant or water vapor or any combination
thereof or any quantity of noxious acids, fumes or gases in any place or manner
as to cause injury, detriment or nuisance to any person or the public, or to
endanger the comfort, health or safety of any such person or of the public or
in any manner as to cause or have a tendency to cause injury or damage to
business or property in the city.
(Prior Code, § 30.1-23) (Ord. 775, passed 12-3-1984) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.058 DUST, FLY ASH; STANDARD FOR MEASURING.
   (A)   No person shall, cause, suffer or allow to be discharged or emitted
from any fuel-burning or dust-separating equipment, any dust, soot or fly ash
exceeding 0.85 pounds per 1,000 pounds of gases, adjusted to 12% CO2; except
that, dust, soot or fly ash not exceeding 15%, of the total dust, soot or fly
ash entering any dust-separating equipment may be discharged or emitted to the
atmosphere; and for the purposes of this section the amount of dust, soot or
fly ash in the gases shall be determined according to the test code for dust-
separating apparatus of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers, as
revised and amended from time to time.
   (B)   All fuel-burning equipment in which pulverized fuel is or is intended
or designed to be burned, spreader stokers or similar types of suspension-
burning equipment, installed after the passing of this subchapter shall be
provided with dust-separating equipment approved by the inspector sufficient to
prevent the discharge or emission of dust, soot or fly ash in excess of the
limits set forth in division (A) above.
(Prior Code, § 30.1-24) (Ord. 775, passed 12-3-1984) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.059 DWELLINGS; APPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS.
   This subchapter shall not apply to single or multiple dwellings where each
dwelling unit is heated by a separate, self-contained heating plant.
(Prior Code, § 30.1-25) (Ord. 775, passed 12-3-1984)
§ 94.060 SMOKE INDICATOR; EXCEPTION.
   Each stack or chimney of every plant that burns or is intended or designed
to burn solid or liquid fuel and has more than 500 square feet of boiler
heating surface (50 h.p.) shall be equipped with an approved smoke indicator or
recorder. This section shall not apply to a stack or chimney that is readily
visible to the firefighter from the boiler room without the aid or use of a
smoke indicator if a firefighter is in constant attendance in such boiler room.
For the purpose of this section, SMOKE INDICATOR includes, in the case of a
boiler room having a firefighter in constant attendance, a mirror or other
device that enables the firefighter to determine conditions at the top of the
stack or chimney from the boiler room at all times, and, in the case of a
boiler room not having a firefighter in constant attendance, means a smoke
indicator of a type which will sound an alarm or flash a signal to attract the
attention of the firefighter.
(Prior Code, § 30.1-26) (Ord. 775, passed 12-3-1984) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.061 FUEL-BURNING EQUIPMENT; INSTALLATION AND OPERATION; SEALING.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall erect, construct, reconstruct, install, alter or
repair any fuel-burning equipment unless and until he or she shall have first
procured a permit known as an installation permit from the inspector.
Application for a permit, shall in addition to the required fees be accompanied
by plans and specifications, in duplicate, of the fuel-burning equipment and
all work proposed in connection therewith, including the form, description and
dimensions thereof, and of the building, if any, in which the fuel-burning
equipment is or is to be located, the means provided or proposed for admitting
air for combustion, the character of the fuel to be used, the maximum quantity
of fuel to be burned per hour, the operating requirements and the use to be
made of such fuel-burning equipment, and generally all particulars necessary to
establish that the fuel-burning equipment and all proposed work in connection
therewith for which application is made complies with this subchapter.
      (2)   Nothing contained herein shall be construed to require a permit:
         (a)   In the case of routine maintenance work or minor alterations or
repairs which do not change the capacity of fuel-burning equipment or the
method of combustion or do not adversely affect the production, emission or
discharge of smoke, dust, fly ash, soot, fumes or other solid or gaseous
product of combustions; and
         (b)   In the case of any emergency repair where serious consequences
would otherwise result; provided that, application for the necessary
installation permit is filed otherwise, in accordance with this section on the
first business day following commencement of the repair work.
(Prior Code, § 30.1-27)
   (B)   (1)   The work of erecting, constructing, reconstructing, installing,
altering or repairing fuel-burning equipment shall be commenced and proceeded
with within one year from the date of the installation permit otherwise such
permit shall be void.
      (2)   Upon the completion of this work, the inspector shall inspect same
and, if such work conforms to the application, plans and specification filed
therefor, and to the provisions of this subchapter and the regulations, shall
issue a permit, known as an operating permit, which shall be posted in a
conspicuous position adjacent to the equipment.
      (3)   No person shall operate or use or cause, suffer or allow to be
operated or used any fuel-burning equipment in respect to which an installation
permit has been issued unless he or she shall have first procured an operating
permit.
(Prior Code, § 30.1-28)
   (C)   Whenever an operating permit is refused, revoked or cancelled, the
inspector is authorized to seal immediately the fuel-burning equipment until
the owner, lessee or other person required to procure the operating permit
shall have complied with the provisions of this subchapter and its regulations.
(Prior Code, § 30.1-33)
(Ord. 775, passed 12-3-1984) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.062 EXISTING STACK OR CHIMNEY; ABATEMENT.
   Whenever any prior existing chimney or stack is so located that the
emissions or discharges therefrom are a nuisance to the occupants of any
building or structure subsequently erected or where any building or structure
subsequently erected adversely affects the draft of any such chimney or stack,
such nuisance shall be abated or the adverse affect upon such draft shall be
corrected as the case may be, either by increasing the height of the chimney or
stack, or by making such other provision as may be deemed effective by the
inspector. The work of increasing the height of the chimney or stack or making
such other provision as may be deemed effective by the inspector shall be done
by the owner of the building or structure of which the chimney or stack forms
part and the cost and expenses incurred thereby may be recovered by him or her
from the owner of the building or structure subsequently erected, in court as a
debt due and payable.
(Prior Code, § 30.1-29) (Ord. 775, passed 12-3-1984) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.063 FEES.
   The fees for the issuance of installation permits and operating permits
shall be such sums as the City Council shall from time to time determine.
(Prior Code, § 30.1-30) (Ord. 775, passed 12-3-1984)
§ 94.064 INSPECTOR; DUTIES AND POWERS.
   (A)   The inspector shall be responsible for the enforcement of this
subchapter and the regulations promulgated thereunder and his or her duties
shall, among others, be as follows:
      (1)   To investigate complaints, including complaints about air
pollution, make observations of smoke and air pollution conditions and take the
necessary action to abate nuisances therefrom;
      (2)   To issue permits, and notices, and to keep records of applications,
plans, specifications, permits, violations, complaints and other matters on
file for Department purposes only;
      (3)   To examine the plans and specifications for all new buildings and
alterations of or repairs to existing buildings for the purpose of ascertaining
that such buildings when erected, altered or repaired will meet the
requirements of this subchapter;
      (4)   To examine the plans and specifications for the erection,
construction, reconstruction, installation, alteration or repair of fuel-
burning equipment and inspect such work and issue permits, all as required in
accordance with the provisions of this subchapter;
      (5)   To publish and disseminate information on methods of smoke and air
pollution reduction; and
      (6)   To enlist the cooperation of civic, technical, scientific and
educational groups, societies and organizations in respect to the reduction and
abatement of smoke, air and other atmospheric pollution.
(Prior Code, § 30.1-31)
   (B)   The inspector may, at reasonable hours enter upon any property, except
dwellings, to inspect same for the purposes of this subchapter. The inspector
may require the owner, occupant, manager or agent of any property to make such
tests of or alterations in fuel-burning equipment thereon or the manner of
operating the same as may, in his or her opinion, be necessary to prevent or
lessen the emission or discharge to the atmosphere of air contaminants or other
solid or gaseous products of combustion. No person shall in any manner
obstruct, hinder, delay, resist, prevent or in any way interfere or attempt to
interfere with the inspector in the carrying out of his or her duties or refuse
entry upon any property or premises at any reasonable time. Whenever compliance
with the provisions of this subchapter creates undue hardship, the inspector
may permit deviation from strict compliance with the provisions of this
subchapter if the purpose of this subchapter is observed and not violated.
(Prior Code, § 30.1-32) (Ord. 775, passed 12-3-1984)
§ 94.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any violation of §
94.007 of this chapter shall constitute a municipal civil infraction. A
defendant who is found responsible for a violation designated as a municipal
civil infraction, whether by admission or by court determination, is subject to
a civil fine not to exceed $500 per offense, plus court costs. Any subsequent
violation of §
94.007 of this chapter may be prosecuted as a misdemeanor with fines not
exceeding $500 and/or 90 days in jail. Each day that the violation occurs
constitutes a separate violation.
(Prior Code, § 24-9)
   (C)   (1)   Any person who parks on any city street in a residential area in
a manner which is in violation of §
94.020 of this chapter is responsible for a municipal civil infraction and is
subject to the penalties set forth herein.
      (2)   Any person who violates any provision of §
94.020 of this chapter is responsible for a municipal civil infraction and will
be responsible to pay a fine not to exceed $500, plus court costs. Each day the
unreasonable use of property continues constitutes a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 24-38)
   (D)   (1)   Any person, firm or corporation or any other legal entity who
violates or neglects to comply with any provisions of §§
94.035 through
94.040 of this chapter, or any regulation promulgated pursuant thereto, is
responsible for a municipal civil infraction and subject to the following
fines:
         (a)   For the first violation: a fine not exceeding $500, plus court
costs; and
         (b)   For a second or subsequent violation(s): a mandatory fine of
$500, plus court costs.
      (2)   Each day that a violation(s) is permitted to exist shall constitute
a separate offense. The imposition of any infraction shall not exempt the
offender from compliance with the other requirements contained in Ch. 51 of
this code of ordinances, including, but not limited to, the abatement of
violations and the payment of the costs for removal of any yard waste, tall
grass or noxious weeds incurred by the city.
(Prior Code, § 14-37)
   (E)   (1)   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of §§
94.055 through
94.064 of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of
not more than $500 per day for each violation. Each day of any violation shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense.
      (2)   In addition, the Department of Legal Affairs may, at the request of
the City Council, file an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to
recover the full value of the injuries done to the natural resources of the
city and the costs of surveillance and enforcement by the city resulting from
any violation.
(Prior Code, § 30.1-34)
(Ord. 730, passed 5-10-1982; Ord. 775, passed 12-3-1984; Ord. 1139, passed 3-
11-2002; Ord. 1486, passed 11-3-2003; Ord. 1193, passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 1246,
passed 10-24-2005)
CHAPTER 95: MARINE SAFETY
Section
General Provisions
   
95.001   Application
   
95.002   Definitions
Certification Conditions
   
95.015   Conditions to operation of vessels
   
95.016   Exemption
   
95.017   Types of certifications; fees and taxes; exemptions
   
95.018   Notice of destruction, abandonment or sale of vessel; transfer of
vessel; fees; duration
   
95.019   Dealer certificates of number and dealer decals
   
95.020   Violation; record of charge or citation; inspections and modifications
Numbering and Identification
   
95.035   Applicability
   
95.036   Form of number
   
95.037   Numbers; display; size; color
   
95.038   Other numbers prohibited
   
95.039   Documented vessels; decals; display
   
95.040   Removal of number
   
95.041   Validation decals; display; size; color
Casualties
   
95.055   Applicability; casualties involving vessels
   
95.056   Immediate notification of death or disappearance
   
95.057   Report of collision, accident or other casualty
Operation Regulations
   
95.070   Operation of motorboats by children
   
95.071   Personal flotation devices; exception; definitions
   
95.072   Operation of personal watercraft; requirements; prohibitions;
exception
   
95.073   Operation of vessels; rules; speed; interference with use of waters by
others
   
95.074   Maximum or unlimited motorboat speed; rules; exceptions; waiver
   
95.075   Reckless operation of vessels
   
95.076   Operating motorboat at more than slow-no wake speed; prohibitions;
exceptions
   
95.077   Operation in counter-clockwise fashion; distance between persons being
towed and other objects; exception
   
95.078   Operation of vessels; prohibited in certain areas
   
95.079   Towing of person; prohibited time; exceptions
   
95.080   Vessels; use of portions unintended for occupancy prohibited;
exceptions
   
95.081   Interface with operation of vessel by non-occupant
   
95.082   Divers; marking point of submergence; distance from diver’s flag
   
95.083   Motorboat; muffler or underwater exhaust system required; maximum
sound levels
   
95.084   Responsibility for damage caused by vessel wake
   
95.085   Peace officers; stopping of vessels; duty of operator
   
95.086   Negligent crippling or death
Capacities
   
95.100   Inspection of watercraft and equipment
   
95.101   Maximum capacity tags
   
95.102   Weight capacity
   
95.103   Horsepower capacity
   
95.104   Passenger capacity
Equipment
   
95.115   Applicability
   
95.116   Navigation lights; intensity standards; placement; screening
   
95.117   Personal flotation devices
   
95.118   Fire extinguishing equipment
   
95.119   Backfire flame control
   
95.120   Ventilation
   
95.121   Muffler; cut outs
   
95.122   Violation
Outboard Motorboats
   
95.135   Less than 16 feet in length
   
95.136   Sixteen feet or over and less than 26 feet in length
   
95.137   Twenty-six feet or over and less than 40 feet in length
   
95.138   Forty feet or over and not more than 65 feet in length
Inboard and Inboard-Outboard Motorboats
   
95.150   Less than 16 feet in length
   
95.151   Sixteen feet or over and less than 26 feet in length
   
95.152   Twenty-six feet and over and less than 40 feet in length
   
95.153   Forty feet and over and not more than 65 feet in length
Sailboats and Other Types of Boats
   
95.165   Sailboat without motor, less than 16 feet in length
   
95.166   Sailboat without motor, 16 feet or over in length
   
95.167   Sailboat with motor
   
95.168   Rowboats
   
95.169   Canoes and kayaks
   
95.170   Speed of boats; no wake
Personal Watercraft
   
95.185   Definitions; applicable to personal watercraft
   
95.186   Applicability
   
95.187   Rules
   
95.188   Operation of personal watercraft; requirements; prohibition; violation
   
95.189   Reckless operation of personal watercraft; impoundment
   
95.190   Operation of personal watercraft; distance requirements; exceptions
   
95.191   Individual required to complete boating safety course; certificate
required
   
95.192   Display of boating safety certificate
   
95.193   Operation of personal watercraft; graduated age provisions
   
95.194   Certification requirements for out-of-state residents
   
95.195   Sources of boating safety courses; failure of dealer to advise;
violation
   
95.196   Availability of documents to dealer; providing documents to buyer
   
95.197   Enforcement of subchapter
   
95.198   Compliance with state law
Restrictions, Violations and Penalties
   
95.210   Operation of vessel by person under influence of intoxicating liquor
or controlled substance
   
95.211   Enhanced sentencing
   
95.212   Peace officer; arrest without warrant; reasonable cause; conditions;
returning vessel and occupants to shore; effect of not charging person
receiving citation
   
95.213   Chemical test and analysis of blood, urine or breath; collection of
sample or specimen; application of administrative rules
   
95.214   Chemical tests; administration; procedures; evidence
   
95.215   Order not to operate vessel on waters of state; convictions;
effectiveness
   
95.216   Failure to answer citation or notice or comply with judgment or order;
conditions
   
95.217   Person subject to order; prohibited conduct
   
95.218   Impoundment of vessel; order; execution; liability for expenses;
rights of conditional vendor, chattel mortgagee or lessor of vessel
   
95.219   Conviction based on plea of nolo contendere
   
95.220   Public dock, pier, wharf or retaining wall; entry or use prohibited
under certain wind condition; barricades; notice
 
   
95.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 95.001 APPLICATION.
   (A)   This chapter applies to vessels and associated equipment used, to be
used or carried in vessels used on waters subject to the jurisdiction of the
city.
   (B)   This chapter, except where expressly indicated otherwise, does not
apply to any of the following:
      (1)   Foreign vessels temporarily using waters subject to the
jurisdiction of the city;
      (2)   Military or public vessels of the United States, except
recreational-type public vessels;
      (3)   A vessel whose owner is a state or political subdivision of a
state, other than the state and its political subdivisions, that is used
principally for governmental purposes and that is clearly identifiable as such;
and/or
      (4)   A ship’s lifeboat.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-1) (Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998)
§ 95.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANCHORED RAFTS. All types of non-powered rafts used for recreation purposes
that are anchored seasonally on waters of the state or city.
   ASSOCIATED EQUIPMENT. Any of the following that are not radio equipment:
      (1)   An original system, part or component of a boat at the time that
boat was manufactured, or a similar part or component manufactured or sold for
replacement;
      (2)   Repair or improvement of an original or replacement system, part or
component;
      (3)   An accessory or equipment for, or appurtenance to, a boat; and
      (4)   A marine safety article, accessory or equipment intended for use by
a person on board a boat.
   BOAT. A vessel.
   BOAT LIVERY. A business that holds a vessel for renting, leasing or
chartering.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. As defined in § 7104 of the Public Health Code, Public
Act 368 of 1978, being M.C.L.A. § 333.7104.
   CONVICTION. A final conviction, the payment of a fine, a plea of guilty or
nolo contendere if accepted by the court, a finding of guilt or a probate court
disposition on a violation of this chapter, regardless of whether the penalty
is rebated or suspended.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-11)
   DEALER. A person and an authorized representative of that person who
annually purchases from a manufacturer, or who is engaged in selling or
manufacturing, six or more vessels that require certificates of number under
this chapter or as required by state law.
   IDENTIFICATION DOCUMENT. Any of the following:
      (1)   A valid Michigan operator’s or chauffeur’s license;
      (2)   A valid driver’s or chauffeur’s license issued by an agency,
department or bureau of the United States or another state;
      (3)   An official identification card issued by an agency, department or
bureau of the United States, the State of Michigan or another state; and
      (4)   An official identification card issued by a political subdivision
of the State of Michigan or another state.
   ISSUING AUTHORITY. The United States Coast Guard or a state that has a
numbering system approved by the United States Coast Guard.
   LAW OF ANOTHER STATE. A law or ordinance enacted by another state or by a
local unit of government in another state.
   LIFEBOAT. A small boat designated and used solely for lifesaving purposes,
and does not include a dinghy, tender, speedboat or other type of craft that is
not carried aboard a vessel for lifesaving purposes.
   LONG-TERM INCAPACITATING INJURY. An injury that causes serious impairment of
a body function.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-12)
   MANUFACTURER. A person engaged in any of the following:
      (1)   The manufacture, construction or assembly of boats or associated
equipment;
      (2)   The manufacture or construction of components for boats and
associated equipment to be sold for subsequent assembly; and/or
      (3)   The importation of a boat or associated equipment into the state
for sale.
   MARINE LAW. This chapter, M.C.L.A. §§ 324.80101 et seq. (part 801) or a rule
adopted under the state’s Administrative Code which is incorporated herein by
reference.
   MARINE SAFETY ACT. Former Public Act 303 of 1967, being M.C.L.A. §§ 281.1001
through 281.1199.
   MARINE SAFETY PROGRAM. Marine law enforcement, search and rescue operations,
water safety education, recovery of drowned bodies and boat livery inspections.
   MICHIGAN VEHICLE CODE. Public Act 300 of 1949, being M.C.L.A. §§ 257.1
through 257.923.
   MOTORBOAT. A vessel propelled wholly or in part by machinery.
   OPERATE. To be in control of a vessel while the vessel is under way and is
not secured in some manner such as being docked or at anchor.
   OPERATOR. The person who is in control or in charge of a vessel while the
vessel is under way and is not secured in some manner such as being docked or
at anchor.
   OWNER. A person who claims or is entitled to lawful possession of a vessel
by virtue of that person’s legal title or equitable interest in a vessel.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-13)
   PASSENGER. A person carried on board a vessel other than any of the
following:
      (1)   The owner or his or her representative; and/or
      (2)   The operator.
   PEACE OFFICER. Any of the following:
      (1)   A sheriff;
      (2)   A sheriff’s deputy;
      (3)   A deputy who is authorized by a sheriff to enforce this chapter,
the Marine Laws or Marine Safety Act and who has satisfactorily completed at
least 40 hours of law enforcement training, including training specific to this
part;
      (4)   A village or township marshal;
      (5)   An officer of the Police Department of the city;
      (6)   An officer of the State Police; and/or
      (7)   The Director and conservation officers employed by the Department
of Environmental Quality.
   PERSONAL WATERCRAFT. A vessel that meets all of the following requirements:
      (1)   Uses a motor-driven propeller or an internal combustion engine
powering a water jet pump as its primary source of propulsion;
      (2)   Is designed without an open load carrying area that would retain
water; and
      (3)   Is designed to be operated by one or more persons positioned on,
rather than within, the confines of the hull.
   PORT. Left, and reference is to the port side of a vessel or to the left
side of the vessel.
   PROBATE COURT DISPOSITION. The entry of the probate court order of
disposition for a child found to be within the provisions of Ch. XIIA of Public
Act 288 of 1939, being M.C.L.A. §§ 712A.1 through 712A.31.
   PROSECUTING ATTORNEY. The Prosecuting Attorney of the city.
   REGATTA, BOAT RACE, MARINE PARADE, TOURNAMENT or EXHIBITION. An organized
water event of limited duration that is conducted according to a prearranged
schedule.
   SLOW-NO WAKE SPEED. A very slow speed whereby the wake or wash created by
the vessel would be minimal.
   STARBOARD. Right, and reference is to the starboard side of a vessel or to
the right side of the vessel.
   STATE AID. Payment made by the state to a county for the conduct of a marine
safety program.
   UNDOCUMENTED VESSEL. A vessel that does not have, and is not required to
have, a valid marine document issued by the United States Coast Guard or
Federal Agency successor to the United States Coast Guard.
   UNIFORM INSPECTION DECAL. An adhesive-backed sticker created by the state
pursuant to M.C.L.A. § 324.80166 that is color-coded to indicate the year that
it expires and is attached to a vessel in the manner prescribed for decals in
M.C.L.A. § 324.80122.
   USE. Operate, navigate or employ.
   VESSEL. Every description of watercraft used or capable of being used as a
means of transportation on water.
   WATERS OF THIS STATE. Any waters within the territorial limits of the state,
and includes those waters of the Great Lakes that are under the jurisdiction of
the state.
   WATERS OF THE CITY. Any waters within the territorial limits of the city and
includes the waters of the state under the jurisdiction of the city.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-14)
(Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998)
CERTIFICATION CONDITIONS
§ 95.015 CONDITIONS TO OPERATION OF VESSELS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, a person shall not
operate or give permission for the operation of a vessel of any length on the
waters of the city unless the fees prescribed by state law and administrative
rule for the vessel are paid, the certificate of number assigned to the vessel
is on board and is in full force and effect, and, except for the following, the
identifying number and decal are displayed on each side of the forward half of
the vessel in accordance with the rules promulgated by the state.
      (1)   A decal and identifying number for a wooden hull and historic
vessel as that term is defined in M.C.L.A. § 324.80124 may be displayed in the
manner described in Mich. Admin. Code R. § 281.1202.
      (2)   A decal for an inflatable boat may be displayed on the transom of
the boat.
   (B)   If a vessel is actually numbered in another state of principal use in
accordance with a federally approved numbering system, it is in compliance with
the numbering requirements of the state while it is temporarily being used in
the state. This subsection applies to a vessel for which a valid temporary
certificate is issued to the vessel’s owner by the issuing authority of the
state in which the vessel is principally used.
   (C)   If a vessel is removed to the state as the new state of principal use,
a number awarded by any other issuing authority is valid for not more than 60
days before numbering is required by the state.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-21) (Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998)
§ 95.016 EXEMPTION.
   (A)   The owner of a vessel is not required to pay a fee and a vessel is not
required to be numbered and to display a decal under this chapter if the vessel
is one or more of the following:
      (1)   Used temporarily on the waters of the state and the owner and the
vessel are from a country other than the United States;
      (2)   A vessel that is owned by the United States, used in the public
service for purposes other than recreation and clearly identifiable as such a
vessel;
      (3)   A vessel’s lifeboat;
      (4)   An all-terrain vehicle not used as a vessel;
      (5)   A raft, sailboard, surfboard or swim float;
      (6)   A vessel 16 feet or less, propelled by hand either with oars or
paddles and not used for rental or other commercial purposes; and/or
      (7)   A non-motorized canoe or kayak not used for rental or other
commercial purposes.
   (B)   The owner of a vessel documented by the United States Coast Guard or a
federal agency that is the successor to the United States Coast Guard shall
comply with this chapter, including the payment of fees as provided in this
chapter. However, the vessel shall not be required to display numbers under
this chapter.
   (C)   This chapter does not prohibit the numbering of an undocumented vessel
pursuant to this chapter upon request by the owner, even though the vessel is
exempt from the numbering requirements of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-22) (Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998)
§ 95.017 TYPES OF CERTIFICATIONS; FEES AND TAXES; EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, the owner of a vessel
required to be numbered and to display a decal shall file an application for a
certificate of number with the Secretary of State. The Secretary of State shall
prescribe and furnish certificate of title application forms. If a vessel
requiring a certificate of title under M.C.L.A. §§ 324.80301 et seq. part 803
is sold by a dealer, that dealer shall combine the application for a
certificate of number that is signed by the vessel owner with the application
for a certificate of title. The dealer shall obtain the certificate of number
in the name of the owner. The owner of the vessel shall sign the application. A
person shall not file an application for a certificate of number that contains
false information.
   (B)   A dealer who submits an application for a certificate of number as
provided in division (A) above may issue to the owner of the vessel a 15-day
temporary permit, on forms prescribed by the Secretary of State, for the use of
the vessel while the certificate of number is being issued.
   (C)   A dealer may issue a 15-day permit, on a form prescribed by the
Secretary of State, for the use of a vessel purchased in this state and
delivered to the purchaser for removal to a place outside of this state, if the
purchaser certifies by his or her signature that the vessel will be registered
and primarily used and stored outside of the state and will not be returned to
the state by the purchaser for use or storage. A certificate of number shall
not be issued for a vessel holding a permit under this division (C).
   (D)   A 15-day temporary permit issued under divisions (B) or (C) above
shall not be renewed or extended.
   (E)   A person shall operate or permit the operation of a vessel for which a
15-day temporary permit has been issued under this section only if the
temporary permit is valid and displayed on the vessel as prescribed by rule
promulgated in the state’s Administrative Code.
   (F)   Upon receipt of an initial application for a certificate of number in
approved form and payment of the required fee, the Secretary of State shall
enter the information upon the official records and issue to the applicant a
certificate of number containing the number awarded to the vessel, the name and
address of the owner and other information that the Secretary of State
determines necessary. The Secretary of State shall issue a certificate of
number that is pocket size and legible. Except as provided in division (G)
below, a person operating a vessel shall present that vessel’s certificate of
number to a peace officer upon the peace officer’s request.
   (G)   The owner or authorized agent of the owner of a vessel less than 26
feet in length that is leased or rented to a person for non-commercial use for
not more than 24 hours may retain, at the place from which the vessel departs
or returns to the possession of the owner or the owner’s representative, the
certificate of number for that vessel if a copy of the lease or rental is on
the vessel. Upon the demand of a peace officer, the operator shall produce for
inspection either the certificate of number or a copy of the lease or rental
agreement for that vessel. The lease or rental agreement shall contain each of
the following:
      (1)   The vessel number that appears on the certificate of number;
      (2)   The period of time for which the vessel is leased or rented;
      (3)   The signature of the vessel’s owner or that person’s authorized
agent; and
      (4)   The signature of the person leasing or renting the vessel.
   (H)   Upon receipt of a certificate of number for a vessel, the owner of
that vessel shall paint on or attach in a permanent manner to each side of the
forward half of the vessel the number identified in the certificate of number,
in the manner prescribed by the rules contained in the state’s Administrative
Code. The Secretary of State shall assign to the owner of vessels for rent or
lease a block of numbers sufficient to number consecutively all of that owner’s
rental or lease vessels. The owner shall maintain the numbers in a legible
condition. A vessel documented by the United States Coast Guard or a federal
agency that is the successor to the United States Coast Guard is not required
to display numbers under this chapter, but shall display a decal indicating
payment of the fee required by law, and shall otherwise be in compliance with
this chapter. This division (H) does not apply to a non-powered vessel 12 feet
or less in length.
   (I)   Upon receipt of an application for a certificate of number in an
approved form and payment of the fee required by law, the Secretary of State
shall issue a decal that is color-coded and dated to identify the year of its
expiration and the decal shall be displayed as required by state law or
administrative rule.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-23) (Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998; Ord. 1118, passed 6-11-
2001)
§ 95.018 NOTICE OF DESTRUCTION, ABANDONMENT OR SALE OF VESSEL; TRANSFER OF
VESSEL; FEES; DURATION.
   (A)   The owner of a vessel shall notify the Secretary of State within 15
days: if the vessel is destroyed, abandoned or sold; if an interest in the
vessel is transferred, either wholly or in part, to another person; or if the
owner’s address no longer conforms to the address appearing on the certificate
of number. The notice shall consist of a surrender of the certificate of
number, on which the proper information shall be noted on a place to be
provided on the certificate. When the surrender of the certificate is due to
the vessel being destroyed or abandoned, the Secretary of State shall cancel
the certificate and enter that fact in the Secretary of State’s records, and
the number may be reassigned.
   (B)   If the surrender of the certificate of number is due to a change of
the owner’s address, the new address shall be recorded by the Secretary of
State and a certificate of number bearing that information shall be returned to
the owner.
   (C)   The transferee of a vessel register under the state, within 15 days
after acquisition of a vessel, shall make application to the Secretary of State
for transfer to the transferee of the certificate of number issued to the
vessel. The transferee shall provide his or her name, address and the number of
the vessel and pay to the Secretary of State a transfer fee. Unless the
application is made and the fee paid within 15 days after acquisition of the
vessel, the vessel shall be considered to be without certificate of number and
a person shall not operate the vessel until a certificate is issued. Upon
receipt of the application and appropriate fees, the Secretary of State shall
transfer the certificate of number issued for the vessel to the new owner. The
certificate of number shall be valid for a three-year period.
   (D)   If a certificate of number is lost, mutilated or illegible, the owner
of the vessel shall obtain a duplicate of the certificate upon application and
payment of a fee.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-24) (Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998)
§ 95.019 DEALER CERTIFICATES OF NUMBER AND DEALER DECALS.
   (A)   A dealer shall apply for and obtain from the Secretary of State dealer
certificates of number and dealer decals for each vessel of the dealer that is
tested, demonstrated or otherwise operated. A single dealer certificate of
number and dealer decal issued pursuant to this section may be used on only one
vessel at a time.
   (B)   The operator of a vessel governed by this chapter shall do each of the
following:
      (1)   Maintain the dealer certificate of number on board the vessel;
      (2)   Upon demand of a peace officer, display the dealer certificate of
number; and
      (3)   Permanently or temporarily display the identifying number and
dealer decal on the vessel in accordance with rules promulgated by the state.
   (C)   A person shall not operate a vessel numbered under this section unless
the dealer is on board the vessel or the operator has the written authorization
of the dealer to operate the vessel. A person shall not use a vessel numbered
under this section for commercial purposes that include the rental of the
vessel or the carrying of passengers for hire on the vessel.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-25) (Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998)
§ 95.020 VIOLATION; RECORD OF CHARGE OR CITATION; INSPECTIONS AND
MODIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Each judge and each clerk of a court of record shall keep a full
record of every case in which a person is charged with or cited for a violation
of this chapter corresponding to regulating the operation of vessels.
   (B)   (1)   Within 14 days after a conviction, forfeiture of bail, entry of
a civil infraction determination or default judgment upon a charge of, or
citation for, violating this chapter regulating the operation of vessels, the
judge or clerk of the court of record shall prepare and immediately forward to
the Secretary of State an abstract of the record of the court for the case.
      (2)   The abstract shall be certified to be true and correct by
signature, stamp or facsimile signature by the person required to prepare the
abstract.
      (3)   If the city is authorized to accept a payment of money as a
settlement for a violation of the chapter, the city shall send a full report of
each case in which a person pays any amount of money to the city to the
Secretary of State upon a form prescribed by the Secretary of State.
   (C)   The abstract or report required under this section shall be made upon
a form furnished by the Secretary of State.
   (D)   (1)   Every person required to forward abstracts to the Secretary of
State under this section shall certify for the period from January 1 through
June 30 and for the period from July 1 through December 31 that all abstracts
required to be forwarded during the period have been forwarded.
      (2)   The certification shall be filed with the Secretary of State not
later than 28 days after the end of the period covered by the certification.
      (3)   The certification shall be made upon a form furnished by the
Secretary of State.
   (E)   The court shall not submit, and the Secretary of State shall discard
and not enter on the boating record, an abstract for a conviction of civil
infraction determination for a violation of this part that could not be the
basis for the Secretary of State’s issuance of an order not to operate a vessel
on the waters of the state. The Secretary of State shall discard and not enter
on the boating record an abstract for a bond forfeiture that occurred outside
the state.
   (F)   If a conviction or civil infraction determination is reversed upon
appeal, the court shall transmit a copy of the order of reversal to the
Secretary of State, and the Secretary of State shall enter the order in the
proper book or index in connection with the record of the conviction or civil
infraction determination.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-26) (Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998)
NUMBERING AND IDENTIFICATION
§ 95.035 APPLICABILITY.
   This subchapter regarding the numbering of vessels and motorboats apply to
all motorboats and all other vessels 12 feet in length or over which are
required to be numbered or to display a decal indicating payment of fees under
the state laws and which are operated on any waters within the territorial
limits of the city.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-41) (Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998)
§ 95.036 FORM OF NUMBER.
   (A)   Each number required by the Act shall consist of capital letters “MC”
denoting the State of Michigan, followed by four numerals followed by two
capital letters (e.g., MC 0000 AA).
   (B)   A number suffix shall not include the letters I, O or Q which may be
mistaken for numerals.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-42) (Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998)
§ 95.037 NUMBERS; DISPLAY; SIZE; COLOR.
   (A)   Each number required by this chapter or the state laws shall meet all
of the following requirements:
      (1)   Be painted on or permanently attached to each side of the forward
half of the vessel or motorboat, except as allowed by divisions (B) or (C)
below;
      (2)   Be in plain vertical block characters of not less than three inches
in height;
      (3)   Contrast with the color of the background and be distinctly visible
and legible;
      (4)   Have spaces or hyphens that are equal to the width of the letter
“M” between the letter and number groupings (e.g., MC 0000 AA or MC-0000-AA);
      (5)   Read from left to right; and
      (6)   Be as high above the water line as practical.
   (B)   When a vessel or motorboat is used by a manufacturer or dealer for
testing or demonstrating, the number may be painted on or attached to removable
plates that are temporarily, but firmly attached to each side of the forward
half of the vessel or motorboat.
   (C)   On vessels or motorboats so configured that a number on the hull or
superstructure would not be easily visible, the number must be painted on or
attached to a backing plate that is attached to the forward half of the vessel
or motorboat so that the number is visible from each side of the vessel or
motorboat.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-43) (Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998)
§ 95.038 OTHER NUMBERS PROHIBITED.
   A person may not use a vessel or motorboat to which this chapter applies
that has any number that is not issued by the Secretary of State for that
vessel or motorboat on its forward half.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-44) (Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998)
§ 95.039 DOCUMENTED VESSELS; DECALS; DISPLAY.
   (A)   Each decal required by the laws of the state to indicate payment of
fees required of vessels documented by the United States Coast Guard or federal
agency successor thereto shall be:
      (1)   Identical to the validation decal prescribed in Mich. Admin. Code
R. § 281.1208;
      (2)   Be permanently affixed to each side of the forward half of the
vessel; and
      (3)   Be as high above the water line as practical.
   (B)   When a decal is lost, destroyed or defaced, the owner of the
documented vessel shall apply to the Secretary of State for a duplicate decal.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-45) (Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998)
§ 95.040 REMOVAL OF NUMBER.
   The person whose name appears on a certificate of number as the owner of a
motorboat or vessel shall remove the number and validation decal from the
vessel when one of the following occurs:
   (A)   The motorboat or vessel is documented by the United States Coast Guard
or federal agency successor thereto; however, the decal prescribed in Mich.
Admin. Code R. § 281.1206 shall then be displayed;
   (B)   The certificate of number is invalid under the Act; and/or
   (C)   The motorboat or vessel is no longer principally used in the state.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-46) (Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998)
§ 95.041 VALIDATION DECALS; DISPLAY; SIZE; COLOR.
   (A)   The validation decal required by the laws of the state shall meet the
following requirements:
      (1)   Be permanently attached to each side of the forward half of the
motorboat or vessel;
      (2)   Be approximately three inches square;
      (3)   Indicate the year in which the decal expires by the colors, blue,
international orange, green and red, in rotation beginning with blue decals
that expire in 1973 (e.g., decal expires 12-31-1973: blue; expires 12-31-1974:
international orange; expires 12-31-1975: green; expires 12-31-1976: red;
expires 12-31-1977: blue; and the like); and
      (4)   Be displayed on each side of the motorboat or vessel three inches
beyond the last letter of the assigned number and on the same strake or level
as the number.
   (B)   When a validation decal is lost, destroyed or defaced, the owner of
the motorboat or vessel shall apply to the Secretary of State for a duplicate.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-47) (Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998)
CASUALTIES
§ 95.055 APPLICABILITY; CASUALTIES INVOLVING VESSELS.
   (A)   Applicability.
      (1)   Divisions (B) and (D) below apply to a vessel operated on waters
subject to the jurisdiction of the city when the vessel is either of the
following:
         (a)   Operated by its operator for recreational purposes; and
         (b)   Required to be numbered in the state.
      (2)   This section does not apply to a vessel required to have a
certificate of inspection under 46 C.F.R. Ch. I.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-61)
   (B)   Assistance to injured persons.
      (1)   The operator of a vessel involved in a collision, accident or other
casualty, and the operator of any other vessel, to the extent that he or she
can do so without serious danger to his or her own vessel, crew and passengers,
shall render reasonable assistance to a person affected by the collision,
accident or other casualty, including the transporting of the injured person to
a physician or surgeon for medical or surgical treatment, if it is apparent
that treatment is necessary or when requested by the injured person.
      (2)   A person who complies with division (B)(1) above, or who
gratuitously and in good faith renders assistance at the scene of a vessel
collision, accident or other casualty without objection of the person assisted,
is not liable for civil damages as a result of the rendering of assistance, or
for an act or omission in providing or arranging towage, medical treatment or
other assistance, if the assisting person acts as an ordinary, reasonably
prudent person would have acted under the same or similar circumstances.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-62)
   (C)   Exchange of identification. In the case of collision, accident or
other casualty involving a vessel, the operator shall stop his or her vessel
and give his or her name and address and identification of his or her vessel,
and the name and address of the owner of the vessel if he or she is not the
operator, to the operator or occupants of any other vessel involved or to the
owner or his or her agents of any property damaged by the accident.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-63)
   (D)   Report.
      (1)   In the case of collision, accident or other casualty involving a
vessel, the operator shall report the collision, accident or other casualty to
the nearest peace officer, state police post or the sheriff of the county in
which the collision, accident or other casualty occurred.
      (2)   A report of a collision, accident or other casualty involving a
vessel that is made to a peace officer other than the sheriff of the county in
which the collision, accident or other casualty occurred shall be reported
without delay by the peace officer to the sheriff of the county in which the
collision, accident or other casualty occurred.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-64)
(Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998)
§ 95.056 IMMEDIATE NOTIFICATION OF DEATH OR DISAPPEARANCE.
   (A)   When, as a result of an occurrence that involves a vessel or its
equipment a person dies or disappears from a vessel, the operator shall notify
without delay, by the quickest means available, the sheriff of the county in
which the collision, accident or other casualty occurred or the nearest peace
officer or state police post of the following:
      (1)   The date, times and exact location of the occurrence;
      (2)   The name of each person who died or disappeared;
      (3)   The number and name of the vessel; and
      (4)   The names and addresses of the owner and operator.
   (B)   When the operator of a vessel cannot give the notice required by
division (A) above, each person on board the vessel shall give the required
notice or determine that the notice has been given.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-65) (Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998)
§ 95.057 REPORT OF COLLISION, ACCIDENT OR OTHER CASUALTY.
   (A)   The report required by the laws of the state shall be made by the
operator of a vessel when as a result of an occurrence that involves the vessel
or its equipment any of the following occur:
      (1)   A person dies;
      (2)   A person loses consciousness or receives medical treatment or is
disabled for more than 24 hours;
      (3)   Damage to the vessel and other property damage totals more than
$100; and/or
      (4)   A person disappears from the vessel under circumstances that
indicate death or injury.
   (B)   The report required by the laws of the state shall be made as follows:
      (1)   Within 48 hours of the occurrence, if a person dies within 24 hours
of the occurrence;
      (2)   Within 48 hours of the occurrence, if a person loses consciousness
or receives medical treatment or is disabled for more than 24 hours or
disappears from a vessel; and
      (3)   Within five days of the occurrence or death, if an earlier report
is not required by this rule.
   (C)   When the operator of a vessel cannot make the report required by law,
the owner shall make the report.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-66) (Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998)
OPERATION REGULATIONS
§ 95.070 OPERATION OF MOTORBOATS BY CHILDREN.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D) below, a person less than
12 years of age shall not operate a motorboat on the waters of the city unless
all of the following conditions are met.
      (1)   He or she is under the direct supervision of a person on board the
motorboat who is 16 years of age or older.
      (2)   The motorboat he or she operates is powered by a motor or motors
totaling no more than 35 horsepower.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D) below, a person 12
through 15 years of age may operate a motorboat on the waters of the city only
if that person complies with either of the following:
      (1)   He or she is accompanied by at least one person 16 years of age or
older; or
      (2)   He or she is in possession of a boating safety certificate issued
after he or she has satisfactorily completed an approved course in boating
safety.
   (C)   A person 12 through 15 years of age operating a motorboat pursuant to
division (B)(2) above shall present the boating safety certificate issued to
him or her upon the demand of any peace officer.
   (D)   This section does not apply to the operation of a motorboat that is
powered by a motor or motors totaling no more than six horsepower.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-81) (Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998)
§ 95.071 PERSONAL FLOTATION DEVICES; EXCEPTION; DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (C) below, a person shall not operate a
vessel on the waters of the city unless each person in an open deck area on
board the vessel who is less than six years of age is wearing a Type I or Type
II personal flotation device as described in Mich. Admin. Code R. § 281.1234.
   (B)   A parent or guardian of a child less than six years of age who
accompanies that child on board a vessel that is not a charter boat described
in division (C) below shall ensure that the child is wearing a personal
flotation device that complies with this section.
   (C)   This section does not apply to a charter boat bearing either of the
following:
      (1)   A valid certificate of inspection issued by the United States Coast
Guard that verifies the charter boat’s compliance with Subch. H or Subch. T of
the Code of Federal Regulations, 46 C.F.R. §§ 70.01-1 to 80.40 and 175.01-1 to
185.910; or
      (2)   A valid certificate of inspection issued by the state for a Class C
vessel that is greater than 45 feet in length.
   (D)   As used in this section, CHARTER BOAT and CLASS C VESSEL mean those
terms as defined in M.C.L.A. § 324.44501.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-82) (Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998)
§ 95.072 OPERATION OF PERSONAL WATERCRAFT; REQUIREMENTS; PROHIBITIONS;
EXCEPTION.
   (A)   A person shall not operate a personal watercraft on the waters of the
state unless each person riding on or being towed behind the vessel is wearing
a Type I, Type II or Type III personal flotation device as described in Mich.
Admin. Code R. § 281.1234.
   (B)   While operating a personal watercraft equipped by the manufacturer
with a lanyard-type engine cutoff switch on the waters of the city, a person
shall have the lanyard attached to his or her person, clothing or personal
flotation device as is appropriate for the specific vessel.
   (C)   A person shall not operate a personal watercraft on the waters of the
city between the hours from sunset to sunrise.
   (D)   A personal watercraft shall at all times be operated in a reasonable
and prudent manner. Maneuvers that unreasonably or unnecessarily endanger life,
limb or property, including, but not limited to, weaving through congested
vessel traffic, jumping the wake or another vessel unreasonably or
unnecessarily close to the other vessel or when visibility around the other
vessel is obstructed, and swerving at the last possible moment to avoid a
collision, constitute reckless operation of a vessel, as provided in §
95.075 of this chapter.
   (E)   A person shall not operate a personal watercraft on the waters of the
city carrying more persons than the vessel is designed to carry. Carrying more
persons than the vessel is designed to carry is prima facie evidence of
reckless operation of a watercraft under §
95.075 of this chapter.
   (F)   A person operating a personal watercraft on the waters of the city
shall maintain a distance of 100 feet from any dock, raft or buoy or occupied
bathing area or shall not cross within 150 feet behind another vessel, other
than a personal watercraft, that is traveling a speed greater than “slow-no
wake speed”.
   (G)   A person under the age of 12 shall not operate a personal watercraft
on the waters of the city. A person 12 through 15 years of age may operate a
personal watercraft on the waters of the city only when accompanied by a person
16 years of age or older or without adult supervision when in possession of a
boating safety certificate in compliance with M.C.L.A. § 324.80141.
   (H)   The owner of a personal watercraft or a person having charge over or
control of a personal watercraft shall not authorize or knowingly permit the
personal watercraft to be operated in violation of division (G) above.
   (I)   This section does not apply to a performer engaged in a professional
exhibition or a person preparing to participate or participating in a regatta,
race, marine parade, tournament or exhibition held in compliance with this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-83) (Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998)
§ 95.073 OPERATION OF VESSELS; RULES; SPEED; INTERFERENCE WITH USE OF WATERS BY
OTHERS.
   (A)   (1)   When vessels are being operated in such a manner as to make
collision imminent or likely, the following rules apply.
         (a)   When two vessels are approaching each other head-on, or nearly
so, the operator of each shall cause his or her vessel to pass on the port side
of the other.
         (b)   When overtaking a vessel proceeding in the same direction, the
operator of the overtaking vessel, unless it is not feasible to do so, shall
pass on the port side of the vessel ahead.
         (c)   When two vessels are approaching each other at right angles or
obliquely so as to involve risk of collision, other than when one vessel is
overtaking another, the operator of the vessel that has the other on his or her
own port side shall hold his or her course and speed, and the operator of the
vessel that has the other on his or her own starboard side shall give way to
the other by directing his or her course to starboard so as to cross the stern
of the other vessel or, if necessary to do so, shall slacken his or her speed,
stop or reverse.
         (d)   When a motorboat and a vessel under sail are proceeding in a
manner that involves a risk of collision, the operator of the motorboat shall
give way to the vessel under sail.
         (e)   When a motorboat and a vessel not propelled by sail or
mechanical means are proceeding in a manner that involves risk of collision,
the operator of the motorboat shall give way to the other vessel.
         (f)   When, by any of the rules provided in this section, the operator
of a vessel is required to give way to the other, the operator of the other
vessel shall maintain his or her direction and speed.
      (2)   This section does not relieve the operator of a vessel otherwise
privileged by this section from the duty to operate with due regard for the
safety of all persons using the waters of the city.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-84)
   (B)   (1)   A person operating or propelling a vessel upon the waters of the
city shall operate it in a careful and prudent manner and at such a rate of
speed so as not to endanger unreasonably the life or property of any person. A
person shall not operate any vessel at a rate of speed greater than will permit
him or her, in the exercise of reasonable care, to bring the vessel to a stop
within the assured clear distance ahead.
      (2)   A person shall not operate a vessel in a manner so as to interfere
unreasonably with the lawful use by others of any waters.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-85)
(Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998)
§ 95.074 MAXIMUM OR UNLIMITED MOTORBOAT SPEED; RULES; EXCEPTIONS; WAIVERS.
   (A)   On waters of the city for which a motorboat speed limit is not
established by the state, or the city, or on any waters for which stricter
speed restrictions are not established pursuant to an act, a maximum speed
limit of 55 mph is established, except in an emergency and except for
authorized peace and conservation officers when engaged in official duties. The
maximum speed limit of 55 mph shall not apply to the Great Lakes and Lake St.
Clair, except for an area within one mile of the shoreline measured at a right
angle from the shoreline.
   (B)   A person shall not operate a motorboat on the waters of the city at a
speed greater than slow-no wake speed or the minimum speed necessary for the
motorboat to maintain forward movement when within 100 feet of the shoreline
where the water depth is less than three feet, as determined by vertical
measurement, except in navigable channels not otherwise posted.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-86) (Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.075 RECKLESS OPERATION OF VESSELS.
   (A)   If a person carelessly or heedlessly operates a vessel upon the waters
of the city in disregard of the rights or safety of others, without due caution
and circumspection, or at a rate of speed or in a manner that endangers or is
likely to endanger a person or property, that person is guilty of reckless
operation of a vessel punishable as set out in §
95.999 of this chapter.
   (B)   If a person while being towed on water skis, a water sled, a surfboard
or a similar contrivance upon the waters of the city, carelessly and heedlessly
navigates, steers or controls himself or herself in disregard of the rights and
safety of others or without due caution and circumspection and in a manner that
endangers or is likely to endanger a person or property, then that person is
guilty of reckless operation of the contrivance that he or she controls and is
subject to the penalties described in division (C) below.
   (C)   Upon a person’s conviction under this section, the court may issue an
order prohibiting that person from operating a vessel on the waters of the
state for a period of not more than two years. Upon a person’s subsequent
conviction under this section, the court shall order that person to participate
in and complete a marine safety educational program approved by the state. An
order issued pursuant to this division (C) is in addition to any other penalty
authorized under this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-87) (Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998)
§ 95.076 OPERATING MOTORBOAT AT MORE THAN SLOW-NO WAKE SPEED; PROHIBITIONS;
EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Subject to the exceptions described in division (B) below, a person
shall not operate a motorboat at more than slow-no wake speed if any of the
following circumstances exist:
      (1)   A person is located on or in the bow of the motorboat, and that
motorboat is not manufactured to provide bow seating; and/or
      (2)   A person or a portion of a person’s body extends beyond the
exterior port or starboard walls of the hull of the motorboat.
   (B)   This section does not apply to either of the following:
      (1)   A person engaged in the operation of a sailboat that is not being
powered by a moto; and/or
      (2)   A person on board a vessel who is attempting to anchor, moor, dock
or otherwise secure the vessel.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-88) (Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998)
§ 95.077 OPERATION IN COUNTER-CLOCKWISE FASHION; DISTANCE BETWEEN PERSONS BEING
TOWED AND OTHER OBJECTS; EXCEPTION.
   Persons operating vessels on the waters of the city in areas not marked by
well-defined channels, canals, rivers or stream courses shall operate the
vessels in a counter-clockwise fashion to the extent that it is reasonably
possible. These persons and persons being towed on water skis or on a water
sled, kite, surfboard or similar contrivance shall maintain a distance of 100
feet from any dock, raft, buoy or occupied bathing area, or vessel moored or at
anchor, except when the vessel is proceeding at a slow-no wake speed or when
water skiers are being picked up or dropped off, if that operation is otherwise
conducted with due regard to the safety of persons and property and in
accordance with the laws of the state.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-89) (Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998)
§ 95.078 OPERATION OF VESSELS; PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN AREAS.
   A person shall not operate a vessel on any of the waters of the city within
a lawfully authorized restricted area clearly marked by buoys, beacons or other
distinguishing devices as being prohibited to vessels.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-90) (Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.079 TOWING OF PERSON; PROHIBITED TIME; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   An operator of any vessel shall not have in tow or otherwise be
assisting in the propulsion of a person on water skis or on a water sled,
surfboard or other similar contrivance during the period of one hour after
sunset to one hour prior to sunrise.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-91)
   (B)   (1)   A person shall not operate a vessel on the waters of the city if
he or she is towing or otherwise assisting a person on water skis or on a water
sled, aquaplane, surfboard or other similar contrivance unless a person capable
of communicating to the vessel operator the condition and needs of the person
being towed or assisted is on board the vessel and positioned to observe the
person being towed or assisted.
      (2)   Division (B)(1) above does not apply to vessels used by duly
constituted ski schools in the giving of instructions or to vessels used in
sanctioned ski tournaments, competitions, expositions or trials. Vessels
described in this division (B) shall be equipped with a 170-degree wide-angle
rearview mirror affixed in a manner that will permit the operator to observe
the progress of the person being towed.
      (3)   This section does not apply to motorboats less than 16 feet in
length actually operated by the person being towed and so constructed as to be
incapable of carrying the operator in or on the motorboat.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-92)
(Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998; Ord. 1118, passed 6-11-2001) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.080 VESSELS; USE OF PORTIONS UNINTENDED FOR OCCUPANCY PROHIBITED;
EXCEPTIONS.
   Any occupant or operator of any vessel under way on the waters of the city
shall not sit, stand or walk upon any portion of the vessel not specially
designed for that purpose, except when immediately necessary for the safe and
reasonable navigation or operation of the vessel.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-93) (Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.081 INTERFACE WITH OPERATION OF VESSEL BY NON-OCCUPANT.
   A person not in a boat shall not intentionally rock, tip, jostle or
otherwise interfere with the operation of any vessel, except under supervised
training.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-94) (Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.082 DIVERS; MARKING POINT OF SUBMERGENCE; DISTANCE FROM DIVER’S FLAG.
   Any person diving or submerging in any of the waters of the city with the
aid of a diving suit or other mechanical diving device shall place a buoy or
boat in the water at or near the point of submergence. The buoy or boat shall
bear a red flag not less than 14 inches by 16 inches with a three and one-half
inch white stripe running from one upper corner to a diagonal lower corner. The
flag shall be in place only while actual diving operations are in progress. A
vessel shall not be operated within 200 feet of a buoyed diver’s flag unless it
is involved in tendering the diving operation. A person diving shall stay
within a surface area of 100 feet of the diver’s flag.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-95) (Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998)
§ 95.083 MOTORBOAT; MUFFLER OR UNDERWATER EXHAUST SYSTEM REQUIRED; MAXIMUM
SOUND LEVELS.
   (A)   (1)   Subject to division (B) below, a person shall not operate a
motorboat on the waters of the city unless the motorboat is equipped and
maintained with an effective muffler or underwater exhaust system that does not
produce sound levels in excess of 90 db(A) when subjected to a stationary sound
level test as prescribed by SAE J2005 or a sound level in excess of 75 db(A)
when subjected to a shoreline sound level measurement procedure as described by
SAE J1970. The operator of a motorboat shall present the motorboat for a sound
level test as prescribed by SAE J2005 upon the request of a peace officer. If a
motorboat is equipped with more than one motor or engine, the test shall be
performed with all motors or engines operating. To determine whether a person
is violating this division (A), a peace officer may measure sound levels
pursuant to procedures prescribed in SAE J1970, issued 1991-92.
      (2)   If these decibel levels are modified by the state, then those
amendments are herein incorporated by reference and all of the following apply.
         (a)   A person shall not operate a motorboat on the waters of the city
if the motorboat produces sound levels that exceed the maximum decibel level or
levels established under this chapter.
         (b)   The operator of a motorboat shall present the motorboat for the
sound level test established pursuant to this chapter upon the request of a
peace officer.
         (c)   A motorboat equipped with more than one motor or engine shall be
tested with all motors or engine operating.
   (B)   Division (A) above does not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   A motorboat being operated by a boat or marine engine manufacturer
for the purpose of testing or development;
      (2)   A motorboat that qualifies as an historic vessel; or
      (3)   A motorboat tuning up or testing for or participating in official
trials for speed records or a sanctioned race conducted pursuant to a permit
issued by a unit of government.
   (C)   A person shall not operate on the waters of the city a motorboat that
is equipped with a cutout, bypass, amplifier or other similar device.
   (D)   As used in this section, db(A) means decibels on the “A” scale on a
sound meter having characteristics of a general purpose sound meter as defined
by American National Standards Institute S1.4.-1983.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-96) (Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998; Ord. 1118, passed 6-11-
2001)
§ 95.084 RESPONSIBILITY FOR DAMAGE CAUSED BY VESSEL WAKE.
   The owner of any vessel operated upon the waters of the city is personally
responsible for any damage to life or property resulting from a wake or swell
created by the negligent operation or propulsion of the vessel, if the vessel
is being operated with his or her consent.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-97) (Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998)
§ 95.085 PEACE OFFICERS; STOPPING OF VESSELS; DUTY OF OPERATOR.
   (A)   Upon the direction of a peace officer, the operator of a vessel moving
on the waters of the city shall immediately bring the vessel to a stop or
maneuver it in a manner that permits the peace officer to come beside the
vessel. The operator of the vessel and any person on the vessel shall do the
following upon the request of the peace officer:
      (1)   Provide his or her correct name and address;
      (2)   Exhibit the certificate of number awarded for the vessel; and
      (3)   If the vessel does not bear a decal as required by this chapter,
state law or administrative rule, submit to a reasonable inspection of the
vessel and to a reasonable inspection and test of the equipment of the vessel.
   (B)   A peace officer who conducts an inspection of a vessel authorized
under this section shall include in that inspection a reasonable examination
and test of the equipment on that vessel. If the peace officer does not find a
violation of a marine law, he or she shall affix to the vessel an adhesive copy
of the uniform marine safety inspection decal and shall complete a receipt for
that decal.
   (C)   A completed receipt for a decal shall include all of the following:
      (1)   The name of the peace officer;
      (2)   The time, date, and place of the inspection; and
      (3)   The vessel’s identifying number.
   (D)   (1)   A peace officer shall deliver to his or her supervisor or person
designated by that supervisor a receipt for a decal within 48 hours of affixing
the decal to a vessel.
      (2)   The supervisor or person designated by the supervisor shall
maintain receipts received under this section for a period of one year.
   (E)   Except for inspection of a vessel to determine the number and adequacy
of personal flotation devices on that vessel, a peace officer shall not stop
and inspect a vessel bearing the decal described in this section during the
period the decal remains in effect unless that peace officer has probable cause
to believe the vessel or the vessel’s operator is in violation of a marine law
or local ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-98) (Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998)
§ 95.086 NEGLIGENT CRIPPLING OR DEATH.
   A person who, by the operation of any vessel at an immoderate rate of speed
or in a careless, reckless or negligent manner, but not willfully or wantonly,
injures so as to cripple or cause the death of another is guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-100) (Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998) Penalty, see §
95.999
CAPACITIES
§ 95.100 INSPECTION OF WATERCRAFT AND EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Watercraft subject to this chapter shall be:
      (1)   Of sound and substantial construction and in good seaworthy
condition;
      (2)   Equipped by the livery operator with oars and paddles, as
hereinafter provided, which shall be of sturdy construction and without holes,
large chips or cracks which will diminish their operation effectiveness, or
structural strength. This division (A)(2) applies to all watercraft, including
those propelled by machinery or sail. Watercraft with oarlock sockets shall be
equipped with not less than two oars and two oarlock horns. Watercraft without
oarlock sockets shall be equipped with not less than two paddles;
      (3)   Equipped by the livery operator with an anchor of sufficient size
and weight and an anchor line of sufficient strength and length to accommodate
the watercraft in normal depth of the waters on which it is to be used. This
requirement does not apply to canoes;
      (4)   Equipped by the livery operator with one life-saving cushion or
other approved life-saving device, in good condition, per person. Life-saving
equipment shall be of the type approved by the U.S. Coast Guard and shall bear
a stamp or label indicating such approval. Other equipment currently prescribed
by law shall also be carried on board; and
      (5)   Provided with sufficient buoyancy to keep the watercraft from
sinking when it is filled with water and passengers are clinging to it if the
aggregate weight of motor, passengers, and equipment carried in or attached to
the watercraft does not exceed its maximum weight capacity, as determined by
the maximum weight capacity formula contained in these rules.
   (B)   Pontoon boats shall meet the following deck requirements.
      (1)   The deck shall not exceed the width at the pontoons.
      (2)   The deck shall not be greater than six inches above the pontoons.
      (3)   The deck length within railings shall not be greater than 80% of
pontoon length and shall not overhang the pontoons.
      (4)   The deck shall drain freely.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-161) (Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.101 MAXIMUM CAPACITY TAGS.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   The sheriff of each county or any peace officer duly authorized by
him or her shall issue to the owner, for each watercraft, a maximum capacity
tag.
      (2)   This tag shall be placed by or in the presence of, the inspecting
officer on the watercraft in such a location and manner as to be clearly
visible and legible from the position designed or normally intended to be
occupied by the operator of the watercraft when underway.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-162)
   (B)   Watercraft for use with outboard motors. The capacity tag for a
watercraft for use with an outboard motor shall contain:
      (1)   The total weight of persons, motor, gear and other articles placed
aboard which the watercraft is capable of carrying with safety under normal
conditions;
      (2)   The recommended number of persons commensurate with the weight
capacity of the watercraft at a presumed weight of 150 pounds per person;
      (3)   The maximum horsepower of the motor the watercraft is designed or
intended to accommodate; and
      (4)   A notice that the information appearing on the capacity tag applies
under normal conditions and that the weight of the outboard motor and its
associated equipment is considered to be part of the weight capacity.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-163)
   (C)   Watercraft not for use with outboard motors. The capacity tag for a
watercraft not for use with an outboard motor, such as a canoe, rowboat,
inboard boat or inboard-outboard boat shall contain:
      (1)   The total weight of persons, gear and other articles placed aboard
which the watercraft is capable of carrying with safety under normal
conditions;
      (2)   The recommended number of persons commensurate with the weight
capacity of the watercraft at a presumed weight of 150 pounds per person; and
      (3)   A notice that the information appearing on the capacity plate
applies under normal conditions.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-164)
(Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.102 WEIGHT CAPACITY.
   (A)   The capacity tag shall contain the weight capacity of the watercraft
determined as hereinafter provided.
   (B)   (1)   The weight capacity of a watercraft for use with an outboard
motor, except a watercraft dependent solely upon the buoyancy of pontoons or
similar flotation devices, shall be determined by either of the following
methods:
         WC = 7-1/2 LBD
         (a)   WC is the weight capacity in pounds;
         (b)   L is the centerline length;
         (c)   B is the maximum beam amidships; and
         (d)   D is the effective depth figured from keel to lowest freeboard.
      (2)   Reference to the manufacturer’s capacity tag installed in a
watercraft if manufactured or offered for original sale in the state on or
after 1-1-1968, or in accordance with standards approved by the state’s
Waterways Commission, or its successor.
   (C)   The weight capacity of a watercraft with a permanently installed
engine, except watercraft dependent solely upon the buoyancy of pontoons or
similar flotation devices, shall be determined in the same manner as for
watercraft for use with outboard motors; except that, the weight of all
machinery and associated operating gear including battery, fuel and fuel system
shall be subtracted.
   (D)   (1)   The weight capacity of a watercraft dependent solely upon the
buoyancy of pontoons or similar flotation devices shall be determined by
applying the formula:
         WC = [(62-1/2V) Boat Wgt.]:2
         (a)   WC is the weight capacity of the watercraft; and
         (b)   V is the volume of both pontoons.
      (2)   If equipped with a permanently installed engine, the weight of all
machinery and associated operating gear including battery, fuel and fuel system
shall be subtracted from the weight capacity.
   (E)   The weight capacity of a rowboat and any other watercraft for use
without an outboard motor shall be determined in the same manner as for a
watercraft for use with an outboard motor, following the formula expressed as
WC = 7-1/2 LBD.
   (F)   The weight capacity of a canoe shall be determined by the formula WC =
7-1/2 LBD × 2.
   (G)   The livery operator shall provide the inspecting officer with
information relative to the weight of the watercraft either by reference to the
manufacturer’s rating or by actual weighing of the watercraft.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-165) (Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998)
§ 95.103 HORSEPOWER CAPACITY.
   (A)   The horsepower capacity of an outboard watercraft, excepting canoes or
pontoon craft, shall be determined by either of the following methods.
      (1)   (a)   The horsepower capacity of an outboard watercraft, other than
a canoe, and except one dependent solely upon the buoyancy of pontoons or
similar flotation devices, shall not exceed the value given by the boat
horsepower table in Figure 1.
         (b)   The horsepower capacity of an outboard watercraft, other than a
canoe, and dependent solely upon the buoyancy of pontoons or similar flotation
devices shall not exceed the value given by multiplying the cubic feet of
flotation in the pontoons by the pontoon length in feet and dividing by the
pontoon diameter in inches.
         (c)   If the pontoons are not circular in cross-section, the diameter
of the largest circle that can be inscribed in the pontoon shall be used.
      (2)   By reference to a manufacturer’s capacity plate installed in a
watercraft, if manufactured or offered for original sale in the state on or
after 1-1-1968, or in accordance with standards approved by the state’s
Waterways Commission or its successor, or the horsepower capacity recommended
by the livery operator, whichever is the lesser.
 
FIGURE 1
Boat Horsepower Table
Multiply overall length ________ (decimal ft.) × stern width ________ (decimal ft.)
= Factor ________
(nearest whole number)
       Remote steering and 20” or No remote steering or transom less than 20” or
       equivalent                   equivalent
Factor
is
under
40,
40-45, Over 57                      Over 57
46-
49,
50-53,
54-57
H.P.
Cap is
5, 10, (2 × Factor) - 90           (3/4 Factor) - 20
15,
20, 25
H.P. Cap = ________ (raise to even 5 h.p. increment)
 
(Prior Code, § 21.5-166)
   (B)   The horsepower capacity for canoes shall be determined by the
following table, or by the horsepower capacity recommended by the livery
operator, whichever is the lesser.
 
For canoes under 15 feet in length       4 horsepower
For canoes under 15 to 18 feet in length 5 horsepower
For canoes over 18 feet in length        8 horsepower
 
(Prior Code, § 21.5-167)
(Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998)
§ 95.104 PASSENGER CAPACITY.
   Passenger capacity shall be determined by applying that one of the following
formulas resulting in the lesser capacity:
   (A)   (WC M):150, where M is the weight of the largest outboard motor and
associated operating equipment which the watercraft is represented to
accommodate if usable with outboard motor; and 150 is the presumed pound weight
per person. For a watercraft with an inboard or inboard-outboard motor, divide
WC by 150; and
   (B)   Boat length multiplied by the maximum boat beam divided by 15. This
formula is not applicable to canoes.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-168) (Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998)
EQUIPMENT
§ 95.115 APPLICABILITY.
   This subchapter pertaining to equipment apply to vessels and associated
equipment used, to be used or carried in vessels used on any waters within the
city, except:
   (A)   Foreign vessels temporarily using waters subject to state
jurisdiction;
   (B)   Military or public vessels of the United States, except recreational-
type public vessels;
   (C)   A vessel whose owner is a state or political subdivision thereof,
other than the state and its political subdivisions, which is used principally
for governmental purposes and which is clearly identifiable as such; and
   (D)   A ship’s lifeboat.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-181) (Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998)
§ 95.116 NAVIGATION LIGHTS; INTENSITY STANDARDS; PLACEMENT; SCREENING.
   Navigation lights shall be of sufficient intensity so that the candlepower
outside the lens is not less than that amount corresponding to the required
distance of visibility as described in Mich. Admin. Code R. § 281.1233, as
amended.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-182) (Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998)
§ 95.117 PERSONAL FLOTATION DEVICES.
   (A)   Personal flotation devices required by this chapter to be carried
aboard vessels shall be of the following types.
      (1)   Type I is an approved device designed to turn an unconscious person
in the water from a face downward position to a vertical or slightly backward
position and to have more than 20 pounds of buoyancy.
      (2)   Type II is an approved device designed to turn an unconscious
person in the water from a face down position to a vertical or slightly
backward position and to have at least 15.5 pounds of buoyancy.
      (3)   Type III is an approved device designed to keep a conscious person
in a vertical or slightly backward position and to have at least 15.5 pounds of
buoyancy.
      (4)   Type IV is an approved device designed to be thrown to a person in
the water and not worn. It is designed to have at least 16.5 pounds of
buoyancy.
   (B)   Personal flotation devices required by these rules to be carried
aboard vessels shall be:
      (1)   Approved by the United States Coast Guard;
      (2)   Legibly marked with the approval number issued by the United States
Coast Guard;
      (3)   Of an appropriate size for the person for whom it is intended;
      (4)   Readily accessible and immediately available; and
      (5)   In good and serviceable condition.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-183) (Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998)
§ 95.118 FIRE EXTINGUISHING EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   All hand-portable fire extinguishers, semi-portable fire extinguishing
systems and fixed fire extinguishing systems required by these rules shall be
of a type approved by the United States Coast Guard.
   (B)   Hand-portable fire extinguishers and semi-portable fire extinguishing
systems are classified by a combination letter and number symbol. The letter
indicating the type of fire which the unit could be expected to extinguish and
the number indicating the relative size of the unit.
   (C)   For the purpose of these rules, all required hand-portable fire
extinguishers and semi- portable fire extinguishing systems are of the “B”
type; that is, suitable for extinguishing fires involving flammable liquids,
greases and so forth.
   (D)   The number designations for size start with “I” for the smallest to
“III” for the largest. Sizes I and II are considered hand-portable fire
extinguishers and size III is considered a semi-portable fire extinguishing
system which shall be fitted with a suitable hose and nozzle or other
practicable means so that all portions of the space concerned may be covered.
Examples of size graduations for some of the typical hand-portable fire
extinguishers and semi-portable fire extinguishing systems are as indicated in
Mich. Admin. Code R. § 281.1235, Table 4, as amended.
   (E)   All hand-portable fire extinguishers and semi-portable fire
extinguishing systems shall have permanently attached thereto a metallic
nameplate giving the name of the item, the rated capacity in gallons, quarts or
pounds, the name and address of the person or firm for whom approved, and the
identifying mark of the actual manufacturer.
   (F)   Vaporizing liquid type fire extinguishers containing carbon
tetrachloride or chlorobro- momethane or other toxic liquids are not acceptable
as equipment required by these rules.
   (G)   Hand-portable or semi-portable extinguishers which are required on
their nameplates to be protected from freezing shall not be located where
freezing temperatures may be expected.
   (H)   A dry chemical, stored-pressure fire extinguisher not fitted with
pressure gauge or indicating device, manufactured prior to 1-1-1965, may be
carried on motorboats so long as it is maintained in good and serviceable
condition. The following maintenance and inspections are required for such an
extinguisher:
      (1)   When the date on the inspection record tag on the extinguisher
shows that six months have elapsed since the last weight check ashore, the
extinguisher is no longer accepted as meeting required maintenance conditions
until reweighed ashore and found to be in a serviceable condition and within
required weight conditions.
      (2)   If the weight of the container is one-quarter ounce less than that
stamped on the container, it shall be serviced.
      (3)   If the outer seals, which indicate tampering or use when broken,
are not intact, the officer shall inspect the extinguisher to see that the
frangible disc in the neck of the container is intact; and if the disc is not
intact, the container shall be serviced.
      (4)   If there is evidence of damage, use or leakage, such as dry
chemical powder observed in the nozzle or elsewhere on the extinguisher, the
container shall be replaced and the extinguisher properly serviced or the
extinguisher replaced with another approved extinguisher.
   (I)   A dry chemical, stored-pressure fire extinguisher without pressure
gauge or indicating device manufactured after 1-1-1965, shall not be carried on
motorboats as required equipment.
   (J)   When a fixed fire extinguishing system is installed, it shall be of a
carbon dioxide type approved and installed as required by the United States
Coast Guard.
   (K)   Fire extinguishers are required if any of the following conditions
exist:
      (1)   Closed compartment under thwarts and seats where portable fuel
tanks may be stored;
      (2)   Double bottoms not sealed to the hull or which are not completely
filled with flotation material;
      (3)   Closed living spaces;
      (4)   Closed compartments in which combustible or flammable materials are
stored; and/or
      (5)   Permanently installed fuel tanks.
   (L)   The following conditions do not, in themselves, require that fire
extinguishers be carried:
      (1)   Bait wells;
      (2)   Glove compartments;
      (3)   Buoyant flotation material;
      (4)   Open slatted flooring; and
      (5)   Ice chests.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-184) (Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998)
§ 95.119 BACKFIRE FLAME CONTROL.
   (A)   Every gasoline engine installed in a motor boat after 4-25-1940,
except outboard motors, shall be equipped with an acceptable means of backfire
flame control.
   (B)   Installations made before 11-19-1952, need not meet the detailed
requirements of this rule and may be continued in use as long as they are
serviceable and in good condition. Replacements shall meet the applicable
conditions in this rule.
   (C)   Installations consisting of backfire flame arresters bearing United
States Coast Guard approval No. 162.015 may be continued in use as long as they
are serviceable and in good condition. Replacements shall meet the applicable
conditions of this rule.
   (D)   Installations consisting of engine air and fuel induction systems and
given United States Coast Guard approval No. 162.015 may be continued in use as
long as they are serviceable and in good condition. Replacements shall meet the
applicable conditions of this rule.
   (E)   The following are acceptable means of backfire flame control for
gasoline engines:
      (1)   A backfire flame arrester constructed in accordance with
specifications of, and approved by, the United States Coast Guard. The flame
arrester shall be suitably secured to the air intake with flame-tight
connections;
      (2)   An engine air and fuel induction system which provides adequate
protection from propagation of backfire flame to the atmosphere equivalent to
that provided by an approved backfire flame arrester. A gasoline engine
utilizing an air and fuel induction system, and operated without an approved
backfire flame arrester shall have the installation tested and labeled in
accordance with the specifications of, and approved by, the United States Coast
Guard;
      (3)   Any attachment to the carburetor or location of the engine air
induction system by means of which flames caused by engine backfire will be
dispersed to the atmosphere outside the vessel in such a manner that the flames
will not endanger the vessel, persons on board or nearby vessels and
structures. All attachments shall be of metallic construction with flame-tight
connections and firmly secured to withstand vibration, shock and engine
backfire. The installations do not require formal approval and labeling, but
will be accepted by state and local law enforcement officers on the basis of
compliance with this rule; and
      (4)   Where manufacturers wish to produce vessels having an integrated
engine-vessel design, a pre-market approval of an engine air induction system
is available. An installation shall be tested and labeled in accordance with
the specifications of, and approval by, the United States Coast Guard.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-185) (Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.120 VENTILATION.
   All motorboats, except open boats, the construction or decking over of which
is commenced after 4-25-1940, and which use fuel having a flash point of 110°F
or less, shall have at least two ventilator ducts, fitted with cowls or their
equivalent, for the efficient removal of explosive or flammable gases from the
bilges of every engine and fuel tank compartment. There shall be at least one
exhaust duct installed so as to extend from the open atmosphere to the lower
portion of the bilge and at least one intake duct installed so as to extend to
a point at least midway to the bilge or at least below the level of the
carburetor intake. The cowls shall be located and trimmed for maximum
effectiveness and in such a manner so as to prevent displaced fumes from being
recirculated.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-186) (Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.121 MUFFLER; CUT OUTS.
   (A)   The exhaust of all internal combustion engines used on any waters of
the city shall be muffled effectively by equipment so constructed and used as
to muffle the noise of the exhaust or the engine in a reasonable manner.
   (B)   The use of cut outs, bypasses or similar devices is prohibited.
   (C)   A modern device, underwater exhaust system or a system discharging
cold water through the exhaust of an inboard engine, each of which is capable
of muffling the noise of the exhaust of the engine in a reasonable manner,
shall be considered as meeting the requirement of this rule.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-187) (Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.122 VIOLATION.
   A person shall not operate a vessel on waters of the city unless equipped in
accordance with this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-188) (Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998) Penalty, see §
95.999
OUTBOARD MOTORBOATS
§ 95.135 LESS THAN 16 FEET IN LENGTH.
   An outboard motorboat less than 16 feet in length shall be equipped as
follows:
   (A)   If the motorboat is not an open boat, it shall be equipped with two
ducts fitted with cowls or their equivalent as specified in Mich. Admin. Code
R. § 281.1237 as amended;
   (B)   One Type I, II, III, IV Coast Guard approved personal flotation device
as specified in Mich. Admin. Code R. § 281.1234 as amended in good and
serviceable condition, for each person aboard. The devices shall be ready at
hand and not encased in plastic bags or other type containers;
   (C)   If the motorboat is constructed so that it has decking or compartments
where explosive or flammable gases may be entrapped as illustrated in Figure 2
(incorporated herein by reference only), it shall be equipped with one BI type
coast guard approved fire extinguisher in good and serviceable condition and as
specified in Mich. Admin. Code R. § 281.1235 as amended. When a fixed fire
extinguishing system is installed in the machinery space, one less BI type fire
extinguisher is required;
   (D)   If underway between sunset and sunrise, the motorboat shall be
equipped with an Exhibit 1 white light aft higher than the bowlight showing all
around the horizon and visible two miles and a combination 20-point bowlight
forward, showing green to starboard and red to port, visible one mile or in
lieu of this requirement may display lights as specified by the international
rules of the road;
   (E)   If the motorboat is anchored between sunset and sunrise on the Great
Lakes or waters connected thereto and not in a special anchorage area a white
light shall be displayed on the forward part of the motorboat so as to be
visible to a boat approaching form any direction;
   (F)   All lights shall be as specified by Mich. Admin. Code R. § 281.1233,
as amended; and
   (G)   A muffler as specified by Mich. Admin. Code R. § 281.1238, as amended,
for each motor.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-201) (Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998)
§ 95.136 SIXTEEN FEET OR OVER AND LESS THAN 26 FEET IN LENGTH.
   An outboard motorboat 16 feet or over and less than 26 feet in length shall
be equipped as follows:
   (A)   If the motorboat is not an open boat, it shall be equipped with two
ducts fitted with cowls or their equivalent as specified in Mich. Admin. Code
R. § 281.1237, as amended;
   (B)   One Type I, II or III coast guard approved personal flotation device
as specified in Mich. Admin. Code R. § 281.1234, as amended, in good and
serviceable condition, for each person aboard, plus one Type IV throwable
device. The devices shall be ready at hand and not encased in plastic bags or
other type containers;
   (C)   One hand, mouth or power operated whistle, capable of producing a
blast of two seconds or more in duration, and audible for at least one-half
mile;
   (D)   If the motorboat is constructed so that it has decking or compartments
where explosive or flammable gases may be entrapped, it shall be equipped with
one BI type coast guard approved fire extinguisher in good and serviceable
condition and as specified in Mich. Admin. Code R. § 281.1235, as amended. When
a fixed fire extinguishing system is installed in the machinery space, one less
BI type fire extinguisher is required;
   (E)   If underway between sunset and sunrise, the motorboat shall be
equipped with an Exhibit 1 white light aft higher than the bowlight showing all
around the horizon and visible two miles and a combination 20-point bowlight
forward, showing green to starboard and red to port visible one mile or in lieu
of this requirement may display lights as specified by the international rules
of the road;
   (F)   If the motorboat is anchored between sunset and sunrise on the Great
Lakes or waters connected thereto and not in a special anchorage area, a white
light shall be displayed on the forward part of the motorboat so as to be
visible to a boat approaching from any direction;
   (G)   All lights shall be as specified by Mich. Admin. Code R. § 281.1233,
as amended; and
   (H)   A muffler as specified by Mich. Admin. Code R. § 281.1238, as amended,
for each motor.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-202) (Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998)
§ 95.137 TWENTY-SIX FEET OR OVER AND LESS THAN 40 FEET IN LENGTH.
   An outboard motorboat 26 feet or over and less than 40 feet in length shall
be equipped as follows:
   (A)   If the motorboat is not an open boat, it shall be equipped with two
ducts fitted with cowls or their equivalent as specified in Mich. Admin. Code
R. § 281.1237, as amended;
   (B)   One Type I, II or III Coast Guard approved personal flotation device
as specified in Mich. Admin. Code R. § 281.1234, as amended, in good and
serviceable condition, for each person aboard, plus one Type IV throwable
device. The devices shall be ready at hand and not encased in plastic bags or
other type containers;
   (C)   An efficient fog bell which when struck, produces a clear bell-like
tone of full round characteristics;
   (D)   One hand or power operated whistle, capable of producing a blast of
two seconds or more duration and audible for a distance of at least one mile;
   (E)   If the motorboat is constructed so that it has decking or compartments
where explosive or flammable gases may be entrapped, it shall be equipped with
two BI type coast guard approved hand- portable fire extinguishers in good and
serviceable condition and as specified in Mich. Admin. Code R. § 281.1235, as
amended. One BII type Coast Guard approved fire extinguisher may be substituted
for two BI types. When a fixed fire extinguishing system is installed in the
machinery space, one less BI type fire extinguisher is required;
   (F)   If underway between sunset and sunrise, the motorboat shall be
equipped with an Exhibit 1 white light aft higher than the bowlight showing all
around the horizon and visible two miles, one white light forward showing 20
points and visible two miles, a green light to starboard showing ten points and
visible one mile and a red light to port showing ten points and visible one
mile or in lieu of this requirement may display lights as specified by the
international rules of the road;
   (G)   If the motorboat is anchored between sunset and sunrise on the Great
Lakes or waters connected thereto and not in a special anchorage area a white
light shall be displayed on the forward part of the motorboat so as to be
visible to a boat approaching from any direction;
   (H)   All lights shall be as specified by Mich. Admin. Code R. § 281.1233,
as amended; and
   (I)   A muffler as specified by Mich. Admin. Code R. § 281.1238, as amended,
for each motor.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-203) (Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998)
§ 95.138 FORTY FEET OR OVER AND NOT MORE THAN 65 FEET IN LENGTH.
   An outboard motorboat 40 feet or over and not more than 65 feet in length
shall be equipped as follows:
   (A)   If the motorboat is not an open boat, it shall be equipped with two
ducts fitted with cowls or their equivalent as specified in Mich. Admin. Code
R. § 281.1237, as amended;
   (B)   One type I, II or III Coast Guard approved personal flotation device
as specified in Mich. Admin. Code R. § 281.1234, as amended, in good and
serviceable condition, for each person aboard, plus one Type IV throwable
device. The devices shall be ready at hand and not encased in plastic bags or
other containers;
   (C)   An efficient fog bell which when struck, produces a clear bell-like
tone of full round characteristics;
   (D)   One power operated whistle capable of producing a blast of two seconds
or more duration and audible for a distance of at least one mile;
   (E)   If the motorboat is constructed so that it has decking or compartments
where explosive or flammable gases may be entrapped, it shall be equipped with
three BI type Coast Guard approved hand-portable fire extinguishers in good and
serviceable condition and as specified in Mich. Admin. Code R. § 281.1235, as
amended. One BII type Coast Guard approved fire extinguisher may be substituted
for two BI types. When a fixed fire extinguishing system is installed in the
machinery space, one less BI type fire extinguisher is required;
   (F)   If underway between sunset and sunrise, the motorboat shall be
equipped with an Exhibit 1 white light aft higher than the bowlight showing all
around the horizon and visible two miles, one white light forward showing 20
points and visible two miles, a green light to starboard showing ten points and
visible one mile and a red light to port showing ten points and visible one
mile or in lieu of this requirement may display lights as specified by the
international rules of the road;
   (G)   If the motorboat is anchored between sunset and sunrise on the Great
Lakes or waters connected thereto and not in a special anchorage area a white
light shall be displayed on the forward part of the motorboat so as to be
visible to a boat approaching from any direction;
   (H)   All lights shall be as specified by Mich. Admin. Code R. § 281.1233,
as amended; and
   (I)   A muffler as specified by Mich. Admin. Code R. § 281.1238, as amended,
for each month.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-204) (Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998)
INBOARD AND INBOARD-OUTBOARD MOTORBOATS
§ 95.150 LESS THAN 16 FEET IN LENGTH.
   An inboard or inboard-outboard motorboat less than 16 feet in length shall
be equipped as follows:
   (A)   One coast guard approved backfire flame arrester as specified in Mich.
Admin. Code R. § 281.1236, as amended, on each carburetor of all gasoline
engines;
   (B)   At least two ducts fitted with cowls or their equivalent as specified
in Mich. Admin. Code R. § 281.1237, as amended;
   (C)   One Type I, II, III, IV Coast Guard approved personal flotation device
as specified in Mich. Admin. Code R. § 281.1234, as amended, in good and
serviceable condition for each person aboard. The devices shall be ready at
hand and not encased in plastic bags and other containers;
   (D)   One B1 type Coast Guard approved hand-portable fire extinguisher in
good and serviceable condition and as specified in Mich. Admin. Code R. §
281.1235, as amended. When a fixed fire extinguishing system is installed in
the machinery space, one less BI type fire extinguisher is required;
   (E)   If underway between sunset and sunrise, the motorboat shall be
equipped with an Exhibit 1 white light aft higher than the bowlight showing all
around the horizon and visible two miles and a combination 20 point bowlight
forward, showing green to starboard and red to port visible one mile or in lieu
of this requirements may display lights as specified by the international rules
of the road;
   (F)   If the motorboat is anchored between sunset and sunrise on the Great
Lakes or waters connected thereto and not in a special anchorage area, a white
light shall be displayed on the forward part of the motorboat so as to be
visible to a boat approaching from any direction; and
   (G)   All lights shall be as specified by Mich. Admin. Code R. § 281.1233,
as amended.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-22) (Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998)
§ 95.151 SIXTEEN FEET OR OVER AND LESS THAN 26 FEET IN LENGTH.
   An inboard or inboard-outboard motorboat 16 feet or over and less than 26
feet in length shall be equipped as follows:
   (A)   One coast guard approved backfire flame arrester as specified in Mich.
Admin. Code R. § 281.1236, as amended, on each carburetor of all gasoline
engines;
   (B)   At least two ducts fitted with cowls or their equivalent as specified
in Mich. Admin. Code R. § 281.1237, as amended;
   (C)   One Type I, II or III coast guard approved personal flotation device
as specified in Mich. Admin. Code R. § 281.1234 as amended in good and
serviceable condition for each person aboard, plus one Type IV throwable
device. The devices shall be ready at hand and not encased in plastic bags or
other containers;
   (D)   One hand, mouth or power operated whistle, capable of producing a
blast of two seconds or more duration and audible for at least one-half mile;
   (E)   One BI type coast guard approved hand-portable fire extinguisher in
good and serviceable condition and as specified in Mich. Admin. Code R. §
281.1235, as amended. When a fixed fire extinguishing system is installed in
the machinery space, one less BI type fire extinguisher is required;
   (F)   If underway between sunset and sunrise, the motorboat shall be
equipped with an Exhibit 1 white light aft higher than the bowlight showing all
around the horizon and visible two miles and a combination 20-point bowlight
forward showing green to starboard and red to port visible one mile or in lieu
of this requirement may display lights as specified by the international rules
of the road;
   (G)   If the motorboat is anchored between sunset and sunrise on the Great
Lakes or waters connected thereto and not in a special anchorage area, a white
light shall be displayed on the forward part of the motorboat so as to be
visible to a boat approaching from any direction;
   (H)   All lights shall be as specified by Mich. Admin. Code R. § 281.1233,
as amended; and
   (I)   A muffler as specified by Mich. Admin. Code R. § 281.1238, as amended,
for each motor.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-222) (Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998)
§ 95.152 TWENTY-SIX FEET AND OVER AND LESS THAN 40 FEET IN LENGTH.
   An inboard or inboard-outboard motorboat 26 feet or over and less than 40
feet in length shall be equipped as follows:
   (A)   One coast guard approved backfire flame arrester as specified in Mich.
Admin. Code R. § 281.1236, as amended, on each carburetor of all gasoline
engines;
   (B)   At least two ducts fitted with cowls or their equivalent as specified
in Mich. Admin. Code R. § 281.1237, as amended;
   (C)   An efficient fog bell which when struck produces a clear, bell-like
tone of full round characteristics;
   (D)   One hand or power operated whistle, capable of producing a blast of
two seconds or more duration and audible for a distance of at least one mile;
   (E)   One Type I, II or III coast guard approved personal flotation device
as specified in Mich. Admin. Code R. § 281.1234, as amended, in good and
serviceable condition for each person aboard, plus one Type IV throwable
device. The devices shall be ready at hand and not encased in plastic bags or
other containers;
   (F)   At least two BI type coast guard approved hand-portable fire
extinguishers in good and serviceable condition and as specified in Mich.
Admin. Code R. § 281.1235, as amended, one BII type coast guard approved fire
extinguisher may be substituted for two BI types. When a fixed fire
extinguishing system is installed in the machinery space, one less BI type fire
extinguisher is required;
   (G)   If underway between sunset and sunrise, the motorboat shall be
equipped with an Exhibit 1 white light aft higher than the bowlight showing all
around the horizon and visible two miles, one white light forward showing 20
points and visible two miles, a green light to starboard showing ten points and
visible one mile and a red light to port showing ten points and visible one
mile or in lieu of this requirement may display lights as specified by the
international rules of the road;
   (H)   If the motorboat is anchored between sunset and sunrise on the Great
Lakes or waters connected thereto and not in a special anchorage area, a white
light shall be displayed on the forward part of the motorboat so as to be
visible to a boat approaching from any direction;
   (I)   All lights shall be as specified by Mich. Admin. Code R. § 281.1233,
as amended; and
   (J)   A muffler as specified by Mich. Admin. Code R. § 281.1238, as amended,
for each motor.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-223) (Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998)
§ 95.153 FORTY FEET AND OVER AND NOT MORE THAN 65 FEET IN LENGTH.
   An inboard or inboard-outboard motorboat 40 feet or over and not more than
65 feet in length shall be equipped as follows:
   (A)   One coast guard approved backfire flame arrester as specified in Mich.
Admin. Code R. § 281.1236, as amended, on each carburetor of all gasoline
engines;
   (B)   At least two ducts fitted with cowls or their equivalent as specified
in Mich. Admin. Code R. § 281.1237, as amended;
   (C)   An efficient fog bell which when struck produces a clear bell-like
tone of full round characteristics;
   (D)   One power operated whistle, capable of producing a blast of two
seconds or more duration and audible a distance of at least one mile;
   (E)   One Type I, II or III coast guard approved personal flotation device
as specified in Mich. Admin. Code R. § 281.1234, as amended, in good and
serviceable condition for each person aboard, plus one Type IV throwable
device. The devices shall be ready at hand and not encased in plastic bags or
other containers;
   (F)   At least three BI type coast guard approved hand-portable fire
extinguishers in good and serviceable condition and as specified in Mich.
Admin. Code R. § 281.1235, as amended. One BII type coast guard approved fire
extinguisher may be substituted for two BI types. When a fixed fire
extinguishing system is installed in the machinery space, one less BI type fire
extinguisher is required;
   (G)   If underway between sunset and sunrise, the motorboat shall be
equipped with an Exhibit 1 white light aft higher than the bowlight showing all
around the horizon and visible two miles, one white light forward showing 20
points and visible two miles, a green light to starboard showing ten points and
visible one mile and a red light to port showing ten points and visible one
mile or in lieu of this requirement may display lights as specified by the
international rules of the road;
   (H)   If the motorboat is anchored between sunset and sunrise on the Great
Lakes or water connected thereto and not in a special anchorage area, a white
light shall be displayed on the forward part of the motorboat so as to be
visible to a boat approaching from any direction;
   (I)   All lights shall be as specified by Mich. Admin. Code R. § 281.1233;
and
   (J)   A muffler as specified by Mich. Admin. Code R. § 281.1238, as amended,
for each motor.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-224) (Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998)
SAILBOATS AND OTHER TYPES OF BOATS
§ 95.165 SAILBOAT WITHOUT MOTOR, LESS THAN 16 FEET IN LENGTH.
   A sailboat without a motor and less than 16 feet in length shall be equipped
as follows.
   (A)   One Type I, II, III or IV coast guard approved personal flotation
device as specified in Mich. Admin. Code R. § 281.1234, as amended, in good and
serviceable condition for each person aboard. The devices shall be ready at
hand and not encased in plastic bags or other containers.
   (B)   If underway between sunset and sunrise, the sailboat shall be equipped
with a lantern showing a white light which shall be ready at hand and which
shall be exhibited in sufficient time to prevent collision.
   (C)   If the sailboat is anchored between sunset and sunrise on the Great
Lakes or waters connected thereto and not in a special anchorage area, a white
light shall be displayed on the forward part of the sailboat so as to be
visible to a boat approaching from any direction.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-241) (Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998)
§ 95.166 SAILBOAT WITHOUT MOTOR, 16 FEET OR OVER IN LENGTH.
   A sailboat without a motor and 16 feet or over in length shall be equipped
as follows.
   (A)   One type I, II, III or IV coast guard approved personal flotation
device as specified in Mich. Admin. Code R. § 281.1234, as amended, in good and
serviceable condition for each person aboard, plus one type IV throwable
device. The devices shall be ready at hand and not encased in plastic bags or
other containers.
   (B)   If underway between sunset and sunrise, the sailboat shall be equipped
with a lantern showing a white light which shall be ready at hand and which
shall be exhibited in sufficient time to prevent collision.
   (C)   If the sailboat is anchored between sunset and sunrise on the Great
Lakes or waters connected thereto and not in a special anchorage area, a white
light shall be displayed on the forward part of the sailboat so as to be
visible to a boat approaching from any direction.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-242) (Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998)
§ 95.167 SAILBOAT WITH MOTOR.
   A sailboat with a motor shall be equipped as follows:
   (A)   Personal flotation devices, backfire flame arresters, ventilation
ducts and cowls, fire extinguishers, whistles and bells and mufflers, as
required by these rules for motorboats of the same length; and
   (B)   If underway between sunset and sunrise shall be equipped with and
exhibit navigation lights as required by these rules for motorboats of the same
length, except:
      (1)   A sailboat 26 feet or over in length under sail alone on the Great
Lakes and waters connected thereto between sunset and sunrise shall be equipped
with and exhibit a green light to starboard showing ten points and visible one
mile, and red light to port showing ten points and visible one mile and a
lantern showing a white light which shall be ready at hand and which shall be
exhibited in sufficient time to prevent collision.
      (2)   If the sailboat is anchored between sunset and sunrise on the Great
Lakes or waters connected thereto and not in a special anchorage area, a white
light shall be displayed on the forward part of the sailboat so as to be
visible to a boat approaching from any direction. In lieu of these lighting
requirements sailboats may display lights as specified by the international
rules of the road.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-243) (Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998)
§ 95.168 ROWBOATS.
   (A)   A rowboat shall be equipped with personal flotation devices as
required by this chapter for a motorboat of the same length.
   (B)   If underway between sunset and sunrise, a rowboat shall be equipped
with a lantern showing a white light which shall be ready at hand and which
shall be exhibited in sufficient time to prevent collision.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-244) (Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998)
§ 95.169 CANOES AND KAYAKS.
   (A)   A canoe or kayak shall be equipped with one Type I, II, III or IV
coast guard approved personal flotation device as specified in Mich. Admin.
Code R. § 281.1234, as amended, in good and serviceable condition for each
person aboard. The devices shall be ready at hand and not encased in plastic
bags or other type containers.
   (B)   If underway between sunset and sunrise, a canoe or kayak shall be
equipped with a lantern showing a white light which shall be ready at hand and
which shall be exhibited in sufficient time to prevent collision.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-245) (Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998)
§ 95.170 SPEED OF BOATS; NO WAKE.
   (A)   On the following waters of the Detroit River adjacent to the city, it
is unlawful for the operator of a vessel to exceed a “slow-no wake” speed when
within 300 feet of the shore:
      (1)   South of an east-west line beginning where the Ecorse Creek
intersects the Detroit River, extending eastward 300 feet from shore and
continuing to 300 feet south of the intersection of Perry Place with the
Detroit River; and
      (2)   South of an east-west line beginning where Cedar Street, as
extended, intersects the Detroit River, thence south to the southern most city
limit as extended 300 feet off shore.
   (B)   This section shall not be enforced when waived by the state’s Natural
Resources Commission or its successor for marine events.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-246) (Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998) Penalty, see §
95.999
PERSONAL WATERCRAFT
§ 95.185 DEFINITIONS; APPLICABLE TO PERSONAL WATERCRAFT.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ASSOCIATED EQUIPMENT. Any of the following that are not radio equipment:
      (1)   An original system, part or component of a personal watercraft at
the time that boat was manufactured, or a similar part or component
manufactured or sold for replacement;
      (2)   Repair or improvement of an original or replacement system, part or
component;
      (3)   An accessory or equipment for, or appurtenance to, a personal
watercraft; and
      (4)   A marine safety article, accessory or equipment intended for use by
a person on board a boat.
   BOAT LIVERY. As defined in § 44501 of the Natural Resources and
Environmental Protection Act, Public Act 451 of 1994, being M.C.L.A. §
324.44501.
   BOATING SAFETY CERTIFICATE. Any of the following:
      (1)   The document issued by the Department under this Act that certifies
that the individual named in the document has successfully completed a boating
safety course and passed an examination approved and administered as required
under M.C.L.A. §§ 324.80140 and 324.80211;
      (2)   A document issued by the United States Coast Guard auxiliary that
certifies that the individual named in the document has successfully completed
a United States Coast Guard auxiliary course concerning boating safety; and
      (3)   A written rental agreement provided to an individual named in the
rental agreement entered into under § 44522 of the Natural Resources and
Environmental Protection Act, Public Act 451 of 1994, being M.C.L.A. §
324.44522, only on the date or dates indicated on the rental agreement while
the named individual is operating a personal watercraft leased, hired or rented
from a boat livery.
   BOATING SAFETY COURSE. A course that meets both of the following
requirements:
      (1)   Provides instruction on the safe operation of a personal watercraft
that meets or exceeds the minimum course content for boating or personal
watercraft education established by the National Association of State Boating
Law Administrators Education Committee (October 1996); and
      (2)   Is approved by the Department.
   CHANNEL. Either of the following:
      (1)   The deepest part of a stream, bay or straight-through which the
main current flows; or
      (2)   The part of a body of water deep enough for navigation through an
area otherwise not suitable for navigation that is marked by a single or double
line of navigational aids or range markers.
   DEALER. A person and an authorized representative of that person who
annually purchases from a manufacturer, or who is engaged in selling or
manufacturing, six or more personal watercraft that require certificates of
number under part 801 of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection
Act, Public Act 451 of 1994, being M.C.L.A. §§ 324.80101 to 324.80199.
   DEPARTMENT. The Department of Natural Resources.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of the Department of Natural Resources.
   MANUFACTURER. A person engaged in any of the following:
      (1)   The manufacture, construction or assembly of personal watercraft or
associated equipment;
      (2)   The manufacture or construction of components for personal
watercraft and associated equipment to be sold for subsequent assembly; and/or
      (3)   The importation of a personal watercraft or associated equipment
into the state for sale.
   OPERATE. To be in control of a personal watercraft that is under way and is
not docked or at anchor or secured in another way.
   OPERATOR. The person who is in control or in charge of a personal watercraft
while that vessel is under way.
   OWNER. A person who claims or is entitled to lawful possession of a personal
watercraft by virtue of that person’s legal title or equitable interest in a
personal watercraft.
   PEACE OFFICER. One or both of the following:
      (1)   A law enforcement officer, as that term is defined in § 2 of the
state’s Law Enforcement Officers Training Council Act, Public Act 203 of 1965,
being M.C.L.A. § 28.602; and/or
      (2)   A deputy who is authorized by a sheriff to enforce this Act and who
has satisfactorily completed at least 40 hours of law enforcement training,
including training specific to this Act.
   PERSON. An individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership,
association, governmental entity or other legal entity.
   PERSONAL WATERCRAFT. A vessel that meets all of the following requirements:
      (1)   Uses a motor-driven propeller or an internal combustion engine
powering a water jet pump as its primary source of propulsion;
      (2)   Is designed without an open load carrying area that would retain
water; and
      (3)   Is designed to be operated by one or more persons positioned on,
rather than within, the confines of the hull.
   POLITICAL SUBDIVISION. The City of Wyandotte.
   SLOW-NO WAKE SPEED. The use of vessel at a very slow speed so that the
resulting wake or wash is minimal.
   USE. Operate, navigate or employ.
   VESSEL. Every description of watercraft used or capable of being used as a
means of transportation on water.
   WATERS OF THIS STATE. Any waters within the territorial limits of the state
and includes those waters of the Great Lakes that are under the jurisdiction of
the state.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-261) (Ord. 1072, passed 5-3-1999)
§ 95.186 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   This subchapter applies to personal watercraft and associated
equipment used on the waters of the city.
   (B)   Except where expressly indicated otherwise, this article does not
apply to a personal watercraft that is all of the following:
      (1)   Owned by a state or political subdivision of a state other than the
state and its political subdivisions;
      (2)   Used principally for governmental purposes; and
      (3)   Clearly marked and identifiable as personal watercraft that is used
principally for governmental purposes.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-262) (Ord. 1072, passed 5-3-1999)
§ 95.187 RULES.
   The rules promulgated by the Department for Natural Resources or its
successor under the Administrative Procedures Act of 1969, Public Act 306 of
1969, being M.C.L.A. §§ 24.201 to 24.328, are incorporated herein with regards
to personal watercraft.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-263) (Ord. 1072, passed 5-3-1999)
§ 95.188 OPERATION OF PERSONAL WATERCRAFT; REQUIREMENTS; PROHIBITION;
VIOLATION.
   (A)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, a person shall not
operate a personal watercraft on the waters of the city unless each person 12
years of age or older riding on or being towed behind the personal watercraft
is wearing a Type I, Type II or Type III personal flotation device as described
in Mich. Admin. Code R. § 281.1234.
      (2)   A person shall not operate a personal watercraft on the waters of
the city unless each person on board or being towed by the personal watercraft
who is less than 12 years of age is wearing a Type I or Type II personal
flotation device as described in Mich. Admin. Code R. § 281.1234.
      (3)   A person shall not operate a personal watercraft on the waters of
the city unless each person on board the personal watercraft is wearing a
personal flotation device that is not inflatable.
      (4)   A person shall not operate a personal watercraft on the waters of
the city unless the child is in the company of his or her parent or guardian or
a designee of the parent or guardian.
      (5)   While operating a personal watercraft equipped by the manufacturer
with a lanyard-type engine cutoff switch on the waters of the city, a person
shall have the lanyard attached to his or her person, clothing or personal
flotation device as is appropriate for the personal watercraft.
      (6)   A person shall not operate a personal watercraft on the waters of
the city during the period that begins one hour before sunset and ends at 8:00
a.m. As used in this division (A)(6), SUNSET means that time as determined by
the National Weather Service.
      (7)   A person operating a personal watercraft on the waters of the city
shall not cross within 150 feet behind another vessel, other than a personal
watercraft, unless the person is operating the personal watercraft at slow-no
wake speed.
      (8)   A person shall not operate a personal watercraft on the waters of
the city where the water depth is less than two feet, as determined by vertical
measurement, unless one or both of the following circumstances exist:
         (a)   The personal watercraft is being operated at slow-no wake speed;
and/or
         (b)   The personal watercraft is being docked or launched.
      (9)   A person shall operate a personal watercraft in a reasonable and
prudent manner. A maneuver that unreasonably or unnecessarily endangers life,
limb or property, including, but not limited to, all of the following,
constitutes reckless operation of a personal watercraft under M.C.L.A. §
324.80208:
         (a)   Weaving through congested vessel traffic;
         (b)   Jumping the wake of another vessel unreasonably or unnecessarily
close to the other vessel or when visibility around the other vessel is
obstructed; and
         (c)   Waiting until the last possible moment before swerving to avoid
a collision.
      (10)   A person shall not operate a personal watercraft on the waters of
the city carrying more persons than the personal watercraft is designed to
carry.
      (11)   A violation of division (A)(10) above is prima facie evidence of
reckless operation of a watercraft under M.C.L.A. § 324.80208.
      (12)   A person operating a personal watercraft in excess of the speeds
established under part 801 of the Natural Resources and Environmental
Protection Act, Public Act 451 of 1994, being M.C.L.A. §§ 324.80101 to
324.80199, is guilty of reckless operation of a personal watercraft under
M.C.L.A. § 324.80208.
      (13)   This section does not apply to a performer engaged in a
professional exhibition or a person preparing to participate or participating
in a regatta, race, marine parade, tournament or exhibition held in compliance
with § 80164 of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, Public
Act 451 of 1994, being M.C.L.A. § 324.80164, under a permit issued by the
Department and at the time and place specified in the permit.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-264)
   (B)   A person shall not operate a personal watercraft in the waters of the
city outside of a channel or in an area where aquatic rooted vegetation is
visible above the surface of the water in the deltaic wetlands of a lake that
is greater that 32 square miles and less than 144 square miles in area.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-265)
(Ord. 1072, passed 5-3-1999)
§ 95.189 RECKLESS OPERATION OF PERSONAL WATERCRAFT; IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   If a person carelessly and heedlessly operates a personal watercraft
upon the waters of the city in disregard of the rights or safety of others,
without due caution and circumspection, or at a rate of speed or in a manner
that endangers or is likely to endanger a person or property, that person is
guilty of reckless operation of a personal watercraft and is subject to the
penalties described in divisions (B) or (C) below, or both, as applicable.
   (B)   Upon a person’s conviction under this section, the court may issue an
order prohibiting the person from operating a personal watercraft on the waters
of the state for a period of not more that two years and shall order the person
to participate in and complete a boating safety course. An order issued
pursuant to this division (B) is in addition to any other penalty authorized
under §
95.999 of this chapter or division (C) below.
   (C)   Upon a person’s second or subsequent conviction under this section,
the court may issue an order impounding the personal watercraft that the person
was operating at the time the person violated division (A) above for a period
of not more that one year, if either of the following conditions exists:
      (1)   The person is an owner of the personal watercraft; and/or
      (2)   The person is the minor child of an owner of the personal
watercraft.
   (D)   The cost of storage for an impoundment ordered under division (C)
above shall be paid by the owner of the personal watercraft.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-266) (Ord. 1072, passed 5-3-1999)
§ 95.190 OPERATION OF PERSONAL WATERCRAFT; DISTANCE REQUIREMENTS; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Except when traveling at slow-no wake speed perpendicular to the
shoreline, a person who operates a personal watercraft on one of the Great
Lakes that is under the jurisdiction of the waters of the city shall maintain a
distance of 200 feet from the shoreline.
   (B)   Except as provided in division (D) below, a person who operates a
personal watercraft or a person who is being towed by a personal watercraft on
a water sled, kite, surfboard, parachute, tube, water ski or similar equipment
on the waters of the city shall maintain a distance of not less than 100 feet
from a dock, raft or buoyed or occupied bathing or swimming area, a person in
the water or on the water in a personal flotation device, or a vessel moored,
anchored, drifting or sitting in dead water.
   (C)   A person who operates a personal watercraft or a person who is being
towed by a personal watercraft on a water sled, kite, surfboard, parachute,
tube, water ski or similar equipment on the waters of the city shall maintain a
distance of not less that 200 feet from a submerged diver, vessel engaged in
underwater diving activities or a flotation device displaying the international
diving insignia.
   (D)   Division (B) above does not apply under either of the following
conditions:
      (1)   The personal watercraft being operated or the person being towed is
proceeding at a slow-no wake speed; or
      (2)   The personal watercraft being operated or the person being towed is
in a navigable channel, canal, river or stream not otherwise posted.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-267) (Ord. 1072, passed 5-3-1999)
§ 95.191 INDIVIDUAL REQUIRED TO COMPLETE BOATING SAFETY COURSE; CERTIFICATE
REQUIRED.
   An individual who is required to complete a boating safety course under the
state law shall not operate a personal watercraft upon the waters of the city
unless that individual has in his or her immediate possession a boating safety
certificate.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-268) (Ord. 1072, passed 5-3-1999)
§ 95.192 DISPLAY OF BOATING SAFETY CERTIFICATE.
   (A)   An individual who is required to complete a boating safety course
under the state law and who operates a personal watercraft on the waters of the
city shall display his or her boating safety certificate upon the demand of a
peace officer who identifies himself or herself as a peace officer.
   (B)   A person shall display only his or her own boating safety certificate
upon the demand of a peace officer under division (A) above.
   (C)   A person shall not display a fraudulent boating safety certificate to
a peace officer under division (A) above.
   (D)   A peace officer shall not stop a personal watercraft solely for the
purpose of determining whether the operator has in his or her possession a
boating safety certificate.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-269) (Ord. 1072, passed 5-3-1999) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.193 OPERATION OF PERSONAL WATERCRAFT; GRADUATED AGE PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Except as provided in divisions (B) and (C) below, a person under the
age of 14 shall not use a personal watercraft on the waters of the city.
   (B)   A person who is 12 or more and less than 14 years of age before 1-1-
1999 may use a personal watercraft on the waters of the city if, before 1-1-
1999, he or she obtained a boating safety certificate.
   (C)   A person who is 12 or more and less than 14 years of age may use a
personal watercraft on the waters of the city if all of the following
circumstances exist:
      (1)   The person is accompanied solely by the person’s parent or legal
guardian;
      (2)   Both the person and the parent or legal guardian have obtained a
boating safety certificate;
      (3)   The personal watercraft is equipped by the manufacturer with a
lanyard-type engine cutoff switch, and the parent or legal guardian has the
lanyard attached to his or her person, clothing or personal flotation device;
and
      (4)   The personal watercraft is designed to carry not less than two
persons.
   (D)   A person who was born after 12-31-1978 shall not operate a personal
watercraft upon the waters of the city unless he or she first obtains a boating
safety certificate.
   (E)   The owner of a personal watercraft or a person having charge over or
control of a personal watercraft shall not authorize or knowingly permit the
personal watercraft to be operated in violation of this section.
   (F)   This section does not apply to a performer engaged in a professional
exhibition or a person preparing to participate or participating in a regatta,
race, marine parade, tournament or exhibition held in compliance with § 80164
of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, Public Act 451 of
1994, being M.C.L.A. § 324.80164, under a permit issued by the Department and
at the time and place specified in the permit.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-27) (Ord. 1072, passed 5-3-1999; Ord. 1118, passed 6-11-
2001)
§ 95.194 CERTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS FOR OUT-OF-STATE RESIDENTS.
   Beginning 4-1-2000, a person who is not a resident of the city shall operate
a personal watercraft on the waters of the state only if he or she has one of
the following in his or her possession:
   (A)   A boating safety certificate;
   (B)   A certificate issued by his or her state of residence that reflects
education and training that is substantially similar to the education and
training required to obtain a boating safety certificate under this subchapter;
and/or
   (C)   A certificate showing that he or she has successfully completed a
course that meets the requirement prescribed in §
95.191.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-271) (Ord. 1072, passed 5-3-1999)
§ 95.195 SOURCES OF BOATING SAFETY COURSES; FAILURE OF DEALER TO ADVISE;
VIOLATION.
   A dealer of a new or used personal watercraft shall advise each person who
buys a personal watercraft from the dealer of the sources of boating safety
courses in the area.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-272) (Ord. 1072, passed 5-3-1999)
§ 95.196 AVAILABILITY OF DOCUMENTS TO DEALER; PROVIDING DOCUMENTS TO BUYER.
   A dealer shall provide a copy of a summary of the laws of the state that
pertain to personal watercraft and a summary of the safety features of the
personal watercraft to each person who buys a personal watercraft from the
dealer.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-273) (Ord. 1072, passed 5-3-1999)
§ 95.197 ENFORCEMENT OF SUBCHAPTER.
   Peace officers shall enforce this subchapter. If a person has received a
citation for a violation of a certification requirement prescribed in this
subchapter, the court may waive any fine and costs upon receipt, not more than
ten days after the citation is issued, of proof of certification by a law
enforcement agency that the person, before the appearance date on the citation,
produced a valid boating safety certificate or other certification described in
this subchapter, as applicable, that was valid on the date the violation
occurred.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-275) (Ord. 1072, passed 5-3-1999)
§ 95.198 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAW.
   Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, a personal watercraft
operator shall comply with part 801 of the Natural Resources and Environmental
Protection Act, Public Act 451 of 1994, being M.C.L.A. §§ 324.80101 to
324.80199.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-276) (Ord. 1072, passed 5-3-1999)
RESTRICTIONS, VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
§ 95.210 OPERATION OF VESSEL BY PERSON UNDER INFLUENCE OF INTOXICATING LIQUOR
OR CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE.
   (A)   A person shall not operate a vessel on the waters of the city if
either of the following applies:
      (1)   The person is under the influence of intoxicating liquor or a
controlled substance, or both; or
      (2)   The person has a blood alcohol content of 0.10 grams or more per
100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath or per 67 milliliters of
urine.
   (B)   The owner of a vessel or a person in charge or in control of a vessel
shall not authorize or knowingly permit the vessel to be operated on the waters
of city by a person who is under the influence of intoxicating liquor or a
controlled substance, or both, or who has a blood alcohol content of 0.10 grams
or more per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath or per 67
milliliters of urine.
   (C)   A person shall not operate a vessel on the waters of the city when,
due to the consumption of an intoxicating liquor or a controlled substance, or
both, the person’s ability to operate the vessel is visibly impaired. If a
person is charged with violating division (A) above, a finding of guilty under
this division (C) may be rendered.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-121) (Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.211 ENHANCED SENTENCING.
   (A)   If the Prosecuting Attorney intends to seek an enhanced sentence under
§
95.999 of this chapter based upon the defendant having one or more prior
convictions, the Prosecuting Attorney shall include on the complaint and
information filed in District Court, Circuit Court, Recorder’s Court, Municipal
Court or Probate Court a statement listing the defendant’s prior convictions.
   (B)   A prior conviction shall be established at sentencing by one or more
of the following:
      (1)   An abstract of conviction;
      (2)   A copy of the defendant’s boating record; and/or
      (3)   An admission by the defendant.
   (C)   A person, who is convicted of an attempted violation of §
95.210(A) or (C) of this chapter, shall be punished as if the offense had been
completed.
   (D)   When issuing an order under this part, the Secretary of State and the
court shall treat a conviction of an attempted violation of §
95.210(A) or (C) of this chapter, former § 171(1) or (3) of the Marine Safety
Act, a local ordinance substantially corresponding to §
95.210(A) or (C) of this chapter or a law of another state substantially
corresponding to §
95.210(A) or (C) of this chapter the same as if the offense had been completed.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-124) (Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998)
§ 95.212 PEACE OFFICER; ARREST WITHOUT WARRANT; REASONABLE CAUSE; CONDITIONS;
RETURNING VESSEL AND OCCUPANTS TO SHORE; EFFECT OF NOT CHARGING PERSON
RECEIVING CITATION.
   (A)   A peace officer, without a warrant, may arrest a person if the peace
officer has reasonable cause to believe that the person was, at the time of an
accident, the operator of a vessel involved in the accident in the city while
in violation of §
95.210(A) and (C) of this chapter.
   (B)   A peace officer who has reasonable cause to believe that a person was
operating a vessel on the waters of the city and that, by the consumption of
intoxicating liquor, the person may have affected his or her ability to operate
a vessel, may require the person to submit to a preliminary chemical breath
analysis. The following apply with respect to a preliminary chemical breath
analysis:
      (1)   Only a peace officer who has successfully completed a training
course taught by a state-certified instructor in the administration of the
preliminary chemical breath analysis may administer that test;
      (2)   A peace officer may arrest a person based in whole or in part upon
the results of a preliminary chemical breath analysis;
      (3)   The results of a preliminary chemical breath analysis are
admissible in a criminal prosecution for a crime described in §
95.210(A) and (C) of this chapter or §
95.214(E) of this chapter or in an administrative hearing solely to assist the
court or hearing officer in determining a challenge to the validity of an
arrest. This division (B)(3) does not limit the introduction of other competent
evidence offered to establish the validity of an arrest;
      (4)   A person who submits to a preliminary chemical breath analysis
remains subject to the requirements of §
95.214(E) through (H) of this chapter for the purposes of chemical tests
described in those sections; and
      (5)   A person who refuses to submit to a preliminary chemical breath
analysis upon a lawful request by a peace officer is responsible for a civil
infraction and may be ordered to pay a civil fine of not more than $100.
   (C)   A peace officer making an arrest under this chapter shall take
measures to assure that the vessel and its occupants are safely returned to
shore.
   (D)   If, within 60 days after the issuance of a citation for a civil
infraction under this section, the person to whom the citation is issued is not
charged with a violation of §
95.210(A) and (C) of this chapter, the citation issued for the civil infraction
is void. Upon application of the person to whom the citation is issued, money
paid by the person as fine, costs or otherwise shall be immediately returned.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-125) (Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.213 CHEMICAL TEST AND ANALYSIS OF BLOOD, URINE OR BREATH; COLLECTION OF
SAMPLE OR SPECIMEN; APPLICATION OF ADMINISTRATIVE RULES.
   (A)   The following apply with respect to a chemical test and analysis of a
person’s blood, urine or breath, other than a preliminary chemical breath
analysis:
      (1)   The amount of alcohol or presence of a controlled substance, or
both, in an operator’s blood at the time alleged as shown by chemical analysis
of the person’s blood, urine, or breath is admissible into evidence in any
civil or criminal proceeding; and
      (2)   A person arrested for a crime described in §§
95.210(A) and (C) and 95.214(E)(1) of this chapter shall be advised of all of
the following:
         (a)   If the person takes a chemical test of his or her blood, urine
or breath administered at the request of a peace officer, the person has the
right to demand that someone of the person’s own choosing administer one of the
chemical tests; that the results of the test are admissible in a judicial
proceeding as provided under this subchapter and shall be considered with other
competent evidence in determining the innocence or guilt of the defendant; and
that the person is responsible for obtaining a chemical analysis of a test
sample obtained pursuant to the person’s own request;
         (b)   If the person refuses the request of a peace officer to take the
test described in division (A)(2)(a) above, the test shall not be given without
a court order, but the peace officer may seek to obtain such a court order; and
         (c)   The person’s refusal of the request of a peace officer to take
the test described in division (A)(2)(a) above will result in issuance of an
order that the person not operate a vessel on the waters of the state or city
for at least six months.
   (B)   A sample or specimen of urine or breath shall be taken and collected
in a reasonable manner. Only a licensed physician, or a licensed nurse or
medical technician under the direction of a licensed physician, qualified to
withdraw blood and acting in a medical environment, may withdraw blood at the
request of a peace officer for the purpose of determining the amount of alcohol
or presence of a controlled substance, or both, in a person’s blood, as
provided in this division (B). A qualified person who withdraws or analyzes
blood, or assists in the withdrawal or analysis, in accordance with this
subchapter is not liable for a crime or civil damages predicated on the act of
withdrawing or analyzing blood and related procedures unless the withdrawal or
analysis is performed in a negligent manner.
   (C)   A rule relating to a chemical test for alcohol or a controlled
substance promulgated under the state’s Vehicle Code, Public Act 300 of 1949,
being M.C.L.A. §§ 257.1 through 257.923, applies to a chemical test
administered under this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-126) (Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998)
§ 95.214 CHEMICAL TESTS; ADMINISTRATION; PROCEDURES; EVIDENCE.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   A chemical test described in §
95.213 of this chapter shall be administered at the request of a peace officer
having reasonable grounds to believe the person has committed a crime described
in §
95.210(A) of this chapter. A person who takes a chemical test administered at
the request of a peace officer, as provided in §
95.213 of this chapter, shall be given a reasonable opportunity to have someone
of the person’s own choosing administer one of the chemical tests described in
§
95.213 of this chapter within a reasonable time after the person’s detention,
and the results of the test are admissible and shall be considered with other
competent evidence in determining the innocence or guilt of the defendant. If
the person charged is administered a chemical test by someone of the person’s
own choosing, the person charged is responsible for obtaining a chemical
analysis of the test sample.
      (2)   If, after an accident, the operator of a vessel involved in the
accident is transported to a medical facility and a sample of the operator’s
blood is withdrawn at that time for the purpose of medical treatment, the
results of a chemical analysis of that sample are admissible in any civil or
criminal proceeding to show the amount of alcohol or presence of a controlled
substance, or both, in the person’s blood at the time alleged, regardless of
whether the person had been offered or had refused a chemical test. The medical
facility or person performing the chemical analysis shall disclose the results
of the analysis to a Prosecuting Attorney who requests the results for use in a
criminal prosecution as provided in this division (A)(2). A medical facility or
person disclosing information in compliance with this division (A)(2) is not
civilly or criminally liable for making the disclosure.
      (3)   If, after an accident, the operator of a vessel involved in the
accident is deceased, a sample of the decedent’s blood shall be withdrawn in a
manner directed by the medical examiner for the purpose of determining the
amount of alcohol or the presence of a controlled substance, or both, in the
decedent’s blood. The medical examiner shall give the results of the chemical
analysis of the sample to the law enforcement agency investigating the accident
and that agency shall forward the results to the state.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-127)
   (B)   Chemical test; introduction of other competent evidence; availability
of test results.
      (1)   The provisions of §
95.213 of this chapter and division (A) above relating to a chemical testing do
not limit the introduction of any other competent evidence bearing upon the
question of whether or not a person was impaired by, or under the influence of,
intoxicating liquor or a controlled substance, or both, or whether the person
had a blood alcohol content of 0.10 grams or more per 100 milliliters of blood,
per 210 liters of breath or per 67 milliliters of urine.
      (2)   If a chemical test described in §
95.213 of this chapter and division (A) above is administered, the results of
the test shall be made available to the person charged or the person’s attorney
upon written request to the prosecution, with a copy of the request filed with
the court. The prosecution shall furnish the results at least two days before
the day of the trial. The results of the test shall be offered as evidence by
the prosecution in that trial. Failure to fully comply with the request bars
the admission of the results into evidence by the prosecution.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-128)
   (C)   Chemical analysis of blood, urine or breath; amount of alcohol in
operator’s blood; presumptions; refusal to submit to chemical test as evidence.
      (1)   Except in a prosecution relating solely to a violation of §
95.210(A)(2) of this chapter, the amount of alcohol in the operator’s blood at
the time alleged as shown by chemical analysis of the person’s blood, urine or
breath gives rise to the following presumptions:
         (a)   If at the time defendant had an alcohol content of 0.07 grams or
less per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath or per 67
milliliters of urine, it shall be presumed that the defendant’s ability to
operate a vessel was not impaired due to the consumption of intoxicating liquor
and that the defendant was not under the influence of intoxicating liquor;
         (b)   If at the time the defendant had an alcohol content of more than
0.07 grams, but less than 0.10 grams per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210
liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine, it shall be presumed that the
defendant’s ability to operate a vessel was impaired within the provisions of §
95.210(C) of this chapter due to the consumption of intoxicating liquor; and
         (c)   If at the time the defendant had an alcohol content of 0.10
grams or more per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67
milliliters of urine, it shall be presumed that the defendant was under the
influence of intoxicating liquor.
      (2)   A person’s refusal to submit to a chemical test as provided in §
95.213 and division (A) above is admissible in a criminal prosecution for a
crime described in §§
95.210(A) and (C) and division (F) below only for the purpose of showing that a
test was offered to the defendant, but not as evidence in determining innocence
or guilt of the defendant. The jury shall be instructed accordingly.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-129)
   (D)   Advising defendant of penalties and sanctions; ordering screening;
assessment and rehabilitative services.
      (1)   Before accepting a plea of guilty or nolo contendere under §§
95.210,
95.211 and
95.999 of this chapter, the court shall advise the accused of the maximum
possible term of imprisonment and the maximum possible fine that may be imposed
for the violation, and shall advise the defendant that the maximum possible
sanctions that may be imposed will be based upon the boating record maintained
by the Secretary of State or other evidence of a prior conviction as provided
in §
95.999 of this chapter.
      (2)   Before imposing sentence, other than court ordered operating
sanctions, for a violation of §
95.210(A) and (C) of this chapter, the court shall order the person to undergo
screening and assessment by a person or agency designated by the office of
substance abuse services to determine whether the person is likely to benefit
from rehabilitative services, including alcohol or drug education or treatment
programs. As part of the sentence, the court may order the person to
participate in and successfully complete one or more appropriate rehabilitative
programs. The person shall pay for the costs of the screening, assessment and
rehabilitative services.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-130)
   (E)   Sentencing as multiple offender; consideration of prior convictions;
sanctions; “another boating substance abuse offense” defined.
      (1)   Immediately upon acceptance by the court of a plea of guilty or
nolo contendere or upon entry of a verdict of guilty for a violation of §
95.210(A) and (C) of this chapter whether or not the person is eligible to be
sentenced as a multiple offender, the court shall consider all prior
convictions currently entered upon the boating record of the person or other
evidence of prior convictions established under §
95.999 of this chapter, except those convictions that, upon motion by the
defendant, are determined by the court to be constitutionally invalid, and
shall impose the following sanctions:
         (a)   For a conviction under §
95.210(A) of this chapter:
            1.   If the court finds that the person has no prior convictions
within seven years for a violation of §
95.210(A) and (C) of this chapter, former § 171(1), (3), (4) or (5), or another
boating substance abuse offense, or that the person has one prior conviction
within seven years for a violation of §
95.210(C) of this chapter; former § 171(3) of the Marine Safety Act; former §
73b of the Marine Safety Act; a local ordinance substantially corresponding to
§
95.210(C) of this chapter or former § 73b of the Marine Safety Act; or law of
another state substantially corresponding to §
95.210(C) of this chapter or former § 73b of the Marine Safety Act, the court
may order that the person not operate a vessel on the waters of the state for
not less than one year or more than two years;
            2.   If the court finds that the person has one or more prior
convictions within seven years for a violation of §
95.210(A) and (C) of this chapter; former § 73 of the Marine Safety Act; a
local ordinance substantially corresponding to §
95.210(A) of this chapter or former § 73 of the Marine Safety Act; or a law of
another state substantially corresponding to §
95.210(A) of this chapter, or former § 73 of the Marine Safety Act, the court
shall order that the person not operate a vessel on the waters of the state for
not less than two years; and
            3.   If the court finds that the person has two or more prior
convictions within ten years for a violation of §
95.210(A) and (C) of this chapter, or former § 171(1), (3), (4) or (5) or
another boating substance abuse offense, the court shall order with no
expiration date that the person not operate a vessel on the waters of the
state.
         (b)   For a conviction under §
95.210(C) of this chapter or a local ordinance substantially corresponding to §
95.210(C) of this chapter:
            1.   If the court finds that the convicted person has no prior
conviction within seven years for a violation of §
95.210(A) and (C) of this chapter, or former § 171(1), (3), (4) or (5) or
another boating substance abuse offense, the court may order that the person
not operate a vessel on the waters of the state for not less than six months or
more than one year;
            2.   If the court finds that the person has one prior conviction
within seven years for a violation of §
95.210(A) and (C) of this chapter; former § 73 of the Marine Safety Act; a
local ordinance substantially corresponding to §
95.210(A) of this chapter or former § 73 of the Marine Safety Act; or a law of
another state substantially corresponding to §
95.210(A) of this chapter, or former § 73 of the Marine Safety Act, the court
shall order that the person not operate a vessel on the waters of the state for
not less than two years; and
            3.   If the court finds that the person has two or more prior
convictions within ten years for a violation of §
95.210(A) and (C) of this chapter, or former § 171(1), (3) or (5) or another
boating substance abuse offense, the court shall order with no expiration date
that the person not operate a vessel on the waters of the state.
      (2)   As used in this section, ANOTHER BOATING SUBSTANCE ABUSE OFFENSE
means former §§ 73 or 73b of the Marine Safety Act, a local ordinance
substantially corresponding to §
95.210(A) or (C) of this chapter or former §§ 73 or 73b of the Marine Safety
Act, or a law of another state substantially corresponding to §
95.210(A) and (C) of this chapter, or former §§ 73 or 73b of the Marine Safety
Act.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-131)
   (F)   Consent to chemical tests of blood, breath or urine; circumstances;
exception; administration.
      (1)   A person who operates a vessel on the waters of the city is
considered to have given consent to chemical tests of his or her blood, breath
or urine for the purpose of determining the amount of alcohol or presence of a
controlled substance, or both, in his or her blood in all of the following
circumstances:
         (a)   The person is arrested for a violation of §
95.210(A) and (C) of this chapter; and/or
         (b)   The person arrested for negligent homicide, manslaughter or
murder resulting from the operation of a vessel, and the peace officer had
reasonable grounds to believe that the person was operating the vessel while
impaired by, or under the influence of, intoxicating liquor or a controlled
substance, or both, or while having a blood alcohol content of 0.10 grams or
more per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67
milliliters of urine.
      (2)   A person who is afflicted with hemophilia, diabetes or a condition
requiring the use of an anticoagulant under the direction of a physical shall
not be considered to have given consent to the withdrawal of blood.
      (3)   A chemical test described in division (F)(1) above shall be
administered as provided in §
95.213 of this chapter and division (A) above.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-132)
   (G)   Refusal to submit to chemical test at request of peace officer;
obtaining court order; forwarding report to Secretary of State.
      (1)   If a person refuses the request of a peace officer to submit to a
chemical test offered pursuant to §
95.213 of this chapter and division (A) above, a test shall not be given
without a court order, but the officer may seek to obtain the court order.
      (2)   If a person refuses a chemical test offered pursuant to §
95.213 of this chapter and division (A) above, the peace officer who requested
the person to submit to the test shall immediately forward a written report to
the Secretary of State. The report shall state that the officer had reasonable
grounds to believe the person committed a crime described in §
95.210(A) above and division (F)(1) above and that the person refused to submit
to the test upon the request of the peace officer and has been advised of the
consequences of the refusal. The form of the report shall be prescribed and
furnished by the Secretary of State.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-133)
   (H)   Refusal to submit to chemical test; notice of right to request
hearing.
      (1)   If a person refuses to submit to a chemical test pursuant to §
95.213 of this chapter and division (A) above, the peace officer shall
immediately notify the person in writing that within 14 days of the date of the
notice the person may request a hearing as provided in division (I) below. The
form of the notice shall be prescribed and furnished by the Secretary of State.
      (2)   The notice shall specifically state that failure to request a
hearing within 14 days will result in issuance of an order that the person not
operate a vessel on the waters of the state. The notice shall also state that
here is not a requirement that the person retain counsel for the hearing,
though counsel is permitted to represent the person at the hearing.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-134)
   (I)   Refusal to submit to chemical test; failure to request hearing; manner
and conditions of hearing if requested; record of proceedings; order; petitions
to review order or to review determination of hearing officer.
      (1)   If a person who refuses to submit to a chemical test pursuant to §
95.213 of this chapter and division (A) above does not request a hearing within
14 days of the date of notice pursuant to §
95.213 of this chapter, the Secretary of State shall issue an order that the
person not operate a vessel on the waters of the state for six months or, for a
second or subsequent refusal within seven years, for one year.
      (2)   If a hearing is requested, the Secretary of State shall hold the
hearing in the same manner and under the same conditions as provided in § 322
of the state’s Vehicle Code, Public Act 300 of 1949, being M.C.L.A. § 257.322.
A person shall not order a hearing officer to make a particular finding on any
issue enumerated under divisions (I)(2)(a) through (I)(2)(d) below. Not less
than five days’ notice of the hearing shall be mailed to the person requesting
the hearing, to the peace officer who filed the report under division (G) above
and, if the Prosecuting Attorney requests receipt of the notice, to the
Prosecuting Attorney of the county where the arrest was made. The hearing
officer may administer oaths, issue subpoenas for the attendance of necessary
witnesses and grant a reasonable request for an adjournment. Not more than one
adjournment shall be granted to a party, and the length of an adjournment shall
not exceed 14 days. A hearing under this subsection shall be scheduled to be
held within 45 days after the date of arrest and, except for delay attributable
to the unavailability of the defendant, a witness or material evidence or to an
interlocutory appeal or exceptional circumstances, but not for delay
attributable to docket congestion, shall be finally adjudicated within 77 days
after the date of arrest. The hearing shall cover only the following issues:
         (a)   Whether the peace officer had reasonable grounds to believe that
the person had committed a crime described in §
95.210(A) of this chapter or division (F)(1) above;
         (b)   Whether the person was placed under arrest for a crime described
in §
95.210(A) of this chapter or division (F)(1) above;
         (c)   If the person refused to submit to the test upon the request of
the officer, whether the refusal was reasonable; and
         (d)   Whether the person was advised of his or her rights under §
95.213 of this chapter.
      (3)   The hearing officer shall make a record of proceedings held
pursuant to division (I)(2) above. The record shall be prepared and transcribed
in accordance with § 86 of the Administrative Procedures Act of 1969, Public
Act 306 of 1969, being M.C.L.A. § 24.286. Upon notification of the filing of a
petition for judicial review in Circuit Court and not less than ten days before
the matter is set for review, the hearing officer shall transmit to the court
in which the petition is filed the original or a certified copy of the official
record of the proceedings. The parties to the proceedings for judicial review
may stipulate that the record be shortened. A party unreasonably refusing to
stipulate to a shortened record may be taxed by the court in which the petition
is filed for the additional costs. The court may permit subsequent corrections
to the record.
      (4)   After a hearing, if the person who requested the hearing does not
prevail, the Secretary of State shall order that the person not operate a
vessel on the waters of the state for six months or, for a second or subsequent
refusal within seven years, for one year. The person may file a petition in the
Circuit Court of the county in which the arrest was made to review the order.
If, after the hearing, the person who requested the hearing prevails, the peace
officer who filed the report under section may, with the consent of the
Prosecuting Attorney, file a petition in the Circuit Court of the county in
which the arrest was made to review the determination of the hearing officer.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-135)
(Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998)
§ 95.215 ORDER NOT TO OPERATE VESSEL ON WATERS OF STATE; CONVICTIONS;
EFFECTIVENESS.
   (A)   Notwithstanding a court order issued under §§
95.210(A) and (C) and 95.214(D) and (E) of this chapter, former §§ 171(1), (3),
(4) or (5), 181 or 182 of the Marine Safety Act, former §§ 73 or 73b of the
Marine Safety Act, or a local ordinance substantially corresponding to §§
95.210(A) and (C) and 95.214(D) and (E) of this chapter, or former §§ 73 or 73b
of the Marine Safety Act, if a court has not ordered a person not to operate a
vessel as authorized by this chapter, the Secretary of State shall issue an
order that the person not operate a vessel on the waters of the state for not
less than six months or more than two years, if the person has the following
convictions within a seven-year period, whether under the law of the state, a
local ordinance substantially corresponding to a law of the state or a law of
another state substantially corresponding to a law of the state:
      (1)   One conviction under §
95.210(A) of this chapter, former § 171(1) of the Marine Safety Act or former §
73 of the Marine Safety Act;
      (2)   Any combination of two convictions under §
95.210(C) of this chapter, former § 171(3) of the Marine Safety Act or former §
73b of the Marine Safety Act; and
      (3)   One(1) conviction under §
95.210(A) of this chapter, former § 171(1) or the Marine Safety Act or former §
73 of the Marine Safety Act and one conviction under §
95.210(C) of this chapter, former § 171(3) of the Marine Safety Act or former §
73b of the Marine Safety Act.
   (B)   If the Secretary of State receives records of more than one conviction
of a person resulting from the same incident, an order not to operate shall be
issued solely for that violation for which an order could be effective for the
longest period of time under this section.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-136) (Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998)
§ 95.216 FAILURE TO ANSWER CITATION OR NOTICE OR COMPLY WITH JUDGMENT OR ORDER;
CONDITIONS.
   (A)   If a person is charged with, or convicted of a violation of §
95.210(A), (B) and (C) of this chapter, or a local ordinance substantially
corresponding to §
95.210(A), (B) and (C) of this chapter, and the person fails to answer a
citation or a notice to appear in court, or for any matter pending or fails to
comply with an order or judgment of the court, including, but not limited to,
paying all fines, costs and crime victim’s rights assessments, the court shall
immediately give notice by first-class mail sent to the person’s last known
address that if the person fails to appear within seven days after the notice
is issued or fails to comply with the order or judgment of the court,
including, but not limited to, paying all fines, costs and crime victim’s
rights assessments, within 14 days after the notice is issued, the Secretary of
State will issue an order with no expiration date that the person not operate a
vessel on the waters of the state. If the person fails to appear within the
seven-day period or fails to comply with the order of judgment of the court,
including, but not limited to, paying all fines, costs and crime victim rights
assessments, within the 14-day period, the court shall immediately inform the
Secretary of State who shall immediately issue the order and send a copy to the
person by personal service or first class mail sent to the person’s last known
address.
   (B)   An order imposed under division (A) above remains in effect until both
of the following occur:
      (1)   The court informs the Secretary of State that the person has
appeared before the court and that all matters relating to the violation are
resolved; and
      (2)   The person has paid to the court a $25 administrative order
processing fee.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-137) (Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998)
§ 95.217 PERSONS SUBJECT TO ORDER; PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   (A)   A person who is ordered not to operate a vessel on the waters of this
state or of the city and who has been notified of the order by personal service
or first class mail shall not operate a vessel on the waters of the city. A
person shall not knowingly permit a vessel owned by the person to be operated
on the waters of the city by a person who is subject to such an order. A person
who violates this division (A) is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as
follows:
      (1)   By imprisonment for not more than 90 days or by a fine of not more
than $500 or both; and
      (2)   For a second or subsequent violation punishable under this division
(A), by imprisonment for not more than 90 days or a fine of not more than
$1,000 or both.
   (B)   Upon receiving a record of the conviction of a person upon a charge of
unlawful operation of a vessel while the person is subject to an order not to
operate a vessel on the waters of the city, the Secretary of State shall
immediately extend the length of the order for an additional like period. If
the Secretary of State receives records of more than one conviction resulting
from the same incident, all of the convictions shall be treated as a single
violation for purposes of extending the length of an order under this division
(B).
   (C)   Before a person is arraigned before a judge or District Court
magistrate on a charge of violating this section, the arresting officer shall
obtain the boating record of the person from the Secretary of State and shall
furnish the record to the court. The boating record of the person may be
obtained from the Secretary of State’s computer information network.
   (D)   This section does not apply to a person who operates a vessel solely
for the purpose of protecting human life or property, if the life or property
is endangered and the summoning or giving of prompt aid is essential.
   (E)   If a person is convicted of violating division (A) above, the court
shall order confiscation of the vessel’s certificate of number and cancellation
of the vessel’s registration numbers, unless the vessel was stolen or
permission to use the vessel was not knowingly given. The Secretary of State
shall not assign a registration number to or issue a certificate of number for
a vessel whose number is canceled and certificate confiscated until after the
expiration of 90 days after the cancellation or confiscation, whichever is
later.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-138) (Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998)
§ 95.218 IMPOUNDMENT OF VESSEL; ORDER; EXECUTION; LIABILITY FOR EXPENSES;
RIGHTS OF CONDITIONAL VENDOR, CHATTEL MORTGAGEE OR LESSOR OF VESSEL.
   (A)   (1)   When a person is convicted under §
95.217(A) of this chapter, the vessel, if it is owned in whole or in part by
that person, shall be ordered impounded for not less than 30 or more than 120
days from the date of judgment.
      (2)   An order of impoundment issued pursuant to this division (A) above
is valid throughout the state.
      (3)   Any peace officer may execute the impoundment order.
      (4)   The order shall include the implied consent of the owner of the
vessel to the storage for insurance coverage purposes.
   (B)   (1)   The owner of a vessel impounded pursuant to this section is
liable for expenses incurred in the removal and storage of the vessel whether
or not the vessel is returned to him or her. The vessel shall be returned to
the owner only if the owner pays the expenses for removal and storage.
      (2)   If redemption is not made or the vessel is not returned as provided
in this section within 30 days after the time set in the impoundment order for
return of the vessel, the vessel shall be considered abandoned.
   (C)   Nothing in this section affects the rights of a conditional vendor,
chattel mortgagee or lessor of a vessel registered in the name of another
person as owner who becomes subject to this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-139) (Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998)
§ 95.219 CONVICTION BASED ON PLEA OF NOLO CONTENDERE.
   A conviction based on a plea of nolo contendere shall be treated in the same
manner as a conviction based upon a plea of guilty or a finding of guilt for
all purposes under this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-140) (Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998)
§ 95.220 PUBLIC DOCK, PIER, WHARF OR RETAINING WALL; ENTRY OR USE PROHIBITED
UNDER CERTAIN WIND CONDITION; BARRICADES; NOTICE.
   (A)   When wind conditions on the Great Lakes attain a magnitude whereby
one-third of the waves resulting from the conditions cause any public dock,
pier, wharf or retaining wall to be awash, it constitutes a state not
conductive to the orderly and safe use and occupancy of those structures.
   (B)   When the conditions described in division (A) above exist, any
harbormaster, peace or police officer or other authorized official may rope off
or barricade entry to these structures or post in a conspicuous manner notices
that entry on those structures for the purpose of fishing, swimming or other
recreational activity is prohibited.
   (C)   A person shall not knowingly enter or remain upon any public dock,
pier, wharf or retaining wall for the purpose of fishing, swimming or other
recreational activity when the structure is roped, cabled, or otherwise
barricaded in a manner designed to exclude intruders, when notice against entry
is given by posting in a conspicuous manner, or when notice to leave or stay
off is personally communicated to that person by a peace or police officer or
other authorized official of the local unit of government.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-141) (Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Unless otherwise specified under this chapter, a violation of
this chapter or state law or administrative rules referenced under this chapter
is a municipal civil infraction. Any person convicted of reckless operation of
a vessel, as defined in §
95.075 of this chapter, or of operating a vessel while under the influence of
intoxicating liquor or narcotic drugs, in addition to any other penalty, may be
refused by the court having jurisdiction of the violation the right of
operating any vessel on any of the waters of the city for a period of not more
than two years. The maximum penalty where not otherwise specified under this
chapter is $500 and/or 90 days in jail.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-99)
      (2)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter by operating
any watercraft, boat, vessel or personal watercraft in such a manner as to fail
to exercise due caution on the waters of the city is responsible for a
municipal civil infraction with a fine not to exceed $100, plus court costs.
This infraction shall not be reported to the Secretary of the State of
Michigan.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-277)
      (3)   See §§
95.210 through
95.220 of this chapter for further penalties and penal information.
   (B)   A dealer who fails to submit an application as required by §
95.017 of this chapter is guilty of a municipal civil infraction, subject to a
civil fine not less than $25 and not more than $500, together with costs as
permitted by law.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-23)
   (C)   A person who violates §
95.071 of this chapter is responsible for a civil infraction and may be ordered
to pay a civil fine of not more than $100.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-82)
   (D)   A person operating a motorboat in violation of §
95.074 of this chapter is guilty of reckless operation of a motorboat
punishable as a misdemeanor with a fine not to exceed $500 and/or imprisonment
not to exceed 90 days.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-86)
   (E)   If a person is guilty of reckless operation of a vessel, as per §
95.075 of this chapter, the violation is punishable as a misdemeanor with a
fine not to exceed $500 and/or imprisonment not to exceed 90 days and subject
also to the provision of §
95.075(C) of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-87)
   (F)   Any person permitting himself or herself to be towed on water skis or
on a water sled, surfboard or similar contrivance in violation of §
95.079(A) of this chapter is guilty of a municipal civil infraction, subject to
a civil fine not less than $25 and not more than $500, together with costs as
permitted by law.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-91)
   (G)   A person who violates §
95.083 of this chapter is guilty of a municipal civil infraction, subject to a
civil fine not less than $25 and not more than $500, together with costs as
permitted by law. Additionally, before putting the motorboat back in use, a
person who violates §
95.083 of this chapter shall be required to install an effective muffler or
underwater exhaust system that meets the requirements of §
95.083 of this chapter on the motorboat in violation at his or her expense.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-96)
   (H)   (1)   A person who is detained for a violation of §
95.085 of this chapter and who furnishes a peace officer false, forged,
fictitious or misleading verbal or written information identifying the person
as another person is guilty of a municipal civil infraction, subject to a civil
fine not less than $25 and not more than $500, together with costs as permitted
by law.
      (2)   A peace officer who observes a criminal marine law violation or
criminal ordinance violation may immediately arrest the person without a
warrant or issue to the person a written or verbal warning.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-98)
   (I)   (1)   Unless otherwise specified in §§
95.185 through
95.198 of this chapter, a person who violates §§
95.185 through
95.198 of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment
for not more than 90 days or a fine of not more than $100, or both. In
addition, a person who violates §§
95.185 through
95.198 of this chapter may be required to participate in and complete a boating
safety course.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-274)
      (2)   A person who violates §
95.188(B) of this chapter is responsible for a municipal civil infraction
punishable by a fine of $100, plus court costs.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-265)
      (3)   A dealer who violates §
95.195 of this chapter is responsible for a municipal civil infraction and
shall be ordered to pay a civil fine in the amount of $100.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-272)
      (4)   A dealer who violates §
95.196 of this chapter is responsible for a municipal civil infraction and
shall be ordered to pay a civil fine in the amount of $100.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-273)
   (J)   (1)   (a)   If a person is convicted of violating §
95.210(A) of this chapter, the following apply:
            1.   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (J)(1)(b) and (J)(1)
(c) below, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by one
or more of the following:
               a.   Community service for not more than 45 days;
               b.   Imprisonment for not more than 90 days; and
               c.   A fine of not less than $100 or more than $500.
            2.   If the violation occurs within seven years of a prior
conviction, the person shall be sentenced to both a fine of not less than $200
or more than $1,000 and either of the following:
               a.   Community service for not less than ten days or more than
90 days, and may be imprisoned for not more than 90 days; or
               b.   Imprisonment for not less than 48 consecutive hours or more
than 90 days, and may be sentenced to community service for not more than 90
days.
         (b)   A term of imprisonment imposed under division (J)(1)(a)2. above
shall not be suspended. A person sentenced to perform service to the community
under this section shall not receive compensation and shall reimburse the city
for the cost of supervision incurred by the city as a result of the person’s
activities in that service.
         (c)   In addition to the sanctions prescribed under division (J)(1)(a)
above, the court may, pursuant to the Code of Criminal Procedure, Public Act
175 of 1927, being M.C.L.A. §§ 760.1 through 776.21, order the person to pay
the costs of the prosecution. The court shall also impose sanctions under §
95.214(B) and (C) of this chapter.
         (d)   A person who is convicted of violating §
95.210(B) of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by
imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or a fine of not less than $100 or more
than $500, or both.
         (e)   As used in this division (J)(1), PRIOR CONVICTION means a
conviction for a violation of any of the following:
            1.   Section 95.210(A) of this chapter;
            2.   Former § 171(1), (4) or (5) of the Marine Safety Act;
            3.   Former § 73 of the Marine Safety Act;
            4.   A local ordinance substantially corresponding to §
95.210(A) of this chapter or former § 73 of the Marine Safety Unit; and
            5.   A law of another state substantially corresponding to §
95.210(A) of this chapter or former § 73 of the Marine Safety Act.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-122)
      (2)   (a)   If a person is convicted of violating §
95.210(C) of this chapter, the following apply:
            1.   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (J)(2)(b) and (J)(2)
(c) below, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by one or more of
the following:
               a.   Community service for not more than 45 days;
               b.   Imprisonment for not more than 90 days; and
               c.   A fine of not more than $300.
            2.   If the violation occurs within seven years of one prior
conviction, the person shall be sentenced to both a fine of not less than $200
or more than $1,000, and either of the following:
               a.   Community service for not less than ten days or more than
90 days, and may be sentenced to imprisonment for not more than 90 days; or
               b.   Imprisonment for not more than 90 days, and may be
sentenced to community service for not more than 90 days.
            3.   If the violation occurs within ten years of two or more prior
convictions, the person shall be sentenced to both a fine of not less than $200
or more than $1,000, and either of the following:
               a.   Community service for a period of not less than ten days or
more than 90 days, and may be sentenced to imprisonment for not more than 90
days; or
               b.   Imprisonment for not more than 90 days, and may be
sentenced to community service for not more than 90 days.
         (b)   In additions to the sanctions prescribed in division (J)(2)(a)
above, the court may, pursuant to the Code of Criminal Procedure, Public Act
175 of 1927, being M.C.L.A. §§ 760.1 through 776.21, order the person to pay
the costs of the prosecution. The court shall also impose sanctions under §
95.214(C) and (D) of this chapter.
         (c)   A person sentenced to perform service to the community under
this section shall not receive compensation, and shall reimburse the city for
the cost of supervision incurred by the city as a result of the person’s
activities in that service.
         (d)   As used in this section, PRIOR CONVICTION means a conviction for
a violation of any of the following:
            1.   Section 95.210(A) and (C) of this chapter;
            2.   Former § 171(1) of the Marine Safety Act;
            3.   Former § 73 of the Marine Safety Act;
            4.   Former § 73b of the Marine Safety Act;
            5.   A local ordinance substantially corresponding to §
95.210(A) and (C) of this chapter, former § 73 of the Marine Safety Act or
former § 73b of the Marine Safety Act; and
            6.   A law of another state substantially corresponding to §
95.210(A) and (C) of this chapter, former § 73 of the Marine Safety Act or
former § 73b of the Marine Safety Act.
(Prior Code, § 21.5-123)
(Ord. 1048, passed 5-18-1998; Ord. 1072, passed 5-3-1999; Ord. 1118, passed 6-
11-2001)
CHAPTER 96: SPECIAL CITY EVENTS
Section
   
96.001   Definition
   
96.002   Unlawful activities
   
96.003   Violations
 
   
96.999   Penalty
§ 96.001 DEFINITION.
   SPECIAL EVENTS, as used in this chapter, shall include the Spring Fling, Hot
Country Jam, Annual Wyandotte Street Art Fair, Wyandotte Waterfest and other
similar type events within the city.
(Prior Code, § 25-181) (Ord. 966, passed 5-24-1993)
§ 96.002 UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   A city resolution preceding the special event shall define the area
where the special event is permitted.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person at any special event to do any of
the following within the area where said special event is to be held:
      (1)   Bring any animal (including fish or reptile) to the special event,
whether with a leash or not, unless said animal is part of an event as
authorized by the city or other sponsor of the special event;
      (2)   Bring any bicycle or unicycle into the area where the special event
is conducted. It is permissible to place the bicycle or unicycle in any bicycle
rack which is provided;
      (3)   Bring any skateboard, roller skates, roller blades or other similar
device into the special event area; and
      (4)   Take or carry any radio, tape player, stereo, boom box, speaker or
other device which transmits music or sound into the special event area. It is
permissible for an individual to wear a headphone radio device sometimes known
as a “Walkman”.
(Prior Code, § 25-182) (Ord. 966, passed 5-24-1993) Penalty, see §
96.999
§ 96.003 VIOLATIONS.
   Should any individual violate any of the provisions of this chapter, and if
said individual shall refuse to come into compliance with the chapter
requirement after being provided a verbal warning by a police officer, then the
police officer is authorized to issue a civil infraction for said violation.
(Prior Code, § 25-183) (Ord. 966, passed 5-24-1993)
§ 96.999 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates the terms of this chapter is guilty of a civil
infraction which shall carry with it a fine not to exceed $100 along with court
costs.
(Prior Code, § 25-184) (Ord. 966, passed 5-24-1993)
CHAPTER 97: PARKS, RECREATION AND CITY-OWNED PROPERTY
Section
   
97.001   Closing hours
   
97.002   Alcoholic beverages
   
97.003   Animals and fowl
   
97.004   Violation of Public Recreation Commission rules
   
97.005   Bicycle riding prohibited
   
97.006   Sports, games, exercise or amusement in designated areas
   
97.007   Golfing prohibited
   
97.008   Park rangers
   
97.009   Feeding seagulls prohibited; exception
 
   
97.999   Penalty
§ 97.001 CLOSING HOURS.
   (A)   (1)   All city-owned parks, playgrounds and parking lots shall be
closed from 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. each day unless said areas have signs
posted setting forth a different closing time. In addition, the public parking
lots servicing the Yack Arena and within the area bounded by Biddle Avenue,
Eureka Avenue, Third Street and Elm Street shall be closed from one-half hour
after the public function at the Yack Arena ends until 6:00 a.m.
      (2)   The City Council may from time to time, by resolution, revise the
hours of closing. In addition, the Chief of Police or his or her designate from
the Police Department may order any city-owned park, playground, parking lot or
publicly-owned area immediately closed if he or she determines any of the
following exists:
         (a)   There exists a public crisis, emergency, rioting or civil
disturbance within any city-owned park, playground, parking lot or other
publicly-owned area, or within such proximity thereto as to create a danger to
persons or property within the city;
         (b)   Injuries to persons or damage to property have occurred or there
is a probability that the same will occur and that the public safety is
imperiled, and there is apprehension of further danger to persons or property;
and/or
         (c)   Persons have gathered and remained in a city-owned park, parking
lot, playground or publicly-owned area in such numbers that the Chief of Police
or his or her designate from the Police Department determine that said
assemblage of persons at one time causes any of the following conditions to
exist:
            1.   Obstruction of the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles
within the parking lot, nearby streets or publicly-owned area;
            2.   Any disturbance or annoyance to the comfort and repose of
others, including surrounding residents and passers-by; and/or
            3.   The Police Department with the available manpower on duty at
that time is unable to effectively supervise the area in question and unable to
protect the public safety, health or welfare or unable to protect the city
property and surrounding privately-owned property.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, excepting law enforcement
officers or other persons on official city business, to be within the confines
of any city-owned parks, playgrounds, parking lots or publicly-owned area in
violation of the terms of this section.
(Prior Code, § 26-1) (Ord. 569, passed 8-2-1976; Ord. 766, passed 5-14-1984;
Ord. 793, passed 4-4-1986) Penalty, see §
97.999
§ 97.002 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to transport, have under his or her
control, possess or to drink any alcoholic beverages in any park, playground,
parking lot or publicly-owned area, as described above in §
97.001 of this chapter; except in the recreation building at Mulberry and
Fourth Street by permission of the city’s Public Recreation Commission.
(Prior Code, § 26-2) (Ord. 570, passed 8-9-1976; Ord. 675, passed 12-15-1980;
Ord. 951, passed 7-27-1992) Penalty, see §
97.999
§ 97.003 ANIMALS AND FOWL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to bring any animal, reptile or bird,
with or without leash, or to have any animal, reptile or bird in his or her
custody or control in any park or playground area within the city, except in
playground areas on days officially designated by the Recreation Director.
(Prior Code, § 26-3) (Ord. 572, passed 9-13-1976) Penalty, see §
97.999
§ 97.004 VIOLATION OF PUBLIC RECREATION COMMISSION RULES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the rules of the
Public Recreation Commission.
(Prior Code, § 26-4) Penalty, see §
97.999
§ 97.005 BICYCLE RIDING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   A BICYCLE, for purposes of this section only, is defined as a device
propelled by human power upon which a person may ride, having two tandem
wheels. It includes pedal bicycles with helper motors.
   (B)   The riding of a bicycle is prohibited in all city-owned parks and
playgrounds. A bicycle may be walked, carried or parked within the park or
playground; provided, it is done in such a manner that does not interfere with
pedestrians using the park or playground.
   (C)   The parent of a child or guardian of a ward shall not authorize or
knowingly permit the child or ward to violate the provisions of this section.
(Prior Code, § 26-5) (Ord. 710, passed 9-21-1981; Ord. 823, passed 8-17-1987;
Ord. 1402, passed 9-15-2014) Penalty, see §
97.999
§ 97.006 SPORTS, GAMES, EXERCISE OR AMUSEMENT IN DESIGNATED AREAS.
   No person shall engage in any sport, game, exercise or amusement in the city
park and playground system, except such portions thereof as may be designated
for such activities by the Superintendent of Recreation and then only under
such rules and regulations as may be prescribed by the Public Recreation
Commission. The city’s Police Department shall have the authority to order any
person or persons acting in violation of this section to leave the park or
playground area.
(Prior Code, § 26-6) (Ord. 717, passed 11-2-1981) Penalty, see §
97.999
§ 97.007 GOLFING PROHIBITED.
   Golfing is prohibited in all city parks and playgrounds. The term GOLFING
shall include the striking, driving, hurling or hitting of a golf ball.
(Prior Code, § 26-7) (Ord. 750, passed 8-29-1983) Penalty, see §
97.999
§ 97.008 PARK RANGERS.
   (A)   The Police and Fire Commission is authorized to hire, prescribe the
duties and assign park rangers to work in any of the city-owned parks and
playgrounds.
   (B)   The park rangers are authorized to issue appearance tickets for
violations of any of the provisions set forth or referred to in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 26-8) (Ord. 781, passed 5-13-1985)
§ 97.009 FEEDING SEAGULLS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to feed seagulls in or adjacent to
Bishop Park in the city unless specifically authorized by the Superintendent of
Recreation.
(Prior Code, § 26-9) (Ord. 801, passed 7-28-1986) Penalty, see §
97.999
§ 97.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of §
97.005 of this chapter is responsible for a civil infraction.
(Prior Code, § 26-5)
   (C)   Any person violating §
97.007 of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 26-7)
(Ord. 710, passed 9-21-1981; Ord. 750, passed 8-29-1983; Ord. 823, passed 8-17-
1987; Ord. 1402, passed 9-15-2014)
CHAPTER 98: UNMANNED AIRCRAFT
Section
   
98.001   Definitions
   
98.002   Registration required
   
98.003   Prohibited acts
   
98.004   Exceptions
 
   
98.999   Penalty
§ 98.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMERCIAL UNMANNED AIRCRAFT. An aircraft that is operated without the
possibility of direct human intervention from within or on the aircraft
(including, but not limited to, drones) that is used for business purposes and
has gained Federal Aviation Administration approval for flying civil unmanned
aircraft.
   NON-COMMERCIAL UNMANNED AIRCRAFT. An aircraft that is operated without the
possibility of direct human intervention from within or on the aircraft
(including, but not limited to, drones) that is not used for business purposes
and includes, but not limited to, all hobby and recreational uses of unmanned
aircraft and any business use of unmanned aircraft that has not gained Federal
Aviation Administration approval for flying civil unmanned aircraft systems.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, corporation, limited liability company,
partnership, association or business entity of any sort, whether or not
operated for profit.
   UNMANNED AIRCRAFT SYSTEM (UAS). An unmanned aircraft (commercial and non-
commercial) and the equipment necessary for the safe and efficient operations
of that aircraft that is operated remotely without any means of physical
attachment to the aircraft such as string or wire or operated autonomously
through the use of an onboard computer and either weighs over 55 pounds or
weighs less than 55 pounds, but has a camera, viewing distance or listening
device attached thereto.
(Prior Code, § 36.1-1) (Ord. 1455, passed 11-20-2017)
§ 98.002 REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   All unmanned aircraft systems (UAS), commercial and non-commercial,
operating within the city must be registered with the FAA. Registration numbers
must be clearly displayed on the UAS. The operator of the UAS must have in his
or her possession his or her certificate of registration from the FAA.
Registration of UAS can be done online at RegisterMyUAS.faa.gov.
(Prior Code, § 36.1-2) (Ord. 1455, passed 11-20-2017)
§ 98.003 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   No person shall:
   (A)   Operate any unmanned aircraft in any manner to endanger the safety of
any persons or property;
   (B)   Operate any unmanned aircraft in such a manner so as to observe or
record the activities of anyone who, by their location, has reasonable
expectation of privacy or expectation of being safe from surveillance or
observation. For purposes of this provision, persons have a reasonable
expectation of being safe from surveillance or observation if they are within a
building, within an enclosed privacy fence or in an area not otherwise visible
from ground level on neighboring public or private property;
   (C)   Operate any unmanned aircraft with the purpose of harassing any person
or animal;
   (D)   Operate any unmanned aircraft so as to interfere with any police or
fire investigation;
   (E)   Operate any unmanned aircraft within 500 feet of a police
investigation, traffic collision, medical emergency, fire or fire
investigation;
   (F)   Operate any unmanned aircraft within two miles of a heliport (Henry
Ford Hospital Wyandotte);
   (G)   Operate any unmanned aircraft within five miles of any airport;
   (H)   Operate any unmanned aircraft over or within 500 feet of any city
special event;
   (I)   Operate any unmanned aircraft in or over any city park or city-owned
land or city-owned building unless authorized to by the City Administrator or
designee;
   (J)   Operate any unmanned aircraft within one mile of city water treatment
facility, water tower, electric generating facility, substation or control
center;
   (K)   Operate any unmanned aircraft over any open-air assembly or crowd,
school, school yard, hospital or place of worship;
   (L)   Operate any unmanned aircraft at an altitude higher than 400 feet
above ground level;
   (M)   Operate any unmanned aircraft in any manner that interferes with, or
fails to give way to, any manned aircraft;
   (N)   Operate any unmanned aircraft between dusk and dawn;
   (O)   Operate any unmanned aircraft outside the visual line of sight of the
operator; and/or
   (P)   Operate any unmanned aircraft in violation of any federal, state or
county regulation.
(Prior Code, § 36.1-2) (Ord. 1455, passed 11-20-2017) Penalty, see §
98.999
§ 98.004 EXCEPTIONS.
   The prohibitions in §
98.003 of this chapter do not apply to:
   (A)   The operations of unmanned aircraft by the Police Department, Fire
Department or other law enforcement agency in the performance of their official
duties; or
   (B)   The operation of unmanned aircraft by a city department in the
performance of its duties or function.
(Prior Code, § 36.1-2) (Ord. 1455, passed 11-20-2017)
§ 98.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person found in violation of this chapter shall be responsible for
a municipal civil infraction and subject to fines and costs as permitted by law
and/or as set forth in §
11.006 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   If any person commits a second offense, or subsequent violation of
this chapter, such a violation constitutes a misdemeanor punishable by a fine
not exceeding $500 and/or imprisonment not exceeding 90 days; provided, the
authorized city official issues an appearance ticket and marks it as a
misdemeanor. Nothing herein requires the authorized city official to charge a
repeat offense of this chapter by the same person as a misdemeanor.
   (C)   The Police Department having reasonable basis to believe that an
unmanned aircraft has been operated in violation of this chapter may seize said
unmanned aircraft for the purpose of any criminal proceedings.
(Prior Code, § 36.1-3) (Ord. 1455, passed 11-20-2017)
CHAPTER 99: ALARM SYSTEMS
Section
   
99.001   Purpose
   
99.002   Definitions
   
99.003   Proper alarm system operation and maintenance
   
99.004   Operating instructions
   
99.005   Police Department alarm report
   
99.006   Police Department false alarm fee
 
   
99.999   Penalty
§ 99.001 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to encourage security and fire alarm
users, businesses or residents to maintain the operational reliability and the
proper use of the alarm system by limiting unnecessary police or fire emergency
responses to false alarms.
   (B)   This chapter: governs burglary, robbery and fire systems; establishes
fees; provides for penalties for violations; and establishes a system of
administration.
(Prior Code, § 2.1-1) (Ord. 1164, passed 3-3-2003)
§ 99.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALARM. A notification, initiated purposely by a person or electronically,
intended to summon the Police or Fire Department for a response to: an
unauthorized entry on a premises; an unauthorized entry on a premises for the
commission of an unlawful act; smoke, heat or fire.
   ALARM NOTIFICATION LETTER. A form letter that indicates the date and time of
an alarm activation that required police or fire personnel response, that is
designated to be sent to alarm users as notification of false alarms.
   ALARM SITE. A single premises or location that an alarm service is provided
by an alarm system or systems.
   ALARM SYSTEMS. A device that emits a sound or transmits a signal or message,
designated for the detection of: an unauthorized entry on a premises; an
unauthorized entry on a premises for the commission of an unlawful act; smoke,
heat or fire.
      (1)   In this chapter, the term ALARM SYSTEM includes, but is not limited
to, the terms, “automatic hold up alarm system”, “burglar alarm system”, “hold
up alarm system”, “manual hold up alarm system” and “police alarm system”.
      (2)   Upon the effective date of this chapter, ALARM SYSTEMS installed
that employ audible signals shall be equipped with shut-off devices that
automatically silences the audible signal after 15 minutes.
   ALARM USER. A person, firm or corporation, resident/homeowner or other
person on whose premises an alarm system is maintained within the city, except
for alarm systems on motor vehicles.
   FALSE ALARM. An alarm not resulting from: unauthorized entry on a premises;
an unauthorized entry on a premises for the commission of an unlawful act;
smoke, heat or fire; initiated purposely by a person or electronically, through
mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation or the negligence of the
owner, lessee of an alarm system or actions of the employee or agent of the
establishment, corporation or facility.
   FALSE ALARM EXCEPTION. Any alarm caused by weather conditions such as an
electrical storm, power outage, tornado, blizzard or act of God; or an alarm
that is activated by a person working on the alarm system with prior
notification to the Police Department; or an alarm malfunction that is
corrected within three business days of notification by the Police Department;
provided, the alarm user presents documentation of repair service by the alarm
company to remedy the malfunction.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, LLC or corporation or other entity.
(Prior Code, § 2.1-2) (Ord. 1164, passed 3-3-2003)
§ 99.003 PROPER ALARM SYSTEMS OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE.
   An alarm user or person in control of an alarm system shall:
   (A)   Maintain the premises and alarm system in a manner that will minimize
or eliminate false alarm conditions and notifications;
   (B)   Respond or cause a representative to respond at the system’s location
within a reasonable period of time when notified by the city to deactivate a
malfunctioning alarm system to provide security for the premises;
   (C)   Not manually activate an alarm for any reason other than an occurrence
of an event that the alarm system is intended; and
   (D)   Adjust the mechanism or cause the mechanism to be adjusted so that the
alarm signal will not sound for longer than 15 minutes after activation.
(Prior Code, § 2.1-3) (Ord. 1164, passed 3-3-2003) Penalty, see §
99.999
§ 99.004 OPERATING INSTRUCTIONS.
   A person in control of an alarm system shall maintain at each alarm site a
complete set of written operating instructions for each alarm system. Special
codes, combinations or passwords should not be included in these instructions.
(Prior Code, § 2.1-4) (Ord. 1164, passed 3-3-2003)
§ 99.005 POLICE DEPARTMENT ALARM REPORT.
   (A)   A “Wyandotte Police Department Alarm Report” will be completed when
Police Department members respond to an alarm.
   (B)   The alarm report will include the following information:
      (1)   Business or resident name;
      (2)   Address of the alarm site;
      (3)   Date and time of alarm;
      (4)   Type of alarm;
      (5)   Alarm company name and operator’s name or ID number;
      (6)   Alarm source;
      (7)   Weather conditions;
      (8)   Person receiving alarm notification;
      (9)   Assigned officers;
      (10)   Officer’s findings;
      (11)   Complaint number if applicable; and
      (12)   Notification of alarm status process. Alarm company employee or ID
number, business owner/employee name, homeowner name, time of notification and
telephone number of person contacted.
   (C)   The alarm report will indicate whether the alarm was a true alarm
condition or a false alarm.
(Prior Code, § 2.1-5) (Ord. 1164, passed 3-3-2003)
§ 99.006 POLICE DEPARTMENT FALSE ALARM FEE.
   (A)   The alarm user shall be required to pay the city the sum of $25 for a
second false alarm and $50 for each additional false alarm in a given calendar
quarter. Alarm users will be notified by the city’s Police Department of all
false alarms that Department members respond within seven business days of the
alarm in the form of an alarm notification letter. Quarters are as follows:
      (1)   First quarter: January through March;
      (2)   Second quarter: April through June;
      (3)   Third quarter: July through September; and
      (4)   Fourth quarter: October through December.
   (B)   At the end of each calendar quarter, the alarm user will be billed for
false alarms received at his or her business or residence. The Police
Department shall forward the alarm user an invoice indicating the number of
false alarms received during a given quarter to include the date and time of
each false alarm, alarm charge and total amount due. Any required fees shall be
paid within 30 days upon receipt of invoice to the city’s Police Department
Records Bureau. Collected fees will be deposited by Department members to the
Treasurer of the city.
   (C)   (1)   Failure to pay charges within the 30 days will result in an
overdue invoice notice being forwarded to the alarm user by the Police
Department.
      (2)   Fees not paid within 30 days of the overdue invoice notice will
result in the issuance of an ordinance violation citation to the alarm user in
violation of the city ordinance governing alarm systems.
   (D)   (1)   The Chief of Police may authorize Police Department records
clerks to issue citations for the violation of city ordinance involving false
alarms.
      (2)   Citations will be forwarded to the city’s 27th District Court for
processing.
(Prior Code, § 2.1-6) (Ord. 1164, passed 3-3-2003)
§ 99.999 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
municipal civil infraction and a fine not exceeding $500. Payment of the civil
infraction fine does not excuse the person who violates this chapter from
paying any other fee or charge required by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 2.1-7) (Ord. 1164, passed 3-3-2003)
CHAPTER 100: WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
Section
   
100.001   Sealer of Weights and Measures
   
100.002   Standards
   
100.003   Stamping approved weights and measures
   
100.004   False or unsealed instruments and measures
   
100.005   Inspection of measures
Charter reference:
   Power of city to control weights and measures, see § 4
Statutory reference:
   Weights and measures, see M.C.L.A. §§ 290.601 et seq.
§ 100.001 SEALER OF WEIGHTS AND MEASURES.
   (A)   The Mayor shall, with the approval of the Council, appoint a sealer of
weights and measures who shall serve at the pleasure of the Council. He or she
shall receive such compensation as may be determined by the Council.
   (B)   The city’s Sealer of Weights and Measures shall inspect, try, test and
ascertain the accuracy of all weights, scales, beams and all instruments and
measures of every kind kept, offered or exposed for sale or used or employed
within the city by any person in proving the size, quantity, extent, area or
measurement of quantities, things, produce, food and articles for distribution
or consumption offered by such person for sale, hire or award; and he or she
shall have the power to and shall from time to time weigh or measure packages
or amounts of commodities of whatsoever kind kept for the purpose of sale,
offered for sale or sold or in the process of delivery, in order to determine
whether the same contains the amount represented and whether they be offered
for sale or sold in a manner in accordance with law. The Sealer of Weights and
Measures shall perform the duties and have like powers as the County Sealer as
prescribed by state law.
   (C)   The City Sealer shall keep a complete record of all his or her
official acts in a book wherein he or she shall list alphabetically, according
to the name of the person owning the instruments and measures inspected and
this record shall be maintained in the office of the City Clerk and be open to
public inspection.
(Prior Code, § 39-1)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to appoint sealer, see M.C.L.A. §§ 290.617 et seq.
§ 100.002 STANDARDS.
   The standards by which all instruments and measures shall be tried, proved
and sealed shall be the same as the standards prescribed by state law.
(Prior Code, § 39-2)
Statutory reference:
   Weights and measures generally, see M.C.L.A. §§ 290.601 et seq.
§ 100.003 STAMPING APPROVED WEIGHTS AND MEASURES.
   Whenever the City Sealer inspects, tries or tests any instrument and measure
and he or she finds it to correspond, or causes it to correspond, with the
standards prescribed herein, he or she shall seal or mark such instrument or
measure with a stamp indicating approval, and the year in which the inspection
is made.
(Prior Code, § 39-3)
§ 100.004 FALSE OR UNSEALED INSTRUMENTS AND MEASURES.
   The City Sealer is authorized to seize, for use as evidence and without
formal warrant any false or unsealed instrument, measure or package or amounts
of commodities, found to be used, retained or offered or exposed for sale or
sold in violation of law.
(Prior Code, § 39-4)
§ 100.005 INSPECTION OF MEASURES.
   No person shall neglect or refuse to exhibit any instrument or measure used
by him or her in buying or selling to the city’s Sealer of Weights and Measures
when demanded by him or her for the purpose of inspection. The Sealer may
appoint certain days for the inspection of weights and measures at the City
Hall, at which time and place all persons, or their agents, shall attend with
the instruments and measures specified in the notice of inspection hereinafter
set forth. Notice of the time and place of inspection, specifying the
instruments and measures to be inspected, shall be published in one or more
newspapers in general circulation in the city not less than one week prior to
the inspection.
(Prior Code, § 39-5)
TITLE XI: GENERAL BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   AUCTIONS; GARAGE SALES
      
111.   PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
      
112.   ADVERTISEMENTS
      
113.   FILM PRODUCTION
      
114.   GASOLINE SERVICE STATIONS
      
115.   TELECOMMUNICATIONS
      
116.   FOOD AND DRINK ESTABLISHMENTS
      
117.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
      
118.   MARIJUANA BUSINESSES
CHAPTER 110: AUCTIONS; GARAGE SALES
Section
Merchant’s Auction
   
110.001   Definitions
   
110.002   Sale restrictions
   
110.003   Prohibited practices
   
110.004   Accounts required
   
110.005   Sworn statement required; contents
   
110.006   Inspector
   
110.007   Secondhand household furniture or goods; exemption
   
110.008   Judicial sales; exemption
Dealer’s Auction
   
110.020   Definition
   
110.021   Sales restrictions
Auctioneer’s Licenses
   
110.035   License required
   
110.036   Application
   
110.037   Persons eligible
   
110.038   Term
   
110.039   Bond
   
110.040   Conducting auctions; license fees
Garage Sales, Yard Sales and Other Personal Sales
   
110.055   Definitions
   
110.056   Exemptions
   
110.057   Signs
   
110.058   Hours
   
110.059   Frequency and duration
   
110.060   Permits required; application; fee; display
MERCHANT’S AUCTION
§ 110.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MERCHANT AND RETAILER. Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or other
legal entity which engages in the retail sale of goods, wares, property or
merchandise.
   MERCHANT’S AUCTION. Any sale or offering for sale of property by a merchant
or retailer to the highest bidder or offering for sale of property at a high
price and then offering the same at successive lower prices until a buyer is
secured.
(Prior Code, § 5-1) (Ord. 788, passed 10-28-1985)
§ 110.002 SALE RESTRICTIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, dispose of, advertise for sale
or offer for sale at public auction any property of any kind unless he or she
complies with the following conditions.
   (A)   Such sale shall be conducted by an auctioneer duly licensed by the
City Clerk, as herein provided.
   (B)   Such property shall have been on the tax rolls of the city for a
period of one year prior to such sale or comprise the stock of goods of a
merchant who has regularly done business in the city for one year continuously
prior to such sale.
   (C)   All taxes, plus penalties, which have become a lien under any law or
provision of this code, shall have first been paid.
   (D)   In the event such sale is a closing out sale, state statute on going
out of business sales and the provisions of this code regulating such sales
shall be complied with.
   (E)   No property of any kind shall be added to the goods, wares or stock at
any closing out sale after the inventory is filed, nor shall any property be
added within 60 days prior to the commencement of such sale in anticipation
thereof.
   (F)   No property which has been struck off to the highest bidder during the
course of such sale shall again be offered for sale during such auction.
   (G)   No sale of platinum, gold, silver, plated ware, precious or semi-
precious stones, watches or other jewelry shall be permitted unless it is a
closing-out auction and application therefor has been on file with the City
Clerk for a period of 60 days prior to the first day of such sale, and every
such article sold shall have securely attached to it a tag or label upon which
shall be plainly written or printed in English a true and correct statement of
the kind and quality of the metal of which such article is made or with which
it is plated, and the true name or names, weight, quality and color of any
precious or semi-precious stone or stones, together with the name of the
manufacturer of such article.
   (H)   A sales book shall be kept, signed by the purchaser, showing each sale
of any article at the time of purchase, opposite a description of the article
and, if no purchaser comes forward to sign such book, then the next highest
bidder shall have the right to sign such sales book and to demand and receive
such article at the amount of his or her last highest bid.
   (I)   No auction shall be conducted or continued in the city after 11:00
p.m. of any day.
(Prior Code, § 5-2) (Ord. 788, passed 10-28-1985) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 110.003 PROHIBITED PRACTICES.
   The following acts, omissions and practices are prohibited in the sale of
property at public auction:
   (A)   The use of deceit, fraud of misrepresentation in the sale or offering
for sale of any article;
   (B)   The substitution of any article in place of an article bid upon at
auction;
   (C)   The use of false bidders, cappers or puffers;
   (D)   The use of bells, buzzers, bally-hoo or any variety of mechanical or
excessive vocal sound to attract attention in connection with sales at auction;
   (E)   The use of any false or misleading advertising matter, relative to the
kind or quality of the goods or to the past history, or present status thereof;
   (F)   The substitution of an unlicensed person in place of a licensed
auctioneer;
   (G)   The failure to exhibit an auctioneer’s license to any police officer
upon demand at the place where an auction is conducted; and/or
   (H)   The receipt for sale by auction or the sale by auction of any licensed
auctioneer of any goods, wares or merchandise from any minor, knowing him or
her to be such.
(Prior Code, § 5-3) (Ord. 788, passed 10-28-1985)
§ 110.004 ACCOUNTS REQUIRED.
   Each auctioneer shall keep an accurate record of all goods and chattels sold
by him or her, together with the name and address of the person from whom such
goods and chattels were received, which record shall be open to inspection by
any police officer or the City Clerk at all reasonable times.
(Prior Code, § 5-4) (Ord. 788, passed 10-28-1985)
§ 110.005 SWORN STATEMENT REQUIRED; CONTENTS.
   (A)   At least five full days before commencing any sale by auction, except
as specified in §
110.008 of this chapter, the owner of the property sought to be sold shall file
a sworn application with the City Clerk, which shall state the following:
      (1)   Whether the auction sought to be conducted is a closing-out
auction;
      (2)   If it is a closing-out auction, that the application is made in
good faith for the purpose of retiring from business and that all statutes and
the provisions of this code governing closing-out sales have been complied
with;
      (3)   The stock of goods, or other property, sought to be sold, is a bona
fide part of applicant’s stock or has been on the tax rolls of the city for one
year;
      (4)   A complete description of the property sought to be sold, in
duplicate, including, if it is personal property, a completely itemized
inventory with identifying numbers or other means of readily determining the
identity of each and every article;
      (5)   The place where the auction is to be conducted;
      (6)   The name of the auctioneer who is to conduct the sale;
      (7)   The name of the owner of the property for the preceding year;
      (8)   The length of time the applicant has been in business in the city
and the address of such business;
      (9)   All taxes on such property have been paid;
      (10)   No property other than that listed shall be sold or offered for
sale on the premises where the auction is being conducted during such auction
sale; and
      (11)   All of the property listed is actually on the premises where the
auction is to be conducted.
   (B)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for the auctioneer to conduct the auction
at any place other than that stated in such statement, and it shall be unlawful
for either the auctioneer or owner to do, either themselves or through their
agents or servants, any act or thing contrary to the statement.
      (2)   No person shall make a false statement.
(Prior Code, § 5-5) (Ord. 788, passed 10-28-1985) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 110.006 INSPECTOR.
   (A)   The City Clerk may appoint an inspector for every auction sale
conducted in the city, except such as are exempt by the provisions of this
subchapter, who shall be at all times on the premises while such sale is in
progress. He or she shall be given a copy of the inventory by the City Clerk
and shall, as each article is sold, check such item off the inventory.
   (B)   If any article is offered for sale which does not appear on the
inventory, the inspector is authorized to forbid the sale of such article and,
if the auctioneer refuses to comply with such request, the inspector may
forthwith stop the sale until the auctioneer furnishes satisfactory proof that
such article was included in the inventory.
   (C)   The owner or auctioneer shall pay or cause to be paid to the City
Clerk the sum of $10, or the cost to be incurred in placing such inspector,
whichever is greater, in advance, for each day such auction is to continue, for
the services of said inspector; such payment may be made on the day of the sale
prior to the commencement of the sale.
(Prior Code, § 5-6) (Ord. 788, passed 10-28-1985)
§ 110.007 SECONDHAND HOUSEHOLD FURNITURE OR GOODS; EXEMPTION.
   (A)   This subchapter shall not apply to auction sales of secondhand
household furniture and household goods.
   (B)   The words SECONDHAND HOUSEHOLD FURNITURE AND HOUSEHOLD GOODS, in this
subchapter, mean household furniture and household goods which have actually
been used for housekeeping purposes.
(Prior Code, § 5-7) (Ord. 788, passed 10-28-1985)
§ 110.008 JUDICIAL SALES; EXEMPTION.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to any sale conducted by
any sheriff, constable or other public or court officer or any person acting
under the license, direction or authority of any court.
(Prior Code, § 5-8) (Ord. 788, passed 10-28-1985)
DEALER’S AUCTION
§ 110.020 DEFINITION.
   (A)   DEALER’S AUCTION is any business which is primarily designed to sell
property through the means of public auction or by sale to the highest bidder
on a continuing basis.
   (B)   This definition does not apply to an auction conducted by a retailer
or merchant.
(Prior Code, § 5-9)
§ 110.021 SALES RESTRICTIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, dispose of, advertise for sale
or offer for sale at a dealer’s auction any property of any kind unless he or
she complies with the following conditions:
   (A)   (1)   Maintain a list which contains the name, address, telephone
number, driver’s license number, Social Security number and tax identification
number, if any, of each and every seller, buyer and supplier of goods,
merchandise and property sold at the auction; and
      (2)   Said list shall be open to inspection by any police officer or the
City Clerk at all reasonable times.
   (B)   (1)   An inventory of all property to be sold at the auction, which
contains the following information:
         (a)   Name and address of the seller and supplier of the property;
         (b)   Description of the property to be sold and the quantity;
         (c)   Price for each item sold; and
         (d)   Name of the purchaser of each item sold at the auction.
      (2)   Said list shall be open to inspection by any police officer or the
City Clerk at all reasonable times.
   (C)   No auction shall be conducted or continued within the city after 11:00
p.m. of any day.
(Prior Code, § 5-10) (Ord. 788, passed 10-28-1985) Penalty, see §
10.999
AUCTIONEER’S LICENSES
§ 110.035 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage in the business of auctioneer or sell or cry off at a
merchant’s or dealer’s auction any real estate, goods, wares or merchandise of
any description within the city without a license from the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 5-26) (Ord. 788, passed 10-28-1985) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 110.036 APPLICATION.
   A person desiring the license required by the provisions of this subchapter
shall file a sworn, written application with the City Clerk giving the
information required upon the form and such other information as the Clerk may
require to determine whether the license is to be issued. Such application
shall be accompanied by affidavits of three residents of the city certifying to
the good reputation and moral character of the applicant.
(Prior Code, § 5-27) (Ord. 788, passed 10-28-1985)
§ 110.037 PERSONS ELIGIBLE.
   No license shall be issued pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter to
any person who is under 18 years of age or who is not of good reputation and
moral character.
(Prior Code, § 5-28) (Ord. 788, passed 10-28-1985)
§ 110.038 TERM.
   All licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter shall
expire on the first Monday in June of each year.
(Prior Code, § 5-30) (Ord. 788, passed 10-28-1985)
Charter reference:
   Term of license, see § 178
§ 110.039 BOND.
   Before any license is issued pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter,
the applicant shall execute a bond in the penal sum of $2,000 with two or more
sufficient sureties to be approved by the Clerk, conditioned upon the faithful
compliance by the applicant with the provisions of the Charter and this code
and the payment of all penalties which may be recovered against him or her for
the violation thereof and upon the faithful accounting to the consignor or
owner of the goods entrusted to and moneys received by him or her and for the
protection of any person purchasing goods who shall sustain any damage by
unlawful or fraudulent sale by said auctioneer.
(Prior Code, § 5-31) (Ord. 788, passed 10-28-1985)
Charter reference:
   Power of city to require bonds for licenses, see § 177
§ 110.040 CONDUCTING AUCTIONS; LICENSE FEES.
   Prior to the issuance of a license pursuant to the provisions of this
subchapter, the applicant(s) for same shall pay to the City Clerk a license fee
of $500 per year or $100 per day.
(Prior Code, § 5-46) (Ord. 1057, passed 12-21-1998)
Charter reference:
   Power to city to set license fee, see § 177
GARAGE SALES, YARD SALES AND OTHER PERSONAL SALES
§ 110.055 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GARAGE SALE, BASEMENT SALE, RUMMAGE SALE, ANY SIMILAR TERMS SUCH AS ATTIC
SALE, LAWN SALE, FLEA MARKET SALE OR ANY SIMILAR CASUAL SALE AND THE LIKE. Any
sale of tangible personal property, whether used, secondhand, damaged or
discarded, not otherwise regulated in this code, advertised by any means
whereby the public at large is or can be aware of such sale.
   PERSON. Individuals, groups, organizations, partnerships, voluntary
associations and corporations.
(Prior Code, § 13-1) (Ord. 755, passed 10-10-1983)
§ 110.056 EXEMPTIONS.
   This subchapter shall not apply to sales by individuals selling five or less
of household or personal items belonging to them or to any sale regulated under
any other provisions of the ordinances of the city.
(Prior Code, § 13-2) (Ord. 755, passed 10-10-1983)
§ 110.057 SIGNS.
   (A)   One sign advertising a garage sale may be erected or placed on the
premises of the sale and shall be removed immediately at the end of the third
day. No sign shall be erected or placed on any other property or street right-
of-way.
   (B)   Said sign shall not be in excess of six square feet and shall not be
illuminated in any manner whatsoever, except incidentally by street lights or
house lights.
(Prior Code, § 13-3) (Ord. 755, passed 10-10-1983) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 110.058 HOURS.
   No garage sale shall be held between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.
(Prior Code, § 13-4) (Ord. 755, passed 10-10-1983) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 110.059 FREQUENCY AND DURATION.
   Garage sales shall not exceed two per year, per household, and shall not be
conducted for any period in excess of three consecutive days within one
calendar month, however, an additional permit may be issued by the City Clerk
during said 12-month period if the applicant is in the process of moving out of
or within the city; however, the City Clerk may not issue more than one
additional permit during the 12-month period for any reason.
(Prior Code, § 13-5) (Ord. 755, passed 10-10-1983; Ord. 1058, passed 2-1-1999)
Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 110.060 PERMITS REQUIRED; APPLICATION; FEE; DISPLAY.
   (A)   Required. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, tenant or lessee
of a residence to conduct, advertise or promote a garage sale without first
filing with the City Clerk the information hereinafter specified and obtaining
from such City Clerk a permit to do so, to be known as a “garage sale permit”.
(Prior Code, § 13-26)
   (B)   Application. A person desiring a garage sale permit shall make written
application to the City Clerk on the forms prescribed by said Clerk. Such forms
shall contain the following:
      (1)   Name and address of the person, group, organization, partnership,
association or corporation conducting the sale;
      (2)   Location at which said sale is to be conducted;
      (3)   The number of days which said sale is to be conducted;
      (4)   A description of the items proposed to be sold;
      (5)   The date, nature and location of any past sale conducted by the
applicant; and
      (6)   An affidavit signed by the applicant affirming that the items to be
sold are the sole property of such applicant.
(Prior Code, § 13-27)
   (C)   Fee. The fee for a garage sale permit is $10 which shall be obtained
at the City Clerk’s office and is due a the time of making application for the
permit.
(Prior Code, § 13-28)
   (D)   Display. The permit authorizing the garage sale shall be displayed in
the front window or other prominent place, clearly visible from the street, at
each location where a sale is being conducted.
(Prior Code, § 13-29)
(Ord. 755, passed 10-10-1983; Ord. 1057, passed 12-21-1998; Ord. 1353, passed
9-19-2011) Penalty, see §
10.999
CHAPTER 111: PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
Section
Peddlers and Transient Merchants
   
111.001   Definitions
   
111.002   Vehicles
   
111.003   Littering
   
111.004   Business hours
   
111.005   Restricted areas of operation
   
111.006   License required; fee; tag; exemption
Commercial Solicitors and Canvassers
   
111.020   Definitions
   
111.021   Enforcement
   
111.022   Hours of operation
   
111.023   Reports and records
   
111.024   Exemption
   
111.025   License required; application; form; display; record
Non-Commercial Solicitors
   
111.040   Definition
   
111.041   Hours of operation
   
111.042   Entry to premises restricted
   
111.043   Permit required; application; issuance; appeal; expiration or
revocation
PEDDLERS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
§ 111.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PEDDLER. Any person who goes about from place to place, selling or offering
for sale, goods, ware, merchandise and all kinds of property, traveling on foot
or in vehicles, and selling from house to house or by crying his or her wares
from the street. Such term shall include HAWKERS and HUCKSTERS.
   TRANSIENT MERCHANT. Any person engaged temporarily in the retail sale of
goods, wares or merchandise, in any place in the city and who, for the purpose
of conducting such business, occupies or uses any lot, building, room,
structure of any kind. Such term shall include: ITINERANT MERCHANTS, ITINERANT
VENDORS and persons engaged in selling goods, wares or merchandising at retail
in the city who are not on the tax rolls of the city. Any person who commences
a business of selling goods, wares and merchandise at retail within the city
after January 1 in any year who is not assessed on the tax roll for that year
and who occupies or uses the licensed premises for a period of less than 180
days shall be deemed a TRANSIENT MERCHANT.
(Prior Code, § 27-16) (Ord. 610, passed 3-27-1978)
§ 111.002 VEHICLES.
   (A)   Peddler’s vehicles shall be kept in motion, except when making a sale,
and their movements shall be timed and executed so as to cause a minimum of
interference with vehicular and pedestrian traffic. It shall be unlawful for
any peddler to park, stand or stop a vehicle for the purpose of making any sale
within 200 feet of any school property during school hours.
   (B)   A peddler’s vehicle shall be equipped with a receptacle for the
disposing of wrappers, papers and envelopes or other containers.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any peddler’s vehicle to be equipped with any
bell or other instrument, or device, for the purpose of attracting attention,
except as provided in this code.
(Prior Code, § 27-17) (Ord. 610, passed 3-27-1978) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 111.003 LITTERING.
   A peddler shall pick up any wrappers, papers or envelopes which remain after
any sale or delivery of his or her products.
(Prior Code, § 27-18) (Ord. 610, passed 3-27-1978) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 111.004 BUSINESS HOURS.
   It shall be unlawful for any peddler to sell or offer for sale any
merchandise between sunset and 7:00 a.m.
(Prior Code, § 27-19) (Ord. 610, passed 3-27-1978) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 111.005 RESTRICTED AREAS OF OPERATION.
   (A)   The Chief of Police shall have power to designate such streets, parts
of streets, districts or areas wherein it shall be unlawful for any peddler to
operate or conduct his or her business. Such designation shall be made where,
by reason of congested traffic conditions or the character of the neighborhood,
the conduct of such business would constitute a public nuisance.
   (B)   No peddler may sell or offer for sale any merchandise on the city
streets in the central business district during the annual street fair without
receiving the prior approval of the executive committee of the street fair, and
having obtained the necessary licenses or permits from the city in the manner
so provided.
(Prior Code, § 27-20) (Ord. 610, passed 3-27-1978) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 111.006 LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE; TAG; EXEMPTION.
   (A)   Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business as
a peddler or transient merchant in the city without first having obtained a
license from the Clerk. Any person, partnership, corporation or two or more
persons having a joint or common interest seeking a peddler or transient
merchant license in the city shall make written application to the City Clerk
stating the applicant’s name, residence, federal taxpayer identification
number, state employer identification number and, if said applicant is seeking
a transient merchant license also at the same time, deposit $1,000 with the
City Clerk or file a surety company bond for that amount.
(Prior Code, § 27-32)
   (B)   Fee. The annual fee for a license for a peddler, whether or not a
truck or vehicle is used by said peddler, shall be $300. The fee for a
transient merchant’s license shall be $300 per day.
(Prior Code, § 27-33)
   (C)   Tag. The City Clerk shall issue to a person licensed pursuant to this
section two tags which shall bear the license number and the following words
“Peddler’s License, City of Wyandotte”. The licensee shall display such a tag
on each side of any vehicle used in the conduct of his or her business.
(Prior Code, § 27-34)
   (D)   Exemption.
      (1)   The following shall be exempt from the provisions of this section:
         (a)   Any person selling vegetables, eggs, fruits and farm products of
any kind or description which have been raised or produced by him or her, or
which are being sold from an area which has been specially designated by
Council resolution as a farm products sales area, and to which area such person
has been granted access by the council after written request to the Council for
such access;
         (b)   Any mechanic selling any article of his or her own invention;
and
         (c)   Any person selling goods, wares and merchandise manufactured by
him at any store, city market, refreshment stand or booth at fair grounds or by
going about from place to place in the city.
      (2)   To be entitled to this exemption a person must make an affidavit to
such effect to the City Clerk. Upon receipt of such an affidavit, the City
Clerk shall issue a certificate of exemption stating that its holder is exempt
from the provisions of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 27-35)
(Ord. 610, passed 3-27-1978; Ord. 866, passed 6-19-1989; Ord. 904, passed 3-18-
1991; Ord. 1057, passed 12-21-1998) Penalty, see §
10.999
Charter reference:
   Power of city to set license fees, see § 177
COMMERCIAL SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS
§ 111.020 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this subchapter, the terms CANVASSER or SOLICITOR shall mean any
individual, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling either by foot,
wagon, automobile, motortruck or any other type of conveyance, from place to
place, from house to house, or from street to street, taking or attempting to
take orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, personal property of
any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or
performed in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes
for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or whether he is collecting
advance payments on such sales or not, including any person who, for himself or
herself or for another person, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building,
structure, tent, railroad boxcar, boat, hotel room, lodging house, apartment,
shop or any other place within the city for the sole purpose of exhibiting
samples and taking orders for future delivery.
(Prior Code, § 27-47)
§ 111.021 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Police Department shall enforce the provisions of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 27-48)
§ 111.022 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   It shall be unlawful for anyone to solicit from house to house between
sunset of one day and sunrise of next day.
(Prior Code, § 27-49) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 111.023 REPORTS AND RECORDS.
   The Chief of Police shall report to the City Clerk all convictions for
violation of this subchapter, and the City Clerk shall maintain a record for
each license issued and record the reports of violation therein.
(Prior Code, § 27-50)
§ 111.024 EXEMPTION.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to any individual who
canvasses or solicits any business establishment.
(Prior Code, § 27-51)
§ 111.025 LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION; FORM; DISPLAY; RECORD.
   (A)   Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business as
a solicitor or canvasser without a license.
(Prior Code, § 27-63)
   (B)   Application. A person desiring the license required by the provisions
of this section shall file a sworn application (in duplicate) with the City
Clerk giving the following information and submittals:
      (1)   His or her name;
      (2)   His or her permanent home address;
      (3)   His or her local address;
      (4)   A general physical description of himself or herself;
      (5)   A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to
be sold;
      (6)   The name and address of his or her employer and credentials
establishing his or her exact relationship to his or her employer;
      (7)   The length of time the applicant expects to do business in the
city;
      (8)   The place where the goods or property proposed to be sold, or
orders taken for the sale thereof, are manufactured or produced, where such
goods or products are located at the time said application is filed, and the
proposed method of delivery;
      (9)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted
of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature
of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor;
      (10)   A photograph of himself or herself taken within 60 days prior to
the filing of the application showing his or her head and shoulders in a clear
and distinguishing manner;
      (11)   His or her fingerprints;
      (12)   The names of at least two property owners in the county who will
certify to the applicant’s good character and business responsibility, or, in
lieu of the names of references, such other available evidence as to the good
character and business responsibility of the applicant as will enable an
investigator to property evaluate character and business responsibility.
(Prior Code, § 27-64)
   (C)   Processing and issuance.
      (1)   Upon receipt of an application for a canvasser’s or solicitor’s
license the original shall be referred to the Chief of Police who shall cause
such investigation of the applicant’s business and moral character to be made
as he or she deems necessary for the protection of the public welfare. A person
applying for a license who has resided in the city for a period of one year or
more may be licensed pending the investigation of such person’s criminal
record; other persons shall not be issued a license until their criminal record
has been investigated.
      (2)   If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant’s character or
business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the Chief of Police
shall endorse on such application his or her disapproval and his or her reasons
for the same, and return the said application to the City Clerk who shall
notify the applicant that his or her application is disapproved and that no
license will be issued.
      (3)   If, as a result of such investigation, the character and the
business responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the
Chief of Police shall endorse on the application his or her approval, execute a
license addressed to the applicant for the carrying on of the business applied
for and return said license along with the application to the City Clerk, who
shall, upon payment of the prescribed fee, issue the license.
(Prior Code, § 27-65)
   (D)   Fee. A person desiring the license required by the provisions of this
section shall pay a fee of $300 to the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 27-66)
   (E)   Bond. Every applicant for a canvasser’s or solicitor’s license who is
not a resident of the city, or who represents a firm whose principal place of
business is located outside of the state, shall file with the City Clerk a
surety bond, running to the city in the amount of $1,000, with surety
acceptable and approved by the Mayor, conditioned that the said applicant shall
comply fully with all the provisions of the ordinances of the city and the
statutes of the state concerning solicitors and guaranteeing to any citizen of
the city that all money paid as a down payment will be accounted for and
applied according to the representations of the solicitor, and further
guaranteeing to any citizen of the city doing business with said solicitor,
that the property purchased will be delivered according to the representations
of said solicitor. Action on such bond may be brought in the name of the city
to the use or benefit of the aggrieved person.
(Prior Code, § 27-67)
   (F)   Form. A license issued pursuant to this section shall contain:
      (1)   The signature and seal of the issuing officer;
      (2)   The name, address and photograph of the licensee;
      (3)   The class of license issued and the kind of goods to be sold
thereunder;
      (4)   The amount of fee paid;
      (5)   The date of issuance and the length of time the license shall be
operative; and
      (6)   The license number and other identifying description of any vehicle
used in such soliciting or canvassing.
(Prior Code, § 27-68)
   (G)   Display.
      (1)   A person who has been issued a license pursuant to the provisions
of this section shall display it upon request to any police officer.
      (2)   Police officers shall require solicitors or canvassers not known to
them to display their licenses.
(Prior Code, § 27-69)
   (H)   Expiration and renewal. Solicitors’ or canvassers’ licenses shall be
issued for a term not exceeding one year and shall be renewable on the first
Monday in June of each year.
(Prior Code, § 27-70)
   (I)   Record. The City Clerk shall keep a record of all licenses issued
pursuant to this section.
(Prior Code, § 27-71)
(Ord. 604, passed 2-6-1978; Ord. 867, passed 8-28-1989; Ord. 1057, passed 12-
21-1998) Penalty, see §
10.999
Charter reference:
   Power of city to set license fee, see § 177
NON-COMMERCIAL SOLICITORS
§ 111.040 DEFINITION.
   As used in this subchapter, the term NON-COMMERCIAL SOLICITATION shall mean
the request, directly or indirectly, for money, credit, property, financial
assistance or other thing of value on the plea or representation of any group,
society, corporation, organization or individual that such money, credit,
property, financial assistance or other thing of value will be used for any
religious, patriotic, philanthropic, educational, fraternal, benevolent or
reformatory purpose, not operated for pecuniary profits, where no part of the
net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any person, private shareholder
or individual, and where the solicitation of such organization shall be
conducted by members or officers thereof voluntarily and without remuneration
for such solicitation. The term shall not include charitable organizations or
persons soliciting for a charitable organization who have complied with Public
Act 169 of 1975, as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 400.271 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 27-83)
§ 111.041 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any
person to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell or near any door of a
residence located thereon, or rap or knock upon any door or create any sound in
any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such
residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant thereof
and engage in soliciting, prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m.
(Prior Code, § 27-84) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 111.042 ENTRY TO PREMISES RESTRICTED.
   Notice of the determination by the occupant to refuse the entrance of
solicitors upon the occupant’s premises may be accomplished by the posting of a
sign or card upon or near the main entrance door to the premises which shall
state: “No Solicitors Allowed”. Any person who solicits at a premises contrary
to the posted notice shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 27-85) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 111.043 PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION; ISSUANCE; APPEAL; EXPIRATION OR
REVOCATION.
   (A)   Required. No person shall conduct such non-commercial solicitation
without a permit from the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 27-97)
   (B)   Application. A person desiring the permit required by the provisions
of this section shall make written application to the City Clerk upon a form
furnished by the City Clerk giving the information required upon such form.
(Prior Code, § 27-98)
   (C)   Issuance. The City Clerk shall issue the permit required by this
section if he or she finds after conducting reasonable investigation that:
      (1)   The solicitation will not be a fraud on the public;
      (2)   The control and supervision of the solicitation will be under
responsible and reliable persons;
      (3)   The solicitation will not be conducted for private profit or
commercial reasons; and
      (4)   None of the persons who shall act as solicitors have been convicted
of either a felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude.
(Prior Code, § 27-99)
   (D)   Appeal from denial. If the City Clerk refuses to issue the permit
required by the provisions of this section, the applicant may appeal such
action to the City Council by proper petition brought within 15 days from the
Clerk’s action.
(Prior Code, § 27-100)
   (E)   Expiration. A permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this section
shall be valid for the period stated upon it which shall be no longer than 90
days from the date the permit is issued.
(Prior Code, § 27-101)
   (F)   Revocation. The City Clerk shall revoke the permit issued pursuant to
this section if the holder of the permit or any of his or her solicitors are
convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this subchapter, or has
made a false statement in the application, or otherwise fails to meet the
standards set forth in the subchapter concerning the issuance of permits.
(Prior Code, § 27-102)
Penalty, see §
10.999
CHAPTER 112: ADVERTISEMENTS
Section
Handbills
   
112.001   Uninhabited or vacant properties
   
112.002   Posted premises
   
112.003   Inhabited premises
   
112.004   Vehicles, streets and the like
   
112.005   Supplemental provisions
HANDBILLS
§ 112.001 UNINHABITED OR VACANT PROPERTIES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw,
scatter or cast any handbill in or upon any private premises which are
temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant.
(Prior Code, § 17-1) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 112.002 POSTED PREMISES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw,
scatter or cast any handbill upon any premises, if requested by anyone thereon
not to do so, or if there is placed on said premises in a conspicuous position
near the entrance thereof, a sign bearing the words: “No Trespassing”, “No
Peddlers or Agents”, “No Advertisement” or any similar notice, indicating in
any manner that the occupants of said premises do not desire to be molested or
to have their right of privacy disturbed, or to have any such handbills left
upon such premises.
(Prior Code, § 17-2) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 112.003 INHABITED PREMISES.
   No person shall distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any
handbill in or upon any inhabited private premises, except by handing any other
person then present in or upon such private premises which are not posted as
provided in this subchapter; the aforesaid person unless requested by anyone
upon such premises not to do so, may place or deposit any such handbill in or
upon such inhabited private premises, if such handbill is so placed or
deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill from being blown or drifted
about such premises or elsewhere; except that, mailboxes may not be so used
when so prohibited by federal postal laws or regulations; provided further,
however, notwithstanding anything elsewhere in this subchapter to the contrary,
it shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw,
scatter or cast any handbill in or upon any premises whatsoever in the city
between sunset and 7:00 a.m.
(Prior Code, § 17-3) (Ord. 805, passed 11-17-1986) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 112.004 VEHICLES, STREETS AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to scatter or distribute on or along any
public street or municipally-owned parking lot or place or cause to be placed
on or in any motor vehicle on any public street or municipally-owned parking
lot in the city any commercial literature, advertising material, commercial
handbill, card, sample or other matter for the purpose of advertising. The
provisions of this section shall not apply to the advertising material of
religious, fraternal or charitable organizations.
   (B)   Any person who advertises his or her goods, wares or merchandise by
causing any advertising material to be scattered or distributed in any manner
contrary to the provisions of this section shall be subject to the penalties
provided in this code applicable to this subchapter in the same manner as the
person who actually distributes any advertising material.
(Prior Code, § 17-4) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 112.005 SUPPLEMENTAL PROVISIONS.
   This subchapter shall be supplemental to all other ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 17-5)
CHAPTER 113: FILM PRODUCTION
Section
   
113.001   Definition
   
113.002   Permit required
   
113.003   Permit applications
   
113.004   Application investigation
   
113.005   Issuance requirements
   
113.006   Grounds for permit denial
   
113.007   Contents, posting and transferability
   
113.008   Permit revocation
   
113.009   Cost of additional services
   
113.010   Clean-up and restoration
§ 113.001 DEFINITION.
   MOTION PICTURE, TELEVISION, RADIO AND PHOTOGRAPHIC PRODUCTION means all
activity attendant to staging or shooting (video taping or filming or digital
recording) commercial motion pictures, television shows, programs or
commercials, and to the taking of single or multiple photographs for sale or
use for a commercial purpose where the photographer sets up stationary
equipment on public or private property or in the public right-of-way in any
one location for longer than five consecutive minutes.
(Prior Code, § 8.2-1) (Ord. 1321, passed 2-8-2010)
§ 113.002 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall use any public right-of-way, or any public or private
property or facility for the purpose of producing, broadcasting, taking or
making any commercial motion picture, television, radio or photographic unless
he or she shall have first made application for and obtained, as prescribed in
this subchapter, a permit for each instance.
   (B)   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to the following:
      (1)   Current news productions, which includes reporters, photographers
or camera persons in the employment of a newspaper, news service, broadcasting
station or similar entity engaged in this broadcasting of news events;
      (2)   Productions which are conducted by the city’s public, education and
government access organizations or by or at the direction of the city;
      (3)   Productions which are conducted within legally established
commercial motion picture/ television/radio/photography studios;
      (4)   Video or multimedia broadcast or transmission of a live performance
within a live entertainment venue on large screen monitors; or
      (5)   Private events filmed or photographed for non-commercial purposes,
such as private parties or weddings.
(Prior Code, § 8.2-2) (Ord. 1321, passed 2-8-2010) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 113.003 PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Any person desiring a permit to conduct motion picture, television,
radio and photographic production activities under the provisions of this
subchapter shall make application on the appropriate form provided by the city,
or by furnishing the required information in person or by first class mail,
facsimile or the internet to the City Clerk’s office. The form must be signed
and accompanied by all required fees, deposits, hold harmless agreements and
insurance certificates required by this subchapter before it will be processed.
   (B)   The applicant for a permit required by this subchapter shall supply
the following information on the application:
      (1)   The name, mailing address and phone number of the person making the
application, along with the name and contact information for the location
administrator. Where the person making the application is a partnership,
corporation or other association, this information shall be provided for all
partners, officers and directors or members;
      (2)   The address, legal description and proof of ownership of the site
at which the proposed activity is to be conducted. Where ownership is not
vested in the prospective permittee, he or she shall submit an affidavit from
the owner indicating the owner’s consent to the use of the site for the
proposed activity;
      (3)   A statement of the kind, character and type of proposed motion
picture, television, radio and photographic production;
      (4)   The dates and hours during which the proposed motion picture,
television, radio and photographic production is to be conducted;
      (5)   An estimate of the maximum number of attendants expected at the
motion picture, television, radio and photographic production for each day it
is conducted;
      (6)   Each application shall be accompanied by a fee, as follows:
         (a)   A processing fee in an amount established by resolution of the
City Council to reimburse the city for the staff time required to evaluate the
application and establish conditions of approval. The processing fee shall be
waived for charitable and non-profit organizations which qualify under I.R.C. §
501(c)(3). The processing fee is non-refundable;
         (b)   A daily property use fee in an amount established by resolution
of the City Council to compensate the city for the use of public property and
its unavailability for ordinary and usual purposes resulting from the filming
activity;
         (c)   A monitoring fee to reimburse the city for staff time required
to monitor the filming activity, and for reasonable costs for other city
services or equipment approved for use during such activities, in an amount as
determined at the time of the city’s review of permit application; and
         (d)   The processing fee and the property use fee shall be waived for
the following:
            1.   Productions conducted by a cable television company operating
under a franchise granted by the city which are not conducted on public
property, do not interfere with public rights-of-way, and which involve fewer
than two motor vehicles;
            2.   Productions for wholly charitable or educational purposes and
from which no profit is derived, either directly or indirectly; and
            3.   Student filming: productions directed or produced by a person
currently enrolled in courses related to the production.
   (C)   Each application for a permit required by this subchapter shall be
accompanied by a detailed explanation, including drawings and diagrams where
applicable, of the prospective permittee’s plans to provide for the following:
      (1)   The size or area of the property to be used, including a sketch of
the filming site showing placement of work trucks, location of production
vehicles;
      (2)   Sketch of the “base camp” if any, showing any off-street locations
for crew parking, honey wagon, catering and non-essential production vehicles;
      (3)   Traffic-control plan of the exact filming location, listing roads
or lanes to be closed, if any;
      (4)   Description of the duration of the proposed activity and daily
hours of operation;
      (5)   Facilities for clean-up and waste disposal;
      (6)   Letter of notification and signatures from businesses/neighborhoods
impacted by filming if required by the City Clerk or his or her designee; and
      (7)   Insurance arrangements and coverage.
(Prior Code, § 8.2-3) (Ord. 1321, passed 2-8-2010)
§ 113.004 APPLICATION INVESTIGATION.
   Upon receipt by the City Clerk’s office, copies of the application for a
permit required by this subchapter shall be forwarded to the appropriate city
departments, and to such other appropriate public officials as the City Clerk
or his or her designee deems necessary.
(Prior Code, § 8.2-4) (Ord. 1321, passed 2-8-2010)
§ 113.005 ISSUANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   In processing an application for a production filming permit required
by this subchapter, the city shall, at a minimum, require the following.
      (1)   Security personnel. The permittee shall employ, at his or her own
expense, such security personnel as are necessary and sufficient to provide for
the adequate security and protection of the maximum number of attendants at the
location of the filming activity and for the preservation of order and
protection of property in and around the site of the filming activity. No
permit shall be issued unless the Police Chief or his or her designee is
satisfied that such necessary and sufficient security personnel will be
provided by the permittee for the duration of the production filming.
      (2)   Notification. The permittee or his or her designee shall notify
affected residents, occupants and businesses, in advance of filming, and as
instructed by the city, of the duration and location of filming activities,
including information about planned special effects, road and lane closures,
“no parking” requests, sidewalk usage and the time that any barricades will be
placed on the street and/or sidewalk.
      (3)   Access. Production vehicles may not block parking lot access
drives, fire hydrants or be parked in fire lanes and must comply with all
provisions of the state law and local ordinances.
      (4)   Base camps. Base camps may not be located on a public street unless
approved in writing by the city or the Police Chief or his or her designee.
Only the necessary production vehicles (i.e., grip and light trucks) may be
parked on a public street, if necessary, at the filming location. Crew parking,
honey wagon, catering and other non-essential production vehicles shall be at a
predetermined location as approved by the city.
      (5)   Insurance. As a condition of issuing a permit under this
subchapter, the permittee shall furnish insurance in an amount to be determined
by the Director of Finance/Administration, but in no event in an amount less
than $1,000,000 to protect the city against claims of third persons for
personal injury, wrongful death and property damage and to indemnify the city
for damage to the city property arising out of the permittee’s activities.
Additional coverage of such general liability insurance coverage shall be
required in the event motor vehicles, aircraft, helicopters, explosives or
pyrotechnics are used in the activity in an amount to be determined by the
Director of Finance/Administration. Such insurance shall be evidenced by the
standard general special endorsement form or the certificate of insurance
(public liability) form approved by the city. The applicant shall also submit
verification that adequate worker’s compensation insurance coverage is
maintained. The city shall be named as an additional insured party.
      (6)   Fire protection. The permittee shall, at his or her own expense,
take adequate steps as determined by the Fire Chief to ensure fire protection.
No permit shall be issued unless the Fire Chief or his or her designee finds
that permittee will provide all necessary and sufficient compliance with the
requirements of NFPA (National Fire Protection Association) 140 for the
duration of the production filming.
      (7)   Hold harmless agreement. The permittee shall execute a hold
harmless agreement as provided by the city prior to the issuance of any permit.
      (8)   Other conditions. Prior to the issuance of a permit, the City Clerk
may impose any other conditions reasonably calculated to ensure compliance with
the requirements of this subchapter and to protect the health, safety, welfare
and property of attendants or of citizens of the city, including a limitation
on the duration of the permit and the location of activities thereunder.
   (B)   In processing an application for a permit required by this subchapter,
the city shall issue a permit as provided for in this subchapter when, from a
consideration of the application and from such other information as may be
otherwise obtained, the city finds that:
      (1)   The conduct of such activity will not unduly interfere with the use
and enjoyment of neighboring property or unduly interfere with traffic or
pedestrian movement or endanger public safety and that no streets will be
completely closed to traffic for an unreasonable period of time. Adequate
advance notice of any street closure shall be given;
      (2)   The conduct of such activity will not unduly interfere with normal
governmental or city operations, threaten to result in damage or detriment to
public property, or result in the city incurring costs or expenditures in
either money or personnel not reimbursed in advance by the applicant;
      (3)   The activity does not propose to include obscene matter or an
obscene performance and will not involve conduct in violation of state, local
or federal laws, rules or regulations, including Public Act 343 of 1984, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 752.361 to 752.374;
      (4)   At the determination of the city that the condition of such
activity will not constitute a fire hazard or any other type of hazard and all
property safety precautions will be taken as determined by the heads of the
applicable departments or their designees;
      (5)   The permit shall not authorize the production of a film that in any
manner requires the use of property owned by or under the control of the city
in violation of Public Act 84 of 2008, being M.C.L.A. §§ 123.1191 et seq.
prohibiting the production of a film that includes obscene matter or an obscene
performance or that requires that individually identifiable records be created
and maintained for every performer provided in 18 U.S.C. § 2557. The city
reserves the right to review all proposed scripts for any production filming
activities. The decision of the city to issue, conditionally issue or deny a
permit shall be final unless appealed in writing within five working days of
the decision by requesting a hearing before the City Council at the next
available meeting. Where conditions are imposed as prerequisite to the issuance
of a permit and where a permit is denied, notice thereof shall be mailed to the
applicant by first class mail within five days of such action. In the case of a
permit denial, the reasons therefor will be stated in the notice;
      (6)   The permittee shall provide a proper acknowledgment of the city as
part of the production in a form as approved by the City Clerk; and/or
      (7)   The permittee shall execute the city’s contract, as required.
(Prior Code, § 8.2-5) (Ord. 1321, passed 2-8-2010)
§ 113.006 GROUNDS FOR PERMIT DENIAL.
   A filming permit, required by this subchapter, may be denied if:
   (A)   The applicant fails to comply with any or all requirements of this
subchapter, or with any or all conditions imposed pursuant to this subchapter,
or with any other applicable provision of state, local or federal laws, rules
or regulations;
   (B)   The applicant has knowingly made a false, misleading or fraudulent
statement in the application or in any supporting document; and/or
   (C)   The applicant has not provided all information requested by the city.
(Prior Code, § 8.2-6) (Ord. 1321, passed 2-8-2010)
§ 113.007 CONTENTS, POSTING AND TRANSFERABILITY.
   A production film permit required by this subchapter shall specify the name
and address of the permittee, the kind and location of the filming activity,
the maximum number of attendants permissible, the duration of the permit and
any other conditions imposed pursuant to this subchapter. It shall be posted in
a conspicuous place upon the premises of the filming activity, and shall not be
transferred to any other person or location.
(Prior Code, § 8.2-7) (Ord. 1321, passed 2-8-2010)
§ 113.008 PERMIT REVOCATION.
   (A)   The city may revoke a permit issued pursuant to this subchapter
whenever the permittee, his or her employee or agent fails, neglects or refuses
to fully comply with any and all provisions and requirements set forth in this
subchapter, including the conditions imposed upon issuance of the permit, or
with any and all provisions, regulations, ordinances, statutes or other law
incorporated by reference in this subchapter.
   (B)   A permit shall automatically be revoked if riotous, disorderly,
obscene or otherwise unlawful conduct occurs at a filming location or if an
assemblage exceeds 125% of the estimated attendance, as indicated on the
application for a permit, or in the event that the Chief of Police determines
said activity constitutes an imminent threat to the public health, safety or
welfare. In such instances, the premises may be closed by the Police Department
or Fire Department and the assembly disbursed.
(Prior Code, § 8.2-8) (Ord. 1321, passed 2-8-2010)
§ 113.009 COST OF ADDITIONAL SERVICES.
   If deemed necessary by the city, additional police, code enforcement, fire
and other city services shall be provided for the purpose of protecting,
assisting and regulating the proposed activity. The estimated cost of providing
such additional services shall be paid in advance to the city by the applicant.
Any additional city services will be provided/coordinated through the city. In
the event any portion of the estimated cost is not used, said fund will be
reimbursed to the permittee.
(Prior Code, § 8.2-9) (Ord. 1321, passed 2-8-2010)
§ 113.010 CLEAN-UP AND RESTORATION.
   The applicant shall conduct operations in an orderly fashion with continuous
attention to the storage of equipment not in use, maintenance of the area and
the clean-up of trash and debris. The area used shall be cleaned of trash and
debris within two hours of the completion of the activity or within such other
time established in the permit to the city’s satisfaction. The applicant shall
be responsible for restoring any area damaged or disrupted before leaving the
site. If the site is not repaired or restored to the city’s satisfaction, the
city shall have the necessary restoration and/or repairs performed and the
applicant shall reimburse the city for such work within ten days of completing
filming. The applicant shall be required to pay in advance an estimated cost
for clean-up to the city. In the event any portion of the estimated cost is not
used by the city under this section, said fund will be reimbursed to the
permittee.
(Prior Code, § 8.2-10) (Ord. 1321, passed 2-8-2010) Penalty, see §
10.999
CHAPTER 114: GASOLINE SERVICE STATIONS
Section
   
114.001   Location
   
114.002   Storage capacity and pumps
   
114.003   Pre-existing uses
§ 114.001 LOCATION.
   No gasoline filling or service or motor supply station shall be erected or
located within 100 yards of any church, hospital or school or other institution
where large numbers of pedestrians congregate, or within 200 yards from the
location of another filling or service or gasoline or motor supply station.
(Prior Code, § 15-1) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 114.002 STORAGE CAPACITY AND PUMPS.
   (A)    The total gasoline storage capacity of each filling or service or
gasoline or motor supply station established 10-5-1970 shall be limited by the
location of the storage tanks in respect to adjacent buildings which are not an
essential part of the installation and adjacent lot lines as provided in the
following table:
Capacity of Outside Underground Gasoline Storage Tanks
Fire Separation in Feet Quantity of Storage in Gallons
Capacity of Outside Underground Gasoline Storage Tanks
Fire Separation in Feet Quantity of Storage in Gallons
50                      Unlimited
40                      50,000
30                      20,000
25                      12,000
20                      6,000
10                      3,000
 
   (B)   Such station shall have no more than six pumps.
(Prior Code, § 15-2)
§ 114.003 PRE-EXISTING USES.
   If, at any time, a service or gasoline or filling or motor supply station is
discontinued for a period of six months or more, it shall not thereafter be
used as such unless it conforms to all of the requirements of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 15-3)
CHAPTER 115: TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Section
   
115.001   Purpose
   
115.002   Conflict
   
115.003   Definitions
   
115.004   Permit required
   
115.005   Permit issuance
   
115.006   Conduit or utility poles
   
115.007   Route maps
   
115.008   Repair of damage
   
115.009   Maintenance fee; establishment and payment
   
115.010   Modification of existing fees
   
115.011   Savings clause
   
115.012   Use of funds
   
115.013   Annual report
   
115.014   Cable television operators
   
115.015   Existing rights
   
115.016   Compliance
   
115.017   Police powers; reservation
   
115.018   Authorized city officials
 
   
115.999   Penalty
§ 115.001 PURPOSE.
   The purposes of this chapter are to regulate access to and ongoing use of
public rights-of-way by telecommunications providers for their
telecommunications facilities while protecting the public health, safety and
welfare and exercising reasonable control of the public rights-of-way in
compliance with the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way
Oversight Act (Public Act 48 of 2002, being M.C.L.A. §§ 484.3101 et seq.)
(“Act”) and other applicable law, and to ensure that the city qualifies for
distributions under the Act by modifying the fees charged to providers and
complying with the Act.
(Prior Code, § 34.5-1) (Ord. 1169, passed 4-14-2003)
§ 115.002 CONFLICT.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed in such a manner as to conflict
with the Act or other applicable law.
(Prior Code, § 34.5-2) (Ord. 1169, passed 4-14-2003)
§ 115.003 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT. The Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight
Act (Public Act 48 of 2002, being M.C.L.A. §§ 484.3101 et seq.), as amended
from time to time.
   CITY. The City of Wyandotte, Michigan.
   CITY COUNCIL. The City Council or its designee. This section does not
authorize delegation of any decision or function that is required by law to be
made by the City Council.
   CITY ENGINEER. The City Engineer or his or her designee.
   PERMIT. A non-exclusive permit issued pursuant to the Act and this chapter
to a telecommunications provider to use the public right-of-way in the city for
its telecommunications facilities.
All other terms used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as defined or
as provided in the Act, including without limitation the following:
      (1)   AUTHORITY. The Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-
Way Oversight Authority created pursuant to § 3 of the Act, being M.C.L.A. §
484.3103; and
      (2)   MPSC. The Michigan Public Service Commission in the Department of
Consumer and Industry Services, and shall have the same meaning as the term
“Commission” in the Act.
   PERSON. An individual, corporation, partnership, association, governmental
entity or any other legal entity.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway,
street, alley, easement or waterway. PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY does not include a
federal, state or private right-of-way.
   TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES or FACILITIES. The equipment or personal
property, such as copper and fiber cables, lines, wires, switches, conduits,
pipes and sheaths, which are used to or can generate, receive, transmit, carry,
amplify or provide telecommunication services or signals. TELECOMMUNICATION
FACILITIES or FACILITIES do not include antennas, supporting structures for
antennas, equipment shelters or houses, and any ancillary equipment and
miscellaneous hardware used to provide federally licensed commercial mobile
service as defined in § 332(d) of part I of Title III of the Communications Act
of 1934, Ch. 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. § 332, and further defined as
commercial mobile radio service in 47 C.F.R. § 20.3, and service provided by
any wireless, two-way communication device.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER, PROVIDER and TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES. Those
terms as defined in § 102 of the state’s Telecommunications Act, Public Act of
179 of 1991, being M.C.L.A. § 484.2102. TELECOMMUNICATION PROVIDER does not
include a person or an affiliate of that person when providing a federally
licensed commercial mobile radio service as defined in § 332(d) of part I of
the Communications Act of 1934, Ch. 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. § 332, and
further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 C.F.R. § 20.3, or
service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device. For the purpose
of the Act and this chapter only, a PROVIDER also includes all of the
following:
      (1)   A cable television operator that provides a telecommunications
service;
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided by the Act, a person who owns
telecommunication facilities located within a public right-of-way; and
      (3)   A person providing broadband internet transport access service.
(Prior Code, § 34.5-3) (Ord. 1169, passed 4-14-2003)
§ 115.004 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in the Act, a
telecommunications provider using or seeking to use public rights-of-way in the
city for its telecommunications facilities shall apply for and obtain a permit
pursuant to this chapter.
   (B)   Application. Telecommunications providers shall apply for a permit on
an application form approved by the MPSC in accordance with § 6(1) of the Act,
being M.C.L.A. § 484.3106(1). A telecommunications provider shall file one copy
of the application with the City Engineer. Applications shall be complete and
include all information required by the Act, including without limitation a
route map showing the location of the provider’s existing and proposed
facilities in accordance with § 6(5) of the Act, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3106(5).
   (C)   Confidential information. If a telecommunications provider claims that
any portion of the route maps submitted by it as part of its application
contain trade secret, proprietary or confidential information, which is exempt
from the Freedom of Information Act, Public Act 442 of 1976, being M.C.L.A. §§
15.231 to 15.246, pursuant to § 6(5) of the Act, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3106(5),
the telecommunications provider shall prominently so indicate on the face of
each map.
   (D)   Application fee. Except as otherwise provided by the Act, the
application shall be accompanied by a one-time non-refundable application fee
in the amount of $500.
   (E)   Additional information. The City Engineer may request an applicant to
submit such additional information which the City Engineer deems reasonably
necessary or relevant. The applicant shall comply with all such requests in
compliance with reasonable deadlines for such additional information
established by the City Engineer. If the city and the applicant cannot agree on
the requirement of additional information requested by the city, the city or
the applicant shall notify the MPSC as provided in § 6(2) of the Act, being
M.C.L.A. § 484.3106(2).
   (F)   Previously issued permits. Pursuant to § 5(1) of the Act, being
M.C.L.A. § 484.3105(1), authorizations or permits previously issued by the city
under § 251 of the state’s Telecommunications Act, Public Act 179 of 1991,
being M.C.L.A. § 484.2251, and authorizations or permits issued by the city to
telecommunications providers prior to the 1995 enactment of § 251 of the
state’s Telecommunications Act, but after 1985 shall satisfy the permit
requirement of this chapter.
   (G)   Existing provider. Pursuant to § 5(3) of the Act, being M.C.L.A. §
484.3105(3), within 180 days from 11-1-2002, the effective date of the Act, a
telecommunications provider with facilities located in a public right-of-way in
the city as of such date, that has not previously obtained authorization or a
permit under § 251 of the state’s Telecommunications Act, Public Act 179 of
1991, being M.C.L.A. § 484.2251, shall submit to the city an application for a
permit in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. Pursuant to § 5(3)
of the Act, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3105(3), a telecommunications provider
submitting an application under this division (G) is not required to pay the
$500 application fee required under division (D) above. A provider under this
division (G) shall be given up to an additional 180 days to submit the permit
application if allowed by the Authority, as provided in § 5(4) of the Act,
being M.C.L.A. § 484.3105(4).
(Prior Code, § 34.5-4) (Ord. 1169, passed 4-14-2003)
§ 115.005 PERMIT ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Approval or denial. The authority to approve or deny an application
for a permit is hereby delegated to the City Engineer. Pursuant to § 15(3) of
the Act, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3115(3), the City Engineer shall approve or deny
an application for a permit within 45 days from the date a telecommunications
provider files an application for a permit under § 115.004 of this chapter for
access to a public right-of-way within the city. Pursuant to § 6(6) of the Act,
being M.C.L.A. § 484.3106(6), the City Engineer shall notify the MPSC when the
City Engineer has granted or denied a permit, including information regarding
the date on which the application was filed and the date on which permit was
granted or denied. The City Engineer shall not unreasonably deny an application
for a permit.
   (B)   Form of permit. If an application for permit is approved, the City
Engineer shall issue the permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or
without additional or different permit terms, in accordance with §§ 6(1), 6(2)
and 15 of the Act, being M.C.L.A. §§ 484.3106(1), 484.3106(2) and 484.3115.
   (C)   Conditions. Pursuant to § 15(4) of the Act, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3115
(4), the City Engineer may impose conditions on the issuance of a permit, which
conditions shall be limited to the telecommunications provider’s access and
usage of the public right-of-way.
   (D)   Bond requirement. Pursuant to § 15(3) of the Act, being M.C.L.A. §
484.3115(3), and without limitation on division (C) above, the City Engineer
may require that a bond be posted by the telecommunications provider as a
condition of the permit. If a bond is required, it shall not exceed the
reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its
original condition during and after the telecommunications provider’s access
and use.
(Prior Code, § 34.5-5) (Ord. 1169, passed 4-14-2003)
§ 115.006 CONDUIT OR UTILITY POLES.
   Pursuant to § 4(3) of the Act, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3103(3), obtaining a
permit or paying the fees required under the Act or under this chapter does not
give a telecommunications provider a right to use conduit or utility poles.
(Prior Code, § 34.5-6) (Ord. 1169, passed 4-14-2003)
§ 115.007 ROUTE MAPS.
   (A)   Pursuant to § 6(7) of the Act, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3106(7), a
telecommunications provider shall, within 90 days after the substantial
completion of construction of new telecommunications facilities in the city,
submit route maps showing the location of the telecommunications facilities to
both the MPSC and to the city.
   (B)   The route maps should be in paper format unless and until the MPSC
determines otherwise, in accordance with § 6(8) of the Act, being M.C.L.A. §
484.3106(8).
(Prior Code, § 34.5-7) (Ord. 1169, passed 4-14-2003)
§ 115.008 REPAIR OF DAMAGE.
   Pursuant to § 15(5) of the Act, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3115(5), a
telecommunications provider undertaking an excavation or construction or
installing telecommunications facilities within a public right-of-way or
temporarily obstructing a public right-of-way in the city, as authorized by a
permit, shall promptly repair all damage done to the street surface and all
installations under, over, below or within the public right-of-way and shall
promptly restore the public right-of-way to its preexisting condition.
(Prior Code, § 34.5-8) (Ord. 1169, passed 4-14-2003)
§ 115.009 MAINTENANCE FEE; ESTABLISHMENT AND PAYMENT.
   In addition to the non-refundable application fee paid to the city set forth
in § 115.004(D) of this chapter, a telecommunications provider with
telecommunications facilities in the city’s public rights-of- way shall pay an
annual maintenance fee to the Authority pursuant to § 8 of the Act, being
M.C.L.A. § 484.3108.
(Prior Code, § 34.5-9) (Ord. 1169, passed 4-14-2003)
§ 115.010 MODIFICATION OF EXISTING FEES.
   In compliance with the requirements of § 13(1) of the Act, being M.C.L.A. §
484.3113(1), the city hereby modifies, to the extent necessary, any fees
charged to telecommunications providers after 11-1-2002, the effective date of
the Act, relating to access and usage of the public rights-of-way, to an amount
not exceeding the amounts of fees and charges required under the Act, which
shall be paid to the Authority. In compliance with the requirements of § 13(4)
of the Act, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3113(4), the city also hereby approves
modification of the fees of providers with telecommunication facilities in
public rights-of-way within the city’s boundaries, so that those providers pay
only those fees required under § 8 of the Act, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3108. The
city shall provide each telecommunications provider affected by the fee with a
copy of this chapter, in compliance with the requirement of § 13(4) of the Act,
being M.C.L.A. § 484.3113(4). To the extent any fees are charged
telecommunications providers in excess of the amounts permitted under the Act,
or which are otherwise inconsistent with the act, such imposition is hereby
declared to be contrary to the city’s policy and intent, and upon application
by a provider or discovery by the city, shall be promptly refunded as having
been charged in error. Nothing in this section will prohibit the city from
collecting fees agreed to by the parties prior to 11-1-2002.
(Prior Code, § 34.5-10) (Ord. 1169, passed 4-14-2003)
§ 115.011 SAVINGS CLAUSE.
   Pursuant to § 13(5) of the Act, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3113(5), if § 8 of the
Act, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3108 is found to be invalid or unconstitutional, the
modification of fees under § 115.010 of this chapter shall be void from the
date the modification was made and any previously agreed upon or required fees
shall be reinstated.
(Prior Code, § 34.5-11) (Ord. 1169, passed 4-14-2003)
§ 115.012 USE OF FUNDS.
   (A)   Pursuant to § 10(4) of the Act, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3110(4), all
amounts received by the city from the Authority shall be used by the city
solely for rights-of-way related purposes.
   (B)   In conformance with that requirement, all funds received by the city
from the Authority shall be deposited into the Major Street Fund and/or the
Local Street Fund maintained by the city under Public Act 51 of 1951, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 247.651 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 34.5-12) (Ord. 1169, passed 4-14-2003)
§ 115.013 ANNUAL REPORT.
   Pursuant to § 10(5) of the Act, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3110(5), the City
Engineer shall file an annual report with the Authority on the use and
disposition of funds annually distributed by the Authority.
(Prior Code, § 34.5-13) (Ord. 1169, passed 4-14-2003)
§ 115.014 CABLE TELEVISION OPERATORS.
   Pursuant to § 13(6) of the Act, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3113(6), the city shall
not hold a cable television operator in default or seek any remedy for its
failure to satisfy an obligation, if any, to pay after 11-1-2002, the effective
date of this Act, a franchise fee or similar fee on that portion of gross
revenues from charges the cable operator received for cable modem services
provided through broadband internet transport access services.
(Prior Code, § 34.5-14) (Ord. 1169, passed 4-14-2003)
§ 115.015 EXISTING RIGHTS.
   Pursuant to § 4(2) of the Act, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3104(2), except as
expressly provided herein with respect to fees, this chapter shall not affect
any existing rights that a telecommunications provider or the city may have
under a permit issued by the city or under a contract between the city and a
telecommunications provider related to the use of the public rights-of-way.
(Prior Code, § 34.5-15) (Ord. 1169, passed 4-14-2003)
§ 115.016 COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   The city hereby declares that its policy and intent in adopting this
chapter is to fully comply with the requirements of the Act, and the provisions
hereof should be construed in such a manner as to achieve that purpose.
   (B)   The city shall comply in all respects with the requirements of the
Act, including, but not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Exempting certain route maps from the Freedom of Information Act,
Public Act 442 of 1976, being M.C.L.A. §§ 15.231 to 15.246, as provided in §
115.004(C) of this chapter;
      (2)   Allowing certain previously issued permits to satisfy the permit
requirements hereof, in accordance with §
115.004(F) of this chapter;
      (3)   Allowing existing providers additional time in which to submit an
application for a permit, and excusing such providers from the $500 application
fee, in accordance with §
115.004(G) of this chapter;
      (4)   Approving or denying an application for a permit within 45 days
from the date a telecommunications provider files and application for a permit
for access to and usage of a public right-of-way within the city, in accordance
with §
115.005(A) of this chapter;
      (5)   Notifying the MPSC when the city has granted or denied a permit, in
accordance with §
115.005(A) of this chapter;
      (6)   Not unreasonably denying an application for a permit, in accordance
with §
115.005(A) of this chapter;
      (7)   Issuing a permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without
additional or different permit terms, as provided in §
115.005(B) of this chapter;
      (8)   Limiting the conditions imposed on the issuance of a permit to the
telecommunications provider’s access and usage of the public right-of-way, in
accordance with §
115.005(C) of this chapter;
      (9)   Not requiring a bond of a telecommunications provider which exceeds
the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its
original condition during and after the telecommunication provider’s access and
use, in accordance with §
115.005(D) of this chapter;
      (10)   Not charging any telecommunications providers any additional fees
for construction or engineering permits, in accordance with §
115.006 of this chapter;
      (11)   Providing each telecommunications provider affected by the city’s
right-of-way fees with a copy of this chapter, in accordance with §
115.011 of this chapter;
      (12)   Submitting an annual report to the Authority, in accordance with §
115.014 of this chapter; and
      (13)   Not holding a cable television operator in default for a failure
to pay certain franchise fees, in accordance with §
115.014 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 34.5-16) (Ord. 1169, passed 4-14-2003)
§ 115.017 POLICE POWERS; RESERVATION.
   Pursuant to § 15(2) of the Act, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3115(2), this chapter
shall not limit the city’s right to review and approve a telecommunication
provider’s access to and ongoing use of a public right-of-way or limit the
city’s Authority to ensure and protect the health, safety and welfare of the
public.
(Prior Code, § 34.5-17) (Ord. 1169, passed 4-14-2003)
§ 115.018 AUTHORIZED CITY OFFICIALS.
   Any police or ordinance officer or other designee of the City Engineer is
hereby authorized to issue municipal civil infraction citations (directing
alleged violators to appear in court) or municipal civil infraction violation
notices (directing alleged violators to appear at the Municipal Chapter
Violations Bureau) for violations under this chapter as provided by the city
code.
(Prior Code, § 34.5-19) (Ord. 1169, passed 4-14-2003)
§ 115.999 PENALTY.
   A person who violates any provision of this chapter or the terms or
conditions of permit is responsible for a municipal civil infraction and shall
be subject to a fine of $500 and court costs for each violation. Nothing in
this section shall be construed to limit the remedies available to the city in
the event of a violation by a person of this chapter or a permit.
(Prior Code, § 34.5-20) (Ord. 1169, passed 4-14-2003)
CHAPTER 116: FOOD AND DRINK ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
Meat, Poultry and Seafood
   
116.001   Definitions
   
116.002   Food products manufacturing establishments
   
116.003   Vehicles
   
116.004   Alteration of premises, equipment
   
116.005   Unwholesome and diseased food
   
116.006   Rules and regulations
Food Dealers and Processors
   
116.020   Permit for street sales
   
116.021   Compliance with state laws, rules and regulations
   
116.022   Sanitation generally
   
116.023   Protection of food from dust, flies and the like
   
116.024   Vehicles
   
116.025   Contaminated or spoiled food
   
116.026   Reports of illness arising from food
Restaurants
   
116.040   Definitions
   
116.041   Sanitary requirements generally
   
116.042   Floors
   
116.043   Walls and ceilings
   
116.044   Doors and windows
   
116.045   Lighting
   
116.046   Ventilation
   
116.047   Toilet facilities
   
116.048   Water supply
   
116.049   Lavatory facilities
   
116.050   Construction of utensils and equipment
   
116.051   Cleaning and bactericidal treatment of utensils and equipment
   
116.052   Storage and handling of utensils and equipment
   
116.053   Disposal of wastes
   
116.054   Refrigeration
   
116.055   Wholesomeness of food and drink
   
116.056   Storage, display and serving of food and drink
   
116.057   Cleanliness of employees
   
116.058   Linens, lockers, premises the like
Food Trucks
   
116.070   Purpose and intent
   
116.071   Definitions
   
116.072   Permit required, duration and non-transferable
   
116.073   Application
   
116.074   Locations for food trucks
   
116.075   Rules and regulations
   
116.076   Inspection
   
116.077   Revocation
   
116.078   Right to appeal
   
116.079   Impoundment
   
116.080   Fees
   
116.081   Offense and penalty
Charter reference:
   Power of city to regulate food and food handlers, see §
4
Statutory reference:
   Storage of food, see M.C.L.A. §§ 289.1101 et seq.
MEAT, POULTRY AND SEAFOOD
§ 116.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FOOD HANDLER. Any person who slaughters animals or handles the carcasses of
such animals; or who handles meat, meat food products, poultry or seafood or
any utensils during the manufacturing or processing, sale or delivery of same
in any market or processing plant.
   MEAT FOOD PRODUCTS. Every article of food for human consumption which is
composed, derived or prepared in whole or in part, from any portion of the
carcass of any cattle, sheep, swine, goat, fowl or any other edible meat,
except such articles as organo-therapeutic substances, meat juice, meat extract
and the like, which are for medicinal purposes and are advertised only to the
medical profession.
   MEAT INSPECTOR. The Health Officer or any inspector of meat or seafood of
the county’s Health Department.
   MEAT MARKET. Every place where meat, or meat food products, is sold or
offered for sale, at wholesale or retail, for human consumption, except such
establishments where all meats, or meat food products are offered for sale in
prepacked, hermetically sealed, glass or metal containers.
   VEHICLE-VENDOR. Any person who travels about the city selling or offering to
sell meat, meat food products or seafood at retail from any vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 12-16) (Ord. 609, passed 3-27-1978)
§ 116.002 FOOD PRODUCTS MANUFACTURING ESTABLISHMENTS.
   All meats and meat food products shall be cut, cooked and prepared in a room
which shall be used for that purpose only and shall be of adequate size for
purpose intended. Adequate refrigeration shall be provided for all perishable
foods. All sausage shall be made in accordance with the requirements of the
state’s Department of Agriculture.
(Prior Code, § 12-17) (Ord. 609, passed 3-27-1978) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 116.003 VEHICLES.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall transport through any thoroughfare in the city
any poultry, seafood, meat or meat food products in a vehicle unless it is so
covered and closed as to be protected from dust, dirt, insects or any other
substance that will render it unclean, unwholesome or detrimental to health.
      (2)   Every container in every vehicle shall be maintained in a sanitary
condition at all times.
      (3)   All vehicles distributing fresh meats or poultry must be
refrigerated at temperatures of 50°F or lower and no meat, meat food products,
poultry, fish or seafood shall be kept or left in any vehicle over night.
   (B)   Possession of seafood, poultry, meat or meat food products by any
person in the business of selling, manufacturing or processing such products
shall be deemed prima facie evidence that such products are being offered for
sale.
(Prior Code, § 12-18) (Ord. 609, passed 3-27-1978) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 116.004 ALTERATION OF PREMISES, EQUIPMENT.
   It shall be unlawful for any licensee hereunder to alter, or make any change
in, the floor plans or equipment of the licensed premises, or in the buildings
or structures thereof, without first submitting plans and specifications of the
intended changes or alterations to the Health Department or Department of
Engineering and Building.
(Prior Code, § 12-19) (Ord. 609, passed 3-27-1978) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 116.005 UNWHOLESOME AND DISEASED FOOD.
   (A)   No person, shall sell or deliver or have in his or her possession for
sale in the city any seafood, poultry, meat or meat food products which
contains any unhealthful ingredient, constituent or substance, or which has
been transported, handled or stored in an unclean manner, or produced from any
animal which was diseased.
   (B)   Samples of food found in any licensed premises may be taken by the
meat inspector as often as he or she may deem necessary for the purpose of
detection of unwholesomeness or adulteration. The meat inspector may condemn
and forbid the sale of, or cause to be removed or destroyed, any food which is
unwholesome or adulterated.
(Prior Code, § 12-20) (Ord. 609, passed 3-27-1978) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 116.006 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Health Officer may formulate and promulgate such reasonable rules and
regulations, not inconsistent with the provisions of this subchapter, as he or
she may deem necessary to govern the inspection and operation of meat, poultry
and seafood markets, and meat food products manufacturing or processing
establishments.
(Prior Code, § 12-21) (Ord. 609, passed 3-27-1978)
FOOD DEALERS AND PROCESSORS
§ 116.020 PERMIT FOR STREET SALES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, display or offer for sale any
food, produce, fruit or vegetables from any box, table, shelf, stand or
structure on any street, sidewalk, alley or other public place without a permit
issued by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 12-50) (Ord. 610, passed 3-27-1978) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 116.021 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAWS, RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   No person shall violate any law of the state, nor any rule or regulation
adopted by any duly authorized agency of the state, pertaining to the
production, processing, storage, handling or sale of any food.
(Prior Code, § 12-51) (Ord. 610, passed 3-27-1978) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 116.022 SANITATION GENERALLY.
   No person producing, transporting, processing, storing, selling, preparing
or serving food shall fail to effectively protect same against contamination or
spoilage. Waste shall not be accessible to flies and shall not pollute the
surface soil or contaminate any water supply. Soap, running water and
individual towels shall be provided for the proper cleaning of the hands. No
person shall expectorate upon any floor or wall of any building in which any
food is produced, processed, stored, prepared, sold or served. No person shall
buy, sell or use any polish, article or substance containing any cyanide
preparation or other poison for the cleansing of articles or utensils used for
the service or preparation of food.
(Prior Code, § 12-52) (Ord. 610, passed 3-27-1978) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 116.023 PROTECTION OF FOOD FROM DUST, FLIES AND THE LIKE.
   It shall be unlawful to display, sell or offer for ale any prepared food
unless the container or receptacle in which it is kept, stored or displayed is
covered adequately to protect it from dust, dirt, flies, insects, vermin or
other contaminating or unwholesome influences.
(Prior Code, § 12-53) (Ord. 610, passed 3-27-1978) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 116.024 VEHICLES.
   (A)   All bread, cakes, pies or other baked goods sold from any vehicle or
transported through the city for sale at wholesale or retail, shall be boxed,
wrapped, packaged or adequately covered to protect it from dust, dirt, flies,
insects, vermin or other contaminating or unwholesome influences.
   (B)   (1)   All vehicles transporting or delivering such baked goods shall
be closed and so constructed that the driver’s compartment is enclosed and
separate from the storage compartment.
      (2)   All such vehicles shall be subject to the regulations of, and
inspection by, the Health Officer.
(Prior Code, § 12-54) (Ord. 610, passed 3-27-1978) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 116.025 CONTAMINATED OR SPOILED FOOD.
   (A)   No person shall process, sell, prepare or serve any contaminated or
spoiled food.
   (B)   The Health Officer is hereby empowered to seize and destroy any food
which, in his or her opinion, is contaminated or spoiled.
(Prior Code, § 12-55) (Ord. 610, passed 3-27-1978) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 116.026 REPORTS OF ILLNESS ARISING FROM FOOD.
   No physician, visiting nurse or superintendent or other person in charge of
any school, hospital, institution, dispensary, laboratory or camp, who shall
have knowledge of the occurrence of a number or a group of cases of illness
believed to have been due to the consumption of contaminated or spoiled food,
shall fail to report the same at once by telephone to the Health Officer.
(Prior Code, § 12-56) (Ord. 610, passed 3-27-1978) Penalty, see §
10.999
RESTAURANTS
§ 116.040 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   EMPLOYEE. Any person who handles food or drink during preparation or serving
or who comes in contact with any eating or cooking utensils, or who is employed
in a room in which food or drink is prepared or served.
   RESTAURANT. A food establishment as defined by Public Act 92 of 2000, being
M.C.L.A. § 289.4101, as amended, including a food service establishment as
further defined by the said act. This definition does not include a charitable,
religious, fraternal or other non-profit organization operating a home-prepared
baked goods sale or serving only home-prepared food in connection with its
meetings or as part of a fund-raising event.
   UTENSILS. Any kitchenware, tableware, glassware, cutlery, utensils,
containers or other equipment with which food or drink comes in contact during
storage, preparation or serving.
(Prior Code, § 12-63) (Ord. 611, passed 3-27-1978; Ord. 1151, passed 6-10-2002)
§ 116.041 SANITARY REQUIREMENTS GENERALLY.
   All restaurants shall comply with the provisions of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 12-83) (Ord. 611, passed 3-27-1978) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 116.042 FLOORS.
   The floors of all rooms in which food or drink is stored, prepared or
served, or in which utensils are washed, shall be of such construction as to be
easily cleaned, shall be smooth, and shall be kept clean and in good repair.
(Prior Code, § 12-84) (Ord. 611, passed 3-27-1978) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 116.043 WALLS AND CEILINGS.
   Walls and ceilings of all rooms shall be kept clean and in good repair. All
walls and ceilings of any room on which food or drink is stored or prepared
shall be finished in light color. The walls of all rooms in which food or drink
is prepared or utensils are washed shall have a smooth, washable surface up to
the level reached by splash or spray.
(Prior Code, § 12-85) (Ord. 611, passed 3-27-1978) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 116.044 DOORS AND WINDOWS.
   When flies are prevalent, all openings into the outer air shall be
effectively screened and doors shall be self-closing, unless other effective
means are provided to prevent the entrance of flies.
(Prior Code, § 12-86) (Ord. 611, passed 3-27-1978) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 116.045 LIGHTING.
   All rooms in which food or drink is stored or prepared, or in which utensils
are washed, shall be well lighted.
(Prior Code, § 12-87) (Ord. 611, passed 3-27-1978) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 116.046 VENTILATION.
   All rooms in which food or drink is stored, prepared or served, or in which
utensils are washed, shall be well ventilated.
(Prior Code, § 12-88) (Ord. 611, passed 3-27-1978) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 116.047 TOILET FACILITIES.
   (A)   Each restaurant shall be provided with adequate and conveniently
located toilet facilities for its employees, conforming with the laws and
regulations of the state.
   (B)   In restaurants hereafter constructed, toilet rooms shall not open
directly into any room in which food, drink or utensils are handled or stored.
The doors of all toilet rooms shall be self-closing. Toilet rooms shall be kept
in a clean condition, in good repair and well lighted and ventilated.
Handwashing signs shall be posted in each toilet room used by employees.
   (C)   In case privies or earth closets are permitted and used, they shall be
separate from the restaurant building, and shall be of a sanitary type
constructed and operated in conformity with the standards of the state’s Board
of Health.
(Prior Code, § 12-89) (Ord. 611, passed 3-27-1978) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 116.048 WATER SUPPLY.
   Running water under pressure shall be easily accessible to all rooms in
which food is prepared or utensils are washed, and the water supply shall be
adequate, and of a safe, sanitary quality.
(Prior Code, § 12-90) (Ord. 611, passed 3-27-1978) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 116.049 LAVATORY FACILITIES.
   Adequate and convenient hand-washing facilities shall be provided, including
hot and cold running water, soap and sanitary towels. The use of a common towel
is prohibited. No employees shall resume work after using the toilet room
without first washing his or her hands.
(Prior Code, § 12-91) (Ord. 611, passed 3-27-1978) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 116.050 CONSTRUCTION OF UTENSILS AND EQUIPMENT.
   All multi-use utensils and all show and display cases or windows, counters,
shelves, tables, refrigerating equipment, sinks and other equipment or utensils
used in connection with the operation of a restaurant shall be so constructed
as to be easily cleaned and shall be kept in good repair. Utensils containing
or plated with cadmium or lead shall not be used; provided that, solder
containing lead may be used for jointing.
(Prior Code, § 12-92) (Ord. 611, passed 3-27-1978) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 116.051 CLEANING AND BACTERICIDAL TREATMENT OF UTENSILS AND EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   All equipment, including display cases or windows, counters, shelves,
tables, refrigerators, stoves, hoods and sinks shall be kept clean and free
from dust, dirt, insects and other contaminating material. All cloths used by
waiters, chefs and other employees shall be clean. Single-service containers
shall be used only once.
   (B)   All multi-use eating and drinking utensils shall be thoroughly cleaned
and effectively subjected to an approved bactericidal process after each usage.
All multi-use utensils used in the preparation or serving of food and drink
shall be thoroughly cleaned and effectively subjected to an approved
bactericidal process immediately following the day’s operation. Drying cloths,
if used, shall be clean and shall be used for no other purpose.
   (C)   No article, polish or other substance containing cyanide preparation
or other poisonous substance shall be used for the cleaning or polishing of
utensils.
(Prior Code, § 12-93) (Ord. 611, passed 3-27-1978) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 116.052 STORAGE AND HANDLING OF UTENSILS AND EQUIPMENT.
   After bactericidal treatment utensils shall be stored in a clean, dry place
protected from flies, dust and other contamination, and shall be handled in
such a manner as to prevent contamination as far as practicable. Single-service
utensils shall be purchased only in sanitary containers, shall be stored
therein in a clean, dry place until used and shall be handled in a sanitary
manner.
(Prior Code, § 12-94) (Ord. 611, passed 3-27-1978) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 116.053 DISPOSAL OF WASTES.
   All wastes shall be properly disposed of, and all garbage and trash shall be
kept in suitable receptacles, in such manner as not to constitute a nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 12-95) (Ord. 611, passed 3-27-1978) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 116.054 REFRIGERATION.
   All readily perishable food and drink shall be kept at or below 50°F, except
when being prepared or served. Waste water from refrigeration equipment shall
be properly disposed of.
(Prior Code, § 12-96) (Ord. 611, passed 3-27-1978) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 116.055 WHOLESOMENESS OF FOOD AND DRINK.
   All food and drink shall be clean, wholesome, free from spoilage and so
prepared as to be safe for human consumption. All milk, fluid milk products,
ice cream and frozen desserts served shall be from approved sources. Milk and
fluid milk products shall be served in the individual original containers in
which they were received from the distributors or from a bulk container
equipped with an approved dispensing device provided, that this requirement
shall not apply to cream, which may be served from the original bottle or from
a dispenser approved for such service. All oysters, clams and mussels shall be
from approved sources and, if shucked, shall be kept until used in the
containers in which they were placed at the shucking plant.
(Prior Code, § 12-97) (Ord. 611, passed 3-27-1978) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 116.056 STORAGE, DISPLAY AND SERVING OF FOOD AND DRINK.
   All food and drink shall be so stored, displayed and served as to be
protected from dust, flies, vermin, depredation and pollution by rodents,
unnecessary handling, droplet infection, overhead leakage and other
contamination. No animals or fowl shall be kept or allowed in any room in which
food or drink is prepared or stored. All means necessary for the elimination of
flies, roaches and rodents shall be used.
(Prior Code, § 12-98) (Ord. 611, passed 3-27-1978) Penalty, see §
10.999
Statutory reference:
   Controlled atmosphere storage of food, see M.C.L.A. §§ 286.371 et seq.
§ 116.057 CLEANLINESS OF EMPLOYEES.
   Restaurant employees shall wear clean outer garments and shall keep their
hands clean at all times while engaged in handling food, drink, utensils or
equipment. Employees shall not expectorate or use tobacco in any form in rooms
in which food is prepared.
(Prior Code, § 12-99) (Ord. 611, passed 3-27-1978) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 116.058 LINENS, LOCKERS, PREMISES AND THE LIKE.
   The premises of all restaurants shall be kept clean and free of litter or
rubbish. None of the operations connected with a restaurant shall be conducted
in any room used as living or sleeping quarters. There shall be no direct means
of egress or ingress from the food establishment to living quarters located
within the same building. Adequate lockers or dressing rooms shall be provided
for employees’ clothing and shall be kept clean. Soiled linens, coats and
aprons shall be kept in containers provided for this purpose.
(Prior Code, § 12-100) (Ord. 611, passed 3-27-1978) Penalty, see §
10.999
FOOD TRUCKS
§ 116.070 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   It is the purpose and intent of this subchapter to permit the
operation of food trucks that add to the vibrancy and desirability of the city
and events, while providing a framework under which such businesses operate;
and protect the health, safety and welfare of the city, residents and visitors.
   (B)   The provisions of this subchapter apply to food trucks engaged in the
business of cooking, preparing and distributing food or beverage, with or
without charge, upon or in public and private restricted spaces. This
subchapter does not apply to vehicles which dispense food and that move from
place to place and are stationary in the same location for no more than 15
minutes at a time, such as ice cream trucks, or food vending pushcarts and
stands located on sidewalks.
(Ord. 1544, passed 9-16-2024)
§ 116.071 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following words and phrases shall
have the meanings set forth in this section.
   APPROVED LOCATION. A location that has been approved for a food truck by the
City of Wyandotte with proper applications, payments and documentations
submitted, reviewed and approved.
   CITY. The City of Wyandotte.
   FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT. As defined in M.C.L.A. § 289.1107(t) of the
Michigan Food Law – Act 92 of 2000.
   FOOD WAREHOUSE. A food establishment that stores or distributes food for
wholesale.
   FOOD TRUCK. A mobile food establishment or a special transitory food unit,
or a mobile food vehicle. It includes motorized vehicles (such as a van) or
trailer, equipped to cook, prepare, serve, and/or sell food. This includes
vehicles with on-board kitchens which prepare food from scratch, or heat up
food that was prepared in a brick and mortar commercial or residential
kitchens. FOOD TRUCKS may also sell hot and cold beverages.
   HELPER. A person who has a Michigan food handler’s license, working as an
assistant to a licensed vendor in the sale of food, beverages or goods from an
approved food truck.
   MOBILE FOOD ESTABLISHMENT (MFE). A food service establishment operating from
a vehicle or a trailer, which returns to a food establishment commissary for
servicing and maintenance at least once every 24 hours.
   MOBILE FOOD ESTABLISHMENT COMMISSARY. An operation with the ability to
service a mobile food establishment.
   MOBILE FOOD VEHICLE. A food establishment operating from a vehicle or
watercraft that returns to a licensed commissary for servicing and maintenance
at least once every 24 hours.
   NON-WYANDOTTE BRICK AND MORTAR BUSINESS/RESTAURANT. A traditional type of
business that operates from a physical location, such as a store, office, or
facility where customers can visit outside of Wyandotte, Michigan to avail
products or services.
   PERSON. An individual, corporation, association, sole proprietorship,
partnership, or other legal entity.
   PRIVATE PROPERTY. Land, possessions, or assets that are owned by
individuals, businesses, or entities rather than being owned or controlled by
the government or the public collectively.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. Paved public streets and alleys dedicated for the
passage of vehicles and pedestrians, including abutting traffic lanes, parking
lanes, sidewalks and berms.
   SIDEWALK. A paved portion of any public right-of-way within the City of
Wyandotte primarily used for pedestrian traffic.
   SPECIAL TRANSITORY FOOD UNIT (STFU). A temporary food establishment licensed
to operate in the State of Michigan without 14 day limits, or a mobile food
establishment that is not required to return to a commissary.
   STREET. The paved portion of any public right-of-way in the City of
Wyandotte reserved for vehicular traffic.
   TRAFFIC LANE. A portion of roadway dedicated to vehicles moving where
standing, or parking of motor vehicles is prohibited.
   VEHICLE. A self-propelled motor vehicle used by a vendor which is designed
for transit on streets and highways.
   VENDOR. Any person who sells food or goods from a food truck in a public
right-of-way, or on private property, in the City of Wyandotte, including the
operation of a mobile food establishment, special transitory food unit or motor
food vehicle. This definition includes permit holder.
   WYANDOTTE BRICK-AND-MORTAR BUSINESS/RESTAURANT. A traditional type of
business that operates from a physical location, such as a store, office, or
facility where customers can visit in Wyandotte, Michigan to avail products or
services.
(Ord. 1544, passed 9-16-2024)
§ 116.072 PERMIT REQUIRED, DURATION AND NON-TRANSFERABLE.
   (A)   General. No vendor shall engage as a food truck without a permit from
the City of Wyandotte authorizing such vending. The Special Events Coordinator
shall prescribe the form of such permits and application for such permits which
forms must be in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter. All permits
shall be prominently displayed on the food truck. No vending through a food
truck shall be permitted unless it meets the definitions of this subchapter. A
permit issued under this subchapter shall not be transferable from person to
person. A permit is valid for one food truck and shall not be transferred
between food trucks.
   (B)   Procedure. The Special Events Coordinator shall distribute the
application to the Wyandotte Fire Department and Engineering Department for
review and scheduling of inspections. Requests to use city-owned property or
special events must first obtain City Council approval. All fees shall be
payable to the City of Wyandotte with the application. The Special Events
Coordinator will issue the permit to the vendor when all requirements of this
subchapter are satisfied. If the permit is denied, the Special Events
Coordinator will notify the vendor.
   (C)   Permit duration. A permit allows the vendor to operate in the city for
the duration noted on the permit. The permit application notes timeline options
as follows:
      (1)   One-day permit;
      (2)   One day per month for one year;
      (3)   Yearly; or
      (4)   Event dates.
   (D)   Permit categories.
      (1)   Wyandotte business/restaurant;
      (2)   Non-Wyandotte business/restaurant; and
      (3)   Private property and public property use.
   (E)   Permit exemptions. 
      (1)   Any school or government-sponsored food truck operating on school
or government property; and
      (2)   Any other event approved by the City Council.
   (F)   The City Engineer in consultation with the Department of Public Works,
Wyandotte Police Department and Wyandotte Fire Department is authorized to
designate such other streets, sidewalks, parts of streets or sidewalks,
districts, or areas where it shall be unlawful for any vendor to operate or
conduct the food truck, for the reason that, due to congested traffic
conditions or the character of the neighborhood, the conduct of such business
constitutes a public nuisance, or constitutes a hazard to public health or
safety.
   (G)   The number of permits issued for food trucks in the city may be
limited by public convenience and necessity. In determining public convenience
and necessity, the City Engineer shall consider the number of permits issued,
the demands of the public for food trucks, the vehicular and pedestrian traffic
conditions, the impact on existing businesses in the area, whether such service
would result in a greater hazard to the public, and such other related facts as
may be deemed advisable or necessary. The disapproval of a location for food
truck by the City Engineer shall be final unless there is new information
supporting approval of the vending location. The number of food trucks
contracted to operate during city-approved events or festivals shall be
determined by the Special Events Coordinator applying the above criteria.
(Ord. 1544, passed 9-16-2024)
§ 116.073 APPLICATION.
   The permit application shall include the following:
   (A)   Name, signature, phone number, email contact and business address of
the applicant;
   (B)   A description of the food products and beverages offered for sale
including the intended menu and prices;
   (C)   Information on the food truck vehicle to include plate number, size,
signage and any stands that will be with the set up;
   (D)   Information setting forth the proposed hours of operation, area of
operations, plans for power access, water supply, wastewater disposal, trash
and debris clean up, noise and exhaust;
   (E)   Copies of all necessary licenses and health permits issued by the
Wayne County Health Department;
   (F)   Copies of state permit and license requirements including business
license (business tax certificate), mobile food establishment permit and food
seller’s permit;
   (G)   Copy of permit holder’s valid driver’s license and insurance including
automobile liability coverages as follows:
      (1)   Proof of general comprehensive liability policy with limits of no
less than $1 million combined single limit coverage issued by an insurer
licensed to do business in the State of Michigan and which names the City of
Wyandotte as an additional insured party;
      (2)   Proof of public liability and property damage motor vehicle policy
with limits of no less than $1 million issued by an insurer licensed to do
business in the State of Michigan and which names the City of Wyandotte as an
additional insured party;
   (H)   Signed hold-harmless agreement by the permit holder and the owners of
the private property where the food truck is to be located, and if applicable,
the business owner requesting the food truck operation, indemnifying and
holding harmless the city, its officers and employees for any claims, damages,
or injuries to persons or property which arise out of any activity by the
permit holder, its employees, or agents carried on under terms of the permit;
   (I)   The name and addresses of all helpers together with a copy of their
current Michigan food handler’s license;
   (J)   A statement of the status of monies owed to the city by the vendor,
property owner and business owner, including but not limited to, water bills,
real property taxes, personal property taxes and miscellaneous fees. An
application with any of the above fees owed to the city shall not be eligible
for a permit; and
   (K)   A person or organization desiring to operate a special event/festival
featuring food trucks shall make written application for a permit to the
Special Events Coordinator and include all the information required under this
section for operation of a food truck in the special event application.
(Ord. 1544, passed 9-16-2024)
§ 116.074 LOCATIONS FOR FOOD TRUCKS.
   (A)   A vendor may operate a food truck in the public right-of-way within
the extended property lines of any established place of business if the vendor
is selling the same or similar food of the established business as an accessory
use provided the business owner (and property owner if different) also sign the
application. The requirements and restrictions of Wayne County must be complied
with when applicable. A hold-harmless agreement must be signed by the vendor,
business owner and property owner for that location;
   (B)   A vendor may operate a food truck on, or in the public right-of-way
abutting property zoned or used for residential purposes provided the owners of
the residential property also sign the application. A hold-harmless agreement
must be signed by the vendor and owners of the residential property. The
duration for this permit shall be one day per year;
   (C)   A private event on private property;
   (D)   A private event on city property as approved by City Council;
   (E)   An event for employees on business-owned property;
   (F)   Private property serving the public;
   (G)   A public event held on city property as approved by City Council; and
   (H)   City-approved (or -sanctioned) special event locations.
   (I)   Private property owner(s) must sign the application with the vendor,
and if applicable, the business occupant. All these parties must sign the hold-
harmless agreement with the vendor for the application to be approved.
(Ord. 1544, passed 9-16-2024)
§ 116.075 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   A food truck may only operate during the following hours:
      (1)   9:00 a.m. – 9:00 p.m. in residential areas;
      (2)   7:00 a.m. – 2:00 a.m. in nonresidential areas; and
      (3)   6:00 a.m. – 11:00 p.m. on private property within an area zoned for
commercial use.
   (B)   Operation of a food truck during a city-approved event or festival
shall be allowed by the Special Events Coordinator and shall not be subject to
the requirements of §
116.074.
   (C)   All vendors shall comply with all requirements of state law and all
applicable administrative rules.
   (D)   While conducting business on any street, sidewalks, or public right-
of-way in the city, vendors must comply with all provisions of the city
ordinances that govern sidewalks, streets and public places, traffic, parking
and motor vehicles.
   (E)   A vendor, through the preparation and serving of food to be provided,
shall not create noxious smoke or offensive odors which annoys, disturbs,
injures or endangers the health, peace, safety, or comfort of others, including
but not limited to the provisions of
Ch. 94 of this code of ordinances, Health and Safety; Nuisances.
   (F)   All trash or debris accumulating within 20 feet of any food truck
shall be collected by the vendor and deposited in a trash container on a
regular basis. All food truck vendors must provide trash receptacles adjacent
to or as a part of their truck. The property owner, or business, which has
received the permit for the vending operation, shall provide the vendor and
patrons with appropriate containers for the disposal of such wastes within ten
feet of the location of the operation. Vendors may also rent trash receptacles
from the city at an additional cost. It shall be unlawful for any food truck
vendor, or anyone aiding or assisting in the operation of a food truck, to
throw or deposit any goods, merchandise, packaging, containers, fat, grease,
paper, or other liquid waste upon any alley, street or sidewalk, or in any
sewer, in the city.
   (G)   All waste originating from the food truck, shall be collected and
disposed of off-site by the food truck vendor each day. Spills of food or food
by-products shall be promptly cleaned up. No dumping of greywater on the street
or in parks and storm drains is allowed. Food truck vendors shall take
appropriate precautions to prevent spills or other damages to the public
property as a result of their operation. Food trucks are responsible for all
greywater, grease, and other food waste, which shall not be dumped or disposed
of on or into public property, including but not limited to, sewers and storm
drain and public trash receptacles.
   (H)   No food truck vendor shall make or cause any unreasonable or excessive
noise. No loud music or amplified announcements or noise are permitted. In
addition, all generators must operate at a level of 70 decibels or lower when
measured from a distance of 15 feet. Initial inspection by the police or fire
department shall include generator compliance.
   (I)   Any electrical power required for a food truck operation which is
located on a public right-of-way shall be self-contained, shall not create a
hazard and shall not be drawn from electrical outlets in the public right-of-
way unless permitted by the Electrical Department of Municipal Services.
   (J)   Food trucks operated on private property may use electrical or other
power from the property being occupied or a directly adjacent property if the
property owner(s) provide(s) written consent to do so and in compliance with
all city codes. No power cable or extension cord shall be extended on or across
any city street, sidewalk, or public right-of-way unless approved by the City
Engineer and must be done in a safe manner at all times to prevent tripping.
   (K)   No food truck is allowed within 20 feet of a fire hydrant.
   (L)   No food truck vendor shall conduct business in such a way as would
increase traffic congestion or delays, constitute a hazard to life or property,
interfere with an abutting property owner, or obstruct access to emergency
vehicles.
   (M)   Food truck and vendors shall be subject to, and comply with, all
applicable federal, state and county regulations, including City of Wyandotte
ordinances, building, electrical, mechanical, and fire safety code
requirements, and any permit or inspection requirements deemed necessary by the
Building Official.
   (N)   A license to operate a special transitory food unit shall not be
issued until a current State of Michigan food service license for the unit has
been issued.
   (O)   The menu for the food truck must be approved by the city.
   (P)   Food trucks shall be located within 200 feet of approved and readily
accessible bathroom facilities, or shall be outfitted with contained
handwashing equipment, to ensure proper sanitary facilities are available to
vendors and workers.
   (Q)   When conducting business on any public right-of-way, street, sidewalk,
or alley, in the City of Wyandotte, vendors shall operate, at all times, in
such a manner so as to not interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
   (R)   The vending operation or food truck shall not be located in any street
travel lane and shall only be allowed in designated parking lanes. The vending
operation or food truck shall not be located in a public alley where the
location of the operation reduces the travel width of the alley to nine feet or
less.
   (S)   It shall be unlawful for any vendor to locate a vending operation or
food truck in such a manner as to interfere with any building entrance or exit.
   (T)   Customers shall be served on the curb side, in the easement or berm
area, of the public right-of-way, and such service area shall not impede upon a
five-foot-wide path on a paved surface or sidewalk provided for pedestrian
travel in the easement.
   (U)   If the vending operation is to be conducted on private property; the
food truck shall be located on a paved surface, and the customers shall be
serviced from the private property and such service area shall not impede on
any ingress/egress aisleway or extend into a public right-of-way.
   (V)   When located in a public right-of-way, awnings may extend into the
easement over the serving area and shall have a minimum clearance of seven feet
above the ground to the lowest point of the awning or support structure.
   (W)   Food trucks may not use flashing, blinking or strobe lights; all
exterior lights over 60 watts shall contain opaque, hood shields to direct the
illumination downward.
   (X)   The following signs or advertising methods are prohibited with food
trucks:
      (1)   No sign or banner shall be placed upon or across any public right-
of-way, except by permission of the City Council;
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to display upon any sign or
other advertising structure any obscene, indecent or immoral matter;
      (3)   Signs which incorporate in any manner flashing lights;
      (4)   String lights used in connection with business premises for
commercial purposes, other than seasonal decorations;
      (5)   Any sign unlawfully installed, erected or maintained;
      (6)   Signs on trees or utility poles, whether public or private;
      (7)   Signs on benches;
      (8)   Inflatable balloons including inflatable tube man;
      (9)   Roof top signs; and
      (10)   Feather banners (subject to compliance with sign ordinance).
   (Y)   No food truck may be located adjacent to a brick-and-mortar restaurant
without written permission from the owner(s) of said restaurant and building
owner, if different.
(Ord. 1544, passed 9-16-2024)
§ 116.076 INSPECTION.
   (A)   Inspection and written approval from the Wyandotte Fire Department and
Building Official is required.
   (B)   All inspections regarding food trucks shall conform to the standards
listed in the current National Fire Protection Association’s NFPA Fire Code and
must be in compliance with all city codes. An inspection is required for each
separate location and each separate event.
   (C)   All food trucks exhaust shall be directed away from the service side
of the vehicle. Inspection by the Wyandotte Fire Department shall include
exhaust compliance.
(Ord. 1544, passed 9-16-2024)
§ 116.077 REVOCATION.
   (A)   The city may revoke the permit of a food truck for any of the
following reasons:
      (1)   Fraud, misrepresentation or a false statement on application or in
the course of operating the food truck;
      (2)   Creation of a public nuisance constituting a danger to public
health, safety, comfort or welfare; and/or
      (3)   Violation of any provision of this subchapter.
   (B)   Once a permit has been issued it may be revoked, suspended or not
renewed by the city for failure to comply with the provisions of this
subchapter and any rules or regulations promulgated by the city. Immediately
upon such revocation by the Special Events Coordinator the permit shall become
null and void and the Special Events Coordinator shall provide written notice
to the permit holder by first class mail to the address provided on the
application. No person whose food truck permit has been revoked shall be
eligible to receive another permit within the city for one year from the date
of the permit revocation.
(Ord. 1544, passed 9-16-2024)
§ 116.078 RIGHT TO APPEAL.
   If a permit is denied, revoked or suspended, the applicant or holder of a
permit may appeal to and have a hearing before the City Administrator, or his
or her designee. The appeal must be in writing, signed and submitted to the
City Clerk’s office within ten days of the denial, revocation or suspension.
The City Administrator, or his or her designee, shall make a written
determination. If the city denial, revocation or suspension is upheld by the
City Administrator, the applicant or permit holder may appeal the City
Administrator’s decision to the City Council. The appeal must be in writing,
signed and submitted to the City Clerk’s office within ten days of the City
Administrator’s decision
(Ord. 1544, passed 9-16-2024)
§ 116.079 IMPOUNDMENT.
   Any vehicle or equipment associated with food vending that is not in
compliance with this subchapter and/or left on public property may be impounded
at the owner’s expense.
(Ord. 1544, passed 9-16-2024)
§ 116.080 FEES.
   (A)   A non-refundable application fee and inspection fees shall be charged
for the processing and issuance of a permit under this subchapter. The fees
will be established by City Council resolution and will be reviewed annually.
   (B)   The inspection fees must be paid with the application.
(Ord. 1544, passed 9-16-2024)
§ 116.081 OFFENSE AND PENALTY.
   Any permit holder operating a food truck in violation of any provision of
this subchapter or any rules and regulations promulgated by the city shall be
responsible for a municipal civil infraction pursuant to the city’s codified
ordinances and punishable by a civil fine of not more than $500 per day or
occasion of offense, and shall entitle the city to have the prohibited use
enjoined. Each act of violation and every day upon which a violation shall
occur shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 1544, passed 9-16-2024)
CHAPTER 117: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
Liquor Licenses
   
117.001   Guidelines for consideration of applications for permits, temporary
and special licenses
   
117.002   State license required
   
117.003   City council approval required
   
117.004   Application to city
   
117.005   Restrictions on licenses and operations
   
117.006   Term of approval
   
117.007   Annual license review
   
117.008   Revocation of license
   
117.009   Procedure for recommendation of non-renewal or revocation
   
117.010   Criteria for non-renewal or revocation
   
117.011   License approval procedure
   
117.012   Approval of city departments
   
117.013   Payment of obligations to city
   
117.014   Discretion of Council
   
117.015   Definitions
   
117.016   Prohibition of nudity on licensed premises
 
   
117.999   Penalty
LIQUOR LICENSES
§ 117.001 GUIDELINES FOR CONSIDERATION OF APPLICATIONS FOR PERMITS, TEMPORARY
AND SPECIAL LICENSES.
   The following standards are hereby adopted to serve as guidelines in those
instances where the city’s recommendation or approval is required relative to
the issuance, transfer, renewal, non-renewal or revocation of entertainment
permits, Sunday sales permits, dance permits, temporary licenses, all license
permits and SDM licenses in connection with Class C licensed establishments,
and in all instances when city review is authorized or required by law, which
standards or guidelines will be considered by the City Council, when
applicable, in cases which are brought before it:
   (A)   Violations of health or safety ordinances;
   (B)   Maintenance of a nuisance or such conditions which may contribute to
or be conducive to the existence of a nuisance;
   (C)   Examination of the area affected by an establishment to determine the
existence of or potential for problems including, but not limited to:
         (1)   Loitering;
         (2)   Littering;
         (3)   Boisterous or loud conduct disruptive of the peace of the area;
         (4)   Parking congestion or problems relating to parking conditions
which the Police Department believes would be detrimental to public safety and
welfare;
         (5)   Problems relating to traffic flow which the Police Department
believes would be detrimental to public safety and welfare; and
         (6)   Disturbances in the area.
   (D)   The number of Police Department responses to calls, and other runs
made by the Department, to or near the establishment under consideration, the
reasons for the police response; and consideration of the impact of the number
of police calls has on the city resources available to protect the city’s
health, safety and welfare;
   (E)   The history of an applicant’s timely compliance with applicable state
laws, city ordinances and permits, rules and regulations of the state’s Liquor
Control Commission and the county’s Health Department;
   (F)   The adequacy and layout of the premises as they relate to the license
or permit being sought; and
   (G)   The ability and willingness of the licensee to adequately supervise
and manage the activities it conducts and to cooperate with the city to address
problems identified with the licensee’s operation.
(Prior Code, § 21-276) (Ord. 1178, passed 10-6-2003)
§ 117.002 STATE LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage in the business of selling alcoholic liquor, beer,
wine or spirits for consumption in the city or elsewhere without first
obtaining a liquor license therefor, as required by state law.
(Prior Code, § 21-277) (Ord. 1178, passed 10-6-2003) Penalty, see §
117.999
§ 117.003 CITY COUNCIL APPROVAL REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage of the business of selling alcoholic liquor, beer,
wine or spirits for consumption on the premises within the city without first
having obtained the approval of City Council.
(Prior Code, § 21-278) (Ord. 1178, passed 10-6-2003) Penalty, see §
117.999
§ 117.004 APPLICATION TO CITY.
   (A)   In addition to such application(s) as may be required by the state’s
Liquor Control Commission for licensing by the state, application shall be
submitted to the City Clerk to sell alcoholic liquor, beer, wine or spirits as
set forth below.
   (B)   All applications shall be filed in writing with the City Clerk and
forwarded to the Fire Department, Police Department, Engineering Department,
the City Treasurer and Department of Municipal Service. The application shall
be signed by the applicant, if an individual or by a duly authorized agent
thereof if a partnership or corporation, shall be verified by oath or affidavit
and shall contain the following statements and information:
      (1)   The name, age and address of the applicant in the case of an
individual; or, in the case of an co-partnership, the persons entitled to share
in the profits thereof; in the case of a corporation, the objects for which
organized, the names and addresses of the officers and directors; and, if a
majority interest in the stock of such corporation is owned by one person or
his or her nominee, the name and address of such person;
      (2)   The citizenship of the applicant; his or her place of birth; and,
if a naturalized citizen, the time and place of his or her naturalization;
      (3)   The character of the business of the applicant; and, in the case of
a corporation, the object for which it was formed;
      (4)   The length of time said applicant has been in a business of that
character; or, in the case of a corporation, the date when its charter was
issued;
      (5)   The location and description of the premises or place of business
which is to be operated under such license;
      (6)   A statement as to whether the applicant has operated or made
application for a similar or another license, on any premises other than that
described in this application, and the disposition of such license or
applicant;
      (7)   A statement that the applicant has never been convicted of a felony
and is not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing
contained in the laws of the state;
      (8)   A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of
the state or of the United States, any ordinances of the city or the
administrative rules of any regulatory agency in the conduct of its business;
      (9)   An accurate record and history of any liquor license complaint
violations, committed by the applicant, by a corporation or entity the
applicant has worked for or had a substantial interest in, or by a parent or
subsidiary corporation of the applicant, for the immediately preceding five
years; and
      (10)   Any other material information that may be required by the city to
permit the various departments to adequately review the application.
(Prior Code, § 21-279) (Ord. 1178, passed 10-6-2003)
§ 117.005 RESTRICTIONS ON LICENSES AND OPERATIONS.
   No license shall be issued to operate on any premises:
   (A)   Where there exists a violation of the applicable Building, Electrical,
Mechanical, Plumbing or Fire Prevention Codes, or of applicable zoning
regulations or applicable public health regulations;
   (B)   Where it is determined by a majority of Council that the premises do
not, or will not reasonably soon after commencement of operations, have
adequate off-street parking, lighting, refuse disposal facilities or noise or
nuisance control, or that new construction or remodeling as proposed may not be
completed; and
   (C)   Where Council determines, by a majority vote, that the location
proposed for a licensed liquor establishment will have an adverse effect on the
surrounding community, with consideration given to public safety, health and
welfare of the community and to traffic safety conditions, accessibility to
major streets or highways, distance from public or private schools, impact on
adjacent residential districts, zoning classifications and the availability of
parking to adequately service the proposed use.
(Prior Code, § 21-280) (Ord. 1178, passed 10-6-2003)
§ 117.006 TERM OF APPROVAL.
   Approval of a license shall be for a period of one year subject to review by
Council to determine continued compliance with the regulations of this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 21-281) (Ord. 1178, passed 10-6-2003)
§ 117.007 ANNUAL LICENSE REVIEW.
   (A)   Council may undertake a review of any license at any time for purposes
of making recommendations to the state’s Liquor Control Commission regarding
renewal of said license.
   (B)   Council shall consider:
      (1)   Whether a licensed establishment has been operated, during the
existing licensed year, in a manner consistent with the provisions of this
subchapter and all applicable laws and regulations;
      (2)   Whether continued operation of the licensed establishment is
reasonably likely to adversely affect investment in real property in the
neighborhood of the establishment (this consideration shall include, inter
alia, entertainment, events or promotions);
      (3)   Whether impact upon the neighborhood is otherwise contrary to the
peace, health, safety, order and tranquility of the community; and
      (4)   Whether all of the criteria and standards contained in of this
subchapter have been complied with in a timely manner.
(Prior Code, § 21-282) (Ord. 1178, passed 10-6-2003)
§ 117.008 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   Each establishment within the city for which a liquor license is granted
shall be operated and maintained in accordance with all applicable laws and
regulations, and in a clean and sanitary manner meeting the approval of the
Health Department. Upon any violation of this section or any section of this
subchapter, Council may, after notice and hearing, request the Liquor Control
Commission to revoke such license, as hereinafter provided.
(Prior Code, § 21-283) (Ord. 1178, passed 10-6-2003) Penalty, see §
117.999
§ 117.009 PROCEDURE FOR RECOMMENDATION OF NON-RENEWAL OR REVOCATION.
   (A)   Before filing any objection to renewal or a request for revocation of
a license with the state’s Liquor Control Commission, council shall serve the
licensee, by first class mail, mailed not less than seven days prior to
hearing, with notice of a hearing, which notice shall contain the following:
      (1)   Notice of proposed action;
      (2)   Reasons for the proposed action that the City Council is
considering;
      (3)   Date, time and place of hearing; and
      (4)   A statement that the licensee may present evidence, and any
testimony, arguments and may confront adverse witnesses.
   (B)   Said hearing shall be open to the public, and notice of said public
hearing shall be mailed to each residence or business within 300 feet of the
property of the licensed establishment, and shall be published in the official
newspaper in the city.
   (C)   Following the hearing, Council shall submit to the license holder and
the Commission a written statement of its findings and determination.
(Prior Code, § 21-284) (Ord. 1178, passed 10-6-2003)
§ 117.010 CRITERIA FOR NON-RENEWAL OR REVOCATION.
   Council may recommend non-renewal or revocation of a license to the state’s
Liquor Control Commission upon a determination that, based upon a preponderance
of the evidence presented at the public hearing, any of the following exists:
   (A)   Violation of any of the provisions of this subchapter or any other
law, ordinance, statute, administrative rules or provisions of the state’s
Liquor Control Act, being M.C.L.A. §§ 436.1101 et seq.;
   (B)   Maintenance of a nuisance upon the premises, including, but not
limited to, non- conformance with the standards set forth in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 21-285) (Ord. 1178, passed 10-6-2003)
§ 117.011 LICENSE APPROVAL PROCEDURE.
   No license under this subchapter shall be approved unless approved by a vote
of a majority of the Council elect.
(Prior Code, § 21-286) (Ord. 1178, passed 10-6-2003)
§ 117.012 APPROVAL OF CITY DEPARTMENTS.
   (A)   Before the approval of Council is given for the issuance, renewal or
transfer of a liquor license, or stock in a licensed business, the application
for such issuance, renewal or transfer shall be referred to the following
departments: Fire; Police; Engineering; Treasurer; Legal; and Municipal
Service. The written report of all such departments certifying compliance with
all applicable laws and regulations shall be received by the City Clerk before
such application shall be approved by Council.
   (B)   The city, in its discretion, may approve the issuance, renewal or
transfer of a liquor license or stock in a licensed business that is a
conforming use in accordance with Ch. 159 of this code of ordinances that may
have outstanding code violations that are not safety related as determined by
the City Engineer and Fire Chief; provided, all of the following circumstances
exist:
      (1)   The amount of money required to correct said violations shall be
placed in escrow with the Department of Engineering and Building;
      (2)   The outstanding violations shall be completed within six months of
the payment of the funds into escrow;
      (3)   The applicant will execute a document acknowledging that if the
applicant fails to complete the repairs of the outstanding code violations
within the six months, then the city may object to the renewal of any liquor
license and may commence proceedings to revoke the liquor license as provided
in this section;
      (4)   An escrow may be permitted when the city determines that the
renewal or transfer of the license of stock in an existing licensed business
concerns a situation in which the daily operation of the business will continue
to be carried on by the current management staff or in a situation when the
transfer of stock involves less than 50% of the capital or the voting stock of
the licensed business or the transfer involves less than 50% of the partnership
interest (if the applicant is a partnership) of the licensed business; and
      (5)   The city is satisfied that the licensed business has been operated
in accordance with the guidelines set forth in §
117.001 of this chapter and is satisfied that approval of the requested
issuance, renewal or transfer will not adversely affect said compliance with
the stated guidelines.
(Prior Code, § 21-287) (Ord. 1178, passed 10-6-2003; Ord. 1315, passed 7-27-
2009)
§ 117.013 PAYMENT OF OBLIGATIONS TO CITY.
   All personal property taxes, all real property taxes and all other
obligations which are due and payable to the city and which relate to any
premises for which a liquor license is sought to be used, shall be paid before
Council shall approve the issuance, transfer or renewal of such license.
(Prior Code, § 21-288) (Ord. 1178, passed 10-6-2003)
§ 117.014 DISCRETION OF COUNCIL.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to require Council to approve
any application, nor to limit the discretion granted to Council by the state’s
Liquor Control Code, as amended and all other applicable laws.
(Prior Code, § 21-289) (Ord. 1178, passed 10-6-2003)
§ 117.015 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ALCOHOL. The product of distillation of fermented liquid, whether or not
rectified or diluted with water, but does not mean ethyl or industrial alcohol,
diluted or not, that has been denatured or otherwise rendered unfit for
beverage purposes.
      ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR. Any spirituous, vinous, malt or fermented liquor,
liquids and compounds, whether or not medicated, proprietary, patented and by
whatever name called, containing 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume which are
fit for use for beverage purposes as defined and classified by the Commission
according to alcoholic content as belonging to one of the varieties defined in
the state’s Liquor Control Code of 1998, as amended.
      CLASS C LICENSE. A place licensed to sell at retail beer, wine, mixed
spirit drink and spirits for consumption on the premises.
      COMMISSION. The Liquor Control Commission provided for and created by
state law.
      NUDITY. The exposure by view of persons, of any of the following body
parts, either directly or indirectly, including, but not limited to, exposure,
see-through clothing articles or body stockings:
         (a)   The whole or part of the pubic region;
         (b)   The whole or part of the anus;
         (c)   The whole or part of the buttocks;
         (d)   The whole or part of the genitals; and/or
         (e)   The breast area, including nipple, or more than one-half of the
area of the breast.
      NUISANCE.
         (a)   Violation of the Building, Zoning, Health, Fire Prevention and
Maintenance Codes or ordinances of the city;
         (b)   A pattern of patron conduct in the surrounding neighborhood of
the licensed establishment which is in violation of the law and/or disturbs the
peace, order and tranquility of the neighborhood;
         (c)   Failure to maintain the grounds and exterior of the licensed
establishment, including litter, debris or refuse blowing or being deposited on
adjoining properties;
         (d)   Entertainment without a permit and/or entertainment which
disturbs the peace, order and tranquility of the neighborhood;
         (e)   Any advertising, promotion or activity which, by its nature,
causes, creates or contributes to disorder or to disobedience of rules,
ordinances or laws, or which contributes to the disruption of normal activities
of those in the neighborhood of the licensed establishment;
         (f)   Operation of the licensed premises while in violation of
existing ordinances, codes and regulations; and
         (g)   Failure to adequately address problems resulting from the
operation and management of the licenses premises including, but not limited
to, inadequate parking, unruly patrons and excessive noise.
      PATRON. A person who is a guest, invitee or customer of the licensed
premises.
   (B)   For the purposes of this subchapter, the words and phrases used in
this subchapter have the meaning ascribed to them in the state’s Liquor Control
Code of 1998, as amended, unless the context requires otherwise or unless
modified by the terms of this section. Any definitions contained in the said
code, which are not defined in this section, are adopted herein by reference.
(Prior Code, § 21-290) (Ord. 1309, passed 2-2-2009)
§ 117.016 PROHIBITION OF NUDITY ON LICENSED PREMISES.
   No person, while appearing in a state of nudity, as defined by §
117.015 of this chapter, shall frequent, loiter, work for or perform in any
establishment licensed or subject to licensing by the state’s Liquor Control
Commission. No owner, proprietor or operator of any such establishment shall
allow the presence in such establishment of any person who violates the
provisions of this section.
(Prior Code, § 21-291) (Ord. 1309, passed 2-2-2009) Penalty, see §
117.999
§ 117.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any violation of §
117.016 of this chapter is a municipal civil infraction. In addition, if the
owner, proprietor or operator of the premises violates §
117.016 of this chapter or allows any person to violate §
117.016 of this chapter, the city may revoke the certificate of occupancy and/
or certificate of conformity for the premises and may request the Liquor
Control Commission to revoke and/or not renew the liquor license for the
premises. In addition, the city may seek to enforce the terms of §
117.016 of this chapter through injunctive relief and all other remedies as
allowed by law.
(Prior Code, § 21-291) (Ord. 1309, passed 2-2-2009)
CHAPTER 118: MARIJUANA BUSINESSES
Section
   
118.001   Medical marijuana businesses prohibited
   
118.002   Recreational marijuana businesses prohibited
   
118.003   Rights unaffected
 
   
118.999   Penalty
§ 118.001 MEDICAL MARIJUANA BUSINESSES PROHIBITED.
   All medical marijuana businesses, facilities and establishments are
prohibited within the city.
(Prior Code, § 21.1-1) (Ord. 1468, passed 1-14-2019) Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.002 RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA BUSINESSES PROHIBITED.
   All recreational marijuana businesses, facilities and establishments are
prohibited within the city.
(Prior Code, § 21.1-2) (Ord. 1468, passed 1-14-2019) Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.003 RIGHTS UNAFFECTED.
   This chapter does not affect the rights of registered qualifying patients or
registered primary caregivers under the state’s Medical Marijuana Law, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 333.27101 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 21.1-3) (Ord. 1468, passed 1-14-2019)
§ 118.999 PENALTY.
   Any person or entity who violates this chapter is responsible for a
municipal civil infraction and any prohibited use is hereby declared to be a
public nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 21.1-4) (Ord. 1468, passed 1-14-2019)
TITLE XIII: BUSINESS REGISTRATION AND LICENSING
   Chapter
      
130.   REGISTRATION AND LICENSING
      
131.   JUNK DEALERS, JUNKYARDS AND PAWNBROKERS
      
132.   LEISURE; AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENT
      
133.   TATTOO PARLORS AND TATTOOING
      
134.   USED CAR DEALERS
CHAPTER 130: REGISTRATION AND LICENSING
Section
Business Registration
   
130.001   Scope and definitions
   
130.002   Business registration not an exemption
   
130.003   Registration required to operate business
   
130.004   Application; renewal
   
130.005   Record of establishments
   
130.006   Preliminary inspection of premises
   
130.007   Posting
   
130.008   State or city license not an exemption
   
130.009   Exemption from payment of registration fee
   
130.010   Payment of fees
   
130.011   Transfer of registration certificate
   
130.012   Denial of registration certificate
   
130.013   Grounds for revocation or suspension of registration
   
130.014   Revocation or suspension procedures
   
130.015   Additional authority
Business Licenses
   
130.030   Scope
   
130.031   Business licenses required
   
130.032   Applications
   
130.033   Expiration date, exception
   
130.034   Effect of state license
   
130.035   Compliance with code required; payment of personal property taxes
   
130.036   Payment of fees
   
130.037   Denial of licenses
   
130.038   Persons exempt from license fee
   
130.039   Transfer of licenses
   
130.040   Possession and display
   
130.041   Defective, deteriorated and the like merchandise
   
130.042   Grounds for revocation or suspension of licenses
   
130.043   Revocation or suspension procedures
   
130.044   Renewal
   
130.045   Retained licenses
 
   
130.999   Penalty
BUSINESS REGISTRATION
§ 130.001 SCOPE AND DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   The provisions of this business regulation title shall apply to all
certificates issued by the city clerk in the absence to provisions of the
contrary. The term “registration”, as used in this subchapter, shall be deemed
to include the term “certificate”.
   (B)   For the purpose of this business regulation title, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      BUSINESS. A person, partnership, corporation or any other entity engaged
in commerce, manufacturing, industry, occupation, profession, trade, service,
profit-seeking enterprise or concern.
      CODE. The City of Wyandotte Code Ordinances, all codes adopted by
reference or other means by the city and all city ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 40-1) (Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
§ 130.002 BUSINESS REGISTRATION NOT AN EXEMPTION.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall not exempt a business owner from
complying with any applicable municipal codes referred to in any section of
this code of ordinances. The term “registration”, as used in this subchapter,
shall not include the term “license”.
(Prior Code, § 40-2) (Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
§ 130.003 REGISTRATION REQUIRED TO OPERATE BUSINESS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, either directly or indirectly, to
conduct a business within the city without registering said business in
accordance with the requirements and provisions of this business title.
(Prior Code, § 40-3) (Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.004 APPLICATION; RENEWAL.
   (A)   Application for a registration certificate under this subchapter shall
be made to and upon forms supplied by the City Clerk or his or her designee,
and shall set forth such information as shall be required by the City Clerk for
the purpose of enforcing this subchapter. The required registration fee shall
be tendered to the City Clerk when the registration application is filed.
   (B)   Renewal of the certificate shall be required annually by submitting a
renewal application upon forms supplied by the City Clerk or his or her
designee, setting forth such information as shall be required by the City Clerk
for the purpose of enforcing this subchapter. The renewal fee shall be tendered
to the City Clerk when the renewal application is filed. Renewal applications
shall be filed no later than June 1 of each year.
   (C)   An initial business registration or renewal of a business registration
must be secured by July 1 of each year (except for the 2019-2020 registration
period, where registration must be secured by 8-1-2019), or for a new business,
prior to the opening of the business.
(Prior Code, § 40-4) (Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
§ 130.005 RECORD OF ESTABLISHMENTS.
   The City Clerk shall cause to be maintained a record of all businesses in
the city for the purpose of classifying, serving, inspecting and registering
such businesses.
(Prior Code, § 40-5) (Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
§ 130.006 PRELIMINARY INSPECTION OF PREMISES.
   (A)   Upon receiving an application for a certificate under this subchapter,
the Building Official or his or her designee shall cause all necessary
inspections of the premises to be made to ascertain if the premises are in a
safe, sound and sanitary condition in accordance with all applicable provisions
of state statues and this code.
   (B)   An inspection of businesses that exist and have a certificate of
occupancy prior to the adoption of this business regulation title is not
required.
(Prior Code, § 40-6) (Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
§ 130.007 POSTING.
   The registrant under this subchapter shall post and maintain the certificate
at all times in a conspicuous place in the registered premises.
(Prior Code, § 40-7) (Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
§ 130.008 STATE OR CITY LICENSE NOT AN EXEMPTION.
   The fact that a license or permit has been granted to any person by the
state or city to engage in the operation, conduct, maintenance or management of
any business, service, profession or premises shall not exempt such person from
the necessity of registering with the city.
(Prior Code, § 40-8)
§ 130.009 EXEMPTION FROM PAYMENT OF REGISTRATION FEE.
   No registration fee shall be required from any person exempt from payment of
the fee by state or federal law or from a business which is required to pay a
business license fee to the city. Such persons shall comply with all other
provisions of this business title. The City Clerk shall, in all such cases,
issue to such persons, certificates which are clearly marked as to the
exemption and the reason thereof.
(Prior Code, § 40-9) (Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
§ 130.010 PAYMENT OF FEES.
   A registration period shall run from June 1 to May 31 (except for the 2019-
2020 licensing period, which shall be August 1 to May 31). No certificate shall
be issued until the appropriate fees, as prescribed by resolution of the City
Council, have been paid by the applicant to the City Clerk. All fees required
for the registration of a business pursuant to the code of ordinances must be
paid in full and may not be prorated, regardless of when an application for a
certificate or permit is made. No rebate or refund shall be made of any
registration fee, or part thereof, by reason of the death of the registrant or
by reason of non-use of the certificate or discontinuance of the operation of
the commercial establishment.
(Prior Code, § 40-10) (Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
§ 130.011 TRANSFER OF REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE.
   No certificate or permit issued under the provisions of this code shall be
transferable.
(Prior Code, § 40-11) (Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
§ 130.012 DENIAL OF REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE.
   (A)   The certificate to be issued under this code may be refused by the
City Clerk for any of the following causes:
      (1)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for certificate;
      (2)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the operation
of a business;
      (3)   Any violation of this code;
      (4)   Conducting a business in an unlawful manner of in such manner as to
constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health,
safety or welfare of the public;
      (5)   The failure or inability of an applicant to meet and satisfy the
requirements and provisions of this code;
      (6)   Failure to pay personal property taxes when due;
      (7)   Failure to obtain any required state, county or city license,
registration certificate or permit; and/or
      (8)   Any person or entity who owes any registration or license fees to
the city for any business previously or currently operating in the city.
   (B)   (1)   Any person whose request for certificate is refused shall have
the right to a hearing before the Council provided a written request therefor
is filed with the City Clerk within ten days following the refusal.
      (2)   The Council shall then have the right to order the issuance of the
certificate if it determines the business is in compliance with all terms of
this business regulation title.
(Prior Code, § 40-12) (Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
§ 130.013 GROUNDS FOR REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF REGISTRATION.
   Certificates issued under this code may be suspended or revoked by the City
Clerk for any of the following causes:
   (A)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for registration;
   (B)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the operation of a
business;
   (C)   Any violation of this code;
   (D)   Conducting a business in an unlawful manner or in such manner as to
constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health,
morals, safety or welfare of the public; and/or
   (E)   The failure or inability of an applicant to meet and satisfy the
requirements and provisions of this code.
(Prior Code, § 40-13) (Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
§ 130.014 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Written notice of suspension or revocation of a registration
certificate stating the cause or causes therefor shall be delivered to the
registrant personally or mailed to the address stated in the application for
registration.
   (B)   (1)   Any person whose certificate is revoked or suspended shall have
the right to a hearing before the Council provided a written request therefor
is filed with the City Clerk within ten days following the delivery or mailing
of notice of revocation of suspension.
      (2)   The Council shall have the right to reinstate the registration if
it determines the business is in compliance with the terms of this business
regulation title.
(Prior Code, § 40-14) (Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
§ 130.015 ADDITIONAL AUTHORITY.
   The city hereby authorizes the City Clerk, to adopt such reasonable rules
and regulations as may be necessary to carry out the purpose and intent of this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 40-15) (Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
BUSINESS LICENSES
§ 130.030 SCOPE.
   (A)   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to all licenses and
permits issued by the city in the absence to provisions of the contrary.
   (B)   The term “license”, as used in this subchapter, shall be deemed to
include the term “permit”, but not registration certificate.
(Prior Code, § 40-17) (Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
§ 130.031 BUSINESS LICENSES REQUIRED.
   No person shall, directly or indirectly, operate, conduct, maintain or
manage any business or premises for which any license or permit is required by
any provision of this code without first obtaining a license or permit from the
city in the manner provided in this business regulation title.
(Prior Code, § 40-18) (Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.032 APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Application for a business license as required by this code shall be
made in writing to the City Clerk, who is authorized to create application
forms and to receive and process applications, and to thereafter grant, deny,
suspend or revoke said license as set forth in this subchapter. Applications
shall be on forms supplied by, and to be filed with, the City Clerk. Such
applications shall be signed and dated by the applicant. The applicant shall
accompany the application with a tender of the correct license fee, which fee
shall not be refundable and set by Council resolution. The application shall
contain the following minimum information, plus any other information deemed
necessary by any authorized representative of the city:
      (1)   The nature and kind of business which applicant proposes to conduct
and the manner of operating same;
      (2)   The location, mailing address and all telephone numbers where the
business is to be conducted;
      (3)   A complete list of the names, residence addresses and phone numbers
of all owners of the business, and the name and phone number of the manager or
person principally in charge of the operation of the business. If applicant is
a corporation, partnership or LLC (anything other than an individual), current
documentation establishing the legal entity (e.g., articles of corporation,
partnership agreement and the like) is required;
      (4)   Driver’s license number of each individual listed in division (A)
(3) above;
      (5)   Copy of current state or county licenses held for the business;
      (6)   Whether or not the applicant or person conducting or managing
applicant’s business have been convicted of a crime, misdemeanor or the
violation of any municipal ordinance and, if so, full particulars in connection
therewith;
      (7)   Authorization for the city, its agents and employees to seek
information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set
forth in the application and the qualifications of the applicant for the
permit;
      (8)   A statement that the information provided is true and accurate and
that, if a license is granted, the applicant will abide by all applicable
ordinances, general laws, charters, rules and statutes;
      (9)   Such other identification and information necessary to discover the
truth of the matters herein before specified as required to be set forth in the
application;
      (10)   The applicant shall permit inspection of the licensed premises
and/or activity at reasonable times by any authorized representative of the
city;
      (11)   All other information required by any city ordinance;
      (12)   All information required by this section shall be provided at the
applicant’s expense; and
      (13)   An initial business license or renewal of a business license must
be secured within 30 days of June 1 of each year (except for the 2019-2020
licensing period, where license must be secured by 8-1-2019), or for a new
business, prior to the opening of the business.
   (B)   Upon the completion of the above provided form and the furnishing of
all foregoing information the city shall accept the application for the
necessary investigations. The holder of a business license shall notify the
city of each change in any of the data required to be furnished by this section
within ten days after such change occurs.
(Prior Code, § 40-19) (Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
§ 130.033 EXPIRATION DATE, EXCEPTION.
   The license year shall terminate on May 31 of each calendar year after the
issuance of such license. In all cases where the provisions of this code permit
the issuance of licenses for periods of less than one year, the expiration date
shall be indicated on the face of the license.
(Prior Code, § 40-20) (Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
§ 130.034 EFFECT OF STATE LICENSE.
   (A)   Beginning 1-1-2018, the city shall not impose any licensing
requirements on any individuals who perform a specific occupation if the city
does not already impose licensing requirements on that occupation. However, the
city may continue to regulate any occupation that is subject to licensing
requirements in the city before 1-1-2018.
   (B)   If an occupation is subject to licensing requirements imposed by the
Department of Licensing and Regulatory Affairs or any other licensing authority
of the state, the city shall not impose any regulations on that occupation that
add additional licensing requirements to those already imposed by the licensing
authority of the state.
   (C)   Beginning 1-1-2018, if the Department of Licensing and Regulatory
Affairs or any other licensing authority of the state imposes any new licensing
requirements on any occupation that was previously unregulated by the state
and, if the city has licensing requirements that regulate that occupation in
effect at the time the new state licensing requirements take effect, the city
may not continue to enforce its licensing requirements for that occupation on
or after the date when the state licensing requirements take effect.
   (D)   The term “city” refers to the “City of Wyandotte”.
(Prior Code, § 40-21) (Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
§ 130.035 COMPLIANCE WITH CODE REQUIRED; PAYMENT OF PERSONAL PROPERTY TAXES.
   No license shall be granted to any applicant:
   (A)   Until such applicant has complied with all of the provisions of this
code pertaining to the business for which application for the license is made;
   (B)   If the approval of any officer of the city is required prior to the
issuance thereof until such approval is made;
   (C)   Who is delinquent in the payment of personal property taxes; and/or
   (D)   Who is using or intends to use in the business for which application
for the license is being made, any personal property upon which there is a lien
for unpaid personal property taxes; provided, however, that, granting of a
license shall not be withheld if said lien is for current personal property
taxes the payment of which is not delinquent.
(Prior Code, § 40-22) (Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
§ 130.036 PAYMENT OF FEES.
   No license shall be issued until the appropriate fees set forth in this code
have been paid by the applicant to the City Clerk. All fees required for a
license or permit pursuant to the code of ordinances must be paid in full and
may not be prorated, regardless of when an application for a license or permit
is made.
(Prior Code, § 40-23) (Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
§ 130.037 DENIAL OF LICENSES.
   (A)   Licenses to be issued under this code may be refused by the City Clerk
for any of the following causes:
      (1)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for license;
      (2)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the operation
of a business;
      (3)   Any violation of this code;
      (4)   Conducting a business in an unlawful manner or in such manner as to
constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health,
safety or welfare of the public; and/or
      (5)   The failure or inability of an applicant to meet and satisfy the
requirements and provisions of this code.
   (B)   (1)   Any person whose request for a license is refused shall have the
right to a hearing before the Council; provided, a written request therefor is
filed with the City Clerk within ten days following the refusal.
      (2)   The Council shall then have the right to order the issuance of the
license if it determines the business is in compliance with all terms of this
business regulation title and any other city ordinance that may apply to the
business.
(Prior Code, § 40-24) (Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
§ 130.038 PERSONS EXEMPT FROM LICENSE FEE.
   (A)   No license fee shall be required from any person exempt from payment
of the fee by state or federal law.
   (B)   Such persons shall comply with all other provisions of this business
regulation title.
   (C)   The City Clerk shall, in all such cases, issue to such persons
licenses which are clearly marked as to such exemption.
(Prior Code, § 40-25) (Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
§ 130.039 TRANSFER OF LICENSES.
   No license or permit issued under the provisions of this code shall be
transferable.
(Prior Code, § 40-26) (Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
§ 130.040 POSSESSION AND DISPLAY.
   (A)   A licensee shall carry any license issued in accordance with the
provisions of this code upon his person at all times when engaged in the
operation, conduct or maintenance of any business for which the license was
granted; except that, where such business is operated, conducted or maintained
at a fixed place or establishment said license shall be displayed at all times
in some conspicuous place in his or her place of business; the licensee shall
produce the same for examination when applying for a renewal thereof or when
requested to do so by any city police officer or by any person representing the
issuing authority.
   (B)   A licensee shall display conspicuously on each vehicle or mechanical
device or machine required to be licensed by this code such tags or stickers as
are furnished by the City Clerk.
   (C)   No person shall display any expired, suspended or revoked license, or
any license for which a duplicate has been issued.
(Prior Code, § 40-27) (Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
§ 130.041 DEFECTIVE, DETERIORATED AND THE LIKE MERCHANDISE.
   No licensee shall sell or offer for sale any defective, faulty, incomplete
or deteriorated articles of merchandise, unless the goods are so represented to
prospective customers.
(Prior Code, § 40-28) (Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.042 GROUNDS FOR REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSES.
   Licenses issued under this code may be suspended or revoked by the City
Clerk for any of the following causes:
   (A)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for license;
   (B)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the operation of a
business;
   (C)   Any violation of this code;
   (D)   Conducting a business in an unlawful manner or in such manner as to
constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health,
morals, safety or welfare of the public; and/or
   (E)   The failure or inability of an applicant to meet and satisfy the
requirements and provisions of this code.
(Prior Code, § 40-29) (Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
§ 130.043 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Written notice of suspension or revocation of a license stating the
cause or causes therefor shall be delivered to the licensee personally or
mailed to his or her address stated in his or her application for license.
   (B)   (1)   Any person whose license is revoked or suspended shall have the
right to a hearing before the Council; provided, a written request therefor is
filed with the City Clerk within ten days following the delivery or mailing of
notice of revocation of suspension.
      (2)   The Council shall have the right to reinstate the license if it
determines the business is in compliance with all terms of this business
regulation title that may apply to the business.
(Prior Code, § 40-30) (Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
§ 130.044 RENEWAL.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, an application for renewal of a license
shall be considered in the same manner as an original application. All
applications for license renewals shall be filed in the office of the City
Clerk not later than June 1 of each year (except for the 2019-2020 licensing
period, where renewals shall be filed no later than August 1).
(Prior Code, § 40-31) (Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
§ 130.045 RETAINED LICENSES.
   The following chapters, divisions and sections which required licenses for
the business designated therein were adopted prior to 1-1-2018 and remain in
effect:
Title Chapter/Section
Title                                                  Chapter/Section
                                                       §§
Arcades                                                132.001—
                                                       132.025
                                                       §§
                                                       110.001—
                                                       110.008;
Auctions and auctioneers                               110.020;
                                                       110.021;
                                                       110.035—
                                                       110.040
                                                       §§
Food dealers and processors                            116.020—
                                                       116.026
                                                       §§
Junk dealers, junk yards and the like                  131.001—
                                                       131.011
                                                       §§
Liquor licenses                                        117.001—
                                                       117.016
                                                       §§
Massage establishment                                  132.060—
                                                       132.082
                                                       §§
Meat, poultry, seafood                                 116.001—
                                                       116.006
Mechanical amusement devices; definition of mechanical §
amusement devices only                                 115.001
Outdoor cafés                                         Ch. 190
                                                       §§
Pawnbrokers and second hand dealers                    131.025—
                                                       131.043
                                                       §§
Poolrooms and pool tables                              132.040—
                                                       132.045
                                                       §§
Restaurants                                            116.040—
                                                       116.058
Tattoo parlors                                         Ch. 133
                                                       §§
Used car dealers                                       134.001—
                                                       134.010
 
(Prior Code, § 40-32) (Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
§ 130.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Failure to comply with any provision of this business regulation title
shall be a municipal civil infraction.
(Prior Code, § 40-16) (Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
CHAPTER 131: JUNK DEALERS, JUNKYARDS AND PAWNBROKERS
Section
Junk Dealers, Junkyards and the Like
   
131.001   Fences or walls
   
131.002   Placement of junk
   
131.003   Location and use restrictions
   
131.004   Vehicles
   
131.005   Restrictions on sales
   
131.006   Records
   
131.007   License required; types
   
131.008   Prerequisites
   
131.009   License fee
   
131.010   Bond
   
131.011   License does not permit storing junk in violation of ordinances
Pawnbrokers and Secondhand Dealers
   
131.025   Definitions
   
131.026   Pawnbrokers and secondhand dealers
   
131.027   License required
   
131.028   Posting license; name of licensee
   
131.029   Grounds for denial
   
131.030   Investigation by city’s Chief of Police
   
131.031   License fee and posting
   
131.032   Prohibitions for secondhand and scrap dealers
   
131.033   Hours of operation; purchases from certain persons prohibited
   
131.034   Scrap yard regulations
   
131.035   Non-ferrous metals
   
131.036   Thumbprints and identification of customers
   
131.037   Records and reporting requirements
   
131.038   Electronic reporting of transactions
   
131.039   Exemptions
   
131.040   Suspension
   
131.041   Incorporation of state law
   
131.042   Appeals
   
131.043   License suspension or revocation generally
JUNK DEALERS, JUNKYARDS AND THE LIKE
§ 131.001 FENCES OR WALLS.
   All walls or fences around junkyard shall be maintained in a neat,
substantial condition; the supporting uprights of all fences shall be placed on
the interior of the fence.
(Prior Code, § 40-65) (Ord. 610, passed 3-27-1975; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
Penalty, see §
10.999
Statutory reference:
   Fencing of junkyards near highways, see M.C.L.A. §§ 252.201 et seq.
§ 131.002 PLACEMENT OF JUNK.
   No junk or other materials shall be piled against a junkyard’s fence or
wall, nor shall be outside of, attached to or suspended from any such wall or
fence, nor shall a pile within ten feet of the fence or wall exceed the height
of the enclosing wall or fence.
(Prior Code, § 40-66) (Ord. 610, passed 3-27-1975; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 131.003 LOCATION AND USE RESTRICTIONS.
   No junkyard shall be conducted other than at the place designated in the
license and no living quarters shall be maintained on the premises of the
junkyard.
(Prior Code, § 40-67) (Ord. 610, passed 3-27-1975; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 131.004 VEHICLES.
   A person licensed pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter shall
display his or her name and address on any vehicles used in the licensed
business in letters which are at least five inches high.
(Prior Code, § 40-68) (Ord. 610, passed 3-27-1975; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 131.005 RESTRICTIONS ON SALES.
   No licensee under this subchapter shall purchase or receive any property:
   (A)   Between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.;
   (B)   On a Sunday;
   (C)   From any intoxicated person;
   (D)   From any person under the age of 17 without the written consent of
such person’s parent or guardian; or
   (E)   From any person known or suspected to be a thief or a receiver of
stolen property.
(Prior Code, § 40-69) (Ord. 610, passed 3-27-1975; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
§ 131.006 RECORDS.
   Each license under this subchapter shall, on demand, exhibit all goods
bought or received and give the name, residence and a description of the person
from whom the same was purchased or received to any officer of the Police
Department. He or she shall keep a record or book written in ink in the English
language containing the name, residence and description of all persons from
whom purchases are made.
(Prior Code, § 40-70) (Ord. 610, passed 3-27-1975; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
§ 131.007 LICENSE REQUIRED; TYPES.
   (A)   No person shall engage in the business of dealer in scrap iron, scrap
metal, scrap wood, used or salvaged auto parts or any form of goods commonly
considered as junk, nor assemble the same for the purpose of sale without first
obtaining a license therefor.
   (B)   There shall be three types of junk licenses:
      (1)   Junkyard;
      (2)   Junk truck (motor drawn or propelled vehicle); and
      (3)   Junk pushcart.
(Prior Code, § 40-71) (Ord. 610, passed 3-27-1975; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
§ 131.008 PREREQUISITES.
    No license shall be issued pursuant to this subchapter:
   (A)   Except upon resolution of the Council;
   (B)   Except upon approval of the Police Chief, the Fire Chief, the Health
Officer and the City Engineer;
   (C)   Unless the premises are enclosed with a properly maintained fence.
Such fence shall be tight or solid metal construction unless:
      (1)   The adjoining resident owner objects; or
      (2)   The adjoining private property is actually used for the same or
manufacturing purposes then such fence shall be of two-inch diamond mesh chain
link construction. Such wall or fence shall be not less than seven feet or more
than ten feet in height.
   (D)   Unless the material located in or on the premises are so arranged that
reasonable inspection or access to all parts of the premises can be had by the
enforcing official;
   (E)   Unless the area between the fence and the curb is maintained to the
satisfaction of the Engineering Department; and
   (F)   If 65% or more of all property owners within a radius of 300 feet
measured from the boundary lines of the premises object in writing to the
Council.
(Prior Code, § 40-72) (Ord. 610, passed 3-27-1975; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
§ 131.009 LICENSE FEE.
   (A)   The fee for a license for buying and selling junk shall be $75 per
wagon, truck or other vehicle used or $25 per pushcart used.
   (B)   The fee for a license for a junkyard shall be $300 ($1,000 surety
bond), plus $75 per truck used.
(Prior Code, § 40-73) (Ord. 610, passed 3-27-1975; Ord. 1057, passed 12-21-
1998; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
Charter reference:
   Power of city to set license fees, see § 177
§ 131.010 BOND.
   (A)   A person desiring the license required by the provisions of this
subchapter shall file with the City Clerk a surety or cash bond running to the
city with surety acceptable to the City Attorney guaranteeing to any citizen of
the city that such citizen shall be protected against any loss occasioned by
any act of fraud, theft or receiving stolen goods committed by the licensee.
   (B)   Action on such bond may be brought in the name of the city to the use
or benefit of the aggrieved person.
(Prior Code, § 40-74) (Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
§ 131.011 LICENSE DOES NOT PERMIT STORING JUNK IN VIOLATION OF ORDINANCES.
   A license to operate a junk truck or pushcart shall not include the right to
unload, sort or store junk in violation of the provisions of any ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 40-75) (Ord. 610, passed 3-27-1975)
PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS
§ 131.025 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER. A city, the city mayor, pursuant to M.C.L.A. §
446.203(a)(i).
   PAWNBROKER. A person, corporation, member or members of a partnership,
company or firm who lends money on deposit, or pledge of personal property, or
other valuable thing, other than securities or printed evidence of
indebtedness, or who deals in the purchasing of personal property or other
valuable thing on condition of selling the same back again at a stipulated
price.
   SCRAP PROCESSOR. Any person or entity whose business is, in whole or in
part, the dismantling, wrecking and disposing of junk and/or refuse materials,
including automobiles, or otherwise reclaiming metals for reuse.
   SCRAP YARD. A place where junk, waste, discarded or salvaged materials are
bought, sold, exchanged, stored, packed, disassembled or handled, including
wrecked motor vehicles, used building materials, structural steel materials and
equipment and other manufactured goods that are deteriorated or obsolete so as
to make unusable in their existing condition.
   SECONDHAND DEALER. Any person, corporation, member or members of a
partnership, company or firm, that engages in the business of purchasing,
storing, selling, exchanging and receiving secondhand goods of any kind,
including the receiving and selling of goods on consignment, but does not
include scrap processor, automotive recycler or junkyard that deals principally
in industrial scrap, nor to retail merchants who repossess their own
merchandise sold on title-retaining contract or who accepts merchandise as part
payment on new sale, nor shall it apply to licensed automobile dealers, nor to
persons who conduct rummage sales; provided that, such sales are not conducted
by the same person or at the same location for a period in excess of three days
or more than twice per calendar year, not to sellers of new articles, wares or
merchandise from manufacturers, wholesale distributors or jobbers for retail
sale to customers, nor persons, firms or corporations whose principle business
is that of dealing in new goods, articles and merchandise.
   SECONDHAND GOODS. Any goods, wares, merchandise or other personal property
acquired or purchased after having been acquired at retail and used by another,
except as excluded herein. Such term includes, but is not limited to,
appliances, radios, stereos and speakers, televisions, video equipment,
electronic/computer equipment and devices, computer gaming equipment, tools,
auto parts, firearms, coins, sports memorabilia, jewelry, precious metals,
musical instruments, sporting equipment, bicycles, lawn equipment, snow blowers
and other household equipment, lead pipes, tools, lighting fixtures, plumbing
fixtures, watches, precious stones, musical instruments and electrical
appliances.
(Prior Code, § 40-76) (Ord. 1394, passed 2-10-2014; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-
2019)
§ 131.026 PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS.
   The city is designated and authorized to issue, suspend and revoke licenses
for persons, corporations, partnerships, companies or firms to carry on the
business of a pawnbroker and secondhand dealers pursuant to Public Act 273 of
1917, as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 446.201 et seq., (“the Pawnbrokers Act”).
The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to all existing pawnbrokers and
secondhand dealers and all future pawnbrokers and secondhand dealers.
(Prior Code, § 40-77) (Ord. 1394, passed 2-10-2014; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-
2019)
§ 131.027 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person, corporation, partnership, company or firm, or other entity
located in the city shall carry on the business of a pawnbroker or secondhand
dealer in the city without being licensed pursuant to the Pawnbrokers Act,
being M.C.L.A. §§ 446.201 et seq. and Secondhand Dealers Act, being M.C.L.A. §§
445.401 et seq. and this section and as approved under this subchapter. A
secondhand dealer and pawnbroker’s license is not transferable.
   (B)   Prior to issuance of license both pawnbrokers and secondhand dealers
shall file a bond in the penal sum of $3,000 conditioned that such applicant
will in all respects faithfully comply with and observe all of the Pawnbrokers
and Secondhand Dealer Acts of 1917, being M.C.L.A. §§ 445.401 et seq.
   (C)   All applicants, prior to the issuance of the license shall affirm that
such applicant will in all respects faithfully comply with and observe all the
applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations, including Public Act
350 of 1917, being M.C.L.A. §§ 445.401 et seq. and faithfully perform the
duties and obligations of the business, including compliance with the
provisions of the City Charter, the code of ordinances and this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 40-78) (Ord. 1394, passed 2-10-2014; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-
2019)
§ 131.028 POSTING LICENSE; NAME OF LICENSEE.
   (A)   All persons obtaining a license issued under this section shall place
two copies of the license, one of which placed in the establishments’ window or
door for public view and the other placed conspicuously inside the store for
full view by patrons.
   (B)   In addition to the conspicuous display of two licenses of any license
issued, as required above, a licensee under this subchapter shall post
conspicuously in the designated places of business a sign displaying his or her
name and occupation legibly inscribed therein with letters at a minimum of one
and one-half inches to maximum of two inches in height.
(Prior Code, § 4-79) (Ord. 1394, passed 2-10-2014; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
§ 131.029 GROUNDS FOR DENIAL.
   (A)   The City Clerk may deny an application for a pawnbroker’s or
secondhand dealer license if the application is disapproved by one or more
proper officers of the city, as provided in this subchapter, indicating that
the applicant is unable to meet or continue to meet the requirements of the
Pawnbrokers Act or Secondhand Dealers Act, being M.C.L.A. §§ 445.401 et seq. or
any provision of this subchapter.
   (B)   The City Clerk may also deny an application for any reason identified
in this subchapter.
   (C)   If the City Clerk denies the issuance of a license or a renewal
thereof, a notice of denial including the reasons for the denial shall be
mailed by first class mail to the applicant. If the application for a license
has been denied, the applicant may appeal the denial by requesting a hearing
pursuant to §
131.042 of this subchapter, or may apply at any time submitting a new
application and fee. The notice of denial shall provide that if the applicant
wants to appeal the City Clerk’s decision. the applicant must request a hearing
within 14 days pursuant to §
131.042 of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 40-80) (Ord. 1394, passed 2-10-2014; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-
2019)
§ 131.030 INVESTIGATION BY CITY’S CHIEF OF POLICE.
   (A)   The application for the license with a term no longer than one year
from the date of the issuance shall be referred by the City Clerk to the Chief
of Police for approval, who shall obtain fingerprints from the applicant.
   (B)   The Chief of Police shall conduct an investigation and file a report
with the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 40-81) (Ord. 1394, passed 2-10-2014; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-
2019)
§ 131.031 LICENSE FEE AND POSTING.
   (A)   Commencing with the start of the 2017-2018 licensing cycle (June
2017), the fee for the license required by this subchapter shall be $150 each
year.
   (B)   Any change in the future of this fee may be made by Council
resolution.
(Prior Code, § 40-82) (Ord. 1394, passed 2-10-2014; Ord. 1432, passed 10-3-
2016; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
§ 131.032 PROHIBITIONS FOR SECONDHAND AND SCRAP DEALERS.
   No secondhand or scrap dealer shall loan money on deposit, or pledge of any
personal property, or other valuable thing on condition of selling the same
back again at a stipulated price, without obtaining a pawnbroker’s license
pursuant to the Pawnbrokers Act, being M.C.L.A. §§ 446.201 et seq. and this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 40-83) (Ord. 1394, passed 2-10-2014; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-
2019)
§ 131.033 HOURS OF OPERATION; PURCHASES FROM CERTAIN PERSONS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall purchase or receive, by sale,
barter or exchange or otherwise, any article under a license issued pursuant to
this subchapter from any person between the hours of 9:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. or
as otherwise permitted by law. Further, no person shall purchase or receive
such an article from any of the following:
      (1)   A person who is at the time intoxicated or visibly under the
influence of alcohol or narcotics;
      (2)   A person known by the dealer to be a thief or an associate of
thieves, a prior recipient of stolen property or any person the licensee or
employee has reason to suspect of being such; and/or
      (3)   A minor under the age of 18 years without written consent of the
parent or guardian of such minor.
   (B)   No person shall purchase or receive, by sale, barter or exchange or
otherwise, any article or item that person knows to be stolen, reasonably
should have been known to be stolen, or suspects as having been stolen, except
as specifically authorized by law enforcement authorities.
(Prior Code, § 40-84) (Ord. 1394, passed 2-10-2014; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-
2019) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 131.034 SCRAP YARD REGULATIONS.
    The following regulations shall be applicable to scrap yards.
   (A)   No scrap yard processor or any of the processor’s employees shall
receive, in the line of such business, any article by way of pledge or pawn,
nor loan or advance any sum of money on the security of any article or thing.
   (B)   Every scrap yard processor shall upon demand, exhibit all goods which
he or she has on hand and give a description of persons selling the same to any
member of the Police Department upon request, and shall keep a book containing
the names from whom he or she purchased brass, tin, copper, aluminum or any
metal, except old iron, which book shall be open during business hours to the
inspection of any police officer.
   (C)   No scrap processor shall sell or remove from his or her place of
business any article purchased by him or her until the same shall have been in
his or her possession for 72 hours, unless such article shall have been
purchased directly from some reputable factory or company.
   (D)   No scrap yard may store or handle hazardous materials unless done so
consistent with all other state, federal and local regulations.
   (E)   A scrap yard is subject to annual administrative inspections or
complaint based inspections to ensure the property is maintained in accordance
with the health, safety and welfare of the community, materials are stored in
an orderly manner to allow access to inspect and that property otherwise
complies with the city code.
   (F)   Upon conviction of any scrap processor for violating or failing to
comply with any provisions of this section, the license of such scrap processor
shall be revoked and the convicted persons shall not be licensed as a scrap
processor for a period of two years from the date of his or her convictions,
and the scrap yard shall not be licensed for that particular business for a
period of one year from the date of the conviction of the scrap processor.
(Prior Code, § 40-85) (Ord. 1394, passed 2-10-2014; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-
2019) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 131.035 NON-FERROUS METALS.
   Nothing in this subchapter should be construed to diminish the requirements
that scrap processors and junkyard operators who deal with non-ferrous metals
must comply with the Non-Ferrous Metals Act, being Public Act 429 of 2008, as
amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 445.421 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 40-86) (Ord. 1394, passed 2-10-2014; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-
2019)
§ 131.036 THUMBPRINTS AND IDENTIFICATION OF CUSTOMERS.
   (A)   Whenever a licensee or employee of licensee under this subchapter
purchases or receives any article or valuable thing as described in §
131.025 of this subchapter, the licensee shall first take on a form approved by
the Chief of Police, a legible print of the thumb of the right hand of the
person from whom such article was received. If such person has no right thumb,
the licensee shall take the legible print of the thumb on the left hand or of a
finger, which shall be so identified in writing by the licensee.
   (B)   The seller must provide the secondhand dealer with personal
identification at the time of the transaction, in the form of a valid
operator’s license or a federal or state identification card which includes a
photograph that positively matches the seller. The licensee shall obtain and
maintain a copy of the identification.
(Prior Code, § 40-87) (Ord. 1394, passed 2-10-2014; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-
2019)
§ 131.037 RECORDS AND REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   A licensee shall keep a permanent record in which shall be written, in
the English language, at the time of purchase, exchange or other receipt of any
article, a complete and accurate description thereof. Such description shall
include: an electronic photograph of the article; the article’s trade name and
serial number, if any; the name, residence and a copy of the federal or state-
issued identification/operator’s license of the person from whom the article
was purchased or received; and the day and hour when such purchase or exchange
was made and such other matters required by law. Each entry in such record
shall be numbered consecutively. A member of the Police Department, Sheriff’s
Department, State Police or other authorized person is entitled to inspect the
premises and records of a licensee during all normal business hours.
   (B)   A tag shall be attached to each article purchased, exchanged or
received by licensee in some visible and convenient place, with a number
written thereupon to correspond with the entry number in the record required in
division (A) above, until the article is sold or otherwise disposed of. The
licensee shall promptly prepare from such record a legible and correct copy, on
forms approved by the Chief of Police and written in the English language,
containing a description of each article purchased or received during the
preceding day, the hour and day when the purchase, exchange or receipt was
made, and the description of the person from whom it was purchased, exchanged
or received. Such statement shall be verified by the affidavit of the licensee.
   (C)   Any article purchased, exchanged or received under a license issued
pursuant to this subchapter shall be retained by the purchaser thereof at least
15 days before disposing of the article (unless otherwise authorized in this
subchapter), in an accessible place on the premises where such articles are
purchased and received.
(Prior Code, § 40-88) (Ord. 1394, passed 2-10-2014; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-
2019)
§ 131.038 ELECTRONIC REPORTING OF TRANSACTIONS.
   (A)   All licensed pawnbrokers and secondhand dealers, by 11:59 p.m. daily,
at his or her own expense, under this subchapter shall promptly complete and
transmit, by electronic means, to the Police Department’s computerized system
(s), the data identifying all transactions in which the licensee received used
goods the preceding day by pawn, exchange, purchase or consignment. A
transaction reported by electronic transmission under this division (A) shall
not be reported on paper forms unless the Chief of Police so requests.
   (B)   Each electronic transaction report and record shall include a digital
photograph of the article or group of articles, along with a description of the
article and applicable serial number, make, model number, size, color of the
article or articles; the purchase/loan price; ticket number; dealer name and
location; the name of the person conducting transaction; place of storage/stock
location; and customer information, including operator’s license number or
other federal or state identification number, customer’s name (last, first,
middle), customer address, customer date of birth, physical description
(height, weight, hair color, race, gender, appropriate fingerprint) and any
other information required by the local law enforcement agency.
(Prior Code, § 40-89) (Ord. 1394, passed 2-10-2014; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-
2019)
§ 131.039 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Section 131.036 through of this subchapter shall not apply to the
following:
      (1)   Secondhand or used tires when such tires are removed from the
vehicle to which such tires are attached in the presence of the person
receiving them;
      (2)   Used car dealers;
      (3)   Not-for-profit organizations re-selling donated goods;
      (4)   Art galleries;
      (5)   Used bookstores;
      (6)   Clothing consignment stores; and
      (7)   Antique dealers and other dealers in used household goods.
   (B)   All licensees exempted from electronic reporting under this section,
nonetheless, shall report, in a format approved by the local law enforcement
agency, any transactions involving the following items:
      (1)   Home and personal audio and video equipment, including, but not
limited to, televisions, radios, audio players, receivers and recorders of any
kind; personal electronic devices;
      (2)   Car stereos, GPS devices and other audio and video equipment for
use or installation in a motor vehicle;
      (3)   Computers and video game devices of any kind and related software,
game disks and cartridges;
      (4)   Electrical or other appliances; and
      (5)   Hand or power tools for use in carpentry, woodworking, plumbing,
electrical work and any other aspects of building, construction or other trade.
   (C)   All licensees exempted under this section, nonetheless, must comply
with state law requirements as set forth in M.C.L.A. §§ 445.404(2) and 446.205
and this subchapter, to make and maintain a separate record of all transactions
that is open to inspection by local law enforcement officers and the State
Police.
(Prior Code, § 40-90) (Ord. 1394, passed 2-10-2014; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-
2019)
§ 131.040 SUSPENSION.
   A pawnbroker’s or secondhand dealer’s license issued pursuant to this
subchapter may be suspended by the Chief of Police which shall be deemed a
suspension with intent to revoke. The Chief of Police shall comply with this
subchapter in noticing the suspension. The suspension with intent to revoke
shall automatically become a revocation of the license unless the licensee
requests an appeal hearing within 14 days pursuant to this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 40-91) (Ord. 1394, passed 2-10-2014; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-
2019)
§ 131.041 INCORPORATION OF STATE LAW.
   The Pawnbrokers Act, being Public Act 273 of 1917, as amended, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 446.201 et seq., the Pawnbrokers Act and the Secondhand Dealers
Act, being Public Act 350 of 1917, as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 445.401 et
seq., the Secondhand Dealers Act, are both incorporated by reference as if
fully set forth herein. Any violation of the Pawnbrokers Act and the Secondhand
Dealers Act shall be considered a violation of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 40-92) (Ord. 1394, passed 2-10-2014; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-
2019)
§ 131.042 APPEALS.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved by the denial of an application for a license or
by the suspension or revocation of a license as provided by this subchapter,
shall have a right to redetermination and an appeal. Such a redetermination may
be taken only within 14 days after notice of such a denial, suspension or
revocation is mailed to the person’s last known address. The redetermination
shall be in writing and shall contain a complete statement of the grounds for
appeal. It must be filed with the City Clerk, together with an appeal fee. The
fee for an appeal and/or redetermination under this section shall be the sum of
$100. The Clerk shall forward the appeal to the Chief of Police.
   (B)   Within ten days of the receipt by the Chief of Police of such an
appeal, the Chief of Police shall schedule a redetermination hearing. Unless
waived by the appellant, the Chief of Police shall mail by first class mail a
written notice to the appellant of the time and location of the redetermination
hearing at least five days prior to that hearing. The redetermination hearing
shall be an informal hearing held before the Chief of Police or his or her
designee.
   (C)   The redetermination or decision of the Chief of Police or his or her
designee shall be mailed to the appellant within seven days of the conclusion
of the hearing. The redetermination shall include:
      (1)   The appeal application and the type and nature of the appeal;
      (2)   The applicant’s position;
      (3)   The original reason for denial of the license or permit;
      (4)   The facts as presented;
      (5)   The decision or redetermination;
      (6)   The rationale or basis for the redetermination; and
      (7)   The date which the redetermination was placed in a United States
mail receptacle by the Chief of Police.
   (D)   The redetermination referred to above shall be final and binding,
unless the appellant, within 14 days of the mailing of such redetermination,
files a request in writing addressed to the City Clerk, requesting the City
Council to rehear the redetermination findings. No appeal shall be made to the
City Council, unless:
      (1)   A redetermination was made and timely appealed;
      (2)   A redetermination hearing has been waived by the appellant and the
Chief of Police; and
      (3)   A redetermination was not made due solely to the fault of the city.
   (E)   The appeal to the City Council shall be held within 21 days of receipt
by the City Clerk of the request for redetermination.
   (F)   The denial, suspension or revocation shall be effective during such
appeal or until the Council shall reverse the administrative decision. The City
Council may confirm the denial, suspension or revocation or may reinstate or
order the issuance of the license. The action of the Council shall be final.
(Prior Code, § 40-93) (Ord. 1394, passed 2-10-2014; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-
2019)
§ 131.043 LICENSE SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION GENERALLY.
   (A)   For cause shown, any license issued under this subchapter may be
suspended or revoked by the Chief of Police after the notice in writing,
setting forth the substance of the charges and the time and place of a hearing
thereon; which notice shall be delivered three days in advance, either
personally to the licensee or to the principle place of location of the
licensed activity, or by postage prepaid mail addressed to the licensee’s last
known address. Suspension or revocation may be in addition to any fine imposed.
   (B)   The term CAUSE, as used in this section, shall include:
      (1)   The conviction by licensee of any felony or of a misdemeanor
involving moral turpitude;
      (2)   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for license or made in connection with the conduct of the licensed
activity;
      (3)   Preventing or refusing permission for the inspection by any proper
city agent or official at any reasonable time of any portion of the premises
where the licensed activity is conducted, or of the property thereof;
      (4)   The doing or omitting of any act or permitting any condition to
exist in connection with the licensed activity or upon premises of facility
used in connection therewith; which act, omission or condition constitutes a
breach of the peace or constitutes a menace to the health, safety or general
welfare of the public, or is forbidden by the provisions of this subchapter or
established rule or regulation of the city where pawnbrokers or secondhand
dealer operates or violates the statutes, rules or regulations of the state
applicable to the licensed activity;
      (5)   The failure to obtain and maintain during the term of a license and
any renewal or extension thereof, any local, state or other required
professional governmental license, certification or authority for the trade,
occupation or profession licensed hereunder;
      (6)   The failure to obtain and maintain during the term of the license,
or any renewal or extension thereof, the bonds and insurance required by any
section of this subchapter or the Pawnbrokers Act or Secondhand Dealers Act,
being M.C.L.A. §§ 445.401 et seq.; and
      (7)   Any material misrepresentation made by the licensee in the
application or reports filed by the licensee.
(Prior Code, § 40-94) (Ord. 1394, passed 2-10-2014; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-
2019)
CHAPTER 132: LEISURE; AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENT
Section
Arcades
   
132.001   Definitions
   
132.002   Gambling
   
132.003   Indecent, immoral and the like language or conduct
   
132.004   Disorderly persons
   
132.005   Minors
   
132.006   Alcohol on premises
   
132.007   Intoxicated persons
   
132.008   Drugs
   
132.009   Noise
   
132.010   Hours of operation
   
132.011   Traffic control
   
132.012   Inspections
   
132.013   License required
   
132.014   Qualifications of licensee
   
132.015   Approval of Building Inspector, Police Chief and Chief of the Fire
Department
   
132.016   License fee
   
132.017   Public hearing
   
132.018   License issuance and form
   
132.019   License display
   
132.020   License assignment or transfer
   
132.021   Change of location
   
132.022   Number of machines
   
132.023   Obstructions to public view prohibited
   
132.024   License renewal
   
132.025   License revocation
Pool Rooms and Pool Tables
   
132.040   Definitions
   
132.041   Minors
   
132.042   Hours
   
132.043   Required
   
132.044   Fee
   
132.045   Inspection
Massage Establishments and Outcall Massage Services
   
132.060   Definitions
   
132.061   License and permit required
   
132.062   Exemptions
   
132.063   License or permit procedures
   
132.064   Issuance of license or permit for a massage establishment
   
132.065   Approval or denial of application
   
132.066   Posting of license
   
132.067   Records of employees and patrons
   
132.068   Revocation or suspension of license
   
132.069   Revocation of massagist permit
   
132.070   Renewal of license
   
132.071   Facilities necessary
   
132.072   Operating requirements
   
132.073   Persons under age 18 prohibited on premises
   
132.074   Alcoholic beverages prohibited
   
132.075   Hours
   
132.076   Employment of massagist
   
132.077   Inspections
   
132.078   Unlawful acts
   
132.079   Sale, transfer or change of location
   
132.080   Name and place
   
132.081   Transfer of license
   
132.082   Applicability of regulations to existing businesses
 
   
132.999   Penalty
ARCADES
§ 132.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AMUSEMENT ARCADE or ARCADE. Any place, premises or establishment which is
exclusively used for mechanical amusement devices, as defined herein, or any
business, building or establishment which has a current certificate of
occupancy for a use other than an arcade and in addition have 15 or more
mechanical amusement devices, as defined in this section.
   MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE. Any machine which, upon the insertion of a
coin, slug, token, plate or disc, or the payment of a price, or the use or
application of a credit master switch, or limited or unlimited play upon
payment of a certain sum, or any other similar type of activity, may be
operated by the public generally for use as a game, entertainment or amusement,
whether or not registering a score and whether operated by hand, electricity or
any other form of power. It shall include such devices as video and electronic
machines, marble machines, pinball machines, skill ball machines, mechanical
grab machines, coin-operated bowling alleys, shuffleboard game machines or
devices, whether played with discs, weights, pucks or balls, mechanical guns,
coin-operated motion picture machines, any so-called claw, crane or digger
machine, or any other games, devices, operations or transactions similar
thereto, under whatever name they may be indicated, which when operated, do not
deliver as a result of the application of an element of chance, any money or
property, or by the operation of which a person may not be entitled to receive
as a result of the application of an element of chance, any money or property.
(Prior Code, § 40-34) (Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
§ 132.002 GAMBLING.
   No person who has been issued a certificate from the City Clerk’s office
pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter shall, directly or indirectly, or
through any servant, agent or employee, have upon the premises, any game
machine or device which, according to federal or state law, constitutes a
gambling device or permit gambling or the use, possession or presence of
gambling paraphernalia on the premises.
(Prior Code, § 40-35) (Ord. 723, passed 2-22-1982; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.003 INDECENT, IMMORAL AND THE LIKE LANGUAGE OR CONDUCT.
   No person who has been issued a certificate from the City Clerk’s office
pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter shall, directly or indirectly, or
through any servant, agent or employee permit any indecent, immoral or profane
language, or indecent, immoral, disorderly, vulgar, lewd, obscene or improper
conduct on the licensed premises.
(Prior Code, § 40-36) (Ord. 723, passed 2-22-1982; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.004 DISORDERLY PERSONS.
   No person who has been issued a certificate from the City Clerk’s office
pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter shall, directly or indirectly, or
through any servant, agent or employee, permit the licensed premises to become
a resort for disorderly persons of any type.
(Prior Code, § 40-37) (Ord. 723, passed 2-22-1982; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.005 MINORS.
   No person who has been issued a certificate from the City Clerk’s office
pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter shall, directly or indirectly, or
through any servant, agent or employee:
   (A)   Employ a person who is under the age of 18 years of age;
   (B)   Permit any person under the age of 17 years to be upon the premises
after 10:00 p.m. unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian;
   (C)   Permit operation of any mechanical amusement device by any person
under 18 years of age between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m., excluding
Saturdays, Sundays, holidays and days when school is not in session; and/or
   (D)   Allow or permit a minor who is 17 years of age or under to remain in
or frequent his or her establishment if the parent or guardian of such minor
has notified the person operating said amusement arcade, in writing, objecting
to such minor’s presence or playing of machines on premises and furnished good
and sufficient identification (snapshot photo) of such minor.
(Prior Code, § 40-38) (Ord. 723, passed 2-22-1982; Ord. 1446, passed 4-3-2017;
Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.006 ALCOHOL ON PREMISES.
   No person who has been issued a certificate from the City Clerk’s office
pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter shall, directly or indirectly, or
through any servant, agent or employee, permit the possession or use of any
alcoholic liquor on the premises, nor shall the licensed premises be accessible
in any way with any place where alcoholic liquor is kept, sold, distributed or
given away. This prohibition shall not apply while a State Liquor Control
Commission license is in effect at the licensed premises.
(Prior Code, § 40-39) (Ord. 723, passed 2-22-1982; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.007 INTOXICATED PERSONS.
   No person who has been issued a certificate from the City Clerk’s office
pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter shall, directly or indirectly, or
through any servant, agent or employee, permit intoxicated persons to loiter on
the premises.
(Prior Code, § 40-40) (Ord. 723, passed 2-22-1982; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.008 DRUGS.
   No person who has been issued a certificate from the City Clerk’s office
pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter shall, directly or indirectly, or
through any servant, agent or employee, permit the possession or use of any
drug or narcotic, including marijuana, on the premises.
(Prior Code, § 40-41) (Ord. 723, passed 2-22-1982; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.009 NOISE.
   No person who has been issued a certificate from the City Clerk’s office
pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter shall, directly or indirectly, or
through any servant, agent or employee, permit noise to emerge from licensed
premises which is disturbing to the surrounding area.
(Prior Code, § 40-42) (Ord. 723, passed 2-22-1982; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.010 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   No person who has been issued a certificate from the City Clerk’s office
pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter shall, directly or indirectly, or
through any servant, agent or employee, permit any person to operate or cause
to be operated in the city the amusement arcade between the hours of 11:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m., except on Fridays, Saturdays and legal holidays, when the
prohibited hours shall be between 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(Prior Code, § 40-43) (Ord. 723, passed 2-22-1982; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.011 TRAFFIC CONTROL.
   All parking and other use of streets and alleys by the operators of motor
vehicles at amusement arcades shall conform to the provisions of the state’s
Motor Vehicle Code and the city’s traffic ordinances, zoning ordinance and
directions of the Chief of Police (or his or her designated representative) as
provided from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 40-44) (Ord. 723, passed 2-22-1982; Ord. 1446, passed 4-3-2017;
Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.012 INSPECTIONS.
   A person holding a license issued pursuant to the provisions of this
subchapter at all times shall keep the licensed premises open for inspection by
members of the Police and Fire Departments or other city departments for the
purpose of enforcing any ordinance relating to the health, safety and welfare
of the public.
(Prior Code, § 40-45) (Ord. 723, passed 2-22-1982; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.013 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, maintain or conduct an
amusement arcade without a license issued by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 40-46) (Ord. 723, passed 2-22-1982; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.014 QUALIFICATIONS OF LICENSEE.
   No amusement arcade license shall be granted to any person who has been
convicted of any crime involving moral turpitude, or to any person who has been
convicted of a misdemeanor such as gambling or fraud or who has been convicted
of any felony.
(Prior Code, § 40-47) (Ord. 723, passed 2-22-1982; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
§ 132.015 APPROVAL OF BUILDING INSPECTOR, POLICE CHIEF AND CHIEF OF THE FIRE
DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   Prior to the issuance of a license pursuant hereto, an inspection of
the premises involved shall be made by the City Engineer and by the Chief of
Police (or his or her designated representative) and the Chief of the Fire
Department (or his or her designated representative), and their approval or
disapproval noted on the application before consideration by the City Council.
Before the City Engineer approves the same, he or she shall determine that the
construction of the building involved is in full compliance with the Building
Code and other pertinent city ordinances. The City Engineer shall also
determine whether the proposed arcade complies with all requirements of Ch. 159
of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Before the Chief of Police (or his or her designated representative)
approves the same, he or she must determine that the applicant is providing
sufficient traffic aids and regulations whereby the vehicular traffic shall not
constitute a nuisance or danger. The Police Department shall make a traffic
study and also determine whether sufficient parking spaces are provided for the
proposed arcade pursuant to the state’s Motor Vehicle Code and the city’s
traffic ordinances and traffic-control orders, zoning ordinances and directives
of the Chief of Police (or his or her designated representative) as provided
from time to time before approving the application.
   (C)   Before the Chief of the Fire Department (or his or her designated
representative) approves the same, he or she must determine that all proposed
mechanical amusement devices and all electrical equipment proposed to be used
herein, comply with all applicable ordinances, codes, statutes, rules and
regulations regulating the same.
   (D)   The application shall be rejected if the person conducting said
investigation finds any violation of such codes, ordinances, statutes or rules
and regulations.
(Prior Code, § 40-48) (Ord. 723, passed 2-22-1982; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
§ 132.016 LICENSE FEE.
   The annual fee for an amusement arcade shall be $500, with future fees to be
determined by action of the Council.
(Prior Code, § 40-49) (Ord. 723, passed 2-22-1982; Ord. 1057, passed 12-21-
1998; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
§ 132.017 PUBLIC HEARING.
   Upon receipt by the City Clerk of the application for an arcade license, a
public hearing shall be scheduled before the City Council to determine whether
said license shall be issued. Notice of the public hearing shall be published
in the local newspaper once, at least ten days before the scheduled hearing.
Said notice shall set forth the proposed location of the arcade.
(Prior Code, § 40-50) (Ord. 723, passed 2-22-1982; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
§ 132.018 LICENSE ISSUANCE AND FORM.
   (A)   The City Council, upon receiving an application or reapplication for
an amusement arcade license, shall pass upon the same and, if satisfied that
the applicant possesses the qualifications herein prescribed, may grant a
license for one year.
   (B)   The City Council may reject any application if it finds any of the
following:
      (1)   The applicant does not comply fully with the requirements of §
132.014 of this chapter;
      (2)   Approval has not been noted on the application by the City
Engineer, Police Chief and Chief of the Fire Department;
      (3)   The applicant has previously violated any provision or requirement
of this subchapter;
      (4)   Violations of any provision or requirement of this subchapter have
occurred at the proposed location previously;
      (5)   The proposed arcade would be harmful to the public safety, health,
morals or welfare of the city;
      (6)   The proposed location of the arcade (including its parking
facility) is within 500 feet from the nearest point of the property line of a
public or private elementary, middle, junior high or senior high school. The
restriction established in this division (B)(6) shall not apply to any arcade
which was issued a license by the city prior to the effective date of this
division (B)(6);
      (7)   The proposed location of the arcade (including the arcade’s parking
facility) is within 200 feet from the nearest point of the property line of a
residence, unless a petition to establish an arcade is presented to the City
Council, signed by at least 51% of the persons residing within 200 feet of the
proposed arcade location. The restriction established in this division (B)(7)
shall not apply to any arcade which was issued a license by the city prior to
the effective date of this division (B)(7);
      (8)   The proposed location of the arcade (including its parking
facility) is within 500 feet from the nearest point of the property line of an
already existing arcade in the city. The restriction established in this
division (B)(8) shall not apply to any arcade which was issued a license by the
city prior to the effective date of this division (B)(8);
      (9)   The applicant has failed to provide all the information required by
§
130.032 of this title, and the Council finds that such failure to provide the
requested information prohibits the Council from making a determination of the
applicant’s qualifications for an arcade license; and
      (10)   The proposed arcade would cause the number of presently existing
arcades within the city to exceed the ratio of one arcade for every 5,000
population in the city as determined by the latest federal census and the
Council finds that the addition of any more arcades would be harmful to the
public safety, health, morals or welfare of the city.
(Prior Code, § 40-51) (Ord. 723, passed 2-22-1982; Ord. 724, passed 3-1-1982;
Ord. 731, passed 5-24-1982; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
§ 132.019 LICENSE DISPLAY.
   A license issued pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter shall be
displayed at all times in the licensed premises and the licensee shall also
place an identification sticker issued by the City Clerk on each mechanical
amusement device.
(Prior Code, § 40-52) (Ord. 723, passed 2-22-1982; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
§ 132.020 LICENSE ASSIGNMENT OR TRANSFER.
   No amusement arcade license shall be assignable or transferable.
(Prior Code, § 40-53) (Ord. 723, passed 2-22-1982; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
§ 132.021 CHANGE OF LOCATION.
   If the holder of an amusement arcade license desires to change the location
of the arcade, he or she shall so notify the City Council and file a new
application for a license; provided that, the Council may dispense with proof
of good character.
(Prior Code, § 40-54) (Ord. 723, passed 2-22-1982; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
§ 132.022 NUMBER OF MACHINES.
   (A)   A licensed arcade shall be limited to the number of mechanical
amusement devices set forth in its application for a license unless it receives
prior consent from the City Clerk to place additional devices in the arcade.
   (B)   The City Clerk, before giving said approval, must first send the
applicant’s request for additional devices to the Police and Fire Departments
to conduct an investigation as required in §
132.015 of this chapter and obtain their approval concerning the additional
machines.
(Prior Code, § 40-55) (Ord. 723, passed 2-22-1982; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
§ 132.023 OBSTRUCTIONS TO PUBLIC VIEW PROHIBITED.
   No mechanical amusement device arcade licensee shall permit any obstruction
of a public view by the use of drawn shades, blinds, screens, posters or walls
of a permanent or moveable nature.
(Prior Code, § 40-56) (Ord. 723, passed 2-22-1982; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.024 LICENSE RENEWAL.
   A public hearing for a renewal of license is not required; provided, there
have been no violations of any provision hereof in the previous year at said
location.
(Prior Code, § 40-57) (Ord. 723, passed 2-22-1982; Ord. 1446, passed 4-3-2017;
Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
§ 132.025 LICENSE REVOCATION.
   The City Council may revoke any license, for any violation of any of the
provisions of §§
132.001 through
132.024 of this chapter by the owner, operator or employee of the arcade. The
license may also be revoked for any violation of the fire regulations or codes
of the city, state and also for violation of any applicable city ordinance or
state statute. Said license may be revoked only after a hearing before the
Council, at a time and place set by the Council. The licensee shall be given at
least ten days’ notice prior to the date of hearing, by first class mail.
(Prior Code, § 40-58) (Ord. 723, passed 2-22-1982; Ord. 724, passed 3-1-1982;
Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
POOLROOMS AND POOL TABLES
§ 132.040 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   POOL TABLE. Includes snooker, bumper pool, billiards or any other type of
game.
   POOLROOM. Any place, room, hall or building whose principal business is to
provide a place for the playing of pool, snooker, bumper pool, billiards or any
other similar type of game, or any establishment which has five or more pool
tables.
(Prior Code, § 40-59) (Ord. 782, passed 5-20-1985; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
§ 132.041 MINORS.
   No person who has been issued a license pursuant to the provisions of this
subchapter shall, directly or indirectly, or through any servant, agent or
employee:
   (A)   Employ a person who is under the age of 18 years of age;
   (B)   Permit any person under the age of 17 years to be upon the premises
after 10:00 p.m. unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian;
   (C)   Permit the playing of pool or similar type game by any person under 18
years of age between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., excluding Saturdays,
Sundays, holidays and days when school is not in session;
   (D)   Permit persons under 15 years of age to play pool or similar type of
game at any time, unless accompanied by a parent or guardian; and
   (E)   Allow or permit a minor who is 17 years of age or under to remain in
or frequent his or her establishment if the parent or guardian of such minor
has notified the person operating said poolroom or pool table in writing,
objecting to such minor’s presence or playing of pool or similar type of game
on the premises, and furnished good and sufficient identification (snapshot
photo) of such minor.
(Prior Code, § 40-60) (Ord. 782, passed 5-20-1985; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.042 HOURS.
   No person shall keep open any establishment for the purpose of playing pool
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(Prior Code, § 40-61) (Ord. 782, passed 5-20-1985; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.043 REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall conduct, maintain or operate a poolroom without a
license issued by the City Clerk.
   (B)   No person shall conduct, maintain or operate any establishment which
has a pool table without a license issued by the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 40-62) (Ord. 782, passed 5-20-1985; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.044 FEE.
   (A)   The fee for a license for a poolroom shall be $100, plus $50 for each
pool table.
   (B)   The license fee for each pool table shall be $50.
(Prior Code, § 40-63) (Ord. 782, passed 5-20-1985; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
§ 132.045 INSPECTION.
   No license shall be granted pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter
without the approval of the Fire Chief, Police Chief and Health Department.
Such approvals shall be given if the premises to be licensed comply with all
applicable ordinances. No person shall be granted a license pursuant to this
subchapter unless he or she is over 18 years of age.
(Prior Code, § 40-64) (Ord. 782, passed 5-20-1985)
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS AND OUTCALL MASSAGE SERVICES
§ 132.060 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   EMPLOYEE. Any person other than a massagist, who renders any service in
connection with the operation of a massage business and receives compensation
from the operator of the business or patrons.
   LICENSEE. The person to whom a license has been issued to own or operate a
massage establishment, as defined herein.
   MASSAGE. The treating of external parts of the body for remedial or hygienic
purposes, consisting of stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding,
vibrating or stimulating with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical
electrical apparatus or appliances with or without such supplementary aids as
rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powder, creams, lotions,
ointment or other such similar preparations commonly used in the practice of
massage, under such circumstances that it is reasonably expected that the
person to whom the treatment is provided with pay money therefor.
   MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT or MASSAGE PARLOR. Any establishment which engages in
the practice of massage as defined herein, and which has a fixed place of
business where any person, firm, association or corporation carries on any of
the activities, as defined herein. MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT includes a health
club, health spa or any physical fitness club or business that offers massages
on occasion or incidental to its principal operation.
   MASSAGIST, MASSEUR or MASSEUSE. Any person who, for any consideration
whatsoever, engages in the practice of massage, as defined herein.
   OUTCALL MASSAGE SERVICE. Any business, the function of which is to engage in
or carry on massages at a location designated by the customer or client rather
than at a massage establishment as defined herein, only as permitted by the
terms of this subchapter. (See § 132.078(E) of this chapter.)
   PATRON. Any person 18 years of age or over who receives a massage under such
circumstances that it is reasonably expected that he or she will pay money or
be given any other consideration therefor.
   PERMITTEE. The person to whom a permit has been issued to act in the
capacity of a massagist (masseur or masseuse), as herein defined.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint stock company,
corporation or combination of individuals of whatever form or character.
   PROSTITUTION. Engaging in sexual activity as a business including:
      (1)   The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks or female breasts;
      (2)   Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; or
      (3)   Homosexual and other deviate sexual relations.
   RECOGNIZED SCHOOL or MASSAGE SCHOOL. Any school or educational institution
licensed to do business as a school or educational institution in the state in
which it is located, or any school recognized by or approved by or affiliated
with the American Massage and Therapy Association, Inc. and which has for its
purpose the teaching of the theory, method, profession or work of massage.
   SEXUAL OR GENITAL AREA. Genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus or perineum of
any person, or the vulva or breasts of a female.
   STUDENT. Any person who, under the guidance of an instructor in a massage
school, is being trained or instructed in the theory, method or practice of
massage.
(Prior Code, § 40-111) (Ord. 1294, passed 4-21-2008; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-
2019)
§ 132.061 LICENSE AND PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall operate a massage establishment without first
obtaining a license from the city.
   (B)   No person shall practice massage as a massagist, whether at a massage
establishment or as an outcall service within the city, unless he or she has a
valid and subsisting massagist’s permit issued to him or her by the city
pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter.
   (C)   It shall be the responsibility of an owner, operator, manager or
licensee hereunder to ensure that each person employed or engaged by him or her
in said business as a massagist shall have a valid massagist permit pursuant to
this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 40-112) (Ord. 1294, passed 4-21-2008; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-
2019) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.062 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   This subchapter shall not apply to the following individuals while
engaged in the personal performance of the duties of their respective
professions:
      (1)   Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths or physical
therapists who are fully licensed to practice their respective professions in
the state;
      (2)   Nurses who are registered under the laws of the state; or
      (3)   Barbers and cosmetologists who are duly licensed under the laws of
the state; except that, this exemption shall apply solely to the massaging of
the neck, face, scalp and hair of the customer for cosmetic or beautifying
purposes.
   (B)   In any prosecution for violation of this subchapter, the foregoing
exemptions shall constitute affirmative defenses and it shall be incumbent upon
the defendant to show that he or she or the place involved are not subject to
the provisions of this chapter. Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to
shift the burden of proof of the violation to the defendant.
(Prior Code, § 40-113) (Ord. 1294, passed 4-21-2008; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-
2019)
§ 132.063 LICENSE OR PERMIT PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Any applicant for a license or permit pursuant to this subchapter
shall present to the City Clerk’s office the application containing the
aforementioned and described information. The applicant shall be referred to
the Chief of Police who shall have 30 days in which to investigate the
application and the background of the applicant. Based on such investigation,
the Chief of Police or his or her representative shall render a recommendation
as to the approval or denial of the permit to the City Clerk.
   (B)   The Chief of Police shall recommend denial or approval of an
application for license or permit. In making his or her determination
hereunder, the Chief of Police shall consider:
      (1)   Penal history. All applicant’s convictions, the reasons therefor
and the demeanor of the applicant subsequent to his or her release; and
      (2)   License and permit history. The license and permit history of the
applicant; whether such person was previously operating in the city or state,
or in another state under a license or permit, and had such license or permit
revoked or suspended; the reasons therefor; and the demeanor of the applicant
subsequent to such action.
   (C)   The Division of Inspection, including, but not limited to, the
Building Inspector, Electrical Inspector, Plumbing Inspector, the Police
Department and the Fire Department shall inspect the premises proposed to be
devoted to the massage parlor or similar business, and shall make within 30
days of the inspection recommendations to the City Clerk concerning compliance
with the requirements of this subchapter and all other applicable city
ordinances and regulations. If the applicant has already obtained a valid
certificate of occupancy and certificate of compliance prior to the passage of
the ordinance codified in this chapter, then an inspection by the Building,
Electrical and Plumbing Inspectors is not required as set forth above.
(Prior Code, § 40-114) (Ord. 1294, passed 4-21-2008; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-
2019)
§ 132.064 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE OR PERMIT FOR A MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT.
   The City Clerk shall issue a license for a massage establishment or a permit
for a massagist, masseur or masseuse if all requirements for a massage
establishment or massagist permit described in this subchapter are met, unless
he or she finds:
   (A)   The correct permit or license fee has not been tendered to the city
and in the case of a check, or bank draft, honored with payment upon
presentation;
   (B)   The operation, as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would not
comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, the city’s
building, zoning and health regulations;
   (C)   (1)   The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders
holding more than 10% of the stock (or membership interest if a LLC) of the
corporation; or any of the officers or directors if the applicant is a
corporation; or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the
applicant is a partnership; or the holder of any lien, of any nature, upon the
business; or the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation
of the business, have been convicted of any of the following offenses within or
without of the state:
         (a)   An offense involving the use of force and violence upon the
person of another that amounts to a felony;
         (b)   An offense involving sexual misconduct; and
         (c)   An offense involving narcotics, dangerous drugs or dangerous
weapons that amounts to a felony.
      (2)   The City Clerk may issue a license or permit to any person
convicted of any crimes described in divisions (C)(1)(a), (C)(1)(b) or (C)(1)
(c) above if it finds that such conviction occurred at least five years prior
to the date of the application and the applicant has had no subsequent felony
convictions of any nature and no subsequent misdemeanor convictions for crimes
mentioned in this section.
   (D)   The applicant has knowingly made any false or fraudulent statement of
fact in the permit application or in any document required by the city in
conjunction therewith or have failed to provide the requested information;
   (E)   The applicant has had a massage business, massagist or other similar
permit or license denied, revoked or suspended by the city or any other similar
permit or license denied, revoked or suspended by the city or any other state
or local agency within five years prior to the date of the application;
   (F)   The applicant, if an individual, or any of the officers and directors,
(or members if a LLC) if the applicant is a corporation; or any of the
partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership; or the
manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business,
is not age 18 years or older; and
   (G)   The applicant does owe any taxes, fees or costs to the city.
(Prior Code, § 40-115) (Ord. 1294, passed 4-21-2008; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-
2019)
§ 132.065 APPROVAL OR DENIAL OF APPLICATION.
   (A)   The City Clerk shall act to approve or deny an application for a
license or permit under this subchapter within a reasonable period of time and
in no event shall he or she act to approve or deny said license or permit later
than 90 days from the date that said application was accepted by the City
Clerk’s office.
   (B)   Every license or permit issued pursuant to this subchapter shall be
valid for one year and must be renewed as required by this subchapter.
   (C)   An applicant denied a license, pursuant to these provisions, may
appeal to the City Council in writing, stating reasons why the license should
be granted. The City Council may grant, deny or suspend a license or permit
after an appeal hearing.
(Prior Code, § 40-116) (Ord. 1294, passed 4-21-2008; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-
2019)
§ 132.066 POSTING OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Every massagist shall post the permit required by this subchapter in
his or her work area.
   (B)   Every individual, corporation, partnership or association licensed
under this subchapter shall display such license in a prominent place.
(Prior Code, § 40-117) (Ord. 1294, passed 4-21-2008; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-
2019)
§ 132.067 RECORDS OF EMPLOYEES AND PATRONS.
   (A)   (1)   The licensee or the person designated by the licensee of a
massage establishment shall maintain a register of all persons employed or
engaged as massagists.
      (2)   Included in the register will be a copy of each massagist permit.
      (3)   Such register shall be available at the massage establishment to
representatives of the city during regular business hours.
   (B)   Every patron shall furnish proof of identity by showing a valid
driver’s license, voter registration certificate or similar identification.
(Prior Code, § 40-118) (Ord. 1294, passed 4-21-2008; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-
2019) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.068 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Any license issued for a massage establishment by the city may be
revoked or suspended after notice and a hearing, for good cause, or in any case
where any of the provisions of this subchapter are violated or where any
employee of the licensee, including a massagist is engaged in any conduct which
violates any of the state or local laws or ordinances at licensee’s place of
business.
   (B)   Such permit may also be revoked or suspended, after notice and
hearing, upon the recommendations of the Health Inspector that such business is
being managed, conducted or maintained without regard to proper sanitation and
hygiene.
(Prior Code, § 40-119) (Ord. 1294, passed 4-21-2008; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-
2019)
§ 132.069 REVOCATION OF MASSAGIST PERMIT.
   A massagist, masseur or masseuse permit issued by the city may be revoked or
suspended, after notice and hearing, where it appears that the massagist,
masseur or masseuse has been convicted of any offense which would be cause for
denial of a permit upon an original application, has made a false statement on
an application for a permit, or has committed an act in violation of this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 40-120) (Ord. 1294, passed 4-21-2008; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-
2019)
§ 132.070 RENEWAL OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Application to renew a license to operate a massage establishment or
similar business or a massagist’s permit shall be filed at least 15 days prior
to the date of expiration. Such renewal shall be annual and shall be
accompanied by the annual fee.
   (B)   The applicant shall present the following information to the City
Clerk’s office:
      (1)   A sworn affidavit by the applicant stating that the matters
contained in the original application have not changed, or if they have
changed, specifically stating the changes which have occurred; and
      (2)   A signed statement from a medical or osteopathic doctor stating
that the applicant for a massagist’s license has been examined within the prior
90 days and found to be free from any contagious or communicable disease which
is likely to be communicated during the administration of a massage.
   (C)   The application shall be referred to the Chief of Police who shall
investigate the criminal history of the applicant and any employees holding
permits as massagist since the grant of the original license and the results of
any inspection of the premises during the preceding year.
(Prior Code, § 40-121) (Ord. 1294, passed 4-21-2008; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-
2019)
§ 132.071 FACILITIES NECESSARY.
   No license to conduct a massage establishment shall be issued unless
inspectors of the city reveal that the establishment complies with each of the
following minimum requirements:
   (A)   All provisions of the city’s Building, Plumbing, Fire, Electrical and
Health Codes have been fulfilled. If the applicant has already obtained a valid
certificate of occupancy and certificate of compliance prior to the passage of
this subchapter, then an inspection by the Building, Electrical and Plumbing
Inspectors is not required with the filing of the application;
   (B)   A representative and readable sign shall be posted at the main
entrance identifying the establishment as a massage establishment, and all
signs shall comply with the sign requirements of the city;
   (C)   There shall be no entrance or exit way which provides direct access to
another type of business residence or living quarters;
   (D)   During business hours the premises shall remain open and no exits,
entrances or secondary doorways shall be locked or obstructed in any way to
prevent the immediate free ingress or egress of persons;
   (E)   Minimum ventilation shall be provided in accordance with the state’s
Construction Code;
   (F)   Minimum lighting shall be provided in accordance with the state’s
Construction Code, and in addition at least one artificial light of not less
than 60 watts shall be provided in each enclosed room or booth where massage
services are performed;
   (G)   Adequate dressing, locker and toilet facilities shall be provided for
patrons. One dressing room and, if clothing and personal property is not kept
with the patron, a separate locker for each patron to be served, which shall be
capable of being locked as well as a minimum of one toilet and one wash basin
shall be provided. However, if male and female patrons are to be served
simultaneously at the establishment, separate massage rooms and separate
dressing and toilet facilities shall be provided for male and female patrons;
   (H)   Construction of rooms used for toilets, steam baths and showers shall
be made water-proof with approved water-proofed materials and shall be
installed in accordance with the city’s Building Code. Plumbing fixtures shall
be installed in accordance with the city’s Plumbing Code.
      (1)   Steam rooms and shower compartments shall have water-proof floors,
walls and ceilings.
      (2)   Floors of wet and dry heat rooms shall be adequately pitched to one
or more floor drains properly connected to the sewer.
      (3)   A source of hot water must be available within the immediate
vicinity of dry and wet heat rooms to facilitate cleaning.
   (I)   The premises shall have adequate equipment for disinfecting and
sterilizing non-disposable instruments and materials used in administering
massages. Such non-disposable instruments and materials shall be disinfected
after use on each patron;
   (J)   Closed cabinets shall be provided and used for the storage of clean
linen, towels and other materials used in connection with administering
massages. All soiled linens, towels and other materials shall be kept separate
from the clean storage areas. No common use of towels or linens shall be
permitted; and
   (K)   A minimum of one separate washbasin shall be provided in each massage
parlor for the use of employees of any such establishment, and the basin shall
provide soap or detergent and hot and cold water at all times, and shall be
located within or as close as practicable to the area devoted to the performing
of massage services. In addition, there shall be provided at each washbasin
sanitary towels placed in permanently installed dispensers.
(Prior Code, § 40-122) (Ord. 1294, passed 4-21-2008; Ord. 1359, passed 3-12-
2012; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.072 OPERATING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Every portion of the massage establishment, including appliances and
apparatus, shall be kept clean and operated in a sanitary condition.
   (B)   Price rates for all services shall be prominently posted in the
reception area in a location available to all prospective customers.
   (C)   The premises shall not be made available for accommodating any person
as sleeping quarters. No beds, water mattresses, cots or equipment designed for
sleeping shall be permitted on the premises.
   (D)   No massage shall be performed in a private room which is completely
closed off to the view of other persons, nor fitted with a door capable of
being locked or barred. Reasonable measures may be used to offer privacy to
patrons such as partitions, walls, curtains and the like.
   (E)   (1)   All employees, including massagists and other employees
attending patrons, shall be clean and wear clean uniforms covering the torso.
      (2)   Such uniforms shall be non-transparent and of washable material and
shall be kept in a clean condition. Such clothing shall cover the person’s
pubic area, perineum, buttocks, natal cleft and the entire chest to four inches
below the collarbone, and legs not exposed more than two inches above the
knees.
   (F)   All massage establishments shall be provided with clean laundered
sheets and towels in sufficient quantity and shall be laundered after each use
thereof and stored in a sanitary manner.
   (G)   No massage establishment granted a license under the provisions of
this subchapter shall place, publish or distribute or cause to be placed,
published or distributed any advertisement, picture or statement which is known
or through the exercise of reasonable care should be known to be false,
deceptive or misleading in order to induce any person to purchase or utilize
any professional massage services.
(Prior Code, § 40-123) (Ord. 1294, passed 4-21-2008; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-
2019) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.073 PERSONS UNDER AGE 18 PROHIBITED ON PREMISES.
   No person shall permit any person under the age of 18 years to come or
remain on the premises of any massage business establishment, as massagist,
employee or patron, unless such person is on the premises on lawful business.
(Prior Code, § 40-124) (Ord. 1294, passed 4-21-2008; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-
2019) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.074 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall sell, give, dispense, provide or keep, or cause to be sold,
given, dispensed, provided or kept, any alcoholic beverage on the premises of
any massage business.
(Prior Code, § 40-125) (Ord. 1294, passed 4-21-2008; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-
2019) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.075 HOURS.
   No massage business shall be kept open for any purposes between the hours of
2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m.
(Prior Code, § 40-126) (Ord. 1294, passed 4-21-2008; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-
2019) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.076 EMPLOYMENT OF MASSAGIST.
   No person shall employ as a massagist any person unless said employee has
obtained and has in effect a permit issued pursuant to this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 40-127) (Ord. 1294, passed 4-21-2008; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-
2019) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.077 INSPECTIONS.
   The Chief of Police or police officer or other authorized inspectors from
the city shall from time to time make inspection of each massage business
establishment for the purposes of determining that the provisions of this
subchapter are fully complied with. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to
fail to allow such inspection officer access to the premises or hinder such
officer in any manner.
(Prior Code, § 40-128) (Ord. 1294, passed 4-21-2008; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-
2019) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.078 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, in a massage establishment, to
place his or her hand or hands upon, to touch with any part of his or her body,
to fondle in any manner, or to massage, a sexual or genital part of any other
person. Sexual or genital parts shall include the genitals, pubic area,
buttocks, anus or perineum of any person, or the vulva or breasts of a female.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, in a massage establishment, to
expose his or her sexual or genital parts, or any portion thereof, to any other
person. It shall also be unlawful for any person, in a massage establishment,
to expose the sexual or genital parts, or any portions thereof, of any other
person.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person, while in the presence of any
other person in a massage establishment, to fail to conceal with a fully opaque
covering, the sexual or genital parts of his or her body.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person owning, operating or managing a
massage establishment, any agent, employee or any other person under his or her
control or supervision to perform such acts prohibited in divisions (A) or (B)
above.
   (E)   It shall be further unlawful for any permittee under this subchapter
to administer a massage on an outcall basis, as defined. Such person shall
administer a massage solely within an establishment licensed to carry on such
business under this subchapter. Any violation of these provisions shall be
deemed grounds for revocation of the permit granted hereunder. The restriction
on outcall massage shall not apply to a permittee who performs outcall massage,
as defined herein, upon a customer or client who because of reasons of physical
defects or incapacities or due to illness is physically unable to travel to the
massage establishment. If any outcall massage is performed under this
exception, a record of the date and hour of each treatment and the name and
address of the customer or client, and the name of the employee administering
such treatment and the type of treatment administered, as well as the nature of
the physical defect, incapacity or illness of said client or customer shall be
kept by the licensee or person or employee designated by the licensee. Such
records shall be open to inspection by officials charged with the enforcement
of public health laws. The information furnished or secured as a result of any
such inspection shall be confidential. Any unauthorized disclosure or use of
such information by an employee of the business or the city shall be unlawful.
   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any massage service to be performed within
any cubicle, room, booth or any area within a massage establishment which is
fitted with a door capable of being locked.
(Prior Code, § 40-129) (Ord. 1294, passed 4-21-2008; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-
2019) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.079 SALE, TRANSFER OR CHANGE OF LOCATION.
   Upon sale, transfer or relocation of a massage establishment, the license
therefor shall be null and void unless approved as provided by this subchapter.
It shall be the duty of all owners or licensees having knowledge of the sale,
transfer or relocation of a massage establishment, to immediately report such
sale, transfer or relocation to the City Clerk’s office. The failure to do so
shall result in an immediate suspension of all business.
(Prior Code, § 40-130) (Ord. 1294, passed 4-21-2008; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-
2019)
§ 132.080 NAME AND PLACE.
   No person granted a license pursuant to this subchapter shall operate the
massage establishment under a name not specified in his or her license, nor
shall he or she conduct business under any designation or location not
specified in his or her license.
(Prior Code, § 40-131) (Ord. 1294, passed 4-21-2008; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-
2019) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.081 TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   (A)   No license or permit shall be transferable, except with the consent of
the City Clerk and ratified by the City Council.
   (B)   An application for such transfer shall be in writing and shall be
accompanied by fees provided by City Council resolution. The written
application for such transfer shall contain the same information as requested
herein for initial application for the license or permit.
(Prior Code, § 40-132) (Ord. 1294, passed 4-21-2008; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-
2019)
§ 132.082 APPLICABILITY OF REGULATIONS TO EXISTING BUSINESSES.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall be applicable to all persons and
businesses described herein, whether the herein described activities were
established before or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this
subchapter derives, and including person or persons whose application is
presently under consideration or investigation by the city.
(Prior Code, § 40-134) (Ord. 1294, passed 4-21-2008; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-
2019)
§ 132.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person, except those who are specifically exempted by §§
132.060 through
132.082 of this chapter, whether acting as an individual, owner, employees of
the owner, operator or employee of the operator, or whether acting as a mere
agent or independent contractor for the owner, employee or operator, or acting
as a participant or worker in any way directly or indirectly who gives massages
or operates a massage establishment or any service defined in §§
132.060 through
132.082 of this chapter without first obtaining a license or permit and paying
a fee to do so from the city or shall violate any provisions of §§
132.060 through
132.082 of this chapter shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction
and, upon a determination of responsibility, is subject to a fine not less than
$25 and not more than $500 for each violation and is subject to all other
remedies allowed by law, including the provision of §
132.006 of this code of ordinances. If any person commits a second offense, or
a subsequent violation of §§
132.060 through
132.082 of this chapter, such a violation constitutes a misdemeanor punishable
by a fine not exceeding $500 and/or imprisonment not exceeding 90 days;
provided, the authorized city official issues an appearance ticket (and not a
municipal civil infraction citation or notice) and marks it as a misdemeanor.
However, nothing herein requires the authorized city official to charge a
repeat offense of §§
132.060 through
132.082 of this chapter by the same person as a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 40-133) (Ord. 1294, passed 4-21-2008; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-
2019)
CHAPTER 133: TATTOO PARLORS AND TATTOOING
Section
   
133.001   Definitions
   
133.002   License required; exceptions
   
133.003   Investigations by Police Chief
   
133.004   License issuance; conditions for denial
   
133.005   Hearings; appeals; variances
   
133.006   Inspections; license display; change of information
   
133.007   License fees
   
133.008   License expiration
   
133.009   License transferability
   
133.010   Premises, proper conditions and inspections
   
133.011   Tattooing of minors prohibited; exceptions
   
133.012   Records
   
133.013   Compliance with the Medical Waste Regulatory Act
   
133.014   Hours of operation
   
133.015   Alcoholic beverages
 
   
133.999   Penalty
§ 133.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   EMPLOYEE. Any person over 18 years of age, who renders any service in
connection with the operation of a tattoo parlor and who receives compensation
from the operator of the parlor or patrons.
   OWNER or OPERATOR. A person who owns or controls the operation of a tattoo
parlor. This includes individuals, licensees, managers, lessees, sponsors,
partnerships, corporations, societies, organizations, associations or any
combination of individuals of whatever form or character.
   PATRON. Any person over 18 years age who receives a tattoo under such
circumstances that it is reasonably expected that he or she will pay money or
give any other consideration therefor.
   TATTOO PARLOR. Any place or establishment where tattooing is made available.
   TATTOOING. The creation of an indelible mark or figure upon the human body
by insertion of pigment into or under the skin or by the production of scars.
(Prior Code, § 40-95) (Ord. 993, passed 6-5-1995; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
§ 133.002 LICENSE REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No owner or operator shall engage in or carry on the operation of a
tattoo parlor without first obtaining a valid tattoo license issued by the City
Clerk for each separate office, place or establishment where tattooing is made
available.
   (B)   The license required by this chapter shall not be required of a
registered physician who, in his or her office or in a hospital, causes a
person to be tattooed for medical identification.
(Prior Code, § 40-96) (Ord. 993, passed 6-5-1995; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
Penalty, see §
133.999
§ 133.003 INVESTIGATIONS BY POLICE CHIEF.
   (A)   Upon receiving an application for a tattoo license, the City Clerk
shall refer such application to the Police Chief who shall conduct an
investigation into the applicant’s moral character and personal and criminal
history. The Police Chief or his or her authorized representative may, in his
or her discretion, require a personal interview of the applicant and such
further information, identification and physical examination of the person as
shall bear on the investigation.
   (B)   In the case of an application for a tattoo license, the Police Chief
or his or her authorized representative shall cause to be conducted an
investigation of the premises where the tattoo parlor is to be carried on for
the purpose of ensuring that such premises comply with all the sanitation
requirements set forth in this chapter and with the ordinances of the city
relating to public health, safety and welfare.
   (C)   An applicant for a tattoo license shall submit to lawful inspections
by the Engineering Department, Police Department, Fire Department and such
other departments and such doctors or other health care providers as may be
necessary to ensure that the proposed business and application comply with all
applicable ordinances and regulations of the city. The Police Chief may refuse
to submit any application for approval to Council until he or she has a report
from any department he or she feels necessary to make an inspection that the
application or proposed premises comply with all ordinances and regulations.
   (D)   Before the City Clerk shall issue any license under this chapter, the
Chief of Police shall first submit to the City Clerk, within 45 days of the
receipt of an application, a report of his or her investigations and
inspections and his or her recommendation.
(Prior Code, § 40-97) (Ord. 993, passed 6-5-1995; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
§ 133.004 LICENSE ISSUANCE; CONDITIONS FOR DENIAL.
   (A)   The City Clerk, upon receipt of an application for a license required
by this chapter, and the reports and recommendations of the Police Chief, shall
place such application upon the agenda for the next regularly scheduled City
Council meeting; provided that, such meeting is not less than six days from the
date of receipt of such application and reports and recommendations by the City
Clerk. If it is less than six days from such receipt, such application and
reports and recommendations shall be placed upon the agenda for the following
meeting of City Council.
   (B)   The City Council shall determine whether or not such license shall be
issued after reviewing the reports of investigations and inspections and the
recommendations of the Police Chief and other code enforcement officers. The
City Council shall direct the City Clerk to issue a tattoo license within 14
days unless it finds that:
      (1)   The correct license fee has not been tendered to the city or, in
the case of a check or bank draft, such check or draft has not been honored
with payment upon presentation;
      (2)   The operation, as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would
not comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, the city’s
building, fire, zoning and health ordinances;
      (3)   The applicant, if an individual; any of the stockholders holding
more than 10% of the stock, any officer and any director, if a corporation; any
partner, including a limited partner, if a partnership; and the manager or
other person principally in charge of the operation of the business, has been
convicted of any crime involving moral turpitude (including, but not limited
to, prostitution and pandering), gambling, extortion, fraud or criminal usury,
unless such conviction occurred at least eight years prior to the date of the
application;
      (4)   The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading or
fraudulent statement of fact on the license application or any document
required by the city in conjunction therewith;
      (5)   The applicant has had a tattoo parlor, or other similar permit or
license denied, revoked or suspended for any of the causes set forth in
division (B)(3) above by the city or any other state or local agency within
eight years prior to the date of the application; and
      (6)   The applicant, if an individual; any officer or director, if a
corporation; any partner, including a limited partner, if a partnership; and
the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the
business, is not over 18 years of age.
   (C)   If the City Council denies any application, it shall specify the
particular grounds for such denial and shall direct the department of legal
affairs to notify the applicant by regular mail addressed to the applicant at
the address shown on the application. Such notice shall specify the grounds for
which the application is denied.
(Prior Code, § 40-98) (Ord. 993, passed 6-5-1995; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
§ 133.005 HEARINGS; APPEALS; VARIANCES.
   (A)   Within 20 days of the date of denial of an application for a tattoo
license, the applicant may request, in the form of a written application to the
City Clerk, a hearing before the City Council for reconsideration of his or her
license application or for a variance of any of the provisions of this chapter,
the violation of which provision constituted grounds for the original denial of
the application. Such hearing shall be conducted as follows.
      (1)   At the hearing, the applicant and his or her attorney may present
and submit evidence on the applicant’s behalf to show that the grounds for the
original denial no longer exist.
      (2)   After reviewing an applicant’s evidence, the City Council shall
determine whether to sustain the denial or grant the application for the
license.
      (3)   At the hearing, the applicant and his or her attorney may present a
statement and adequate evidence showing that:
         (a)   There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or
conditions applying to the proposed tattoo parlor referred to in the appeal
application submitted to the City Clerk, which circumstances or conditions do
not apply generally to any proposed tattoo parlor; or
         (b)   The granting of such tattoo license will not, under
circumstances of the particular case, materially affect adversely the health,
safety or welfare of the persons residing or working in the neighborhood, or
attending any tattoo parlor, and will not under the circumstances of the
particular case, be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious
to the immediate neighborhood or the city at larger.
   (B)   In all cases where City Council grants a variance of any provision of
this chapter, City Council shall find that:
      (1)   The granting of the variance, under such conditions as Council may
deem necessary or desirable to apply thereto, will be in harmony with the
general purpose and intent of this chapter; and
      (2)   It will not be injurious to the neighborhood or otherwise
detrimental to the public welfare.
(Prior Code, § 40-99) (Ord. 993, passed 6-5-1995; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
§ 133.006 INSPECTIONS; LICENSE DISPLAY; CHANGE OF INFORMATION.
   (A)   Every licensee/applicant under this chapter shall permit all
reasonable inspections of his or her business premises and shall at all times
comply with the laws and regulations applicable to such business premises,
including after the expiration of the license and during the period the license
may be revoked or suspended.
   (B)   The tattoo licensee/applicant shall display his or her license in an
open and conspicuous place on the premises of the tattoo parlor.
   (C)   If, while any application for a tattoo license is pending, or during
the term of any license granted hereunder, there is any change in fact, policy
or method which would alter the information provided in such application, the
applicant/licensee shall notify the Police Chief of such change, in writing,
within 72 hours after such change.
(Prior Code, § 40-100) (Ord. 993, passed 6-5-1995; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
Penalty, see §
133.999
§ 133.007 LICENSE FEES.
   The owner or operator of a tattoo parlor shall pay one of the following fees
at the time of application for a tattoo parlor license:
 
Initial annual license              $400
1-year renewal of an annual license $350
 
(Prior Code, § 40-101) (Ord. 993, passed 6-5-1995; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
§ 133.008 LICENSE EXPIRATION.
   All licenses granted under this chapter shall expire on June 1 of each year.
(Prior Code, § 40-102) (Ord. 993, passed 6-5-1995; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
§ 133.009 LICENSE TRANSFERABILITY.
   No tattoo license is transferable, separable or divisible, and such
authority as a license confers shall be conferred only on the licensee named
therein.
(Prior Code, § 40-103) (Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
§ 133.010 PREMISES, PROPER CONDITIONS AND INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Every tattoo parlor shall be equipped with proper sterilization
equipment to prevent the spread of infectious and other diseases. The
sterilization equipment must be maintained in a proper sanitary manner and be
at all times in proper working order. No tattooing shall be performed unless
the tattooing equipment and materials have been sterilized before attempting to
tattoo each patron or customer to prevent the spread of infectious and other
diseases.
   (B)   Every tattoo parlor shall, at reasonable business hours, be kept open
for random and periodic inspections by the city’s Chief of Police or his or her
designee as are deemed necessary for the enforcement of this chapter and the
applicable statutes and ordinances of the city to ensure that the public peace,
property, health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city are
protected.
   (C)   The premises used for a tattoo parlor shall be well lighted and
ventilated. They shall be kept clean and the furniture and equipment shall be
maintained in a safe and sanitary condition.
   (D)   All needles, dyes, inks and other materials and equipment used in
tattooing shall at all times be kept in a clean, sterile and non-toxic
condition and the environment of the premises shall be such as to prevent the
transmission of etiologic agents.
   (E)   (1)   Towels, linens and items for the personal use of tattoo
operators and employees and patrons shall be clean and freshly laundered.
Towels, cloths and sheets shall not be used for more than one person.
      (2)   Heavy, white paper may be substituted for sheets; provided that,
such paper is changed for every patron.
   (F)   (1)   The skin or hands of persons attending patrons shall be clean
and in a healthy condition and the nails shall be kept short.
      (2)   The hands shall be washed thoroughly before giving the patron or
customer any attention.
(Prior Code, § 40-104) (Ord. 993, passed 6-5-1995; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
Penalty, see §
133.999
§ 133.011 TATTOOING OF MINORS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   The tattooing of minors is hereby expressly prohibited, except with
the written permission and in the presence of the minor’s parent or legal
guardian.
   (B)   No owner, operator, employee or any other person shall permit any
minor to come or remain on the premises of any tattoo parlor as a tattoo
operator, employee, observer or patron, unless such person is on the premises
on lawful business.
(Prior Code, § 40-105) (Ord. 993, passed 6-5-1995; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
Penalty, see §
133.999
§ 133.012 RECORDS.
   (A)   Every owner, operator or person who operates a tattoo parlor or who
practices or provides a tattoo shall at all times keep an appointment book in
which the name, age and address of each patron or customer shall be entered,
together with the time, date and place of service and the service provided.
   (B)   Such appointment book shall be available at all times for inspection
by the Police Chief or his or her designee, and such appointment book shall be
kept on file for one year from the date of the last entry therein.
(Prior Code, § 40-106) (Ord. 993, passed 6-5-1995; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
Penalty, see §
133.999
§ 133.013 COMPLIANCE WITH THE MEDICAL WASTE REGULATORY ACT.
   Each owner or operator of a tattoo parlor shall comply with all terms of the
state’s Medical Waste Regulatory Act, as set forth in M.C.L.A. §§ 333.13801
through 333.13831.
(Prior Code, § 40-107) (Ord. 993, passed 6-5-1995; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
Penalty, see §
133.999
§ 133.014 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   No person shall open or operate, or cause to be opened or operated in the
city, any tattoo parlor between 11:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
(Prior Code, § 40-108) (Ord. 993, passed 6-5-1995; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
Penalty, see §
133.999
§ 133.015 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
   No person shall sell, give, dispense, provide or keep, or cause to be sold,
given, dispensed, provided or kept, any alcoholic beverages on the premises of
any tattoo parlor.
(Prior Code, § 40-109) (Ord. 993, passed 6-5-1995; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
Penalty, see §
133.999
§ 133.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any owner, operator, employee or other person who violates any
provision of this chapter and/or gives a tattoo or conducts a tattoo parlor
without first obtaining a license therefor and paying a license fee to the city
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by not more than 90 days
in jail or a fine of $500 or both, plus costs of prosecution.
   (B)   In addition to the penalties provided in division (A) above, the
prosecuting attorney for the city is hereby authorized to utilize all other
legal remedies that are authorized by law to abate or enjoin any violation of
this chapter, place or location where the violation occurs.
(Prior Code, § 40-110) (Ord. 993, passed 6-5-1995; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
CHAPTER 134: USED CAR DEALERS
Section
   
134.001   Storage or display of vehicles
   
134.002   Records
   
134.003   Inspection of vehicles
   
134.004   License required
   
134.005   License fee
   
134.006   Bond
   
134.007   Suitable building as prerequisite
   
134.008   Lot requirements
   
134.009   Inspection
   
134.010   Change of location
§ 134.001 STORAGE OR DISPLAY OF VEHICLES.
   (A)   No used car dealer shall store, display or allow to be stored or
displayed any motor vehicle upon the licensed premises, unless he or she has
obtained proper title for such motor vehicle and proper entry is made in his or
her record book.
   (B)   No such person shall make use of any street, sidewalk or other part of
a public highway, or any other property not designated in the license, for the
storing or display of motor vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 40-135) (Ord. 610, passed 3-27-1978; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-
2019) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 134.002 RECORDS.
   (A)   Every used car dealer shall keep, at the place of business named in
his or her license, a book, in which shall be written legibly in ink, in the
English language, at the time of purchase, the complete description of the used
motor vehicle purchased or taken in trade including the title number, serial
number, motor or vehicle number, year, make, body style and color, also the
name, address, age and description of the seller.
   (B)   (1)   At the time of sale of a motor vehicle, a corresponding entry
shall be made in this book as to the date, name and address of the purchaser.
      (2)   When motor vehicles are purchased or taken in trade in addition to
keeping of the above described book, the titles for these motor vehicles
properly assigned to the licensee shall be obtained at the time of purchase and
shall be kept at the licensed place of business until such time as these
vehicles have been sold or some other dispositions made of them.
      (3)   Such books and titles at all times shall be open for the inspection
of the Chief of Police of any member of the Police Department designated by him
or her.
      (4)   All entries in this book shall be made consecutively each business
day and no entry in such book shall be erased, obliterated, destroyed or
defaced, nor shall any pages be removed.
(Prior Code, § 40-136) (Ord. 610, passed 3-27-1978; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-
2019)
§ 134.003 INSPECTION OF VEHICLES.
   Upon demand, a used car dealer shall exhibit all motor vehicles bought or
received in his or her possession for proper inspection to the Chief of Police
or any member of the Police Department designated by him or her.
(Prior Code, § 40-137) (Ord. 610, passed 3-27-1978; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-
2019)
§ 134.004 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage in business as a used car dealer without a license
issued by the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 40-138) (Ord. 610, passed 3-27-1978; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-
2019) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 134.005 LICENSE FEE.
   The fee for a license for a used car dealer shall be $250. The surety bond
shall be $3,000.
(Prior Code, § 40-139) (Ord. 610, passed 3-27-1978; Ord. 1057, passed 12-21-
1998; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-2019)
§ 134.006 BOND.
   (A)   No used car dealer’s license shall be issued until the proposed
licensee shall deposit with the City Clerk a properly executed bond in the sum
of $3,000 with good and sufficient surety or sureties to be approved by the
City Attorney, which shall be conditioned so as to indemnify or reimburse any
purchaser or seller of a motor vehicle in a sum equal to at least the amount of
any payment or payments such purchaser or seller may have been induced to make
through fraud, cheating or misrepresentation as to kind, quality or value of
such used or secondhand motor vehicle whether the said fraud, cheating or
misrepresentations were made by said used car dealer or by his or her
employees, agents or salespersons either at the time of making the sale or
through any advertisement of any character whatsoever, printed or circulated
with reference to the used or secondhand motor vehicle or any part thereof.
   (B)   The used car dealer shall be required to make such indemnification or
reimbursement only after conviction or adjudication of fraud, cheating or
misrepresentation by a court of record in a civil or criminal action.
(Prior Code, § 40-140) (Ord. 610, passed 3-27-1978; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-
2019)
§ 134.007 SUITABLE BUILDING AS PREREQUISITE.
   No used car dealer’s license shall be issued for any premises which do not
have a building which is suitable for the licensed business.
(Prior Code, § 40-141) (Ord. 610, passed 3-27-1978; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-
2019)
§ 134.008 LOT REQUIREMENTS.
   No license shall be issued to conduct a used car business unless the
premises to be used shall have a minimum of 30 feet fronting on a street and
contain a minimum of at least 2,400 square feet of space.
(Prior Code, § 40-142) (Ord. 610, passed 3-27-1978; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-
2019)
§ 134.009 INSPECTION.
   No used car dealer’s license shall be issued until the proposed business
location is inspected by the Fire Chief or a member of the Fire Department
designated by the Fire Chief, to determine whether the operation of a used car
dealers business at such proposed location will conform to all state and local
fire laws, regulations and ordinances, and until the Fire Chief indicates his
or her approval that the operation of said business at said location will so
conform.
(Prior Code, § 40-143) (Ord. 610, passed 3-27-1978; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-
2019)
§ 134.010 CHANGE OF LOCATION.
   (A)   A used car dealer’s license shall be issued only for use on the
premises named in the license application and such location shall not be
changed without the approval of the City Clerk.
   (B)   The Clerk shall not approve such a transfer unless the new location
conforms with all applicable ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 40-144) (Ord. 610, passed 3-27-1978; Ord. 1477, passed 6-17-
2019)
TITLE XV: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
150.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
151.   OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS
      
152.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
      
153.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
      
154.   WEAPONS AND HARMFUL DEVICES
      
155.   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES AND OTHER DRUGS
      
156.   INMATE REIMBURSEMENT
CHAPTER 150: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
150.001   Soliciting immoral acts
   
150.002   Gambling and gambling devices
   
150.003   Fraud in relation to referendary or recall petitions
   
150.004   Abandoned iceboxes
   
150.005   Loitering in public places
   
150.006   Spitting in public places
   
150.007   Alcoholic liquor and minors; purchase, consumption or possession
   
150.008   Liquor in open containers in vehicles, parking lots, streets, alleys
and sidewalks
   
150.009   Curfew for minors
   
150.010   Mandatory school attendance and educational neglect; truancy
   
150.011   Contributing to the neglect or delinquency of children; parental
supervision
   
150.012   School residency fraud
   
150.013   Speed of boats
   
150.014   Waterways and facilities; enforcement
   
150.015   Obstructing access to city building or personnel
   
150.016   Obstructing city business
   
150.017   Flag desecration
   
150.018   Posting bills
   
150.019   Violation of rules of Municipal Service Commission
   
150.020   State misdemeanors
   
150.021   Fraudulent schemes; disguises
   
150.022   Swimming, bathing and the like in the Detroit River
   
150.023   Spray paint
   
150.024   Tobacco products; e-cigarettes prohibited
   
150.025   Use of roller blades
 
   
150.999   Penalty
§ 150.001 SOLICITING IMMORAL ACTS.
   No person shall solicit or accost another for the purpose of committing any
unlawful and immoral act.
(Prior Code, § 25-1) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.002 GAMBLING AND GAMBLING DEVICES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any common
gambling house, or gaming room, or to permit on any premises owned, occupied or
controlled by him or her any apparatus or device used for gaming or gambling,
or to use such apparatus or device or to assist any other person to use same
for gaming or gambling purposes.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his or her possession
any policy or pool slips, tickets, checks or any paper which is marked
additionally with any kind of notation indicating any form of gambling, and the
possession of such writing or device shall constitute prima facie evidence of
intention to use same for gambling.
(Prior Code, § 25-2) Penalty, see §
150.999
Statutory reference:
   Gambling, see M.C.L.A. §§ 750.301 et seq.
§ 150.003 FRAUD IN RELATION TO REFERENDARY OR RECALL PETITIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to affix another’s signature or to swear
to any statement false in any material particular, or to induce any person not
qualified as an elector to sign any referendary or recall petition; or to take
the oath of another to any such petition not knowing him or her to be the
identical person he or she represents himself or herself to be or knowing that
the petition or any part thereof is false or fraudulent in any material
particular; or who shall falsely represent the petition in any material respect
or to falsely represent that the petition is sponsored by others than the true
sponsors.
(Prior Code, § 25-3) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.004 ABANDONED ICEBOXES.
   Any person who knowingly leaves, in a place accessible to children, any
abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or other container of a
kind and size sufficient to permit the entrapment and suffocation of a child
therein, without first removing the snaplock or other locking device from the
lid or cover thereof, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 25-4) Penalty, see §
150.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 750.493d
§ 150.005 LOITERING IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      LOITERING. Remaining idle in essentially one location, and shall include
the concepts of spending time idly, loafing or walking about aimlessly, and
shall include the colloquial expression “hanging around”.
      PURPOSE OF PARKING LOT. Providing a location for the convenience of
persons to park their motor vehicles during designated hours and who remain
inside their parked vehicles, or leave the parking lot without delay once they
have exited their motor vehicle, or immediately proceed to a motor vehicle
which is parked in the lot for the purpose of entering said vehicle. No city-
owned parking lot is intended or designed for the congregation or assemblage of
persons outside of the parked motor vehicles.
   (B)   No person shall loiter on any public street, sidewalk, overpass,
parking lot or other public place in such manner as to:
      (1)   Create or cause to be created a danger of a breach of the peace;
      (2)   Create or cause to be created any disturbance or annoyance to the
comfort or repose of any person;
      (3)   Obstruct or tend to obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or
vehicles;
      (4)   Obstruct, molest or interfere with any person in any public place;
      (5)   Interfere with the intended purpose of the particular location
where the loitering takes place; or
      (6)   Create a dangerous or unsafe situation to the public safety,
especially when in close proximity to streets or other areas where there is
motor vehicle traffic.
   (C)   Whenever the presence of any person in any public place is causing or
likely to cause any of the conditions enumerated in division (B) above, any
police officer is authorized to order that person or persons to leave that
location.
(Prior Code, § 25-5) (Ord. 798, passed 6-2-1986) Penalty, see §
150.999
Statutory reference:
   Disorderly persons, see M.C.L.A. § 750.167
§ 150.006 SPITTING IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   No person shall spit upon any public sidewalk, or upon the floor or interior
of any public conveyance, or upon the floor or walls of any theater, hall,
assembly room, church, school or public building.
(Prior Code, § 25-6) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.007 ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR AND MINORS; PURCHASE, CONSUMPTION OR POSSESSION.
   (A)   Adoption of state laws concerning purchase, consumption or possession
of alcoholic liquor by a minor.
      (1)   Adoption. M.C.L.A. § 436.1703, concerning the purchase, consumption
or possession of alcoholic liquor by a minor, is adopted by reference. A copy
of M.C.L.A. § 436.1703 is on file and available in the Clerk’s office.
      (2)   Purpose. The purpose of this division (A) is to prohibit the
purchase, consumption or possession of alcoholic liquor by a minor.
      (3)   Issuance of citation. The officer who issues a citation under this
division (A) shall mark the local ordinance box on the citation and may make a
reference to the offense being charged by writing the description of the
offense and/or by citing M.C.L.A. § 436.1703, or by any other manner which
would reasonably inform the defendant of the charge.
(Prior Code, § 25-6.1)
   (B)   Purchase, consumption or possession of alcoholic liquor by a minor.
      (1)   A minor shall not purchase or attempt to purchase alcoholic liquor,
consume or attempt to consume alcoholic liquor, possess or attempt to possess
alcoholic liquor, or have any bodily alcohol content, except as provided in
this division (B). A minor who violates this division (B)(1) is responsible for
a municipal civil infraction or guilty of a misdemeanor as follows and is not
subject to the penalties prescribed in M.C.L.A. § 436.1909. MINOR, as used in
this division (B), means a person less than 21 years of age.
      (2)   A peace officer who has reasonable cause to believe a minor has
consumed alcoholic liquor or has any bodily alcohol content may request that
individual to submit to a preliminary chemical breath analysis. The results of
a preliminary chemical breath analysis or other acceptable blood alcohol test
are admissible in a municipal civil infraction proceeding or criminal
prosecution to determine if the minor has consumed or possessed alcoholic
liquor or had any bodily alcohol content.
      (3)   A law enforcement agency, on determining that an individual who is
less than 18 years of age and not emancipated under Public Act 293 of 1968,
being M.C.L.A. §§ 722.1 to 722.6, allegedly consumed, possessed or purchased
alcoholic liquor, attempted to consume, posses or purchase alcoholic liquor, or
had any bodily alcohol content in violation of division (B)(1) above shall
notify the parent or parents, custodian or guardian of the individual as to the
nature of the violation if the name of a parent, guardian or custodian is
reasonably ascertainable by the law enforcement agency. The law enforcement
agency shall notify the parent, guardian or custodian not later than 48 hours
after the law enforcement agency determines that the individual who allegedly
violated division (B)(1) above is less than 18 years of age and not emancipated
under Public Act 293 of 1968, being M.C.L.A. §§ 722.1 to 722.6. The law
enforcement agency may notify the parent, guardian or custodian by any means
reasonably calculated to give prompt actual notice including, but not limited
to, notice in person, by telephone or by first-class mail. If an individual
less than 17 years of age is incarcerated for violating division (B)(1) above,
his or her parents or legal guardian shall be notified immediately as provided
in this division (B)(3).
      (4)   This division (B) does not prohibit a minor from possessing
alcoholic liquor during regular working hours and in the course of his or her
employment if employed by a person licensed by state law, by the Liquor Control
Commission, or by an agent of the Liquor Control Commission, if the alcoholic
liquor is not possessed for his or her personal consumption.
      (5)   The following individuals are not considered to be in violation of
division (B)(1) above:
         (a)   A minor who has consumed alcoholic liquor and who voluntarily
presents himself or herself to a health facility or agency for treatment or for
observation including, but not limited to, medical examination and treatment
for any condition arising from a violation of §§ 520b to 520g of the state’s
Penal Code, Public Act 328 of 1931, being M.C.L.A. §§ 750.520b to 750.520g,
committed against a minor;
         (b)   A minor who accompanies an individual who meets both of the
following criteria:
            1.   Has consumed alcoholic liquor; and
            2.   Voluntarily presents himself or herself to a health facility
or agency for treatment or for observation including, but not limited to,
medical examination and treatment for any condition arising from a violation
for §§ 520b to 520g of the state’s Penal Code, Public Act 328 of 1931, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 750.520b to 750.520g, committed against a minor.
         (c)   A minor who initiates contact with a peace officer or emergency
medical service personnel for the purpose of obtaining medical assistance for a
legitimate health care concern.
      (6)   If a minor who is less than 18 years of age and who is not
emancipated under Public Act 293 of 1968, being M.C.L.A. §§ 722.1 to 722.6,
voluntarily presents himself or herself to a health facility or agency for
treatment or for observation as provided hereunder, the health facility or
agency shall notify the parent or parents, guardian or custodian of the
individual as to the nature of the treatment or observation if the name of a
parent, guardian or custodian is reasonably ascertainable by the heath facility
or agency.
      (7)   This section does not limit the civil or criminal liability of a
vendor or the vendor’s clerk, servant, agent or employee for violation of this
section.
      (8)   The consumption of alcoholic liquor by a minor who is enrolled in a
course offered by an accredited postsecondary educational institution in an
academic building of the institution under the supervision of a faculty member
is not prohibited by this division (B) if the purpose of the consumption is
solely educational and is a requirement of the course.
      (9)   The consumption by a minor of sacramental wine in connection with
religious services at a church, synagogue or temple is not prohibited by this
division (B).
      (10)   Division (B)(1) above does not apply to a minor who participates
in either or both of the following:
         (a)   An undercover operation in which the minor purchases or receives
alcoholic liquor under the direction of the person’s employer and with the
prior approval of the local prosecutor’s office as part of an employer-
sponsored internal enforcement action; or
         (b)   An undercover operation in which the minor purchases or receives
alcoholic liquor under the direction of the state police, the Liquor Control
Commission, or a local police agency as part of an enforcement action unless
the initial or contemporaneous purchase or receipt of alcoholic liquor by the
minor was not under the direction of the state police, the Liquor Control
Commission or the local police agency and was not part of the undercover
operation.
      (11)   The state police, the Liquor Control Commission or a local police
agency shall not recruit or attempt to recruit a minor for participation in an
undercover operation at the scene of a violation of division (B)(1) above, §§
      (12)   In a prosecution for the violation of division (B)(1) above
concerning a minor having any bodily alcohol content, it is an affirmative
defense that the minor consumed the alcoholic liquor in a venue or location
where that consumption is legal.
      (13)   For the purpose of this division (B), the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         ANY BODILY ALCOHOL CONTENT. Either of the following:
            1.   An alcohol content of 0.02 grams or more per 100 milliliters
of blood, per 210 liters of breath or per 67 milliliters of urine; or
            2.   Any presence of alcohol within a person’s body resulting from
the consumption of alcoholic liquor, other than consumption of alcoholic liquor
as a part of a generally recognized religious service or ceremony.
         EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSONNEL. As defined in § 20904 of the
Public Health Code, Public Act 368 of 1978, being M.C.L.A. § 333.20904.
         HEALTH FACILITY OR AGENCY. As defined in § 20106 of the Public Health
Code, Public Act 368 of 1978, being M.C.L.A. § 333.20106.
         PRIOR JUDGMENT. A conviction, juvenile adjudication, finding of
responsibility or admission of responsibility for any of the following, whether
under a law of the state, a local ordinance substantially corresponding to a
law of the state, a law of the United States substantially corresponding to a
law of the state or a law of another state substantially corresponding to a law
of the state:
            1.   This division (B) or §§ 701 or 707 of the Liquor Control Code
of the state, being M.C.L.A. §§ 436.1701 and 436.1707;
            2.   Sections 624a, 624b or 625 of the state’s Vehicle Code, Public
Act 300 of 1949, being M.C.L.A. §§ 257.624a, 257.624b and 257.625;
            3.   Sections 80176, 81134 or 82127 of the Natural Resources and
Environmental Protection Act, Public Act 451 of 1994, being M.C.L.A. §§
324.80176, 324.81134 and 324.82127; and
            4.   Sections 167a or 237 of the state’s Penal Code, Public Act 328
of 1939, being M.C.L.A. §§ 750.167a and 750.237.
(Prior Code, § 25-7)
   (C)   In motor vehicles. It shall be a misdemeanor for any person less than
21 years of age to knowingly transport or possess in a motor vehicle alcoholic
liquor unless the person is employed by a licensee licensed under the state’s
Liquor Law, the Liquor Control Commission or an agent of the Liquor Control
Liquor Control Commission and is transporting or having the alcoholic liquor in
a motor vehicle under the person’s control during regular working hours and in
the course of the person’s employment.
(Prior Code, § 25-7.1)
   (D)   Sale of liquor to minors.
      (1)   Alcoholic liquor shall not be sold or furnished to a person unless
the person has attained 21 years of age. A person who knowingly sells or
furnishes alcoholic liquor to a person who is less than 21 years of age, or who
fails to make diligent inquiry as to whether the person is less than 21 years
of age, is guilty of a misdemeanor. A suitable sign which describes this
section and the penalties for violating this section shall be posted in a
conspicuous place in each room where alcoholic liquors are sold. The signs
shall be approved and furnished by the state’s Liquor Control Commission.
      (2)   In an action for the violation of this section, proof that the
defendant or the defendant’s agent or employee demanded and was shown, before
furnishing alcoholic liquor to a person under 21 years of age, a motor vehicle
operator’s license or a registration certificate issued by the Federal
Selective Service, or other bona fide documentary evidence of the age and
identity of that person, shall be a defense to an action under this division
(D).
(Prior Code, § 25-7.2)
   (E)   Person less than 21 years of age prohibited from operating a motor
vehicle if the person has any bodily alcoholic content.
      (1)   Prohibition. A person who is less than 21 years of age, whether
licensed or not, shall not operate a vehicle upon a highway or other place open
to the general public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an
area designated for the parking of vehicles, within this state if the person
has any bodily alcohol content. As used in this division (E), ANY BODILY
ALCOHOL CONTENT means either of the following:
         (a)   A blood alcohol content of not less than 0.02% or more than
0.07% by weight of alcohol; or
         (b)   Any presence of alcohol within a person’s body resulting from
the consumption of intoxicating liquor, other than consumption of intoxicating
liquor as a part of a generally recognized religious service or ceremony. The
defendant shall bear the burden of proving that the consumption of intoxicating
liquor was a part of a generally recognized religious service or ceremony by a
preponderance of the evidence.
      (2)   Preliminary chemical breath analysis. A person who refuses to
submit to a preliminary breath analysis upon a lawful request by a peace
officer is responsible for a civil infraction.
      (3)   Chemical tests. A person arrested under this division (E) shall be
advised of all the rights contained in M.C.L.A. § 257.625a(6).
(Prior Code, § 25-7.3)
(Ord. 632, passed 4-16-1979; Ord. 633, passed 4-16-1979; Ord. 648, passed 1-14-
1980; Ord. 947, passed 7-27-1992; Ord. 950, passed 7-27-1992; Ord. 995, passed
6-5-1995; Ord. 1100, passed 11-13-2000; Ord. 1216, passed 1-24-2005; Ord. 1290,
passed 10-22-2007; Ord. 1330, passed 7-19-2010; Ord. 1358, passed 12-12-2011;
Ord. 1458, passed 12-18-2017) Penalty, see §
150.999
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see M.C.L.A. §§ 436.1701, 436.1703 and 436.1707
§ 150.008 LIQUOR IN OPEN CONTAINERS IN VEHICLES, PARKING LOTS, STREETS, ALLEYS
AND SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   Liquor in open containers in vehicles. It shall be unlawful for a
person to transport or possess any alcoholic liquor in a container which is
open, uncapped or upon which the sale is broken, within the passenger
compartment of a vehicle on the streets of the city. If the vehicle does not
have a trunk or compartment separate from the passenger compartment, a
container which is open, uncapped or upon which the seal is broken shall be
encased or enclosed. This section shall not apply to any chartered passenger
vehicle licensed by the state’s Public Service Commission.
(Prior Code, § 25-8)
   (B)   Liquor in open containers in parking lots, streets, alleys and
sidewalks. It shall be unlawful for a person to transport, possess or consume
any alcoholic beverages or liquor in a container which is open, uncapped or
upon which the seal is broken, in a parking lot, public or private, in any
alley, public or private, or on any street or sidewalk within the city limits.
This section does not apply to alcoholic beverages or liquor dispensed at
festivals, block parties or any bona fide civic or veterans organizations which
have obtained a permit from the City Council for the use of any public street,
alley or sidewalk.
(Prior Code, § 25-9)
   (C)   Location of licensed liquor premises between the east side of Third
Street to the Detroit River and the south side of Chestnut to the north side of
Pine Street.
      (1)   Application with Police Department. All applicants for a transfer
of location of an existing liquor license between the east side of Third Street
to the Detroit River and the south side of Chestnut to the north side of Pine
Street within the city shall submit said application to the Police Department
for a background check of the applicant.
      (2)   City Council determination.
         (a)   Upon completion of the background check by the Police
Department, said application shall be forwarded to the City Council for a
determination of whether the application should be approved or denied by the
City Council prior to submission of the application to the state’s Liquor
Control Commission.
         (b)   The City Council may base its decision on whether to approve or
deny the applicant based upon the following: a determination of whether the
applicant is in compliance with all appropriate state and local building,
plumbing, zoning, fire, sanitation and health laws and ordinances, and all
other ordinances of the city, and specifically including the provisions of this
section.
      (3)   Notice by City Clerk. If the City Council determines that the
applicant fails to comply with division (C)(2) above, the Council shall direct
the City Clerk to notify the state’s Liquor Control Commission of the City
Council’s determination of non-compliance with this section, and forward to it
a certified copy of the ordinance or ordinances which the applicant has failed
to meet.
      (4)   Restrictions on concentration of licenses within city.
         (a)   Except as provided in division (C)(4)(b) below, a new
application for a license to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the
premises, or a request to transfer the location of such license between the
east side of Third Street to the Detroit River and the south side of Chestnut
to the north side of Pine Street within the city, shall be denied if the
contemplated location of the premises to be licensed is within 1,500 feet of
any other premises licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the
premises. The distance between the licensed premises and the contemplated
location shall be measured along the centerline of the street or streets of
address between two fixed points on the centerline determined by projecting
straight lines, at right angles to the centerline, from the part of the
licensed premises nearest to the contemplated location and from the part of the
contemplated location nearest to the licensed premises.
         (b)   Division (C)(4)(a) above shall not apply if it can be
established that the total gross receipts of the contemplated location for
which the application is being made will or does derive over 50% of its total
gross receipts from the sale of food or other goods and services.
(Prior Code, § 25-9.1)
(Ord. 557, passed 10-6-1975; Ord. 655, passed 7-21-1980; Ord. 740, passed 1-10-
1983; Ord. 948, passed 7-27-1992; Ord. 949, passed 7-27-1992) Penalty, see §
150.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. §§ 257.624a and 436.1501 et seq.
§ 150.009 CURFEW FOR MINORS.
   (A)   No child under the age of 15 shall be permitted, caused or suffered to
be upon the public street or in any public place between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless such child is accompanied by his or her parent or
guardian, or some adult delegated by the parent or guardian to accompany such
child.
   (B)   A minor under the age of 17 years shall not be permitted, caused or
suffered to be upon the public streets or in any public place between the hours
of 10:30 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless such child is accompanied by his or her
parent or guardian or some adult designated by his or her parent or guardian,
to accompany such child.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or other person having
the care or custody of any minor to permit, allow or encourage such minor to
violate any of the provisions of this section.
   (D)   This section shall not apply to a minor who is:
      (1)   Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian;
      (2)   On an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent or guardian,
without any detour or stop;
      (3)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
      (4)   Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home
from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
      (5)   Involved in an emergency;
      (6)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence or abutting the
residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the
police department about the minor’s presence;
      (7)   Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational
activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization,
or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to
or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school,
religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by
the city, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor;
      (8)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the
right of assembly; or
      (9)   Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed
in accordance with state law.
(Prior Code, § 25-10) (Ord. 674, passed 12-15-1980; Ord. 856, passed 11-7-1988;
Ord. 857, passed 11-21-1988; Ord. 883, passed 4-3-1990) Penalty, see §
150.999
Statutory reference:
   Curfew for minors, see M.C.L.A. §§ 722.751 et seq.
§ 150.010 MANDATORY SCHOOL ATTENDANCE AND EDUCATIONAL NEGLECT; TRUANCY.
   (A)   (1)   This division (A) shall be known as and may be cited as the
“Mandatory School Attendance and Educational Neglect Ordinance” of the city.
      (2)   Every parent, guardian or other person in the city having control
and charge of a child from the age of six to the child’s sixteenth birthday
shall send that child to school during the entire school year. The child’s
attendance shall be continuous and consecutive for the school year fixed by the
school district in which the child is enrolled. A child becoming six years of
age before December 1 shall be enrolled on the first school day of the school
year in which the child’s sixth birthday occurs.
      (3)   (a)   No person having the care, custody or control of a child is
required to be enrolled in, or is enrolled in school, shall fail to properly
supervise or care for such child where such failure of supervision or care,
causes the child to:
            1.   Fail to attend school regularly, consecutively or on time at
the start of the school day, unless valid excuse is provided, according to the
attendance policy of the school district;
            2.   Have continued discipline, misconduct or inappropriate
behavior of said child at school; or
            3.   Have continued violations of the adopted school student codes
of conduct by the child.
         (b)   If a person is responsible for divisions (A)(3)(a)1., (A)(3)
(a)2. and/or (A)(3)(a)3. above, said person shall be presumed to be in
violation of this division (A), and where such person as defined above, shall
fail to participate in, or comply with, the corrective measures adopted by the
school district for the attendance, discipline, misconduct, behavior or student
code of conduct of the child, shall be a failure to properly supervise or care
for such child.
      (4)   The Superintendent of Schools in the city, his or her designated
attendance officer, or other law enforcement officer, shall investigate each
case when notified by a teacher, principal, assistant principal, school officer
or other person, of a violation of division (A)(3) above. If the child
complained of is not exempt from public school attendance under state law, the
Superintendent of Schools in the city, his or her designated attendance officer
or other law enforcement officer shall proceed immediately in the manner
provided in this division (A):
         (a)   The Superintendent of Schools in the city, his or her designated
attendance officer or other law enforcement officer may notify in writing, the
parent/guardian in person, or by certified mail, to come to the school or to a
place designated at a specified time to discuss the child, as well as requiring
the child appear at the school the next regular school day following the
receipt of notice, and to continue in regular and consecutive attendance in
school. Proof of service of the required notice shall be retained by the
Superintendent of Schools in the city or his or her designated attendance
officer, or other law enforcement official, who shall notify the appropriate
school officials in case of failure on the part of the parent/guardian to
comply with the notice; and
         (b)   If, after a conference with a parent/guardian that has care,
control or custody of a child, has not resulted in compliance of division (A)
(3) above.
      (5)   The Superintendent of Schools in the city, his or her designated
attendance officer, or other law enforcement officer, after giving the formal
notice in person, or by mail as prescribed in division (A)(4) above, shall
determine whether the parent/guardian has complied with division (A)(3) above.
The Superintendent of Schools in the city, his or her designated attendance
officer, or other law enforcement officer, shall ticket or make a complaint
against the parent/guardian having the legal care, custody or control of the
child who fails to comply to the court having jurisdiction in the city. The
court shall proceed to hear and determine it in the same manner as is provided
for other cases under its jurisdiction.
      (6)   All school personnel, principals, assistant principals,
administrators and teachers shall give assistance and furnish information to
aid the Superintendent of Schools in the city or his or her designee in the
performance of their official duties under this division (A).
(Prior Code, § 25-10.1)
   (B)   (1)    Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(3) below, it shall
be unlawful for any person under the age of 19 years of age to be absent from
school or to have excessive tardies during regularly scheduled hours in the
city.
      (2)   Division (B)(1) above does not apply to the following:
         (a)   Those persons who have written permission from the school
principal or his or her designee to be absent;
         (b)   Those persons who are going to or from a scheduled doctor’s or
dentist appointment;
         (c)   Those persons attending personal business or emergency
situations, such as but not limited to, weddings, funerals and the like; or
         (d)   Those persons attending school sponsored activities and sporting
events in which they are directly involved.
      (3)   This division (B) may be enforced by the city’s Police Department
and school attendance officer; provided, however, that, all appearance tickets
or citations written in violation of this division (B) shall be coordinated
through the city’s Police Department.
(Prior Code, § 25-10.2)
(Ord. 879, passed 3-5-1990; Ord. 997, passed 7-17-1995; Ord. 1135, passed 12-
10-2001; Ord. 1438, passed 12-5-2016; Ord. 1469, passed 2-25-2019; Ord. 1470,
passed 2-25-2019; Ord. 1513, passed 6-21-2021; Ord. 1514, passed 6-21-2021)
Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.011 CONTRIBUTING TO THE NEGLECT OR DELINQUENCY OF CHILDREN; PARENTAL
SUPERVISION.
   (A)   (1)   Any person who shall, by any act, non-performance or by any
word, encourage, contribute toward, cause or tend to cause any minor child
under the age of 17 years to become neglected or delinquent, shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor.
      (2)   The term NEGLECTED, as used in this section, shall mean failure to
provide for the basic needs of a child or failure to care or give proper
attention to a child.
      (3)   The term DELINQUENT, as used in this section, means failure to do
what is required by law, ordinance or the school code of conduct.
   (B)   No person having the care, custody or control of a child under 17
years of age shall fail to properly supervise and care for such child so that
such failure to supervise, care or non-performance of parental duty causes the
child to become delinquent or neglected.
   (C)   No person having the care, custody or control of a child between the
ages of six to 16 years of age shall fail to properly supervise and care for
such child so that such failure causes the child to become excessively tardy or
truant to school at the start of the school day.
(Prior Code, § 25-10.3) (Ord. 997, passed 7-17-1995; Ord. 1206, passed 9-20-
2004) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.012 SCHOOL RESIDENCY FRAUD.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any parent or legal guardian to register his or her
son or daughter in any school within the city’s School District using a
fraudulent address.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to allow his or her address to be
used fraudulently for purposes of establishing school residency for any student
in the city’s School District who does not reside in their residence.
   (C)   The designated school truancy officer or any of the officials
identified in §
11.004 of this code of ordinances is authorized to issue and serve an
appearance ticket under this section.
(Prior Code, § 25-10.4) (Ord. 1439, passed 12-5-2016) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.013 SPEED OF BOATS.
   (A)   All words and phrases used in this section shall be construed and have
the same meanings as those words and phrases defined in the Marine Safety Act,
being M.C.L.A. §§ 324.80101 et seq.
   (B)   On the following waters of the Detroit River adjacent to the city, it
is unlawful for the operator of a vessel to exceed a “slow-no wake speed” when
within 300 feet of the shore:
      (1)   South of an east-west line beginning where the Ecorse Creek
intersects the Detroit River, extending eastward 300 feet from shore, and
continuing to 300 feet south of the intersection of Perry Place with the
Detroit River; and
      (2)   South of an east-west line beginning where Cedar Street, as
extended, intersects the Detroit River, thence south to the southern most city
limit as extended 300 feet off shore.
(Prior Code, § 25-11) (Ord. 561, passed 2-23-1976; Ord. 981, passed 9-12-1994)
Penalty, see §
150.999
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to adopt ordinance under Act, see M.C.L.A. §§ 324.80110 to
324.80113
   The Marine Safety Act, see M.C.L.A. §§ 324.80101 et seq.
§ 150.014 WATERWAYS AND FACILITIES; ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The police officers of the city’s Police Department shall have general
control and supervision of the public and private landings along those portions
of the District River lying within the jurisdiction of the city, and shall
preserve order and peace at all times in and about said landings and all other
areas of the Detroit River lying within the jurisdiction of the city. The
police officers are authorized to board any boats or vessels moored, docked or
any boats or vessels lying within the jurisdiction of the city for the purpose
of enforcing the terms of this section.
   (B)   All ordinances of the code of ordinances of the city shall be
enforceable by the city police officers when carrying out the directives of
this section. All persons on the Detroit River who are within the jurisdiction
of the city are subject to all of the provisions of the code of ordinances of
the city.
(Prior Code, § 25-11.1) (Ord. 863, passed 5-15-1989)
§ 150.015 OBSTRUCTING ACCESS TO CITY BUILDING OR PERSONNEL.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct, impede or interfere
with the access of any person to any city office, building, facility or city
personnel, or to attempt to do the same.
   (B)   CITY PERSONNEL is defined to include any elected or appointed officer
of the city, including, but not being limited to, members of the city
commissions and city agents and employees, who are conducting or engaged in any
governmental or proprietary function of the city.
(Prior Code, § 25-12) Penalty, see §
150.999
Statutory reference:
   Disorderly persons, see M.C.L.A. § 750.167
   Disturbing public places, see M.C.L.A. § 750.170
§ 150.016 OBSTRUCTING CITY BUSINESS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or group of persons at any time,
on any city-owned or city-controlled property, to obstruct, impede or interfere
in any way with the regular course of city business by, but not limited to,
walking, gathering, sitting, standing or lying on any city-owned or city-
controlled property, or to attempt to do the same.
   (B)   CITY BUSINESS is defined to include all or any part of any
governmental or proprietary function of the city being conducted by or engaged
in by any elected or appointed officer, by any commission, member or by any
agent or employee of the city.
(Prior Code, § 25-13) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.017 FLAG DESECRATION.
   (A)   The terms “flag of the United States,” “flag of the state” and “flag
of the city”, as used in this section, shall include any flag, standard colors,
ensign or any picture or representation thereof, made of any substance, or
represented on any substance, of any size evidently purporting to be either of
said flag, standard, colors or ensign of the United States of America, the
state or the city or a picture or a representation thereof, upon which shall be
shown the colors, the stars and stripes or seal or other representation by
which the average person seeing the same without deliberation may believe the
same to represent the flag, standard, colors or ensign of the United States of
America, the state or the city.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to cast contempt upon
any flag of the United States, flag of the state or flag of the city by
publicly mutilating, defacing, defiling, burning or trampling upon such flag,
or by displaying such flag on the person, or otherwise in such a manner as to
cast contempt upon such flag.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to place or cause to be
placed any word, figure, mark, picture, design, drawing or advertisement of any
nature upon any such flag of the United States, flag of the state or flag of
the city.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to expose to the public
view any such flag of the United States, flag of the state or flag of the city
upon which shall have been printed, painted or otherwise produced, or to which
shall have been attached, appended, affixed or annexed, any word, figure, mark,
picture, design, drawing or advertisement.
(Prior Code, § 25-14) Penalty, see §
150.999
Statutory reference:
   Flag desecration, see M.C.L.A. §§ 750.245 et seq.
§ 150.018 POSTING BILLS.
   No person shall tack, nail, paste or in any manner attach or affix to any
telegraph, telephone, electric light, power or fire alarm pole any
advertisement or any advertising matter, sign, notice or placard, in any
street, alley, park, lane or public place in the city.
(Prior Code, § 25-15) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.019 VIOLATION OF RULES OF MUNICIPAL SERVICE COMMISSION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the rules of the
Municipal Service Commission.
(Prior Code, § 25-16) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.020 STATE MISDEMEANORS.
   Every act prohibited by state law as a misdemeanor is hereby prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 25-17) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.021 FRAUDULENT SCHEMES; DISGUISES.
   (A)   Fraudulent schemes prohibited. It is unlawful for any person within
the city to engage in any fraudulent scheme, device or trick to obtain money or
other valuable thing, or to aid or abet in any fraudulent scheme, device or
trick to obtain money or other valuable thing.
   (B)   Disguising with intent to obstruct the execution of the law. Any
person who shall in any manner disguise himself or herself (including
disguising one’s actual identity) with intent to obstruct the due execution of
the law, or with intent to intimidate, hinder or interrupt any officer or any
other person in the legal performance of his or her duty, or the exercise of
his or her rights under the constitution, laws of the state and ordinances of
the city, whether such an intent is effected or not, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 25-18) (Ord. 780, passed 5-6-1985) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.022 SWIMMING, BATHING AND THE LIKE IN THE DETROIT RIVER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to swim, bathe, wade or otherwise
immerse his or her body in the waters of the Detroit River or any of its
tributaries within the city, unless said area is specifically approved by the
city and designated for such activity.
(Prior Code, § 25-19) (Ord. 785, passed 9-16-1985) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.023 SPRAY PAINT.
   (A)   As used in this section, the term SPRAY PAINT shall mean any cans or
similar containers of paint, varnish, lacquer, stain or similar solvent or
substance commonly used in painting and applied by a spraying method or similar
technique.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided, no person under 18 years of age shall
purchase or possess any cans of spray paint.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided, no person shall sell or transfer
possession of any cans of spray paint to another person under 18 years of age;
provided, however, a person may sell or transfer possession of spray paint to a
person under 18 years of age for lawful uses where said juvenile has in his or
her possession and exhibits the written consent of his or her parent or
guardian; and, provided further, that a person may sell or transfer possession
of spray paint to a person under the age of 18 years, not more than one time
per month, which spray paint contains not more than one fluid ounce of said
paint.
   (D)   A person making a sale or transfer of possession of spray paint to a
person under 18 years of age who exhibits the written consent of his or her
parent or guardian shall record the name, address, sex and age of the juvenile,
and the name and address of the consenting parent or guardian. All data
required by this section shall be kept in a permanent type register available
for inspection by the Police Department for a period of at least six months.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person to assist, aid, abet or encourage
any minor to violate any provision of this section.
(Prior Code, § 25-20) (Ord. 956, passed 9-21-1992) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.024 TOBACCO PRODUCTS; E-CIGARETTES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Tobacco products prohibited on school property.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (A)(5) below, a person
shall not use a tobacco product on school property.
      (2)   A person, of any age, who violates division (A)(1) above, shall be
liable for a municipal civil infraction, punishable by a fine of not more than
$50.
      (3)   For the purpose of this division (A), the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         SCHOOL DISTRICT. A school district, local act school district, or
intermediate school district, as those terms are defined in the School Code of
1976, Public Act 451 of 1976, being M.C.L.A. §§ 380.1 to 380.1852; a joint high
school district formed under Public Act 451 of 1976, part 3a; or a consortium
or cooperative arrangement consisting of any combination of these.
         SCHOOL PROPERTY. A building, facility or structure and other real
estate owned, leased or otherwise controlled by a school district.
         TOBACCO PRODUCT. A preparation of tobacco to be inhaled, chewed or
placed in a person’s mouth.
         USE A TOBACCO PRODUCT. Any of the following:
            1.   The carrying by a person of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe
or other lighted smoking device;
            2.   The inhaling or chewing of a tobacco product; or
            3.   The placing of a tobacco product within a person’s mouth.
      (4)   This section may be enforced by the city’s Police Department, the
various school principals or their designees, school security police or school
liaison or all attendance officers; provided, however, that, all appearance
tickets or citations written in violation of this division (A) shall be
coordinated through the city’s Police Department.
      (5)   Division (A)(1) above does not comply to those parts of school
property consisting of outdoor areas including, but not limited to, an open-air
stadium during either of the following time periods:
         (a)   Saturdays, Sundays and other days on which there are no
regularly scheduled school hours; or
         (b)   After 6:00 p.m. on days during which there are regularly
scheduled school hours.
(Prior Code, § 25-21)
   (B)   Restrictions for e-cigarette (or similar items) use or possession in
schools and by minors.
      (1)   No person under the age of 18 years of age may possess or use
(including inhaling or exhaling) any of the following items upon school
property (as defined in division (A) above) or anywhere else within the city:
         (a)   Electronic nicotine delivery system (ends);
         (b)   Electronic cigarette or electronic smoking device;
         (c)   E-Liquid, E-Juice, E-Wax;
         (d)   Vapes, vaporizers, vape pens;
         (e)   E-Pipes;
         (f)   Hookah, water pipe or any other type of pipe; and/or
         (g)   Any other similar type of item as described above that could be
used for inhaling or exhaling, or vaping ingredients or contents including, but
not limited to, nicotine, cannabis (THC), flavorings, propylene glycol,
glycerin or any other ingredients.
      (2)   A person who is 18 years of age or older shall not use or possess
any of the items listed in division (B)(1) above on school property, except
for:
         (a)   Those areas of school property that are outdoors, including, but
not limited to, an open area stadium during either of the following time
periods:
            1.   Saturdays, Sundays and other days on which there is no
regularly scheduled classes or school activities; or
            2.   After 6:00 p.m. on days which there are regularly scheduled
school hours and activities.
         (b)   In the event any person possesses or uses any of the above items
described in division (B)(2)(a) above in violation of this section, the item
will be seized and forfeited to the city.
(Prior Code, § 25-21.1)
   (C)   Selling, giving or furnishing tobacco products to person under age 18.
      (1)   A person shall not sell, give or furnish any cigarette, cigar,
chewing tobacco, tobacco snuff or tobacco in any other form to a person under
18 years of age.
      (2)   Beginning 90 days after the effective date of this section, a
person who sells tobacco products at retail shall post, in a place close to the
point of sale and conspicuous to both employees and customers, a sign that
includes the following statement: “The purchase of tobacco products by a minor
under 18 years of age and the provision of tobacco products to a minor are
prohibited by law. A minor unlawfully purchasing or using tobacco products is
subject to penalties as provided by law.”
      (3)   If the sign required under division (C)(2) above is more than six
feet from the point of sale, it shall be five and one-half inches by eight and
one-half inches, and the statement required under division (C)(2) above shall
be printed in 36-point boldface type. If the sign required under division (C)
(2) above is six feet or less from the point of sale, it shall be two inches by
four inches, and the statement required under division (C)(2) above shall be
printed in 20-point boldface type.
      (4)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge pursuant to division (C)
(1) above that the defendant had in force at the time of arrest and continues
to have in force a written policy to prevent the sale of cigarettes, cigars,
chewing tobacco, tobacco snuff and other tobacco products to persons under 18
years of age, and that the defendant enforced and continues to enforce the
policy. A defendant who proposes to offer evidence of the affirmative defense
described in this division (C)(4) shall file and serve notice of the defense,
in writing, upon the court and the prosecuting attorney. The notice shall be
served not less than 14 days before the date set for trial.
      (5)   A prosecuting attorney who proposes to offer testimony to rebut the
affirmative defense described in division (C)(4) above shall file and serve a
notice of rebuttal, in writing, upon the court and the defendant. The notice
shall be served not less than seven days before the date set for trial, and
shall contain the name and address of each rebuttal witness.
(Prior Code, § 25-22)
   (D)   Possessing or using tobacco products in public by person under age 18.
A person under 18 years of age shall not possess or smoke cigarettes or cigars;
or possess or chew, suck or inhale chewing tobacco or tobacco snuff; or possess
or use tobacco in any other form, on a public highway, street, alley, park or
other lands used for public purposes, or in a public place of business or
amusement.
(Prior Code, § 25-23)
(Ord. 985, passed 10-24-1994; Ord. 1138, passed 3-11-2002; Ord. 1472, passed 2-
25-2019) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.025 USE OF ROLLER BLADES.
   (A)   Definition. The term ROLLER BLADES includes any device marketed as
such, and also includes skateboards, roller skates, street skates or any other
similar device which has coasters or wheels. This definition does not include
bicycles.
   (B)   Prohibited. The following uses of roller blades are prohibited:
      (1)   In any manner or location which shall deface or damage any private
or public property;
      (2)   Upon planter boxes, windowsills, benches, curbs or in close
proximity to doorways so as to hamper the entrance or exit of pedestrians;
      (3)   In any careless or reckless manner which may endanger another;
      (4)   Clinging to a bicycle or to any motor driven device; and
      (5)   In such a manner that the person using the roller blades fails to
yield the right-of-way to pedestrians.
(Prior Code, § 25-24) (Ord. 1089, passed 5-8-2000) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person who refuses to leave the particular location, as set out in
§
150.005 of this chapter, after being ordered to do so by the police officer is
responsible for a civil infraction and subject to a fine not to exceed $100,
plus any court costs that may be incurred.
(Prior Code, § 25-5)
   (C)   (1)   (a)   For the first violation of §
150.007(B)(1) of this chapter, the minor is responsible for a municipal civil
infraction and shall be fined not more than $100. A court may order a minor
under §
150.007(B)(1) of this chapter to participate in substance use disorder services
as defined in § 6230 of the Public Health Code, Public Act 368 of 1978, being
M.C.L.A. § 333.6230, and designated by the Administrator of the Office of
Substance Abuse Services, and may order the minor to perform community service
and to undergo substance abuse screening and assessment at his or her own
expense as described in §
150.007(B)(5) of this chapter. A minor may be found responsible or admit
responsibility only once under §
150.007 of this chapter.
         (b)   If a violation of §
150.007(B)(1) of this chapter occurs after one prior judgment, the minor is
guilty of a misdemeanor. A misdemeanor under §
150.007(B)(1) of this chapter is punishable by imprisonment for not more than
30 days if the court finds that the minor violated an order of probation,
failed to successfully complete any treatment, screening or community service
ordered by the court, or failed to pay any fine for that conviction or juvenile
adjudication, by a fine of not more than $200, or both. A court may order a
minor under §
150.007(B)(1) of this chapter to participate in substance use disorder services
as defined in § 6230 of the Public Health Code, Public Act 368 of 1978, being
M.C.L.A. § 333.6230, and designated by the Administrator of the Office of
Substance Abuse Services, to perform community service, and to undergo
substance abuse screening and assessment at his or her own expense as described
in §
150.007(B)(5) of this chapter.
         (c)   If a violation of §
150.007(B)(1) of this chapter occurs after two or more prior judgments, the
minor is guilty of a misdemeanor. A misdemeanor under §
150.007(B)(1) of this chapter is punishable by imprisonment for not more than
60 days, if the court finds that the minor violated an order of probation,
failed to successfully complete any treatment, screening or community service
ordered by the court, or failed to pay any fine for that conviction or juvenile
adjudication, by a fine or not more than $500, or both, as applicable. A court
may order a minor under §
150.007(B)(1) of this chapter to participate in substance use disorder
services, as defined in § 6230 of the Public Health Code, Public Act 368 of
1978, being M.C.L.A. § 333.6230, and designated by the Administrator of the
Office of Substance Abuse Services, to perform community service, and to
undergo substance abuse screening and assessment at his or her own expense as
described in §
150.007(B)(5) of this chapter.
         (d)   An individual who furnishes fraudulent identification to a minor
or, notwithstanding §
150.007(B)(1) of this chapter, a minor who uses fraudulent identification to
purchase alcoholic liquor, is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by
imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $100, or
both.
      (2)   (a)   If an individual who pleads guilty to a misdemeanor violation
of §
150.007(B)(2) of this chapter or offers a plea of admission in a juvenile
delinquency proceeding for a misdemeanor violation of §
150.007(B)(1) of this chapter, the court, without entering a judgment of guilt
in a criminal proceeding or determination in a juvenile delinquency proceeding
that the juvenile has committed the offense and with the consent of the
accused, may defer further proceedings and place the individual on probation.
The terms and conditions of that probation include, but are not limited to, the
sanctions set forth in division (C)(1)(c) above, payment of the costs including
minimum state cost as provided for in § 18m of Ch. XIIA of the Probate Code of
1939, Public Act 288 of 1939, being M.C.L.A. § 712A.18m, and § 1j of Ch. IX of
the Code of Criminal Procedure, Public Act 175 of 1927, being M.C.L.A. §
769.1j, and the costs of probation as prescribed in § 3 of Ch. XI of the Code
of Criminal Procedure, Public Act 175 of 1927, being M.C.L.A. § 771.3. If a
court finds that an individual violated a term or condition of probation or
that the individual is utilizing this section in another court, the court may
enter an adjudication of guilt, or a determination in a juvenile delinquency
proceeding that the individual has committed the offense, and proceed as
otherwise provided by law. If an individual fulfills the terms and conditions
of probation, the court shall discharge the individual and dismiss the
proceedings. A discharge and dismissal under this division (C)(2)(a) is without
adjudication of guilt or without a determination in a juvenile delinquency
proceeding that the individual has committed the offense and is not a
conviction or juvenile adjudication for purposes of disqualifications or
disabilities imposed by law on conviction of a crime. An individual may obtain
only one discharge and dismissal under this section. The court shall maintain a
non-public record of the matter while proceedings are deferred and the
individual is on probation and if there is a discharge and dismissal under this
division (C)(2)(a). The Secretary of State shall retain a non-public record of
a plea and of the discharge and dismissal under this division (C)(2). These
records shall be furnished to any of the following:
            1.   To a court, prosecutor or police agency on request for the
purpose of determining if an individual has already utilized this division (C)
(2); and
            2.   To the Department of Corrections, a prosecutor or a law
enforcement agency, on the department’s, a prosecutor’s or a law enforcement
agency’s request, subject to all of the following conditions:
               a.   At the time of the request, the individual is an employee
of the Department of Corrections, the prosecutor or the law enforcement agency
or an applicant for employment with the Department of Corrections, the
prosecutor or the law enforcement agency; or
               b.   The record is used by the Department of Corrections, the
prosecutor or the law enforcement agency only to determine whether an employee
has violated his or her conditions of employment or whether an applicant meets
criteria for employment.
         (b)   A misdemeanor violation of division (C)(2)(a) above successfully
deferred, discharged and dismissed under division (C)(2)(c) below is considered
a prior judgment for the purposes of division (C)(1)(c) below.
         (c)   A court may order an individual found responsible for or
convicted of violating division (C)(2)(a) above to undergo screening and
assessment by a person or agency as designated by the department-designated
community mental health entity as defined in § 100a of the Mental Health Code,
Public Act 258 of 1974, being M.C.L.A. § 330.1100a, to determine whether the
individual is likely to benefit from rehabilitative services, including alcohol
or drug education and alcohol or drug treatment programs. A court may order an
individual subject to a misdemeanor conviction or juvenile adjudication of, or
placed on probation regarding, a violation of division (C)(2)(a) above to
submit to a random or regular preliminary chemical breath analysis. The parent,
guardian or custodian of a minor who is less than 18 years of age and not
emancipated under Public Act 293 of 1968, being M.C.L.A. §§ 722.1 to 722.6, may
request a random or regular preliminary chemical breath analysis as part of the
probation.
         (d)   The Secretary of State shall suspend the operator’s or
chauffeur’s license of an individual convicted of a second or subsequent
violation of division (C)(2)(a) above or of violating division (C)(2)(b) above
as provided in § 319 of the state’s Vehicle Code, Public Act 300 of 1949, being
M.C.L.A. § 257.319.
(Prior Code, § 25-7)
      (3)   (a)   A person convicted of violating §
150.007(E) of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and may be punished by
one or more of the following:
            1.   Service to the community for a period of not more than 45
days; and/or
            b.   A fine not more than $250.
         (b)   If the violation occurs within seven years of one or more prior
convictions, the person may be sentenced to one or both of the following:
            1.   Performing service to the community for a period of not more
than 60 days; and/or
            2.   A fine not more than $500.
         (c)   A person sentenced to perform service to the community under §
150.007(E) of this chapter shall not receive compensation and shall reimburse
the appropriate unit of government for the cost of supervision incurred by the
unit of government as a result of the person’s activities in that service.
         (d)   The term PRIOR CONVICTION means a conviction for a violation of
M.C.L.A. § 257.625(1), (3), (4), (5) or (6), former M.C.L.A. § 257.625(1) or
(2), or former M.C.L.A. § 257.625b, or a local ordinance substantially
corresponding to M.C.L.A. § 257.625(1), (3) or (6), former M.C.L.A. § 257.625
(1) or (2), or former M.C.L.A. § 257.625(b), or a law of another state
substantially corresponding to M.C.L.A. § 257.625(1), (3), (4), (5) or (6), or
former M.C.L.A. § 257.625(1) or (2) or former M.C.L.A. § 257.625b.
         (e)   License sanctions shall be imposed pursuant to M.C.L.A. §
257.625b.
         (f)   The court may order the convicted person to pay the costs of
prosecution as allowed by M.C.L.A. §§ 760.1 to 776.21, as amended.
         (g)   Any complaint based upon the defendant having one or more prior
convictions shall include a statement listing the defendant’s prior
convictions.
(Prior Code, § 25-7.3)
   (D)   (1)   A minor found responsible for a civil infraction of §
150.009 of this chapter shall be assessed a minimum fine of $25.
      (2)   An adult found guilty of violation of §
150.009 of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a $500
fine and/or 90 days of imprisonment.
(Prior Code, § 25-10)
   (E)   (1)   A parent or guardian who fails to comply with any provision of §
150.010(A) of this chapter is responsible for a municipal civil infraction
punishable by a fine not to exceed $300 together with court costs or may pay
$300 in fines and costs to the district court without a court hearing. Any
parent or guardian who is found to have failed to comply with any provisions of
§
150.010(A) of this chapter on more than one occasion is guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by a fine, not to exceed $500 and/or imprisonment not to exceed 90
days, together with court costs.
(Prior Code, § 25-10.1)
      (2)   A person who violates §
150.010(B)(1) of this chapter shall be liable for a municipal civil infraction,
punishable by a fine of not more than $300. Any person who violates §
150.010(B)(1) under the age of 18 years of age shall be accompanied by a legal
parent or legal guardian to any court hearing or pay $300 in full to the
district court without a hearing.
(Prior Code, § 25-10.2)
   (F)   (1)   Any person violating §
150.011(B) of this chapter is responsible for a municipal civil infraction
punishable by a fine not to exceed $500 and for costs incurred by the city in
enforcing this provision as allowed by law.
      (2)   Any person violating §
150.011(C) of this chapter is responsible for a municipal civil infraction
punishable by a fine not to exceed $250 and/or court costs.
(Prior Code, § 25-10.3)
   (G)   Any person violating §
150.012 of this chapter is responsible for a municipal civil infraction
punishable by a fine not to exceed $250 and/or court costs.
(Prior Code, § 25-10.4)
   (H)   Whoever violates the provisions of §
150.020 of this chapter within the city shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punished by the same penalty provided by state law; except that, the penalty
shall, in no case, exceed a fine of $500, or imprisonment for 90 days, or both.
(Prior Code, § 25-17)
   (I)   Any person violating §
150.022 of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 25-19)
   (J)   Any violation of provisions of §
150.023 of this chapter within the city, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punishable by the same penalty provided for other misdemeanors in the city.
(Prior Code, § 25-20)
   (K)   (1)   (a)   Any person who violates any provision §
150.024(B) of this chapter is responsible for a municipal civil infraction
subject to a fine of $100.
         (b)   Any person charged with violating §
150.024(B) of this chapter under the age of 18 shall be accompanied to any
district court hearing(s) on said charges by their legal parent or legal
guardian or may pay $100 for a first offense, $200 for a second offense or $300
for a third offense in fines and costs (prior to the court hearing) at the
district court without a hearing.
(Prior Code, § 25-21.1)
      (2)   A person who violates §
150.024(C) of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of
not more than $500 for each offense, plus court costs.
(Prior Code, § 25-22)
      (3)   A person who violates §
150.024(D) of this chapter is responsible for a municipal civil infraction,
punishable by a fine of not more than $100 for each offense, plus court costs.
Pursuant to a court order, the court may require a person who violates §
150.024(D) of this chapter to participate in health promotion and risk
reduction assessment program, if available. A person who is ordered to
participate in a health promotion and risk reduction assessment program under §
150.024(D) of this chapter is responsible for the costs of participating in the
program. In addition, a person who violates §
150.024(D) of this chapter is subject to the following:
         (a)   For the first violation, the court may order the person to do
one of the following:
            1.   Perform not more than 16 hours of community service in a
hospice, nursing home or long-term care facility; or
            2.   Participate in a health promotion and risk reduction program,
as described in this division (K)(3).
         (b)   For a second violation, in addition to participation in a health
promotion and risk reduction program, the court may order the person to perform
not more than 32 hours of community service in a hospice, nursing home or long-
term care facility.
         (c)   For a third or subsequent violation, in addition to
participation in a health promotion and risk reduction program, the court may
order the person to perform not more than 48 hours of community service in a
hospice, nursing home or long-term care facility.
(Prior Code, § 25-22)
   (L)   Any person violating any provision of §
150.025 of this chapter shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction
subject to a fine not to exceed $500, plus court costs. The police shall
impound the roller blade of any individual under the age of 17 years of age
which shall be released to any parent or legal guardian of the violator. In the
event of a second offense by any individual under the age of 17, the roller
blades will be released to any parent or guardian of the minor upon payment of
a cost reimbursement of $50. If an impounded roller blade is not claimed within
90 days, it will be deemed abandoned property and may be sold by the Police
Department.
(Prior Code, § 25-24)
(Ord. 632, passed 4-16-1979; Ord. 633, passed 4-16-1979; Ord. 648, passed 1-14-
1980; Ord. 674, passed 12-15-1980; Ord. 785, passed 9-16-1985; Ord. 798, passed
6-2-1986; Ord. 856, passed 11-7-1988; Ord. 857, passed 11-21-1988; Ord. 879,
passed 3-5-1990; Ord. 883, passed 4-3-1990; Ord. 947, passed 7-27-1992; Ord.
950, passed 7-27-1992; Ord. 956, passed 9-21-1992; Ord. 985, passed 10-24-2019;
Ord. 995, passed 6-5-1995; Ord. 997, passed 7-17-1995; Ord. 1089, passed 5-8-
2000; Ord. 1100, passed 11-13-2000; Ord. 1135, passed 12-10-2001; Ord. 1138,
passed 3-11-2002; Ord. 1206, passed 9-20-2004; Ord. 1216, passed 1-24-2005;
Ord. 1290, passed 10-22-2007; Ord. 1330, passed 7-19-2010; Ord. 1358, passed
12-12-2011; Ord. 1438, passed 12-5-2016; Ord. 1439, passed 12-5-2016; Ord.
1458, passed 12-18-2017; Ord. 1469, passed 2-25-2019; Ord. 1470, passed 2-25-
2019; Ord. 1472, passed 2-25-2019; Ord. 1512, passed 6-21-2021; Ord. 1513,
passed 6-21-2021; Ord. 1514, passed 6-21-2021)
CHAPTER 151: OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS
Section
   
151.001   Assault and battery
   
151.002   Fighting
   
151.003   Jostling others
   
151.004   Harassing or indecent telephone calls
   
151.005   Non-support
   
151.006   Contributing to the neglect or delinquency of children
   
151.007   Malicious, willful destruction of property by minors; recovery of
damages
   
151.008   Alcohol or controlled substances at social gatherings of minors
 
   
151.999   Penalty
§ 151.001 ASSAULT AND BATTERY.
   Except as authorized by law, it shall be unlawful for any person to beat,
strike, wound or assault another.
(Prior Code, § 25-31) Penalty, see §
151.999
Statutory reference:
   Assault and battery, see M.C.L.A. §§ 750.81 et seq.
§ 151.002 FIGHTING.
   No person in the city shall fight another person, except in boxing
exhibitions duly authorized and licensed under law.
(Prior Code, § 25-32) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.003 JOSTLING OTHERS.
   No person shall jostle another person in any street, alley or other public
place.
(Prior Code, § 25-33) Penalty, see §
151.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 750.167
§ 151.004 HARASSING OR INDECENT TELEPHONE CALLS.
   Any person who telephones any other person or causes any other person to be
telephoned and uses any vulgar, indecent, obscene, threatening or offensive
language, or suggesting any lewd or lascivious act over any telephone, or any
person who shall harass, annoy or molest any other person or his or her family
by telephoning, or causing to be telephoned, repeatedly such other person or
his or her family, whether or not conversation ensues and regardless of the
time of day or night, except for lawful business purposes, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 25-34) Penalty, see §
151.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 750.540e
§ 151.005 NON-SUPPORT.
   No person of sufficient ability shall refuse or neglect to support his or
her family.
(Prior Code, § 25-35) Penalty, see §
151.999
Statutory reference:
   Disorderly persons, see M.C.L.A. § 750.167
   Refusing to support wife and children, see M.C.L.A. § 750.165
§ 151.006 CONTRIBUTING TO THE NEGLECT OR DELINQUENCY OF CHILDREN.
   Any person who shall by any act, or by any word, encourage, contribute
toward, cause or tend to cause any minor child under the age of 17 years to
become neglected or delinquent so as to come or tend to come under the
jurisdiction of the Juvenile Division of the Probate Court, as defined in § 2
of Ch. 12a of Public Act 288 of 1939, being M.C.L.A. § 712A.2, as added by
Public Act 54 of 1944, being M.C.L.A. §§ 712A.1 et seq. and by any amendments
thereto, whether or not such child shall in fact be adjudicated a ward of the
probate court, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 25-36) Penalty, see §
151.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 750.145
§ 151.007 MALICIOUS, WILLFUL DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY BY MINORS; RECOVERY OF
DAMAGES.
   The city may recover damages and the cost of clean-up in an amount not to
exceed $2,500 in a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction against
the parents or parent of an unemancipated minor, living with his or her parents
or parent, who has maliciously or willfully destroyed or defaced (including the
writing of graffiti upon city property) any real, personal or mixed property
which belongs to the city.
(Prior Code, § 25-37) (Ord. 790, passed 11-25-1985) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.008 ALCOHOL OR CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES AT SOCIAL GATHERINGS OF MINORS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. An alcoholic liquor as defined in § 2 of the state’s
Liquor Control Act, Public Act 8 of 1933, being M.C.L.A. § 436.1105(3).
      ALLOW. To give permission for, or approval of, possession or consumption
of an alcoholic beverage or a controlled substance, by any of the following
means:
         (a)   In writing;
         (b)   By one or more oral statements;
         (c)   By any form of conduct, including a failure to take corrective
action, that would cause a reasonable person to believe that permission or
approval has been given; and/or
         (d)   If a person 16 years of age or younger is left alone at home
without adult supervision by the owner of the premises and minors are found to
be in possession or consuming alcoholic beverages.
      CONTROL OVER ANY PREMISES, RESIDENCE OR OTHER REAL PROPERTY. The
authority to regulate, direct, restrain, superintend, control or govern the
conduct of other individuals on or within that premises, residence or other
real property, and includes, but is not limited to, a possessory right.
      CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. As defined in § 7104 of the Public Health Code,
Public Act 368 of 1978, being M.C.L.A. § 333.7104.
      CORRECTIVE ACTION. Any of the following:
         (a)   Making a prompt demand that the minor or other individual depart
from the premises, residence or other real property, or refrain from the
unlawful possession or consumption of the alcoholic beverage or controlled
substance on or within that premises, residence or other real property, and
taking additional action described in divisions (b) or (c) below if the minor
or other individual does not comply with the request;
         (b)   Making a prompt report of the unlawful possession or consumption
of alcoholic liquor or a controlled substance to a law enforcement agency
having jurisdiction over the violation; and
         (c)   Making a prompt report of the unlawful possession or consumption
of alcoholic liquor or a controlled substance to another person having a
greater degree of authority or control over the conduct of persons on or within
the premises, residence or other real property.
      MINOR. An individual less than 21 years of age.
      PREMISES. A permanent or temporary place of assembly, other than a
residence, including, but not limited to, any of the following:
         (a)   A meeting hall, meeting room or conference room; and
         (b)   A public or private park.
      RESIDENCE. A permanent or temporary place of dwelling, including, but not
limited to, any of the following:
         (a)   A house, apartment, condominium or mobile home;
         (b)   A cottage, cabin, trailer or tent; and
         (c)   A motel unit, hotel unit or bed and breakfast unit.
      SOCIAL GATHERING. An assembly of two or more individuals for any purpose,
unless all of the individuals attending the assembly are members of the same
household or immediate family.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C) below, an owner, tenant
or other person having control over any premises, residence or other real
property shall not do either of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly allow a minor to consume or possess an alcoholic beverage
at a social gathering on or within that premises, residence or other real
property; or
      (2)   Knowingly allow any individual to consume or possess a controlled
substance at a social gathering on or within that premises, residence or other
real property.
   (C)   This section does not apply to the use, consumption or possession of a
controlled substance by an individual pursuant to a lawful prescription, or to
the use, consumption or possession of an alcoholic beverage by a minor for
religious purposes.
(Prior Code, § 25-38) (Ord. 790, passed 11-25-1985; Ord. 1101, passed 11-13-
2000) Penalty, see §
151.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 600.2913
§ 151.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(2) below, a person who
violates §
151.008(B) of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by
imprisonment for not more than 30 days or by a fine of not more than $500, or
both.
      (2)   For a second or subsequent violation of §
151.008(B) of this chapter, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by
imprisonment for not more than 90 days or by a fine of not more than $500, or
both.
      (3)   Evidence of all of the following gives rise to a rebuttable
presumption that the defendant allowed the consumption or possession of an
alcoholic beverage or a controlled substance on or within a premises, residence
or other real property, in violation of §
151.008 of this chapter:
         (a)   The defendant had control over the premises, residence or other
real property;
         (b)   The defendant knew that a minor was consuming or in possession
of an alcoholic beverage or knew that an individual was consuming or in
possession of a controlled substance at a social gathering on or within that
premises, residence or other real property; and
         (c)   The defendant failed to take corrective action.
      (4)   Section
151.008 of this chapter does not authorize selling or furnishing an alcoholic
beverage to a minor.
      (5)   A criminal penalty provided for under §
151.008 of this chapter may be imposed in addition to any penalty that may be
imposed for any other criminal offense arising from the same conduct.
(Prior Code, § 25-38) (Ord. 790, passed 11-25-1985; Ord. 1101, passed 11-13-
2000)
CHAPTER 152: OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Section
General Provisions
   
152.001   Larceny
   
152.002   Buying, receiving, possessing stolen money, goods or property
   
152.003   Retail fraud
   
152.004   Larceny from a motor vehicle
   
152.005   Fraud
   
152.006   Malicious destruction of property
   
152.007   Maliciously injuring or destroying house, barn or building of another
   
152.008   Maliciously breaking down or injuring fences or opening gates and the
like
   
152.009   Maliciously injuring or destroying fruit, shade or ornamental trees
   
152.010   Maliciously injuring or destroying boundary markers, guideposts and
the like
   
152.011   Checks without sufficient funds
   
152.012   Trespass; intrusion upon adjoining property
   
152.013   Refusal to leave school premises
   
152.014   Unauthorized pagers, beepers and other devices by students
   
152.015   Violation of posted notices
   
152.016   Littering
Portable On-Site Storage Units
   
152.030   Definition
   
152.031   Prohibition on extended placement of portable on-site storage unit
   
152.032   Temporary license
Collection Bins
   
152.045   Definition
   
152.046   Prohibitions on placement of collection bins
   
152.047   License
 
   
152.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.001 LARCENY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the offense of larceny, by
stealing, of the property of another, any money, goods or chattels, or any bank
note, bank bill, bond, promissory note, due bill, bill of exchange or other
bill, draft, order or certificate, or any book of accounts for or concerning
money or goods due or to become due, or to be delivered, or any deed or writing
containing a conveyance of land, or any other valuable contract in force, or
any receipt, release or defeasance, or any writ, process or public record, if
the property stolen shall be of the value of less than $200.
(Prior Code, § 25-51) (Ord. 1071, passed 5-3-1999) Penalty, see §
152.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 750.356
§ 152.002 BUYING, RECEIVING, POSSESSING STOLEN MONEY, GOODS OR PROPERTY.
   A person who buys, receives, possesses, conceals or aids in the concealment
of stolen, embezzled or converted money, goods or property knowing the money,
goods or property to be stolen, embezzled or converted, if the property
purchased, received, possessed or concealed is of a value less than $200, is
guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as stated in §
152.999 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 25-51.1) (Ord. 759, passed 3-5-1984; Ord. 1070, passed 5-7-1999)
Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.003 RETAIL FRAUD.
   Any person who does any of the following in a store or in its immediate
vicinity is guilty of retail fraud, a misdemeanor punishable by §
152.999 of this chapter:
   (A)   While a store is open to the public, alters, transfers, removes and
replaces, conceals or otherwise misrepresents the price at which property is
offered for sale, with the intent not to pay for the property or to pay less
than the price at which the property is offered for sale, if the resulting
difference in price is less than $200;
   (B)   While a store is open to the public, steals property of the store that
is offered for sale at a price of less than $200; and/or
   (C)   With intent to defraud, obtains or attempts to obtain money or
property from the store as a refund or exchange for property that was not paid
for and belongs to the store, if the amount of money, or the value of the
property, obtained or attempted to be obtained is less than $200.
(Prior Code, § 25-51.2) (Ord. 854, passed 10-17-1988; Ord. 1069, passed 5-3-
1999) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.004 LARCENY FROM A MOTOR VEHICLE.
   A person who commits larceny by stealing or unlawfully removing or taking
any wheel, tire, air bag, radio, stereo, clock, telephone, computer or other
electronic device in or on any motor vehicle, house trailer, trailer or semi-
trailer where the value of the property is less than $200, is guilty as
punishable by §
152.999 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 25-51.3) (Ord. 1068, passed 5-3-1999) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.005 FRAUD.
   No person shall obtain the property of another by means of any fraudulent
scheme, trick or device or aid another in so doing.
(Prior Code, § 25-52) Penalty, see §
152.999
Statutory reference:
   False pretenses and false representation, see M.C.L.A. §§ 750.217a et seq.
§ 152.006 MALICIOUS DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY.
   Any person who shall willfully and maliciously destroy or injure the
personal property of another, by any means, if the damage done shall be less
than $200 is guilty as punishable in §
152.999 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 25-53) (Ord. 1067, passed 5-3-1999) Penalty, see §
152.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 750.377a
§ 152.007 MALICIOUSLY INJURING OR DESTROYING HOUSE, BARN OR BUILDING OF
ANOTHER.
   Any person who shall willfully and maliciously destroy or injure any house,
barn or other building of another, or the appurtenances thereof, if the damage
done shall be less than $200, is guilty as set forth in §
152.999 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 25-54) (Ord. 1066, passed 5-3-1999) Penalty, see §
152.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 750.380
§ 152.008 MALICIOUSLY BREAKING DOWN OR INJURING FENCES OR OPENING GATES AND THE
LIKE.
   Any person who shall maliciously break down, injure, mar or deface any fence
belonging to or enclosing lands not his or her own, or shall maliciously throw
down or open any gate, bars or fence, and leave the same down or open, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 25-55) Penalty, see §
152.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 750.381
§ 152.009 MALICIOUSLY INJURING OR DESTROYING FRUIT, SHADE OR ORNAMENTAL TREES.
   Any person who shall willfully and maliciously, or wantonly and without
cause, cut down or destroy or otherwise injure any tree or shrub not his or her
own, standing or growing on the land of another, the damage for which said
cutting down, destruction or injury to the owner of said tree or shrub shall
amount to the sum of less than $200, is guilty as punishable in §
152.999 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 25-56) (Ord. 1065, passed 5-3-1999) Penalty, see §
152.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 750.382
§ 152.010 MALICIOUSLY INJURING OR DESTROYING BOUNDARY MARKERS, GUIDEPOSTS AND
THE LIKE.
   Any person who shall willfully or maliciously break down, injure, remove or
destroy any monument erected for the purpose of designating the boundaries of
the state or any municipality thereof, or of any tract or lot of land, or any
tree marked for that purpose, or shall so break down, injure, remove or destroy
any milestone, mileboard, guidepost or guide board, lawfully erected upon any
highway or other public way or railroad, or shall willfully or maliciously
deface or alter the inscription on any such stone, post or board, or shall
willfully or maliciously mar or deface any building or sign board, or
extinguish any lamp, or break, injure, destroy or remove any gas lamp, oil
lamp, electric light globe or bulb, or any railing or lamppost, erected on any
bridge, sidewalk, street, highway, court or passage, or shall wilfully or
maliciously injure, remove, deface or destroy any board or structure lawfully
erected or used for the posting of bills, posters or other notices, or shall
wilfully or maliciously mutilate, deface or destroy any bill, poster or other
printed or written notice lawfully posted on any board or structure used for
that purpose, without the consent of the owner or occupant thereof, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 25-57) Penalty, see §
152.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 750.383
§ 152.011 CHECKS WITHOUT SUFFICIENT FUNDS.
   (A)   Any person who, with intent to defraud, shall make or draw or utter or
deliver any check, draft or order for the payment of money, to apply on account
or otherwise, upon any bank or other depository, knowing at the time of such
making, drawing, uttering or delivering, that the maker, or drawer, has not
sufficient funds in or credit with such bank or other depository for the
payment of such check, draft or order, in full, upon its presentation, or any
person who with the intent to defraud shall make, draw, utter or deliver any
check, draft or order for the payment of money to apply on account or
otherwise, upon any bank or other depository, and who shall not have sufficient
funds for the payment for same when presentation for payment is made to the
drawee, except where such lack of funds is due to garnishment, attachment, levy
or other lawful cause, and such fact was not known to the person who made,
drew, uttered or delivered the instrument at the time of so doing, shall, if
the amount payable in the check is $50 or less, be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (B)   As against the maker or drawer thereof, the making, drawing, uttering
or delivering of a check, draft or order, payment of which is refused by the
drawee, when presented in the usual course of business, shall be prima facie
evidence of intent to defraud and of knowledge of insufficient funds in or
credit with such bank or other depository; provided, such maker or drawer shall
not have paid the drawee thereof the amount due thereon, together with all
costs and protest fees, within five days after receiving notice that such
check, draft or order has not been paid by the drawee.
(Prior Code, § 25-58) Penalty, see §
152.999
Statutory reference:
   Checks without sufficient funds, see M.C.L.A. §§ 750.131 et seq.
§ 152.012 TRESPASS; INTRUSION UPON ADJOINING PROPERTY.
   (A)   Generally. Any person who shall wilfully enter upon the lands or
premises of another without lawful authority, after having been forbidden to do
so by the owner or occupant, agent or servant of the owner or occupant, or any
person being upon the land or premises of another, upon being notified to
depart therefrom by the owner or occupant, the agent or servant of either, who
without lawful authority neglects or refuses to depart therefrom, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 25-59)
   (B)   Injuring, trespass and the like to public property. It shall be
unlawful for any person to destroy, injure or deface, or in any manner
interfere with or hinder the use of, or to enter upon without lawful authority
where “no trespassing” signs are posted, any public building or any public
property whatsoever.
(Prior Code, § 25-60)
   (C)   Intrusion upon adjoining property.
      (1)   For the purpose of this division (C), the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         COMPLAINANT. Any property owner who has had his or her property
damaged or intruded upon, as defined in this section.
         CONTRACTOR. Any person, corporation or any other legal entity who
performs any work upon the property of another and at the direction of the
property owner.
         DAMAGE. Any destruction, injury, harm or impairment of value caused to
property.
         INTRUDE. To encroach upon the property of another without permission
or lawful authority.
         PROPERTY OWNER. Any person having any interest in real property
including the owner in fee simple, land contract vendee, tenant or other
occupant.
         WORK. Any construction, repairs, maintenance or other similar type
activity.
      (2)   It is the legal responsibility of any contractor, property owner or
any other person when performing any work upon any property to do it in such a
manner so as to not intrude upon or cause damage to any adjoining property. Any
person who causes damage or intrudes upon any adjoining property while in the
course of making repairs, alterations, additions or doing any other work upon
any property in the city, shall be responsible for a municipal civil
infraction.
      (3)   Any property owner whose property has been damaged or intruded upon
as set forth in this division (C) may file a written complaint with the City
Engineer’
      (4)   If the matter is not resolved, a citation may be issued at the
direction of the City Engineer’s office and served upon the property owner and/
or contractor responsible for the intrusion or damage.
(Prior Code, § 25-60.1)
(Ord. 1297, passed 8-11-2008) Penalty, see §
152.999
Statutory reference:
   Trespass, see M.C.L.A. §§ 750.552 et seq.
§ 152.013 REFUSAL TO LEAVE SCHOOL PREMISES.
   (A)   Any person found to be creating a disturbance in any private, public
or parochial school or on the surrounding school grounds shall leave
immediately when so directed by the principal or by any other person designated
by the principal.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person who is not a regularly enrolled
student, teacher, parent or other employee to enter and remain in any school
building or on the school grounds, whether public, private or parochial, in the
city for any reasons whatever, unless such person has received written
permission from the principal or other person designated by the principal to be
in any such public, private or parochial school building or school grounds.
(Prior Code, § 25-61) (Ord. 689, passed 3-30-1981) Penalty, see §
152.999
Statutory reference:
   Trespass, see M.C.L.A. §§ 750.552 et seq.
§ 152.014 UNAUTHORIZED PAGERS, BEEPERS AND OTHER DEVICES BY STUDENTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person enrolled as a student in any private or
public school system in the city to possess, carry or otherwise have control of
or access to any device which is capable of receiving a remote signal by radio
wave or other means while on school property.
(Prior Code, § 25-61.1) (Ord. 910, passed 7-22-1991) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.015 VIOLATION OF POSTED NOTICES.
   Any person who shall enter upon the premises or property of another,
including public property, in violation of a notice posted or exhibited at the
entrance to the premises or at any place on the premises which is readily
observable to the public shall be penalized as in §
152.999 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 25-62) (Ord. 861, passed 4-17-1989) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.016 LITTERING.
   (A)   It is unlawful for a person knowingly, without the consent of the
public authority having supervision of public property or the owner of private
property, to dump, deposit, place, throw or leave, or cause or permit the
dumping, depositing, placing, throwing, projecting, propelling or leaving of,
litter on public or private property or water other than property designated
and set aside for such purposes. The phrase PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY OR WATER
includes, but is not limited to, the right-of-way of a road or highway, a body
of water or watercourse, or the shore or beach thereof, including the ice above
the water; a park, playground, parking lot, building, refuge or conservation or
recreation area and residential or farm properties or timberlands. It is
unlawful for a person who removes a vehicle, wrecked or damaged in an accident
on a highway, road or street, to fail to remove all glass and other injurious
substances dropped on the highway, road or street as a result of the accident.
   (B)   For purposes of this section, the term LITTER, as used herein, shall
mean all rubbish, refuse, waste material, garbage, offal, paper, glass, cans,
bottles, trash, discharged fireworks of any type including consumer fireworks,
debris or other foreign substances of every kind and description.
(Prior Code, § 25-63) (Ord. 1030, passed 3-24-1997; Ord. 1367, passed 7-23-
2012) Penalty, see §
152.999
PORTABLE ON-SITE STORAGE UNITS
§ 152.030 DEFINITION.
   A PORTABLE ON-SITE STORAGE UNIT shall mean any portable structure not built,
erected or designed to be a permanent structure.
(Prior Code, § 25-236) (Ord. 1352, passed 8-8-2011)
§ 152.031 PROHIBITION ON EXTENDED PLACEMENT OF PORTABLE ON-SITE STORAGE UNIT.
   (A)   A portable on-site storage unit may not be placed upon any property or
public street located within the city unless a temporary license is received
from the City Engineer’s office.
   (B)   A portable on-site storage unit shall not be placed in the city street
right-of-way unless a temporary license is received from the City Engineer’s
office. The unit shall not be placed for more than 96 hours. The unit shall
have safety reflectors on all four sides and the name, address and phone number
of the unit’s vendor. Placement upon a city street is not allowed if the
applicant’s property has a driveway, concrete slab or other hard surface that
is adequate for placement of the portable on-site storage unit.
   (C)   Storage of food or any other item that causes an offensive odor or
impairs the air quality to constitute a nuisance is prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 25-237) (Ord. 1352, passed 8-8-2011) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.032 TEMPORARY LICENSE.
   (A)   A portable on-site storage unit may be placed upon property within the
city based upon the following:
      (1)   Application is filed with the City Engineer’s office along with an
application fee of $50 for a temporary license;
      (2)   The applicant submits proof that there is substantial construction
or renovation taking place on the property as evidenced by active building
permits;
      (3)   For activities other than construction or renovations, the City
Engineer determines that such outside storage unit is necessary due to the type
of work being conducted and that no other reasonable alternative exists for
storage;
      (4)   The portable on-site storage unit is placed on a concrete slab,
driveway or other hard surface; and
      (5)   The portable on-site storage unit shall not be placed closer than
ten feet from the front property line so as not obstruct the visibility of the
traffic or pedestrians.
   (B)   A portable on-site storage unit may be placed upon a public street
within the city based on the following:
      (1)   Application is filed with the City Engineer’s office along with an
application fee of $50 for a temporary license;
      (2)   The applicant submits proof that there is substantial construction
or renovation taking place on the property as evidenced by active building
permits;
      (3)   The applicant’s property does not have a driveway, concrete slab or
other hard surface that is adequate for placement of the portable on-site
storage unit;
      (4)   For activities other than construction or renovations, the City
Engineer shall determine if such portable on-site storage unit is necessary due
to the type of work being conducted and/or that no other reasonable alternative
exists for storage;
      (5)   Must be greater than 40 feet from a corner crosswalk;
      (6)   A portable on-site storage unit placed on the street shall not be
greater than one foot from the curb; and
      (7)   The portable on-site storage unit shall not be placed closer than
15 feet from a fire hydrant.
   (C)   The temporary license may be permitted for up to 96 hours on private
property. Only one temporary license and one renewed temporary license may be
issued in one five-year period, unless causes beyond the control of the
property owner necessitate the use of a portable on-site storage unit.
(Prior Code, § 25-238) (Ord. 1352, passed 8-8-2011) Penalty, see §
152.999
COLLECTION BINS
§ 152.045 DEFINITION.
   A COLLECTION BIN (BIN) shall be any container, receptacle or similar device
that is located on any parcel or lot of record within the city that is used for
soliciting and collecting the receipt of clothing, household items or other
salvageable personal property. This term does not include recycle bins for the
collection of recyclable material, any rubbish or garbage receptacle.
(Prior Code, § 25-240) (Ord. 1465, passed 8-27-2018)
§ 152.046 PROHIBITIONS ON PLACEMENT OF COLLECTION BINS.
   (A)   A bin shall not be placed on any property without express written
permission from the property owner and after receiving approval from the city’s
Engineering Department.
   (B)   Bins shall only be allowed in the business, industrial and
recreational zoning districts. Bins are not allowed on residentially zoned
properties, except if the property is utilized as a church.
   (C)   There shall not be more than one bin per property address.
   (D)   A bin shall not be located within 1,000 feet of another bin, unless
the bin existed before adoption of this subchapter. Once removed, this distance
provision shall apply.
   (E)   Bins shall be located at least 25 feet from any property line and at
least 50 feet from any trash or recycling dumpster.
   (F)   Bins shall not be located within required parking spaces or landscape
areas. The applicant shall submit a site plan and a scaled floor plan of his or
her building, identifying all uses. All required parking spaces shall be
identified on the site plan. The location of the bin shall be identified on
site plan. Distances from property lines to the bin shall be shown on the site
plan.
   (G)   Each bin shall be placed on a hard surface such as concrete, blacktop
or other comparable surface, but not gravel. Hard surface shall not to exceed
eight feet wide by five feet long, and shall be located in a manner that is
publicly accessible.
   (H)   Except for the opening slot for donations, bins shall remain locked at
all times to prevent access by unauthorized persons.
   (I)   Bins shall be emptied on a monthly basis or more frequently if needed
to prevent overflow. No items shall be placed around the outside of a bin. Upon
notice by the city to the property owner and collection bin operator, any such
item placed outside a bin shall be removed within 24 hours of said notice. If
items are not removed within 24 hours, the city may remove the item and charge
the cost incurred by the city to the property owner. The cost to provide this
removal shall be $100 and shall increase by $100 for each subsequent instance
the city must remove additional items. Removal fees must be paid by the
property owner.
   (J)   The bin operator and the owner of the property on which a bin is
located shall have 24 hours after notice from the city to correct any
violations of this subchapter. The property owner shall provide the address,
phone number and email of a local agent located in the city where any notices
may be sent between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through
Friday, regarding enforcement of this subchapter.
   (K)   Existing bins shall obtain compliance with this subchapter within six
months of the adoption of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 25-241) (Ord. 1465, passed 8-27-2018) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.047 LICENSE.
   (A)   The applicant for a bin shall:
      (1)   Provide a plan detailing:
         (a)   The access route of the vehicle used to unload the contents of
the bin;
         (b)   The dedicated parking space used for patrons to unload
donations; and
         (c)   A scaled floor plan of building identifying:
            1.   All uses;
            2.   Required parking spaces;
            3.   Location of bin;
            4.   Distance from property line to bin;
            5.   Application for a concrete, blacktop or comparable surface if
a hard surface does not already exist;
            6.   Location of dedicated parking space for bin for unloading of
donations; and
            7.   A description or diagram of the proposed locking mechanism of
the collection bin.
      (2)   Provide a schedule for normal pick up of donations and abide by it;
      (3)   Provide written permission from the property owner;
      (4)   File an application with the city each year. The filing of an
application does not designate approval of a bin. Approval of a bin is only
received after an application is submitted, reviewed and stamped “approved” by
the city’s Engineering Department, if all requirements are met. Upon approval
of an application, the applicant will receive a sticker from the city to be
placed in the appropriate location on the bin;
      (5)   The name, address, email and telephone number of both the operator
of the collection bin and the property owner on which the collection bin is to
be located, including 24-hour contact information; and
      (6)   The signatures of the property owner and the operator of the
collection bin, acknowledging that they will both be responsible for compliance
with all applicable ordinances, laws and conditions related to the collection
bin.
   (B)   (1)   Bins shall not exceed six and one-half feet in height.
      (2)   Bins shall be constructed of a durable, UV-resistant metal, molded
hard plastic or fiberglass material that is painted.
      (3)   Bins shall prominently display the name, address and telephone
number of the owner/operator of the bin, in characters no less than four inches
in height and not greater than six inches in height.
      (4)   Bins shall at all times be maintained in good repair, rust-free and
clean condition and shall remain free of graffiti or other markings.
   (C)   Bins shall not be utilized for the display of any advertising, signage
or promotional materials other than identifying of the owner/operator of the
bin.
   (D)   There shall be one dedicated parking space for patrons to unload
donations.
   (E)   All owners of the property where the bin is located shall apply to the
Engineering Department for approval of placement of their bin. Bins shall not
be placed until approval is provided. A renewal application shall be filed each
year.
   (F)   Fee required per bin:
      (1)   Initial application (one-year period): $100;
      (2)   Renewal application (one-year period): $50; and
      (3)   A license issued under this section shall expire and become null
and void annually on January l of each year. An application for renewal must be
submitted prior to the expiration of the license on a form provided by the
Engineering Department.
   (G)   Any license issued under this subchapter may be revoked for non-
compliance with the terms of this subchapter after notice and a hearing. The
hearing will be conducted by the City Engineer. The license holder may appeal
the decision to the City Council within 21 days of the City Engineer’s
decision.
(Prior Code, § 25-242) (Ord. 1465, passed 8-27-2018) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   A person who commits the offense of larceny, per §
152.001 of this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by
imprisonment for not more than 90 days or a fine of not more than $500 or three
times the value of the property stolen, whichever is greater, or both
imprisonment and a fine.
(Prior Code, § 25-51)
   (C)   A person who violates §
152.002 of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment
for not more than 90 days or a fine of not more than $500 or three times the
value of the property purchased, received, possessed or concealed, whichever is
greater, or both imprisonment and a fine.
(Prior Code, § 25-51.1)
   (D)   Any person who violates §
152.003 of this chapter is guilty of retail fraud, a misdemeanor punishable by
imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or a fine of not more than $500 or
three times the value of the difference in price, property stolen or money or
property obtained or attempted to be obtained, whichever is greater, or both
imprisonment and a fine.
(Prior Code, § 25-51.2)
   (E)   A person who violates §
152.004 of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment
for not more than 90 days or a fine of not more than $500 or three times the
value of the property, whichever is greater, or both imprisonment and a fine.
(Prior Code, § 25-51.3)
   (F)   Any person violating §
152.006 of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment
for not more than 90 days or a fine of not more than $500 or three times the
amount of the destruction or injury, whichever is greater, or both imprisonment
and a fine.
(Prior Code, § 25-53)
   (G)   Any person violating §
152.007 of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment
for not more than 90 days or a fine of not more than $500 or three times the
amount of the destruction or injury, whichever is greater, or both imprisonment
and a fine.
(Prior Code, § 25-54)
   (H)   Any person violating §
152.009 of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment
for not more than 90 days or a fine of not more than $500 or three times the
amount of the destruction or injury, whichever is greater, or both imprisonment
and a fine.
(Prior Code, § 25-56)
   (I)   If the citation, per §
152.012(C) of this chapter, proceeds to court and the property owner or
contractor is found responsible, then a fine and cost may be assessed not to
exceed $500. The court, when assessing any fine or costs, may take into
consideration any corrective action that has been taken by the defendant,
including the payment of any restitution.
(Prior Code, § 25-60.1)
   (J)   Persons carrying or in possession or control of or having access to
such devices, commonly known as pagers, beepers or any other device of similar
design or purpose, whether operating or not, per §
152.014 of this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a
maximum fine of $100 or 90 days in jail, or both. Persons having legitimate
medical or other unusual reasons for possessing said devices and with written
permission of the city’s School Board shall be exempt from this section.
(Prior Code, § 25-61.1)
   (K)   Any person violating §
152.015 of this chapter be responsible for a civil infraction and subject to a
fine not to exceed $100, plus any court costs that may be incurred.
(Prior Code, § 25-62)
   (L)   Any person violating §
152.016 of this chapter shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction
punishable by a fine not to exceed $500 and for costs incurred by the city in
enforcing this provision as allowed by law.
(Prior Code, § 25-63)
   (M)   Any person who fails to comply with the terms of §§
152.030 through
152.032 of this chapter is responsible for a municipal civil infraction subject
to a fine up to $500, together with court costs.
(Prior Code, § 25-239)
   (N)   Any person who fails to comply with the terms of §§
152.045 through
152.047 of this chapter is responsible for a municipal civil infraction,
subject to a fine up to $500, together with court costs.
(Prior Code, § 25-243)
(Ord. 759, passed 3-5-1984; Ord. 854, passed 10-17-1988; Ord. 861, passed 4-17-
1989; Ord. 910, passed 7-22-1991; Ord. 1030, passed 3-24-1997; Ord. 1065,
passed 5-3-1999; Ord. 1066, passed 5-3-1999; Ord. 1067, passed 5-3-1999; Ord.
1068, passed 5-3-1999; Ord. 1069, passed 5-3-1999; Ord. 1070, passed 5-7-1999;
Ord. 1071, passed 5-3-1999; Ord. 1297, passed 8-11-2008; Ord. 1352, passed 8-8-
2011; Ord. 1367, passed 7-23-2012; Ord. 1465, passed 8-27-2018)
CHAPTER 153: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
Section
General Provisions
   
153.001   Disorderly conduct
   
153.002   Assaulting, battering, wounding, resisting, obstructing, opposing or
endangering a person performing his or her duties
   
153.003   Resisting, obstructing officer in discharge of duty
   
153.004   Prohibited conduct on school property or during school functions
   
153.005   Giving false information to a police officer
   
153.006   Disturbing the peace
   
153.007   Disturbing religious worship
   
153.008   Quarrels
   
153.009   Public intoxication
   
153.010   Indecent exposure
   
153.011   Conduct during public functions at athletic stadium or field, civic
center or any other area or meeting place
   
153.012   Entertainers and dancers
   
153.013   Alcoholic beverages and certain sexual conduct prohibited at licensed
premises
   
153.014   Unreasonable noise prohibited
   153.015   Disruptive behavior
Obscenity
   
153.025   Generally
   
153.026   Distribution to minors
   
153.027   Test to be applied in determining violations
   
153.028   Prima facie evidence of violation
 
   
153.999   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Law Enforcement, see
Ch. 33
   Nuisances, see §§
94.001 through
94.007
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 153.001 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   (A)   No person shall make, aid or assist in making any improper noise,
riot, disturbance, breach of the peace or diversion tending to a breach of the
peace.
   (B)   No person shall engage in any indecent or obscene conduct in any
public place.
   (C)   No person shall gather with others for any unlawful purpose or to
annoy or disturb others.
(Prior Code, § 25-76) Penalty, see §
153.999
Statutory reference:
   Disorderly persons, see M.C.L.A. § 750.167
§ 153.002 ASSAULTING, BATTERING, WOUNDING, RESISTING, OBSTRUCTING, OPPOSING OR
ENDANGERING A PERSON PERFORMING HIS OR HER DUTIES.
   (A)   An individual who assaults, batters, wounds, resists, obstructs,
opposes or endangers a person who the individual knows or has reason to know is
performing his or her duties is guilty as punishable by §
153.999 of this chapter.
   (B)   This section does not prohibit an individual from being charged with,
convicted of or punished for any other violation of law that is committed by
that individual while violating this section.
   (C)   A term of imprisonment imposed for a violation of this section may run
consecutively to any term of imprisonment imposed for another violation arising
from the same transaction.
   (D)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      OBSTRUCT. Includes the use or threatened use of physical interference or
force or a knowing failure to comply with a lawful command.
      PERSON. Any of the following:
         (a)   A city police officer;
         (b)   A city firefighter;
         (c)   A city enforcement officer, inspector or official charged with
enforcing city or state codes;
         (d)   Judge, magistrate, probation officer, prosecutor, city attorney,
court employee, court officer, other officer or duly authorized person serving
or attempting to serve or execute any process, rule or order made or issued by
lawful authority or otherwise acting in the performance of his or her duties;
         (e)   Any authorized person of the city enforcing tax liens, tax
warrants and jeopardy assessments and all actions associated therewith; and
         (f)   Any authorized persons of the city who is conducting property
assessments, evaluations or field work.
(Prior Code, § 25-76.1) (Ord. 678, passed 1-19-1981; Ord. 1261, passed 12-19-
2005) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.003 RESISTING, OBSTRUCTING OFFICER IN DISCHARGE OF DUTY.
   Any person who shall knowingly and willfully obstruct, resist, oppose,
assault, beat or wound any police officer, peace officer or other officer or
person duly authorized by law to maintain and preserve the peace, in their
lawful acts, attempts and efforts to maintain, preserve and keep the peace, or
who shall obstruct, resist or oppose any said officer or person duly
authorized, in serving or attempting to serve or execute any process, rule or
order made or issued by lawful authority, or who shall resist any officer in
the execution of any ordinance, by law or any rule, order or resolution made,
issued or passed by the City Council, or who shall assault, beat or wound any
said officer or other person duly authorized, while serving, or attempting to
serve or execute any such process, rule or order, or for having served, or
attempted to serve or execute the same, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 25-76.2) (Ord. 679, passed 1-19-1981) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.004 PROHIBITED CONDUCT ON SCHOOL PROPERTY OR DURING SCHOOL FUNCTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to act in a violent, quarrelsome,
loud, disorderly or destructive manner while on any school property within the
city.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any act that disturbs,
or annoys others, including but not limited to any vulgar language, profanity,
verbal harassment, or threatening behavior, or any act tending to cause a
breach of the peace while on any school property within the city.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person by any act, non-performance, or
encouragement of behavior that contributes to the delinquency of a person under
the age of 20 on any school property within the city.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any student to violate any school rule,
policy, or procedure on school property within the city or during any school
function(s).
   (E)   The superintendent of schools, the designated school/truant officer or
law enforcement official may issue a citation to any person who violates this
section on school grounds or during school functions.
(Prior Code, § 25-76.3) (Ord. 1205, passed 9-20-2004; Ord. 1437, passed 12-5-
2016; Ord. 1471, passed 2-25-2019; Ord. 1511, passed 6-21-2021) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.005 GIVING FALSE INFORMATION TO A POLICE OFFICER.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to report or cause to be reported
to any police agency any information concerning the commission of any offense
or other incident that would require police action when:
      (1)   The person knows that no such offense or other incident has
occurred; or
      (2)   The person knows the information to be false or that he or she has
no such information.
   (B)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person arrested for or charged with
a crime or who was issued a municipal civil infraction or a civil infraction by
a police officer or other authorized city employee to deliberately give a false
name or false addresses to the police officer or to any employee of the court.
      (2)   FALSE NAME shall be defined as the giving by a person of any name
other than his or her own legal name.
(Prior Code, § 25-76.4) (Ord. 1286, passed 9-10-2007) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.006 DISTURBING THE PEACE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to act in a violent, boisterous,
turbulent, quarrelsome, indecent or disorderly manner, or to use profane,
obscene or vulgar language, or to commit any act, or to do anything to disturb
the good order, peace and dignity of the city, its inhabitants or other
persons.
(Prior Code, § 25-77) Penalty, see §
153.999
Cross-reference:
   Curfew for minors, see §
150.009
   Disorderly conduct, see §
153.001
   Disturbing religious worship, see §
153.007
Statutory reference:
   Disturbing public places, see M.C.L.A. § 750.170
§ 153.007 DISTURBING RELIGIOUS WORSHIP.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb or disquiet any congregation
or assembly met for religious worship by making any noise or making any profane
discourse or engaging in any indecent behavior in or near the place of worship
as to disturb the solemnity of the meeting.
(Prior Code, § 25-78) Penalty, see §
153.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. §§ 750.169, 752.525
§ 153.008 QUARRELS.
   No person shall quarrel with another in a public place or cause any other
disturbance with another in a public place.
(Prior Code, § 25-79) Penalty, see §
153.999
Statutory reference:
   Disorderly persons, see M.C.L.A. § 750.167
   Disturbing public places, see M.C.L.A. § 750.170
§ 153.009 PUBLIC INTOXICATION.
   No person shall be intoxicated in a public place to the extent that he or
she endangers himself or herself or others.
(Prior Code, § 25-80) Penalty, see §
153.999
Statutory reference:
   Disorderly persons, see M.C.L.A. § 750.167
§ 153.010 INDECENT EXPOSURE.
   No person shall make any immoral exhibition or indecent exposure of himself
or herself in any public place.
(Prior Code, § 25-81) Penalty, see §
153.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 750.167
§ 153.011 CONDUCT DURING PUBLIC FUNCTIONS AT ATHLETIC STADIUM OR FIELD, CIVIC
CENTER OR ANY OTHER AREA OR MEETING PLACE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this
section during the period any public function is being conducted in and about
any athletic stadium or field, civic center or any other arena or meeting
place.
   (B)   (1)   PUBLIC FUNCTION is defined, for the purpose of this section, to
include, by way of specification, but without limitation, any athletic contest,
exhibition, meeting, convention or rally, to which the public is admitted,
whether with or without a charge.
      (2)   The period of a PUBLIC FUNCTION is defined, for the purpose of this
section, to extend from one hour before the scheduled start of the public
function to one hour after the termination of the last activity comprising the
public function.
   (C)   All persons attending events at any athletic stadium or field, civic
center or any other arena or meeting place shall proceed directly to their
seats, and upon leaving shall proceed directly from their seats to the nearest
exit and depart from the vicinity of the athletic stadium, field, civic center
or any other arena or meeting place without unnecessary delay.
   (D)   During the period of any public function, all persons shall remain in
their seats, except while arriving or departing and except for authorized
purposes, such as visiting the restroom and obtaining refreshments.
   (E)   No person during the period of a public function shall:
      (1)   Collect or remain in a crowd loitering in the aisles, entryways or
spaces of any stadium, civic center, arena or meeting place, or on the
sidewalk, streets or parking areas in the immediate vicinity thereof;
      (2)   Obstruct or hinder the lawful passage of any member of the public;
      (3)   Jostle or roughly crowd another person unnecessarily, or by
offensive or disorderly acts or language annoy or interfere with another
person;
      (4)   Commit a breach of the peace, or engage in threatening, abusive or
insulting behavior whereby a breach of the peace may be occasioned;
      (5)   Make, aid or assist in making any riot, disturbance or other
improper diversion;
      (6)   Climb upon the walls of any athletic stadium, or any other arena or
meeting place, or in or upon any trees in the immediate vicinity thereof;
      (7)   Enter the playing field of the stadium or any other arena, or
interfere in any way with the proceedings scheduled for the public function;
      (8)   Throw any object within or about any athletic stadium or field,
civic center, any other arena or meeting place, or within the immediate
vicinity thereof, or commit any injury or damage to the stadium, field, civic
center, arena or meeting place, its turf or equipment; and/or
      (9)   Sell in or give away or transport into any athletic stadium, field,
civic center, arena or other meeting place, or consume or have in his
possession or control within or in the immediate vicinity thereof, any
alcoholic liquor, beer or intoxicating beverage; provided, however, the City
Council may, by resolution, permit the sale, gift, transportation, consumption,
possession or control of any alcoholic liquor, beer or intoxicating beverage,
within or in the immediate vicinity of any athletic stadium, field, civic
center, arena or other meeting place, upon such terms and conditions as the
City Council may, in said resolution, provide.
(Prior Code, § 25-82) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.012 ENTERTAINERS AND DANCERS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Less than completely and opaquely covered
human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks, female breasts from below a point
immediately above the top of the areola and human male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state, whether or not covered.
      SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Human genitals in a state or simulated state
of sexual stimulation or arousal; acts or simulated acts of human masturbation,
sexual intercourse or sodomy, fondling or other erotic touching of the human
genitals, pubic regions, buttocks or female breasts.
   (B)   Unlawful to employ or engage an unlicensed dancer or entertainer. It
shall be unlawful for any owner, tenant, person, licensee, agent or employee,
of any theater, establishment, bar, tavern, club or business offering any kind
of show or exhibition emphasizing specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas to employ or engage any person as a dancer or entertainer
unless such dancer or entertainer possesses a valid entertainer’s license
issued by the city.
   (C)   Licenses required. It shall be unlawful for any person to provide his
or her services as a dancer or entertainer in any theater, establishment, bar,
tavern, club, business or other location, offering any kind of show or
exhibition emphasizing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas, unless such person possesses at the place of employment, engagement,
show or exhibition, a valid entertainer’s license issued by the city.
   (D)   Prohibitions. It shall be unlawful for any person providing his or her
services as a dancer or entertainer in any theater, establishment, bar, tavern,
club, business or other location, to engage in any specified sexual activities
or engage in any physical contact with specified anatomical areas with any
customer, patron or any other person.
   (E)   Application.
      (1)   Any person desiring employment as a dancer or entertainer in a
theater, establishment, bar, tavern, club, business or any other place for
which an entertainer’s license is required shall first make application to the
city’s Police Department for a license as required in this section.
      (2)   At the time the application is filed, a non-refundable application
fee in the amount of $100 shall be payable to the city and shall be in addition
to any other fee required by this section.
      (3)   Any applicant for a license pursuant to this section shall submit
the following information and submittals to the city’s Police Department:
         (a)   The full correct name, Social Security number and present
address of the applicant;
         (b)   The two previous addresses immediately prior to the present
address of the applicant and the dates of residence;
         (c)   A complete description in writing of the services to be
performed;
         (d)   The location, name and mailing address of all prospective
employers;
         (e)   Written proof (by birth certificate or sworn affidavits) that
the applicant is at least 18 years of age;
         (f)   The individual applicant’s height, weight, color of eyes and
hair and sex;
         (g)   One recent portrait photograph depicting a reasonable likeness
of the applicant that is at least two inches by two inches and a complete set
of the applicant’s fingerprints, which shall be taken by the Police Chief or
his or her designee;
         (h)   All criminal convictions other than traffic violations and the
specifics thereof;
         (i)   The application shall be signed and its truthfulness sworn to by
the applicant;
         (j)   A complete list of all stage names, pseudonyms, aliases or
nicknames under which the applicant has or will appear and documentation of any
legal name changes by any court of record within the last seven years, or name
changes resulting from marriage or divorce; and
         (k)   Such other identification and information necessary to discover
the truth of the matters specified in this section, as required by the Police
Chief or his or her designees.
   (F)   Issuance.
      (1)   The Police Department shall issue or renew an entertainer’s license
after the city police have completed a criminal record check of local and state
police records.
      (2)   A record of conviction for an offense involving gambling,
narcotics, prostitution, pandering, pornography or any crime involving moral
turpitude, or a violation of any provision of this section within the preceding
two years shall be grounds for refusal to issue or renew an entertainer’s
license.
   (G)   Renewal. The entertainer’s license shall be renewed on or before the
first Monday in June of each year.
   (H)   Revocation. A license issued pursuant to this section shall remain the
property of the city and shall be revoked and surrendered upon demand when
proof is submitted to any police officer of any violation of the conditions of
its issuance.
(Prior Code, § 25-83) (Ord. 902, passed 1-28-1991) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.013 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AND CERTAIN SEXUAL CONDUCT PROHIBITED AT LICENSED
PREMISES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. All alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage,
wine or fortified wine, as defined under state law and/or by the state’s Liquor
Control Commission.
      LICENSED PREMISES. Any premises in which alcoholic beverages are sold or
dispensed for consumption on the premises and licensed and/or regulated by the
state’s Liquor Control Commission.
      OPERATOR. The owner, license holder, operator, manager and person in
charge of any licensed premises.
      PARTIALLY NUDE or SEMI-NUDE. A person having any or all of the following
body parts exposed: buttocks; genitals; anus; pubic area; or female breasts.
      PERSON. A natural person, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association or other legal entity.
   (B)   Nudity and certain sexual conduct prohibited.
      (1)   No person shall, on licensed premises, perform acts of or acts
which constitute or simulate:
         (a)   Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral
copulation, flagellation or any sexual acts or sexual activities which are
prohibited by law;
         (b)   The touching, caressing or fondling of the breast, buttocks,
anus, human genitals or pubic region;
         (c)   The displaying of human genitals, buttocks, pubic region, anus
or the female breast below the top of the nipple; or
         (d)   Topless dancing and/or bottomless dancing, partially nude or
semi-nude dancing, strippers or similar entertainers, or topless and/or
bottomless and/or partially nude or semi-nude waitpersons or employees or any
other form of nude or partially nude or semi-nude service or entertainment.
      (2)   No person shall, on licensed premises, use artificial devices or
inanimate objects to perform, simulate or depict any of the prohibited conduct
or activities described in division (B)(1) above.
      (3)   It shall be unlawful for any person to show, display or exhibit, on
licensed premises, any film, video, still picture, electronic reproduction or
any other visual reproduction or image of any act or conduct described in
divisions (B)(1) and (B)(2) above.
   (C)   Allowing persons to engage in prohibited acts. No operator shall allow
or permit to remain in or about the licensed premises any person who performs
acts of or acts which constitute or simulate:
      (1)   Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral
copulation, flagellation or any sexual acts or sexual activities which are
prohibited by law;
      (2)   The touching, caressing or fondling of the breast, buttocks, anus,
human genitals or pubic region;
      (3)   The displaying of human genitals, buttocks, pubic region, anus or
the female breast below the top of the nipple; or
      (4)   Topless dancing and/or bottomless dancing, partially nude or semi-
nude dancing, strippers or similar entertainers, or topless and/or bottomless
and/or partially nude or semi-nude waitpersons or employees or any other form
of nude or partially nude or semi-nude service or entertainment.
   (D)   Amortization of licensed premises.
      (1)   Any licensed premises lawfully operating on the effective date of
this section that is in violation of the provisions or requirements of this
section shall be deemed a non-conforming licensed premises. The non-conforming
licensed premises will be permitted to continue for a period not to exceed six
months, unless sooner terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for
a period of 30 days or more; provided, however, said non-conforming licensed
premises shall be permitted to continue for an additional six-month period if
said licensed premises applies for said extension to the City Council within
the first six-month period.
      (2)   Such non-conforming licensed premises shall not be increased,
enlarged, extended or altered; except that, said non-conforming licensed
premises may be changed and operated to conform to all of the requirements of
this section.
   (E)   Violations. The violation of any provision of this section by the
operator of any licensed premises shall constitute grounds for the suspension
and/or revocation of any and all alcoholic beverages licenses issued to said
premises or to such operator by the state’s Liquor Control Commission.
   (F)   Public nuisance per se. Any violation of any provisions of this
section is hereby declared to be a public nuisance per se, and may be abated by
order of any court of competent jurisdiction.
   (G)   Rights and remedies are cumulative. The rights and remedies provided
herein are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 25-84) (Ord. 941, passed 7-22-1992) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.014 UNREASONABLE NOISE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   A person is guilty of a misdemeanor if he or she operates or permits
the operation of an amplified or un-amplified radio, tape, cassette, stereo,
television, phonograph, musical instrument, boom box, loud speaker other
electronic sound producing device, or similar device, which causes total noise
exceeding 82 DBA or which may be heard more than one hundred feet away from the
source of the noise. As used in this section, DBA means decibels measured on
the A-weighted network of a sound level meter, as specified in American
National Standards Institute Standard S1.4. If it is shown that the noise level
is in excess of the DBA level established in this section or may be heard more
than 100 feet from the source of the noise, that evidence shall be prima facie
evidence that the person is producing unreasonable noise as prohibited by this
section.
   (B)   Any police officer may issue a citation to the offender for any
violation committed in his or her presence without the necessity of a prior
complaint from any other person. The provisions of this section shall not apply
to city approved special events such as the annual Wyandotte Street Art Fair,
concerts, festivals or other similar events.
(Prior Code, § 25-85) (Ord. 1078, passed 9-20-1999) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.015 DISRUPTIVE BEHAVIOR.
   Any person whose conduct or activity causes a disruption to the good order,
health, safety, welfare or peace of the public (including law enforcement) of
the City of Wyandotte including but not limited to being loud, boisterous,
quarrelsome, vulgar, threatening or disruptive, which the police determines not
to be criminal in nature, is responsible for a municipal civil infraction
subject to a fine not to exceed $500 together with court costs.
(Ord. 1529, passed 10-11-2022)
OBSCENITY
§ 153.025 GENERALLY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly sell, lend, give
away, distribute, show or transmute, or offer either to sell, lend, give away,
distribute, show or transmute, or to have in his or her possession with intent
either to sell, lend, give away, distribute, show or transmute, or advertise in
any manner, or to otherwise knowingly offer for either loan, gift, sale or
distribution, any obscene, lewd, lascivious, filthy or indecent, sadistic or
masochistic book, magazine, pamphlet, newspaper, story paper, writing, paper,
phonograph record, picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture film, figure,
image, wire or tape recording or any written, printed or recorded matter of an
indecent character which may or may not require mechanical or other means to be
transmuted into auditory, visual or sensory representations of such character.
   (B)   Any person who publishes or distributes for resale or for reading or
other perusal any book, magazine or pamphlet, so composed as to constitute a
compilation of pictures, illustrations, caricatures, cartoons, words, stories
and advertisements, or any combination thereof, featuring and primarily devoted
for the purpose of commercial exploitation of the description or portrayal or
suggestion of illicit sex, or sexual relations, of perversion, lust or sexual
passion, or any combination thereof, shall be guilty of a violation of a
misdemeanor.
   (C)   For the purpose of this section, possession of six or more identical
copies, or six or more articles of any obscene, lewd, lascivious, filthy or
indecent book, magazine, pamphlet, newspaper, story paper, writing, paper,
phonograph record, picture drawing, photograph, slide, motion picture or
recorded matter of an indecent character, shall be prima facie evidence of
possession with intent to sell, lend, give away, distribute, show or transmute
the thing.
   (D)   Any person who shall, as a condition to a sale, allocation,
consignment or delivery for resale of any paper, magazine, book, periodical or
publication, require that the purchaser or consignee receive for resale any
other article, book or other publication which is contrary to this section or
impose or threaten to impose any penalty, financial or otherwise, by reason of
the failure of any person to accept such articles, books or publications, or by
reason of the return thereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 25-116) (Ord. 573, passed 10-18-1976) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.026 DISTRIBUTION TO MINORS.
   Whoever knowingly either sells or distributes, or imports for the purpose of
selling or distributing to a person under the age of 18 years any obscene,
lewd, lascivious, filthy or indecent book, magazine, pamphlet, newspaper, story
paper, writing, paper, phonograph record, picture, drawing, photograph, motion
picture film, figure, image, wire or tape recording or any written printed or
recorded matter of an indecent character, which may or may not require
mechanical or other means to be transmuted into auditory, visual or sensory
representations of such character, manifestly tending to corrupt the morals of
youth or introduces into a family, school or place of education, or buys,
procures, receives or has in possession any obscene, lewd, lascivious, filthy
or indecent book, magazine, pamphlet, newspaper, story paper, writing, paper,
phonograph record, picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture film, figure,
image, wire or tape recording or any written, printed or recorded matter of an
indecent character, which may or may not require mechanical or other means to
be transmuted into auditory, visual or sensory representations of such
character, either for the purpose of sale, exhibition, loan or circulation to a
person under the age of 18 years or with intent to introduce the same into a
family, school or place of education, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 25-117) (Ord. 573, passed 10-18-1976) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.027 TEST TO BE APPLIED IN DETERMINING VIOLATIONS.
   The test to be applied in cases under this subchapter shall not be whether
sexual desires or sexually improper thoughts would be aroused in those
comprising a particular segment of the community, the young, the immature or
the highly prudish or would leave another segment, the scientific or highly
educated or the so-called worldly wise and sophisticated, indifferent and
unmoved. But, such test shall be the effect of the book, picture or other
subject of complaint considered as a whole, not upon any particular class, but
upon all those whom it is likely to reach, that is, its impact upon the average
person in the community. The book, picture or other subject of complaint must
be judged as a whole in its entire context, not by considering detached or
separate portions only, and by the standards of common conscience of the
community of the contemporary time period of the violation charged.
(Prior Code, § 25-118) (Ord. 573, passed 10-18-1976)
§ 153.028 PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE OF VIOLATION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the depiction, by any method as set
forth in this subchapter of any one or combination of the following acts shall
be prima facie evidence of the violation of this subchapter:
   (A)   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
   (B)   Human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; and/or
   (C)   Fondling or other erotic or intentional touching of the human
genitals, pubic regions, buttock or female breast.
(Prior Code, § 25-119) (Ord. 573, passed 10-18-1976)
§ 153.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   An individual violating §
150.002 of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment
for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $500, or both.
      (2)   Section 150.002 of this chapter does not prohibit an individual
from being charged with, convicted of or punished for any other violation of
law that is committed by that individual while violating §
150.002 of this chapter.
      (3)   A term of imprisonment imposed for a violation of §
150.002 of this chapter may run consecutively to any term of imprisonment
imposed for another violation arising from the same transaction.
(Prior Code, § 25-76.1)
   (C)   (1)   Any person who violates §
153.004 under the age of 18 shall be responsible for a municipal civil
infraction subject to a fine not to exceed $400 together with court costs and/
or community service. In addition, he or she must be accompanied to any
district court hearings on said charge by their legal parent or guardian or may
pay $400 in fines and costs (prior to the court hearing) at the district court
without a hearing.
      (2)   Any person over the age of 17 who violates §
153.004 shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction subject to a fine
not to exceed $500 together with court costs and/or community service or may
pay $500 in fines and costs (prior to the court hearing) to the district court
without a court appearance.
(Prior Code, § 25-76.3)
   (D)   Any person convicted of violating §
153.005 of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and is subject to a fine not
exceeding $500 and/or 90 days in jail.
(Prior Code, § 25-76.4)
   (E)   Any person or operator who violates any provision of §
153.013 of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be fined not less than $100, nor more than $500, for each such
conviction, or shall be punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90
days for each offense, or by both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion
of the court, together with the costs of such prosecution.
(Prior Code, § 25-84)
(Ord. 678, passed 1-19-1981; Ord. 941, passed 7-22-1992; Ord. 1205, passed 9-
20-2004; Ord. 1261, passed 12-19-2005; Ord. 1286, passed 9-10-2007; Ord. 1437,
passed 12-5-2016; Ord. 1471, passed 2-25-2019; Ord. 1511, passed 6-21-2021)
CHAPTER 154: WEAPONS AND HARMFUL DEVICES
Section
Weapons
   
154.001   Discharge of firearms
   
154.002   Firearms; intentionally aiming without malice
   
154.003   Possession of dangerous weapon
   
154.004   Knives and darts
Laser Pointing Devices
   
154.015   Possession of laser pointer devices
   
154.016   Use of laser pointer to harass, annoy or disturb the peace of another
   
154.017   Parental responsibility
 
   
154.999   Penalty
WEAPONS
§ 154.001 DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm, except in the
lawful defense of his or her person or property or as otherwise permitted by
law.
(Prior Code, § 25-96) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.002 FIREARMS; INTENTIONALLY AIMING WITHOUT MALICE.
   Any person who shall intentionally, without malice, point or aim any firearm
at or toward any other person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 25-96.1) (Ord. 760, passed 3-19-1984) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.003 POSSESSION OF DANGEROUS WEAPON.
   (A)   No person shall possess any machine gun, sawed-off shotgun or any
instrument or weapon of the kind commonly known as a blackjack, slingshot, sand
club, sandbag, switchblade knife or metal knuckles, nor any instrument,
attachment or appliance for causing the firing of any firearm to be silent or
intended to lessen or muffle the noise of the firing of any firearms, except as
is otherwise permitted by law.
   (B)   No person shall within the city possess, with intent to use unlawfully
against another, an imitation pistol, or a dagger, dirk, razor, stiletto or
other dangerous weapon.
(Prior Code, § 25-97) Penalty, see §
154.999
Statutory reference:
   Dangerous weapons, see M.C.L.A. § 750.224
§ 154.004 KNIVES AND DARTS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      DART. A pointed weapon or stick thrown by hand.
      SWITCHBLADE OR SELF-OPENING KNIFE. A knife containing a blade or blades
which can be opened by depressing a button, pressure on the handle, release of
a spring or other mechanical contrivance.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, give away
or loan to any minor under the age of 18 years, or for any such minor to be in
possession of any dart in any of the streets, alleys, parks, boulevards,
playgrounds or in any other public property or school in the city or in any
private property generally frequented by the public.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to be in possession of a knife
with a blade more than three inches in length in any of the streets, alleys,
parks, boulevards or other public property or schools in the city, or in any
dance hall, theater, amusement park, liquor establishment, store or other
private property generally frequented by the public for purposes of education,
recreation, amusement, entertainment, sports or shopping. This division (C)
shall not apply to any person in possession of such knife if actively engaged
therein or actively engaged in going to or returning from honest work, trade,
business, sport or recreation.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to be in
possession of any knife of any description in any of the streets, alleys,
parks, boulevards or other public property or schools in the city, or in any
dance hall, theater, amusement park, liquor establishment, store or other
private property generally frequented by the public for purposes of education,
recreation, amusement, entertainment, sport or shopping; provided that, the
prohibition of this division (D) shall not apply to any such person under 18
years of age being in possession of any such knife when it is used or carried
in good faith as a tool of honest work, trade, business, sport or recreation,
or when used or carried in good faith as equipment related to and required for
any legitimate sport, recreation or youth character building program (Boy
Scouts, Girl Scouts and the like), when actively engaged therein or actively
engaged in going to or returning from such honest work, trade, business, sport,
recreation or youth character building program.
(Prior Code, § 25-98) (Ord. 1456, passed 11-20-2017) Penalty, see §
154.999
LASER POINTING DEVICES
§ 154.015 POSSESSION OF LASER POINTER DEVICES.
   (A)   No person shall possess, control, carry or use in any manner any type
of low level light laser pointer (sometimes referred to as a “laser pen”).
   (B)   A person shall not be in violation of this subchapter if his or her
possession of the laser pointer is necessary for his or her employment, trade,
occupation or if the laser pointer is required under circumstances that tend to
establish that its possession is for a lawful purpose (and not for self-defense
or amusement).
(Prior Code, § 25-165) (Ord. 1061, passed 3-1-1999) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.016 USE OF LASER POINTER TO HARASS, ANNOY OR DISTURB THE PEACE OF
ANOTHER.
   No person shall use a laser pointer to harass, annoy or disturb the peace or
enjoyment of another. No person shall shine or aim a laser at another person or
into an occupied building, home or motor vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 25-166) (Ord. 1061, passed 3-1-1999) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.017 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY.
   No parent shall knowingly permit his or her minor child to possess, control,
carry or use any type of low level light laser pointer unless permitted by §
154.015 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 25-167) (Ord. 1061, passed 3-1-1999) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   A person who violates §
154.015 of this chapter is responsible for a municipal civil infraction and
shall forfeit the laser pointer to the police.
(Prior Code, § 25-165)
      (2)   Any person who violates §
154.016 of this chapter is responsible for a municipal civil infraction and
subject to a minimum fine of $250.
(Prior Code, § 25-166)
      (3)   Any person who violates §
154.017 of this chapter is responsible for a municipal civil infraction.
(Prior Code, § 25-167)
(Ord. 1061, passed 3-1-1999)
CHAPTER 155: CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES AND OTHER DRUGS
Section
Controlled Substances
   
155.001   Possession, use; prohibited generally
   
155.002   Drug paraphernalia, possession, sales and the like; prohibited
   
155.003   Fraud and deceit in sales
   
155.004   Loitering and the like about places where drugs and the like are
illegally stored, kept or used for unlawful purpose
   
155.005   Exemption
Model Glue
   
155.020   Definition
   
155.021   Purchases generally
   
155.022   Minors generally
   
155.023   Record of sales to minors
   
155.024   Inhalation, consumption and the like prohibited
   
155.025   Abetting violations by minors
   
155.026   Exemptions
 
   
155.999   Penalty
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES
§ 155.001 POSSESSION, USE; PROHIBITED GENERALLY.
   (A)    No person shall knowingly or intentionally possess, sell, offer for
sale, deliver, distribute, administer, dispense, prescribe or give away any
narcotic drug or other controlled substance, analogue or prescription form, as
defined in Public Act 368 of 1978, as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 333.7101 et
seq. However, the provisions of this section restricting the possession of any
controlled substance, empty gelatin capsule or hypodermic syringe, needle or
other implement or instrument adapted to the use of such a substance by means
of subcutaneous injection, or intracutaneous injection or any other manner or
method of introduction shall not apply to common carriers or warehousemen or
their employees engaged in the lawful transportation or storage of such
controlled substances, syringes, needles or capsules, or to public officers or
employees while engaged in the performance of their official duties, or to
temporary incidental possession on the part of the employees or agents of
persons lawfully entitled to possession. This section does not apply to any
person who possesses a controlled substance, narcotic drug, a controlled
substance analogue, or a prescription form if these items were obtained
directly from, or pursuant to, a valid prescription order of a practitioner (as
defined by the State of Michigan Public Health Code) while acting in the course
of the practitioner's professional practice or if otherwise authorized by law.
   (B)   When any person who has not previously been convicted under division
(A) above or under any statute of the United States, or state law, or municipal
ordinance relating to possession or use of the substances as defined above,
pleads guilty to or is found guilty of violating division (A) above, the court,
without entering a judgment of guilt and with the consent of the accused
person, may defer further proceedings and place the accused person on probation
upon certain terms and conditions, including therein such requirement that the
accused person attend courses of instruction or rehabilitation on the medical,
psychological and social effects of the misuse of drugs and/or the substances
defined above. Upon violation of a term or condition, the court may enter an
adjudication of guilt and proceed as the court determines. Upon fulfillment of
the terms and conditions, the court shall discharge the person and dismiss the
proceedings against him or her. Discharge and dismissal under this section
shall be without adjudication of guilt and is not a conviction for the purposes
of disqualifications or disabilities imposed by law upon the conviction of a
crime. There may be only one discharge and dismissal under division (A) above
with respect to any person. The Police Department shall retain a non-public
record of an arrest and discharge or dismissal under this division (B). This
record shall be furnished to any court or police agency upon request for the
purpose of showing that a defendant in a criminal action involving possession
or use of the substances defined above has already once availed himself or
herself of the provisions of this division (B).
(Prior Code, § 25-136) (Ord. 1410, passed 5-11-2015; Ord. 1525, passed 6-27-
2022)  Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.002 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA, POSSESSION, SALES AND THE LIKE; PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Definitions. The term DRUG PARAPHERNALIA means all equipment, products
and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use or designed for use,
in planting, propagating, cultivating, producing, processing, preparing,
testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing,
injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body a
controlled substance, as defined by state law, in violation of state or local
law. It includes, but is not limited to:
      (1)   Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting
propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which
is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be
delivered;
      (2)   Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing controlled
substances;
      (3)   Isomerization devices used, intended for use or designed for use in
increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance;
      (4)   Testing equipment used, intended for use or designed for use in
identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled
substances;
      (5)   Scales and balances used, intended for use or designed for use in
weighing or measuring controlled substances;
      (6)   Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol,
mannile, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for use or designed for use in
cutting controlled substances;
      (7)   Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use or designed for
use in removing twigs and seeds from or in otherwise cleaning or refining
marijuana;
      (8)   Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used,
intended for use or designed for use in compounding controlled substances;
      (9)   Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended
for use or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled
substances;
      (10)   Containers and other objects used, intended for use or designed
for use in storing or concealing controlled substances;
      (11)   Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended for
use or designed for use in parenterally injected controlled substance into the
human body; and
      (12)   Objects used, intended for use or designed for use in ingesting,
inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish or hashish oil
into the human body, such as:
         (a)   Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes
with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or punctured metal
bowls;
         (b)   Carburetion tubes and devices;
         (c)   Water pipes;
         (d)   Smoking and carburetion masks;
         (e)   Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning materials,
such as a marijuana cigarette that has become too small or too short to be held
in the hand;
         (f)   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
         (g)   Chamber pipes;
         (h)   Carburetor pipes;
         (i)   Electric pipes;
         (j)   Air-driven pipes;
         (k)   Chillums;
         (l)   Bongs; and
         (m)   Ice pipes or chillers.
   (B)   Determination. In determining whether an object is “drug
paraphernalia”, a court or other authority should consider in addition to all
other logically relevant factors, the following:
      (1)   Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the objects
concerning their use;
      (2)   Prior convictions, if any, of any owner, or of anyone in control of
an object, under any city, state or federal law relating to any controlled
substances;
      (3)   The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct
violation of state law;
      (4)   The proximity of the object to controlled substances;
      (5)   The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the
object;
      (6)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or of
anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom he or she knows,
intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of state or local law; the
innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, as to a direct
violation of state law shall not prevent a finding that the object is intended
for use, or designed for use as drug paraphernalia;
      (7)   Instruction, oral or written, provided with the object concerning
its use;
      (8)   Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or
depict its use;
      (9)   National and local advertising concerning its use;
      (10)   The manner in which the object is displayed for sale;
      (11)   Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a
supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a licensed
distributor or dealer of tobacco products;
      (12)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the
objects to the total sales of the business enterprise;
      (13)   The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the
community; and
      (14)   Expert testimony concerning its use.
   (C)   Possession of drug paraphernalia. It is unlawful for any person to
use, or to possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate,
cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacturing, compound, convert, produce, process,
prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest,
inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in
violation of state or local law.
   (D)   Manufacture, delivery or sale of drug paraphernalia. It is unlawful
for any person to deliver, sell, possess with intent to deliver or sell or
manufacture with intent to deliver or sell, drug paraphernalia, knowing that it
will be used to plant, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack,
repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce
into the human body a controlled substance in violation of state law.
   (E)   Advertisement of drug paraphernalia. It is unlawful for any person to
place in any newspaper, magazine, handbill, sign, poster or other publication,
any advertisement, knowing that the purpose of the advertisement, in whole or
in part, is to promote the sale of objects designed or intended for use as drug
paraphernalia.
   (F)   Exceptions. This section shall not apply to manufacturers,
wholesalers, jobbers, licensed medical technicians, technologists, nurses,
hospitals, research teaching institutions, clinical laboratories, medical
doctors, osteopathic physicians, dentists, chiropodists, veterinarians,
pharmacists and embalmers in the normal legal course of their respective
business or profession, nor to persons suffering from diabetes, asthma or any
other medical condition requiring self-injection.
   (G)   Civil forfeiture. Any drug paraphernalia used, sold, possessed with
intent to use or sell, or manufactured with intent to sell in violation of this
subchapter shall be seized and forfeited to the city.
(Prior Code, § 25-137) (Ord. 815, passed 3-30-1987) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.003 FRAUD AND DECEIT IN SALES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person by fraud, scheme, device, trick, deceit,
misrepresentation, subterfuge or any other form of concealment for the purpose
of obtaining money or any other thing of value to sell, furnish, supply or give
away any substance represented to be a substance, as defined in §
155.001 of this chapter, when the same may or may not be the same.
(Prior Code, § 25-139) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.004 LOITERING AND THE LIKE ABOUT PLACES WHERE DRUGS AND THE LIKE ARE
ILLEGALLY STORED, KEPT OR USED FOR UNLAWFUL PURPOSE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, knowing that the substances, devices
and/or other instruments enumerated and prescribed in this subchapter, and
sections thereof, are being illegally sold, dispensed, furnished, given away,
stored, kept or used, to loiter about, frequent or be present in such building,
apartment, automobile, boat or place of any description wherein such illegal
activity is being carried on, conducted or operated, or wherein such illegal
substances, devices and/or instruments prescribed herein are being illegally
kept or stored, for the purpose of unlawfully carrying on, conducting or
operating any of the illegal activities set forth in this subchapter and
sections thereof.
(Prior Code, § 25-140) (Ord. 656, passed 7-21-1980) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.005 EXEMPTION.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to manufacturers,
wholesalers, jobbers, common carriers or their employees or to public officers
or employees while engaged in the performance of their official duties,
licensed medical technicians, technologists, nurses, hospitals, research
teaching institutions, clinical laboratories, medical doctors, osteopathic
physicians, dentists, chiropodists, veterinarians, pharmacists and embalmers in
the normal legal course of their respective business or profession, upon the
showing of such occupation or employment.
(Prior Code, § 25-141)
MODEL GLUE
§ 155.020 DEFINITION.
   As used in this subchapter, the term MODEL GLUE shall mean any glue,
adhesive cement, mucilage, dope, plastic solvent or other adhesive of the type
commonly used in the construction of model airplanes, automobiles, boats and
other unassembled model kits, containing toluene, acetone, xylene, butyl,
hexane, tricresyl phosphate or other toxic ingredient.
(Prior Code, § 25-156)
§ 155.021 PURCHASES GENERALLY.
   No person shall, for the purpose of violating or aiding another to violate
any provision of this subchapter, intentionally possess, buy, sell, transfer
possession or receive possession of any model glue.
(Prior Code, § 25-157) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.022 MINORS GENERALLY.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided, no person under 18 years of age shall
possess or buy any model glue.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided, no person shall sell or transfer
possession of any model glue to another person under 18 years of age; provided,
however, a person may sell or transfer possession of model glue to a person
under 18 years of age for model building or other lawful use where said
juvenile has in his or her possession and exhibits the written consent of his
or her parent or guardian; and, provided further that, a person may sell or
transfer possession of, to a person under the age of 18 years, not more than
one assembly kit which contains not more than one container of model glue not
to exceed one fluid ounce, as a necessary part of model assembly.
(Prior Code, § 25-158) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.023 RECORD OF SALES TO MINORS.
   (A)   A person making a sale or transfer of possession of model glue to a
person under 18 years of age who exhibits the written consent of his or her
parent or guardian, shall record the name, address, sex and age of the juvenile
and the name and address of the consenting parent or guardian.
   (B)   All data required by this section shall be kept in a permanent type
register available for inspection by the Police Department for a period of at
least six months.
(Prior Code, § 25-159)
§ 155.024 INHALATION, CONSUMPTION AND THE LIKE PROHIBITED.
   No person shall inhale, drink, eat or otherwise introduce into his or her
respiratory or circulatory system any compound, liquid, chemical or any
substance known as glue, adhesive cement, mucilage, dope, plastic solvent or
any other material or substance or combination thereof with the intent of
becoming intoxicated, elated, dazed, paralyzed, irrational or in any manner
changing, distorting or disturbing the eyesight, thinking process, judgment,
balance or coordination of such person.
(Prior Code, § 25-160) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.025 ABETTING VIOLATIONS BY MINORS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to assist, aid, abet or encourage any
minor to violate any provision of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 25-161) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.026 EXEMPTIONS.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall not pertain to any person who
inhales, drinks, eats or otherwise introduces into his or her circulatory or
respiratory system such material or substance pursuant to the direction or
prescription of any doctor, dentist or other person authorized to so direct or
prescribe.
(Prior Code, § 25-162)
§ 155.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person who shall be convicted of violating any of the provisions
of §
155.002 of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed $500, or by imprisonment not to exceed 90 days
or both, in the discretion of the court. Each day a violation continues shall
be considered a separate offense and may be punished accordingly.
(Prior Code, § 25-137) (Ord. 815, passed 3-30-1987)
CHAPTER 156: INMATE REIMBURSEMENT
Section
Inmate Reimbursement
   
156.001   Reimbursement
   
156.002   List of inmates
   
156.003   Cooperation of inmate
   
156.004   Reports; investigation to secure reimbursement
   
156.005   Civil action; filing; considerations
   
156.006   Civil action; jurisdiction, disposal of property; restraining order;
appointment of receiver
   
156.007   Enforcement; execution against homestead; prohibition
   
156.008   Furnishing information and assistance to city
   
156.009   Disposition of reimbursements; determination by City Treasurer
Reimbursement from Inmates for Medical Services
   
156.020   Emergency medical services provided to inmates
   
156.021   Definition
   
156.022   Inmate’s responsibility for medical services
INMATE REIMBURSEMENT
§ 156.001 REIMBURSEMENT.
   (A)   The city may seek reimbursement from any person who is or was a
convicted inmate in a city jail, or in a county jail, or any other jail
facility for expenses incurred by the city in relation to the incarceration of
that person, as follows:
      (1)   Not more than $60 per day for the expenses of maintaining that
inmate or the actual per diem cost of maintaining that inmate, whichever is
less, for the entire period of time the inmate was confined to the city jail,
county jail or any other jail facility, including any period of pretrial
detention;
      (2)   The per day cost charged to the city by a city, county or any other
jail facility for housing the inmate in that city jail, or county jail, or any
other jail facility, but not more than $60 per day, for the entire period
during which the inmate was housed in that facility;
      (3)   The cost of providing medical treatment, prescription drugs, dental
care and other medical examinations or procedures;
      (4)   To investigate the financial status of the person; and
      (5)   Any other expenses incurred by the city to collect payments under
this subchapter, including, but not limited to, administrative costs for
searching for collectible assets of the inmate, and reasonable attorney fees
and court costs.
   (B)   Reimbursement under this subchapter may be ordered as a probation
condition entered pursuant to § 3 of Ch. XI of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
Public Act 175 of 1927, being M.C.L.A. § 771.3.
   (C)   Before seeking any reimbursement under this subchapter, the city shall
develop a form to be used for determining the financial status of inmates. The
form shall provide for obtaining the age and marital status of an inmate,
number and ages of children of an inmate, number and ages of other dependents,
type and value of real estate, type and value of personal property, cash and
bank accounts, type and value of investments, pensions and annuities and any
other personalty of significant cash value. The city shall use the form when
investigating the financial status of inmates.
(Prior Code, § 25-201) (Ord. 1266, passed 5-15-2006)
§ 156.002 LIST OF INMATES.
   At, and in accordance with, the request of the City Council, the Chief of
Police shall forward to the City Council a list containing the name of each
sentenced inmate and each pretrial detainee whose prosecution resulted in
conviction from whom reimbursement may be sought under §
156.001 of this chapter, the term of sentence or the period of pretrial
detention, and the date of admission to the city jail, or county jail, or any
other jail facility, together with information regarding the financial status
of each inmate, as required by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 25-202) (Ord. 1266, passed 5-15-2006)
§ 156.003 COOPERATION OF INMATE.
   (A)   An inmate in a city jail, county jail or other jail facility shall
cooperate with the city in seeking reimbursements under this subchapter for
expenses incurred by the city for that inmate.
   (B)   An inmate who willfully refuses to cooperate as provided in division
(A) above shall not receive a reduction in his or her term under § 7 of Public
Act of 1962, being M.C.L.A. § 801.257. If an inmate is ordered to reimburse the
city under this subchapter as a probation condition entered pursuant to § 3 of
Ch. XI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, Public Act 175 of 1927, M.C.L.A. §
771.3, the inmate is subject to probation revocation as provided in § 4 of Ch.
XI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, Public Act 175 of 1927, being M.C.L.A. §
771.4.
(Prior Code, § 25-203) (Ord. 1266, passed 5-15-2006)
§ 156.004 REPORTS; INVESTIGATION TO SECURE REIMBURSEMENT.
   The City Council may investigate or cause to be investigated all the reports
under §
156.002 of this chapter furnished by the Chief of Police for the purpose of
securing reimbursement as provided for under this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 25-204) (Ord. 1266, passed 5-15-2006)
§ 156.005 CIVIL ACTION; FILING; CONSIDERATIONS.
   (A)   Within 12 months after the release from city jail, county jail or
other jail facility of a sentenced inmate or a pretrial detainee whose
prosecution resulted in conviction, an attorney for the city may file a civil
action to seek reimbursement from that person for maintenance and support of
that person while he or she was confined to the jail, for costs charged to the
city by a county for housing that person in a county jail, or for costs charged
to the city by any other entity for housing that person in any other jail
facility, and for any other expense for which the city may be reimbursed under
§
156.001 of this chapter, as provided in this section and §§
156.006 through
156.008 of this chapter. The city may also commence an action for reimbursement
in small claims court.
   (B)   A civil action brought under this subchapter shall be instituted in
the name of the city and shall state the following, as applicable:
      (1)   In the case of an inmate sentenced to a city jail, county, jail or
other jail facility, the date and place of sentence, the length of time set
forth in the sentence, the length of time actually served and the amount or
amounts due to the city pursuant to §
156.001 of this chapter; and
      (2)   In the case of a person imprisoned as a pretrial detainee on a
charge or charges that resulted in conviction, the length of pretrial detention
and the amount or amounts due to the city pursuant to §
156.001 of this chapter.
   (C)   Before entering any order on behalf of the city against the defendant,
the court shall take into consideration any legal obligation of the defendant
to support a spouse, minor children or other dependents and any moral
obligation to support dependents to whom the defendant is providing or has in
fact provided support.
   (D)   The court may enter a money judgment against the defendant and may
order that the defendant’s property is liable for reimbursement for maintenance
and support of the defendant as an inmate and other expenses reimbursable under
§
156.001 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 25-205) (Ord. 1266, passed 5-15-2006)
§ 156.006 CIVIL ACTION; JURISDICTION, DISPOSAL OF PROPERTY; RESTRAINING ORDER;
APPOINTMENT OF RECEIVER.
   (A)   Consistent with §
156.005 of this chapter, the city may file the civil action in the district
court to recover a money judgment and to enforce that judgment in the same
manner as other money judgments entered by the district court. If the defendant
is still an inmate in the city jail, county jail or other jail facility, or is
a prisoner in a state correctional facility, venue in a district of the first
class is proper in the county where the city jail, county jail or other jail
facility, or where the state correction facility is located and in a district
of the second or third class is proper in the judicial district where the city
jail, county jail or other jail facility, or where the state correction
facility is located.
   (B)   If necessary to protect the city’s right to obtain reimbursement under
this subchapter against the disposition of known property, the city, in
accordance with rules of the Supreme Court of the state, may seek issuance of
an ex parte restraining order to restrain the defendant from disposing of the
property pending a hearing on an order to show cause why the particular
property should not be applied to reimbursement of the city for the maintenance
and support of the defendant as an inmate.
   (C)   To protect and maintain the property pending resolution of the matter
the city, upon request, may appoint a receiver. The cost of the receiver shall
be paid for by the inmate.
(Prior Code, § 25-206) (Ord. 1266, passed 5-15-2006)
§ 156.007 ENFORCEMENT; EXECUTION AGAINST HOMESTEAD; PROHIBITION.
   The city shall not enforce any judgment obtained under this subchapter by
means of execution against the homestead of the defendant.
(Prior Code, § 25-207) (Ord. 1266, passed 5-15-2006)
§ 156.008 FURNISHING INFORMATION AND ASSISTANCE TO CITY.
   The sentencing judge and the sheriff of any county in which an inmate’s
property is located shall furnish to the attorney for the city all information
and assistance possible to enable the attorney to secure reimbursement for the
city under this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 25-208) (Ord. 1266, passed 5-15-2006)
§ 156.009 DISPOSITION OF REIMBURSEMENTS; DETERMINATION BY CITY TREASURER.
   The reimbursements secured under this subchapter shall be credited to the
General Fund of the city to be available for general fund purposes. The City
Treasurer may determine the amount due the city under this subchapter and
render sworn statements thereof. These sworn statements shall be considered
prima facie evidence of the amount due.
(Prior Code, § 25-209) (Ord. 1266, passed 5-15-2006)
REIMBURSEMENT FROM INMATES FOR MEDICAL SERVICES
§ 156.020 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PROVIDED TO INMATES.
   The following fees shall be assessed to and paid by any inmate utilizing the
services of an emergency vehicle owned or operated by the city for purposes of
transporting that person to a facility for emergency medical treatment:
Advance life support system (resident) $710
Basic ambulance service (non-resident) $500
Basic ambulance service (non-resident) $810
Basic ambulance service (resident)     $425
Reimbursement for combi-tube           $60
Reimbursement for defibrillator        $40
Reimbursement for extrication          $500
Reimbursement for mileage, per mile    $11
Reimbursement for oxygen               $40
Reimbursement for supplies             $35
Treat and release fee                  $100
 
(Prior Code, § 25-220) (Ord. 1339, passed 1-31-2011)
§ 156.021 DEFINITION.
   An INMATE is any person held in custody, confined or incarcerated by the
city, including, but not limited to individuals who are:
   (A)   Under arrest;
   (B)   Incarcerated;
   (C)   Imprisoned;
   (D)   Escaped from confinement;
   (E)   Under supervised release;
   (F)   On medical furlough;
   (G)   Residing in a mental health facility or halfway house;
   (H)   Living under home detention; or
   (I)   Confined completely or partially in any way under a penal statute or
rule.
(Prior Code, § 25-221) (Ord. 1339, passed 1-31-2011)
§ 156.022 INMATE’S RESPONSIBILITY FOR MEDICAL SERVICES.
   All inmates shall be solely responsible for the payment of any medical
services rendered to, and received by, that person during the course of his or
her confinement with the city, or at the city’s or court’s direction, including
without limitation, transportation to and from a medical treatment facility,
and any treatment deemed necessary by his or her treating physician, whether or
not requested by the prisoner, and shall be required to reimburse the city, in
full for any fees or charges incurred for such services, if not paid directly
to medical facility or practitioner by the prisoner or his or her insurance
carrier.
(Prior Code, § 25-222) (Ord. 1339, passed 1-31-2011)
TITLE XVII: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
170.   BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
      
171.   HOUSING CODE
      
172.   ELECTRICAL CODE AND CONTRACTORS
      
173.   MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME COURTS
      
174.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
      
175.   TREES AND VEGETATION
      
176.   GRADING AND SOIL EROSION CONTROL
      
177.   PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT
      
178.   URBAN RENEWAL
      
179.   SWIMMING POOLS
      
180.   GEOTHERMAL SYSTEMS
      
181.   RENTAL DWELLINGS AND UNITS
CHAPTER 170: BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/84f314df5911a4b8d75bf8da219d5dc254290259/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4401.png]Publisher's Note: This Chapter has been AMENDED by new
legislation (Ord. 1553, effective 5-12-2025). The text of the amendment will be
incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
Section
General Provisions
   
170.001   Moving buildings; permit required
   
170.002   Building materials; removal
   
170.003   Digital reproduction, storage of “as-built” plans and documents
   
170.004   Fences
   
170.005   Gas pipes and mains; leaks; repair and the like
   
170.006   Fee schedule
Building Code
   
170.020   Short title
   
170.021   Adoption of Michigan Building Code
   
170.022   Adoption of Michigan Residential Code
   
170.023   Adoption of International Swimming Pool and Spa Code
   
170.024   Additional Building Code requirements
   
170.025   Additional Residential Code requirements
   
170.026   Floodplain management provisions of the State of Michigan
Construction Code
Mechanical Code
   
170.035   Short title
   
170.036   Adoption of Michigan Mechanical Code
   
170.037   Additional Mechanical Code requirements
Existing Structure Code
   
170.050   Short title
   
170.051   Adoption of Michigan Rehabilitation Code for Existing Buildings
   
170.052   Additional Michigan Rehabilitation Code for Existing Buildings
requirements
Property Maintenance Code
   
170.065   BOCA National Property Maintenance Code adopted
Plumbing Code
   
170.080   Short title
   
170.081   Fees
   
170.082   Adoption of Michigan Plumbing Code
   
170.083   Additional Plumbing Code requirements
Commercial and Industrial Properties
   
170.095   Definitions
   
170.096   Certificate of conformity required; issuance
   
170.097   Disclaimer of liability by city
   
170.098   Application and fee
Abandoned Residential Structures
   
170.110   Purpose
   
170.111   Definitions
   
170.112   Registration; information
   
170.113   Registration and administrative fee
   
170.114   Recovery of fees
   
170.115   Securing structures
   
170.116   Reuse and occupancy
   
170.117   Responsibility for violations
Sewer Construction and Repair
   
170.130   Owner’s responsibility
   
170.131   Sewers to be kept in good repair; recovery of damages by city
   
170.132   Repair, construction at expense of abutting property owner
   
170.133   Construction or repair generally
   
170.134   Bond requirements for permits
   
170.135   Appeals from denials of permits
   
170.136   Suspension or revocation of permits
 
   
170.999   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Electrical Code and Contractors, see
Ch. 172
   Nuisances, see
Ch. 94
   Parks, Recreation and City-Owned Property, see
Ch. 97
   Swimming Pools, see
Ch. 179
   Zoning, see
Ch. 190
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 170.001 MOVING BUILDINGS; PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall remove, or cause to be removed, or aid or assist in
removing, any building, into, along or across any street, alley or any public
space, without first procuring a permit as required by the Building Code.
(Prior Code, § 7-1) Penalty, see §
170.999
§ 170.002 BUILDING MATERIALS; REMOVAL.
   No person owning, building or repairing any house or other building shall
permit any lumber, brick, plaster, mortar, earth, clay, sand, stone or other
material to remain on the sidewalk after sunset of the day upon which it was
placed there, without permission, in writing, from the Chief of Police, subject
to any safeguards he or she may prescribe.
(Prior Code, § 7-2) Penalty, see §
170.999
§ 170.003 DIGITAL REPRODUCTION, STORAGE OF “AS-BUILT” PLANS AND DOCUMENTS.
   In all cases where a building permit is required pursuant to the state’s
Building Code, § 105, Permits, except for buildings and structures wherein
plans are not required to be submitted prior to the granting of a final
certificate of occupancy, the applicant shall submit to the Building Department
full and complete copies of “as-built” plans and specifications for the
completed work. Such plans once reviewed by the Building Department shall be
transferred to an imaging system, which shall store a digital version of the
scanned record in “PDF” format on an optical storage disk, in accordance with §
2 of Public Act 116 of 1992, being M.C.L.A. § 24.402, which provides for the
storage and reproduction of public records. Definitions of the terms used
herein are as defined by R 24.401 et seq. of the state’s Department of
Management and Budget, Department of State, as filed with the Secretary of
State on 11-4-1998. Costs incurred for the process shall be borne by the
applicant of the building permit.
(Prior Code, § 7-3) (Ord. 1278, passed 4-16-2007)
§ 170.004 FENCES.
   (A)   Authorized.
      (1)   Each person, being the owner of property in the city, may construct
and maintain partition fences between his or her own and the next adjoining
property, such partition fences shall be constructed of posts sunk in the soil
to a depth of at least two feet, and of a height above the surface of not less
than three feet or heights or locations of which would not be in violation of
Ch. 190 of this code of ordinances.
      (2)   Owners of adjacent lots may amicably agree upon the, character of
their partition fences and the proportion in which they shall bear the expenses
thereof.
(Prior Code, § 10-1)
   (B)   Prohibited fences. It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of
land in the city to build or maintain any fence constructed wholly or in part
of barbed wire, razor wire or other similar security wires or materials which
could easily cause injury to persons, or any fence, guard wall or other
protection upon which there shall be fixed, attached, or placed in any manner
any spike, nail or pointed instrument of any kind or description, or any fence
electrically charged; provided, however, barbed wire may be used along the top
of such fences surrounding industrial zoned parcels of property, if such barbed
wire is fastened to a portion of the fence extending at an angle over the
property enclosed and not over other private property and not projecting on the
opposite side or the side adjacent to a sidewalk or public way.
(Prior Code, § 10-2)
(Ord. 811, passed 3-23-1987; Ord. 1137, passed 2-4-2003) Penalty, see §
170.999
§ 170.005 GAS PIPES AND MAINS; LEAKS; REPAIR AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   Gas pipes or mains within or beneath any public way shall be so
maintained as to avoid any leakage therefrom.
   (B)   If any leak exists or occurs, it shall be reported to the owner of
such pipe or main, and the leak shall be repaired within 24 hours. The city may
repair any leak not stopped within 24 hours and the owner of the pipe or main
causing the leak shall be charged with the cost of repair and the damage caused
thereby.
(Prior Code, § 29-31) Penalty, see §
170.999
§ 170.006 FEE SCHEDULE.
   (A)   The fees for plan review, deposits, permits, inspections, bonds and
late fees shall be established by City Council resolution. The fees shall be
available for viewing in the office of the City Clerk, the Engineering and
Building Department, and published on the city’s website.
   (B)   The building permit fees shall be based on the estimated cost by the
applicant, which cost shall be checked and approved by the code official.
   (C)   Any required deposit shall be made in the form of cash, cashier’s
check or bond form approved by the code official and the City Attorney.
(Ord. 1506, passed 4-26-2021)
BUILDING CODE
§ 170.020 SHORT TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as and may be cited as the “Building Code of
the City of Wyandotte.”
(Ord. 1506, passed 4-26-2021)
§ 170.021 ADOPTION OF THE MICHIGAN BUILDING CODE.
   (A)   A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the City Clerk’s
office, being marked and designated as the 2015 Michigan Building Code,
including Appendices F, G, and H, is hereby referred to, adopted by the city
and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this subchapter, pursuant to the
provisions of the State Construction Code, in accordance with § 8b(6) of Public
Act 230 of 1972, being M.C.L.A. § 125.1508b(6).
   (B)   The purpose of this code is to establish minimum regulations governing
the design, construction, alteration, enlargement, repair, demolition, removal,
maintenance and use of all buildings and structures; providing for the issuance
of permits, collection of fees, making of inspections; and therefore providing
penalties for the violation thereof.
   (C)   The adoption of the 2015 Michigan Building Code is done in accordance
with M.C.L.A. § 117.3(k).
(Ord. 1506, passed 4-26-2021)
§ 170.022 ADOPTION OF MICHIGAN RESIDENTIAL CODE.
   (A)   A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the City Clerk’s
office being marked and designated as the 2015 Michigan Residential Code,
including all appendices, is hereby referred to, adopted by the city and made a
part hereof, as if fully set out in this subchapter, pursuant to the provisions
of the State Construction Code, in accordance with § 8b (6) of Public Act 230
of 1972, being M.C.L.A. § 125.1508b(6).
   (B)   The purpose of this code is to regulate the fabrication, erection,
construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, location and use of detached
one- and two-family dwellings, their appurtenances and accessory structures and
providing for the issuance of permits and therefore providing penalties for the
violation thereof.
   (C)   The adoption of the 2015 Michigan Residential Code is done in
accordance with M.C.L.A. § 117.3(k).
(Ord. 1506, passed 4-26-2021)
§ 170.023 ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE.
   (A)   A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the City Clerk’s
office being marked and designated as the 2015 International Swimming Pool and
Spa Code, including all appendices, is hereby referred to, adopted by the city
and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this subchapter, pursuant to the
provisions of the State Construction Code, in accordance with § 8b(6) of Public
Act 230 of 1972, being M.C.L.A. § 125.1508b(6).
   (B)   The purpose of this code is to regulate the installation, repairs, and
maintenance of swimming pools, spas and hot tubs, their appurtenances and
accessories and providing for the issuance of permits and therefore providing
penalties for the violation thereof.
   (C)   The adoption of the 2015 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code is
done in accordance with M.C.L.A. § 117.3(k).
(Ord. 1506, passed 4-26-2021)
§ 170.024 ADDITIONAL BUILDING CODE REQUIREMENTS.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/84f314df5911a4b8d75bf8da219d5dc254290259/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4401.png]Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new
legislation (Ord. 1554, effective 5-19-2025). The text of the amendment will be
incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
   (A)   Permit applications. Applications for a permit shall be made in
accordance with § 105.3 of the 2015 Michigan Building Code and as follows.
      (1)   Residential (R-4) new residence permit application. Application
shall be made by a licensed residential builder. Exception: a homeowner who
meets the following requirements. A bona fide owner of property upon which is
proposed the construction of a single-family residence which is or will be on
completion, for a minimum of 18 months his or her place of residence, and no
part of which is used for rental or commercial purposes, nor is contemplated
for such purpose, may do his or her own work, providing he or she applies for
and secures a permit, pays the fee, does the work himself or herself in
accordance with the provisions hereof, applies for inspections and receives
approval of the work by the code official. Failure to comply with these
requirements will subject the owners to the revoking of the permits and to the
fines and penalties as set forth in this code.
      (2)   All other applications. Application for a permit shall be made by
the owner of the building or structure, or agent, or by the licensed engineer,
architect or residential builder employed in connection with the proposed work.
If the application is made by a person other than the owner in fee, it shall be
accompanied by an affidavit of the owner or the qualified applicant or a signed
statement of the qualified applicant witnessed by the code official or his
designee to the effect that the proposed work is authorized by the owner in fee
and that the applicant is authorized to make such application. The full names
and addresses of the owner, applicant and the responsible officers, if the
owner is a corporate body, shall be stated in the application.
      (3)   Electrical permits. Electrical permits shall be issued for the
erection or maintenance of illuminated signs before a sign permit will be
issued.
   (B)   Building Board of Appeals. The Building Board of Appeals shall consist
of seven members appointed by the Mayor and City Council. The Department of
Engineering and Building shall be represented by one member and the Fire
Department shall be represented by one member. The other five members shall
have such qualifications as the Mayor may consider essential to enable them to
act intelligently in matters pertaining to housing and building conditions. The
members from the Department of Engineering and Building and from the Fire
Department shall serve two-year terms and be appointed on the third Monday in
April every two years. The other five members shall serve four-year terms.
Three shall be appointed on the third Monday in April every two years and two
on the third Monday in April every two years thereafter. Each member shall
serve until his or her successor is appointed and qualified. Should any member
resign or fail to serve out their entire term, the Mayor shall appoint a person
to fill the vacancy until the end of said vacating member’s term.
   (C)   Violations. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate a
provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements
thereof or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure
in violation of an approved plan or directive of the code official, or of a
permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be cited
for a municipal civil infraction in accordance with Chapter 11 of this code of
ordinances and the defendant, if found responsible, shall be subject to a fine
of not more than $500. Additionally, the court may assess costs incurred in
compelling the appearance of the defendant and to enforce the terms of this
code. A second offense for the same violation shall constitute a misdemeanor
punishable by a fine of not more than $500 and/or by imprisonment not exceeding
90 days. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served,
in accordance with the terms and provisions hereof, shall be deemed a separate
offense.
   (D)   Bonds and insurance. No person shall erect, install, remove or rehang
any sign for which a permit is required under the provisions of this code until
an approved bond executed by the principal and a surety shall have been filed
in the sum of $5,000. A certified copy of a power of attorney must be submitted
to verify the authority of the individual signing or surety on behalf of the
insurance company. Such bond or insurance policy shall protect and hold
harmless the jurisdiction from any and all claims or demands for damages by
reason of any negligence of the sign hanger, contractor or agent, or by any
reason of defects in the construction, or damages resulting from the collapse,
failure or combustion of the sign or parts thereof. The obligation herein
specified shall remain in force and in effect during the life of every sign and
shall not be canceled by the principal or surety until after a 30-day notice to
the code official.
   (E)   Utilities. All new construction shall have all utilities, such as
electrical service wires, cable television wires and telephone wires, installed
underground from the utility source in the public right-of-way to the new
structure. PVC tubing, of the size required by the utility, shall be installed
a minimum 24 inches below grade for this purpose.
   (F)   Moved structures.
      (1)   No permit shall be issued to move any structure until a building
permit has been obtained for the establishment of the structure in its new
location. Before issuing such a moving permit, the code official shall cause an
inspection to be made of the structure and shall refuse a permit unless he or
she finds the structure to be in a safe and sanitary condition and finds that
it will be in compliance with this code and other ordinances and laws when
established in its new location. A structure which has been depreciated 50% or
more by the City Assessor in establishing its assessed valuation shall not be
moved to any site location within the city. No structure shall be moved to a
new location within the city unless the code official determines that it will
correspond and harmonize with the architecture, size and shape of the other
structures in the neighborhood and that it will result in an upgrading of the
immediate area.
      (2)   When it is necessary to use any part of a public street in moving a
structure, a separate approval for the use of public streets shall be obtained
after filing a bond as required in § 3308.3 of the Michigan Building Code. In
applying for such approval, the mover shall furnish in writing a schedule of
the streets to be used and the time at which the structure will reach each
point in its journey. Also, written approval from every public service
corporation whose property, fixtures, or equipment will be affected,
endangered, or disturbed during the moving shall be submitted showing that the
mover has given proper notice of his or her intentions and furnished suitable
security for the repair of all damage caused by the moving. Approvals must also
be obtained from county and state agencies where applicable. No structure shall
be moved across any railroad track, except during daylight hours and in the
presence of a representative of the company operating said railroad.
 
      (3)   When a structure is to be moved to a new location within the city,
the owner of the newly described site shall file a surety bond in favor of the
city in sufficient amount to guarantee that the structure will be completed in
accordance with all applicable permits and ready for occupancy within six
months after arrival on its new location. Said surety bond shall be approved by
the Department of Legal Affairs and the sum of the bond shall be designated by
the code official. When a lot is left vacant from moving a structure, said lot
shall be cleaned, filled, and graded to the approval of the code official
within five days of the structure being moved off the site.
   (G)   Demolition.
 
      (1)   All buildings, accessory buildings, sheds, concrete slabs,
foundations, floors, driveways and approaches, private and service sidewalks,
fences, walls, and the like, shall be wrecked and removed completely. All
sewers, water lines, and the like, shall be plugged and/or capped
satisfactorily to the code official before backfilling. An inspection of sewer
capping and of foundation removal is required.
      (2)   Site backfilling shall be completed within five working days of the
removal of demolished building material and debris. Failure, for any reason, to
backfill the site as specified will require that the person causing the
demolition or excavation install protective fencing around the site to the
satisfaction of the code official.
         (a)   The person causing said demolition or excavation shall maintain
the fencing to ensure the purpose is being accomplished. As soon as practical,
or at the direction of the code official, the fencing shall be removed and the
site properly backfilled the same day.
         (b)   Backfill shall be clean fill dirt, or crushed aggregate as
approved by the code official, free from broken concrete, stones, wood and
other miscellaneous debris. Documentation shall be submitted by the person
causing the demolition or backfilling certifying that the fill dirt is non-
contaminated and non-hazardous and stating the source of the fill dirt. This
must be approved by the code official before backfilling operations may begin.
         (c)   All backfill shall be compacted by a dozer in approximately 12-
inch lifts.
      (3)   All debris and building materials shall be completely removed from
the premises. The property shall be smoothly graded and left in a neat
condition with no low spots in which water might stand. Final grading shall not
create a nuisance to abutting property. The disturbed area shall be seeded to
promote vegetation growth and reduce soil erosion. Any damage to adjacent
property or abutting public right-of-way, including sidewalks, occurring during
the demolition or excavation shall be repaired by the person causing said
demolition or excavation at his or her own expense.
       (4)   All temporary occupancy of public property shall be considered and
treated as being at the will of the city, and will be permitted only by special
permit issued by the Department. No permit will be issued until the applicant
therefore shall have executed and filed with the City Clerk a bond with
property sureties approved by the Council, in an amount to be designated by the
Council but in no case less than $5,000 conditioned to indemnify, save and keep
harmless the city from any and all loss, expense, cost or liability of any kind
whatsoever which the city may suffer or be put to, from or by reason of any act
or thing done or neglected to be done, or by virtue of the authority given in
such permit or the requirements of the city ordinances.
(Ord. 1509, passed 4-26-2021)
§ 170.025 ADDITIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Other inspections. Other inspections include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   Subfloor inspection for basement and garage floors, commonly made
prior to concrete placement;
      (2)   Backfill inspection, commonly made prior to backfilling foundation
walls and after installation of perimeter drainage system and wall bracing; and
      (3)   Insulation inspection, commonly made prior to installation of lath
and/or wallboard.
   (B)   Zoning approval. All prefabricated construction requires special
approval of the Planning Commission subject to the terms and conditions as set
forth in the Zoning Code.
   (C)   Utilities. All new construction shall have all utilities, such as
electrical service wires, cable television wires and telephone wires, installed
underground from the utility source in the public right-of-way to the new
structure. PVC tubing, of the size required by the utility, shall be installed
a minimum 24 inches below grade for this purpose.
   (D)   Violation penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate
a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements
thereof or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure
in violation of an approved plan or directive of the code official, or of a
permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be cited
for a municipal civil infraction in accordance with Chapter 11 of this code of
ordinances and the defendant, if found responsible, shall be subject to a fine
of not more than $500. Additionally, the court may assess costs incurred in
compelling the appearance of the defendant and to enforce the terms of this
code. A second offense for the same violation shall constitute a misdemeanor
punishable by a fine of not more than $500 and/or by imprisonment not exceeding
90 days. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served,
in accordance with the terms and provisions hereof, shall be deemed a separate
offense.
(Ord. 1509, passed 4-26-2021)
§ 170.026 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT PROVISIONS OF THE STATE OF MICHIGAN
CONSTRUCTION CODE
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to designate an enforcing
agency to discharge the responsibility of the City of Wyandotte located in
Wayne County, Michigan, and to designate regulated flood hazard areas under the
provisions of the State Construction Code Act, Act No. 230 of the Public Acts
of 1972, as amended.
   (B)   Agency designated. Pursuant to the provisions of the State
Construction Code, in accordance with Section 8b(6) of Act 230, of the Public
Acts of 1972, as amended, the Building Official of the City of Wyandotte is
hereby designated as the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibility of
the city under Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, State of
Michigan. The city assumes responsibility for the administration and
enforcement of the Act throughout the corporate limits of the community
adopting this section.
   (C)   Code appendix enforced. Pursuant to the provisions of the State
Construction Code, in accordance with Section 8b(6) of Act 230, of the Public
Acts of 1972, as amended, Appendix G of the Michigan Building Code shall be
enforced by the enforcing agency within the jurisdiction of the community
adopting this section.
   (D)   Designation of regulated flood prone hazard areas. The Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Flood Insurance Study (FIS) Entitled "Flood
Insurance Study for Wayne County, All Jurisdictions," effective October 21,
2021; and the Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) (FIRMS) panels 26163CIND1C,
26163CIND2C, 26163C0407F, 26163C0408F, 26163C0409F, 26163C0416F and
26163C0417F, all effective October 21, 2021; and 26163C0406E, effective
February 2, 2012, are adopted by reference for the purposes of administration
of the Michigan Construction Code, and declared to be a part of Section 1612.3
of the Michigan Building Code, and to provide the content of the "Flood
Hazards" section of Table R301.2(1) of the Michigan Residential Code. A
complete copy of the above referenced law and rules are available to the public
at the office of the City Clerk and available for inspection.
(Ord. 1519, passed 10-18-2021)
MECHANICAL CODE
§ 170.035 SHORT TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as and may be cited as the “Mechanical Code
of the City of Wyandotte.”
(Ord. 1506, passed 4-26-2021)
§ 170.036 ADOPTION OF MICHIGAN MECHANICAL CODE.
   (A)   That a certain document, one copy of which is on file in the City
Clerk’s office being marked and designated as the 2015 Michigan Mechanical Code
is hereby referred to, adopted by the city and made a part hereof, as if fully
set out in this subchapter, pursuant to the provisions of the State
Construction Code, in accordance with § 8b(6) of Public Act 230 of 1972, being
M.C.L.A. § 125.1508b(6).
   (B)   The purpose of this code is to establish the minimum regulations
governing the design, installation and construction of mechanical systems, by
providing reasonable safeguards to protect the public health and safety against
the hazards of inadequate, defective or unsafe mechanical systems and
installations.
   (C)   The adoption of the 2015 Michigan Mechanical Code is done in
accordance with M.C.L.A. § 117.3(k).
(Ord. 1506, passed 4-26-2021)
§ 170.037 ADDITIONAL MECHANICAL CODE REQUIREMENTS.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/84f314df5911a4b8d75bf8da219d5dc254290259/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4401.png]Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new
legislation (Ord. 1554, effective 5-19-2025). The text of the amendment will be
incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
   (A)   Homeowner permits. A bona fide owner of a single-family residence
which is, or will be on completion, for a minimum of two years; his or her
place of residence, and no part of which is used for rental or commercial
purposes, nor is contemplated for such purpose, may do his or her own work,
providing he or she applies for and secures a permit, pays the fee, does the
work himself or herself in accordance with the provisions hereof, applies for
inspections and receives approval of the work by the mechanical inspection
authority. Failure to comply with these requirements will subject the owner’s
permit to cancellation.
    (B)   Additional permit requirement. An electrical permit must be secured
before a mechanical installation permit will be issued. All electrical wiring
and controls required for the operation of equipment installed under a
mechanical installation permit shall comply with the city electrical ordinance.
   (C)   Violations. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate a
provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements
thereof or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure
in violation of an approved plan or directive of the code official, or of a
permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be cited
for a municipal civil infraction in accordance with
Chapter 11 of this code of ordinances and the defendant, if found responsible,
shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500. Additionally, the court may
assess costs incurred in compelling the appearance of the defendant and to
enforce the terms of this code. A second offense for the same violation shall
constitute a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $500 and/or by
imprisonment not exceeding 90 days. Each day that a violation continues after
due notice has been served, in accordance with the terms and provisions hereof,
shall be deemed a separate offense.
   (D)   Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals, established by the city’s
Building Code, shall serve as the Board of Appeals for this code and shall be
subjected to the same rules and procedures.
   (E)   Floor diffusers, registers and grilles. Floor diffusers, registers and
grilles shall be prohibited in any of the following rooms:
      (1)   Toilet rooms;
      (2)   Bathrooms;
      (3)   Washrooms;
      (4)   Laundry rooms;
      (5)   Utility rooms;
      (6)   Kitchens;
      (7)   Basements; and
    
      (8)   Any adjacent room where the possibility of direct flooding may
occur or where chemicals or other contaminants may enter the ducts.
   (F)   Fuel oil piping and storage. The provision of Chapter 13 of the 2015
Michigan Mechanical Code shall apply except for underground storage tanks
permitted and regulated by the State Underground Storage Tank Division.
(Ord. 1509, passed 4-26-2021)
EXISTING STRUCTURE CODE
§ 170.050 SHORT TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as and may be cited as the “Existing
Structures Code of the City of Wyandotte.”
(Ord. 1506, passed 4-26-2021)
§ 170.051 ADOPTION OF MICHIGAN REHABILITATION CODE FOR EXISTING BUILDINGS.
   (A)   That a certain document, one copy of which is on file in the City
Clerk’s office being marked and designated as the 2015 Michigan Rehabilitation
Code for Existing Buildings is hereby referred to, adopted by the city and made
a part hereof, as if fully set out in this subchapter, pursuant to the
provisions of the State Construction Code, in accordance with § 8b(6) of Public
Act 230 of 1972, being M.C.L.A. § 125.1508b(6).
   (B)   The purpose of this code is to protect the public health, safety and
welfare in all existing structures, residential and nonresidential, and on all
existing structures.
   (C)   The adoption of the 2015 Michigan Rehabilitation Code for Existing
Buildings is done in accordance with M.C.L.A. § 117.3(k).
(Ord. 1506, passed 4-26-2021)
§ 170.052 ADDITIONAL MICHIGAN REHABILITATION CODE FOR EXISTING BUILDINGS
REQUIREMENTS.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/84f314df5911a4b8d75bf8da219d5dc254290259/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4401.png]Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new
legislation (Ord. 1554, effective 5-19-2025). The text of the amendment will be
incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
   (A)   Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals, established by the city’s
Building Code shall serve as the Board of Appeals for this code and shall
follow the same rules and procedures.
   (B)   Notice of violation. All notices shall be in writing and shall be
delivered by first class mail and certified mail to the last known owner
appearing upon the last local tax assessment records and each person in control
of the building or structure. If person(s) addressed with an unsafe notice
cannot be found after a diligent search, then such notice shall be posted in a
conspicuous place on the premises.
   (C)   Violation penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate
a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements
thereof or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure
in violation of an approved plan or directive of the code official, or of a
permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be cited
for a municipal civil infraction in accordance with Chapter 11 of this code of
ordinances and the defendant, if found responsible, shall be subject to a fine
of not more than $500. Additionally, the court may assess costs incurred in
compelling the appearance of the defendant and to enforce the terms of this
code. A second offense for the same violation shall constitute a misdemeanor
punishable by a fine of not more than $500 and/or by imprisonment not exceeding
90 days. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served,
in accordance with the terms and provisions hereof, shall be deemed a separate
offense.
(Ord. 1509, passed 4-26-2021)
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
§ 170.065 BOCA NATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE ADOPTED.
   The BOCA National Property Maintenance Code, 1993 Edition, is hereby adopted
with the city’s amendments thereto and fully set out as follows.
   CHAPTER 1: ADMINISTRATION
   SECTION PM-101.0 GENERAL
   PM-101.1 Title: These regulations shall be known as the Property Maintenance
Code of the City of Wyandotte hereinafter referred to as this code.
   PM-101.2 Scope: This code is to protect the public health, safety and
welfare in all existing structures, residential and nonresidential, and on all
existing premises by establishing minimum requirements and standards for
premises, structures, equipment, and facilities for light, ventilation, space,
heating, sanitation, protection from the elements, life safety, safety from
fire and other hazards, and for safe and sanitary maintenance; fixing the
responsibility of owners, operators and occupants; regulating the occupancy of
existing structures and premises, and providing for administration, enforcement
and penalties.
   PM-101.3 Intent: This code shall be construed to secure its expressed
intent, which is to ensure public health, safety and welfare insofar as they
are affected by the continued occupancy and maintenance of structures and
premises. Existing structures and premises that do not comply with these
provisions shall be altered or repaired to provide a minimum level of health
and safety as required herein.
   PM-101.4 Referenced standards: The standards referenced in this code shall
be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of
each such reference. Where differences occur between provisions of this code
and referenced standards, the provisions of this code shall apply.
   PM-101.5 Existing remedies: The provisions in this code shall not be
construed to abolish or impair existing remedies of the jurisdiction or its
officers or agencies relating to the removal or demolition of any structure
which is dangerous, unsafe and unsanitary.
   PM-101.6 Workmanship: All repairs, maintenance work, alterations or
installations which are caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of
this code shall be executed and installed in a workmanlike manner.
   PM-101.7 Application of other codes: Any repairs, additions or alterations
to a structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the
procedures and provisions of the building, plumbing and mechanical codes and
NFPA 70.
   PM-101.8 Other regulations: The provisions in this code shall not be
construed to prevent the enforcement of other ordinances or regulations which
prescribe standards other than those provided herein. In the event of conflict,
the most restrictive provision shall apply.
   SECTION PM-102.0 VALIDITY
   PM-102.1 Validity: If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause
or phrase of this code shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever,
such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this, code which shall
continue in full force and effect, and to this end the provisions of this code
are hereby declared to be severable.
   PM-102.2 Saving clause: This code shall not affect violations of any other
ordinance, code or regulation existing prior to the effective date hereof, and
any such violation shall be governed and shall continue to be punishable to the
full extent of the law under the provisions of those ordinances, codes or
regulations in effect at the time the violation was committed.
   SECTION PM-103.0 MAINTENANCE
   PM-103.1 Required: All equipment, systems, devices and safeguards required
by this code or a previous statute or code for the structure or premises when
erected or altered shall be maintained in good working order. The requirements
of this code are not intended to provide the basis for removal or abrogation of
fire protection and safety systems and devices in existing structures.
   SECTION PM-104.0 APPROVAL
   PM-104.1 Approved materials and equipment: All materials, equipment and
devices approved by the code official shall be constructed and installed in
accordance with such approval.
   PM-104.2 Modifications: Where there are practical difficulties involved in
carrying out provisions of this code, the code official shall have the right to
vary or modify such provisions upon application of the owner or the owners
representative, provided that the spirit and intent of the law is observed and
that the public health, safety and welfare is assured.
      PM-104.2.1 Records: The application for modification and the final
decision of the code official shall be in writing and shall be officially
recorded in the permanent records of the department.
   PM-104.3 Material and equipment reuse: Materials, equipment and devices
shall not be reused unless such elements have been reconditioned, tested and
placed in good and proper working condition and approved.
   PM-104.4 Alternative materials and equipment: The provisions of this code
are not intended to prevent the installation of any material or method of
construction not specifically prescribed by this code, provided that any such
alternative has been approved. An alternative material or method of
construction shall be approved when the code official finds that the proposed
design is satisfactory and complies with the intent of the provisions of this
code, and that the material, method or work offered is, for the purpose
intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this code in quality,
strength, effectiveness, fireresistance, durability and safety.
   PM-104.5 Research and investigations: Sufficient technical data shall be
submitted to substantiate the proposed installation of any material or
assembly. If it is determined that the evidence submitted is satisfactory proof
of performance for the proposed installation, the code official shall approve
such alternative subject to the requirements of this code. The cost of all
tests, reports and investigations required under these provisions shall be paid
by the applicant.
   SECTION PM-105.0 DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE CODE OFFICIAL
   PM-105.1 General: The code official shall enforce all of the provisions of
this code.
   PM-105.2 Notices and orders: The code official shall issue all necessary
notices or orders to ensure compliance with the code.
   PM-105.3 Right of entry: The code official is authorized to enter the
structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect subject to constitutional
restrictions on unreasonable searches and seizures. If entry is refused or not
obtained, the code official is authorized to pursue recourse as provided by
law.
   PM-105.4 Access by owner or operator: Every occupant of a structure or
premises shall give the owner or operator thereof, or agent or employee, access
to any part of such structure or its premises at reasonable times for the
purpose of making such inspection, maintenance, repairs or alterations as are
necessary to comply with the provisions of this code.
   PM-105.5 Identification: The code official shall carry proper identification
when inspecting structures or premises in the performance of duties under this
code.
   PM-105.6 Coordination of enforcement: Inspection of premises, the issuance
of notices and orders and enforcement thereof shall be the responsibility of
the code official so charged by the jurisdiction. Whenever inspections are
necessary by any other department, the code official shall make reasonable
effort to arrange for the coordination of such inspections so as to minimize
the number of visits by inspectors, and to confer with the other departments
for the purpose of eliminating conflicting orders before any are issued. A
department shall not, however, delay the issuance of any emergency orders.
   PM-105.7 Rule-making authority: The code official shall have power as
necessary in the interest of public health, safety and general welfare, to
adopt and promulgate rules and regulations to interpret and implement the
provisions of this code to secure the intent thereof and to designate
requirements applicable because of local climatic or other conditions. Such
rules shall not have the effect of waiving structural or fire performance
requirements specifically provided for in this code or of violating accepted
engineering practice involving public safety.
   PM-105.8 Organization: The code official shall appoint such number of
officers, technical assistants, inspectors and other employees as shall be
necessary for the administration of this code and as authorized by the
appointing authority. The code official is authorized to designate an employee
as deputy who shall exercise all the powers of the code official during the
temporary absence or disability of the code official.
   PM-105.9 Restriction of employees: An official or employee connected with
the enforcement of this code, except one whose only connection is that of a
member of the board of appeals established under the provisions of Section PM-
111.0, shall not be engaged in, or directly or indirectly connected with, the
furnishing of labor, materials or appliances for the construction, alteration
or maintenance of a building, or the preparation of construction documents
thereof, unless that person is the owner of the building; nor shall such
officer or employee engage in any work that conflicts with official duties or
with the interests of the department.
   PM-105.10 Relief from personal responsibility: The code official, officer or
employee charged with the enforcement of this code, while acting for the
jurisdiction, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally, and is hereby
relieved from all personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or
property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of
official duties. Any suit instituted against an officer or employee because of
an act performed by that officer or employee in the lawful discharge of duties
and under the provisions of this code shall be defended by the legal
representative of the jurisdiction until the final termination of the
proceedings. The code official or any subordinate shall not be liable for costs
in any action, suit or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the
provisions of this code; and any officer of the department of building
inspection, acting in good faith and without malice, shall be free from
liability for acts performed under any of its provisions or by reason of any
act or omission in the performance of official duties in connection therewith.
   PM-105.11 Official records: An official record shall be kept of all business
and activities of the department specified in the provisions of this code, and
all such records shall be open to public inspection at all appropriate times
and according to reasonable rules to maintain the integrity and security of
such records.
   SECTION PM-106.0 VIOLATIONS
   PM-106.1 Unlawful acts: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, remove, demolish,
maintain, fail to maintain, provide, fail to provide, occupy, let to another or
occupy or permit another person to occupy any premises, property, structure or
equipment regulated by this code, or cause same to be done, contrary to or in
conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this code, or to fail
to obey a lawful order of the code official, or to remove or deface a placard
or notice posted under the provisions of this code.
   PM-106.2 Penalty: Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any
provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements
thereof shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by fine of not more than
$500.00 or by imprisonment not exceeding ninety (90) days or both such fine and
imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been
served, in accordance with the term and provisions hereof, shall be deemed a
separate offense.
   PM-106.3 Prosecution: In case of any unlawful acts the code official shall
institute an appropriate action or proceeding at law to exact the penalty
provided in Section PM-106.2. Also, the code official shall ask the
jurisdiction’s legal representative to proceed at law or in equity against the
person responsible for the violation for the purpose of ordering that person:
   1.   To restrain, correct or remove the violation or refrain from any
further execution of work;
   2.   To restrain or correct the erection, installation, maintenance, repair
or alteration of such structure;
   3.   To require the removal of work in violation; or
   4.   To prevent the occupancy of the structure that is not in compliance
with the provisions of this code.
   SECTION PM-107.0 NOTICES AND ORDERS
   PM-107.1 Notice to owner or to person in control: Whenever the code official
determines that a structure has fallen into a state of disrepair due to lack of
maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence or whenever the code official has
condemned any structure or equipment under the provisions of Section PM-108.0,
or has become a public nuisance or has become a dangerous building, notice
shall be given to the owner or the person in control in the manner prescribed
below. If the code official has condemned the property or any part thereof, the
code official shall give notice to the owner or person in control and to the
occupants of the intent to placard and to vacate the property or to order
equipment out of service.
   PM-107.2 Form: Such notice prescribed in Section PM-107.1 shall:
   1.   Be in writing;
   2.   Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification;
   3.   Include a statement of the reason or reasons why it is being issued;
   4.   Include a correction order setting the time limit to comply with the
repairs and improvements required to bring the premises into compliance with
the provisions of this code; and
   5.   Include an explanation of the owner’s right to seek a modification or
withdrawal of the notice by requesting a show cause hearing.
   PM-107.3 Disregard of notice: Upon refusal or neglect of the person(s)
served with the notice to comply with the requirements of the order a show
cause hearing shall be held.
   PM-107.4 Service: All notices shall be delivered by first class mail and
either personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last
known owner appearing upon the last local tax assessment records or person in
control of the premises. If a notice is served on a person by certified mail or
if person(s) addressed with a notice cannot be found after a diligent search,
then such notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises.
   PM-107.5 Show Cause Hearing: A show cause hearing shall be held as set forth
in PM-107.2.5 or as set forth in PM-107.3 service for the show cause hearing
shall be in accordance with PM-107.4. The notice shall specify the time and
place of the hearing and be served at least ten (10) days before the date of
the hearing included in the notice. Said hearing shall be presided over by the
City Engineer or his duly authorized representative. In causes involving
dangerous buildings, said hearing shall be presided over by the hearing
officer. Said hearing shall be for the purpose of the owner or person in
control of the premises and any interested party to show cause why the notice
of violation continues after due notice.
   The City Engineer or his duly authorized representative or hearing officer
in the case of dangerous buildings, shall render a decision either closing the
proceedings or ordering the building or structure demolished, otherwise made
safe, or properly maintained within five (5) days after completion of the
hearing. Also, report of findings and a copy of the order shall be filed with
the City Council if the order is not complied with in less than thirty (30)
days. Should said owner or person in control of the premises fail to appear at
the hearing, the City Engineer or his duly authorized representative or hearing
officer, in the case of dangerous buildings, shall take the testimony of the
code official and any interested party and shall make such determination as may
be necessary or warranted and file a report of findings and a copy of the order
with the City Council within five (5) days after noncompliance by the owner and
request that necessary action be taken to enforce the order. If a building is a
dangerous building under Section PM-202.0(B), the order by the hearing officer
may require the owner or person in control of the premises to maintain the
exterior of the building and adjoining grounds owned by the owner of the
building, including, but not limited to, the maintenance of lawns, trees, and
shrubs. A copy of the order shall be served on the owner or person in control
of the premises in the manner prescribed in PM 107.4.
   PM-107.6 Filing of findings: When it is ordered at the hearing as set forth
in PM-107.5 that a building or structure should be demolished, otherwise made
safe, or properly maintained, and that this shall be complied with in a stated
time frame and the owner or person in control neglects to act, the City
Engineer or his duly authorized representative or hearing officer, in the case
of dangerous buildings, shall file a report of the findings with the City
Council and request that the order to demolish, or otherwise make safe, or
properly maintain the building or structure be complied with.
   PM-107.7 Council action: A hearing shall be held before the City Council by
fixing a date not less than thirty (30) days after the hearing prescribed in
PM-107.5 where said owner or person in control of the premises shall be given
the opportunity to show cause why the order has not been complied with. Said
owner or person in control of the premises shall be notified of said hearing
date in accordance with PM-107.4. The City Council shall either approve,
disapprove, or modify the order. If the City Council approves or modifies the
order, the City Council shall take all necessary action to enforce the order.
If the order is approved or modified, the owner or person in control of the
premises shall comply with the order within sixty (60) days after the date of
hearing under this section. In the case of an order of demolition where the
City Council determines that the building or structure has been substantially
destroyed by fire, wind, flood or other natural disaster or has become so old,
dilapidated or out of repair so as to be dangerous, unsafe and unsanitary, or
has become a dangerous building under Section PM-202.0 and the costs of repair
of the building or structure will be greater than the state equalized value of
the building or structure, the owner or person in control of the premises shall
comply with the order of demolition within twenty-one (21) days after the date
of the hearing under this section.
   The City Council may order the notice of violation corrected and all costs
of the demolition, of making the building safe, or of maintaining the exterior
of the building or structure or grounds adjoining the building or structure,
which are incurred by the City to bring the property into conformance shall be
reimbursed to the City by the owner or party in interest in whose name the
property appears.
   The owner or party in interest in whose name the property appears upon the
last local tax assessment records shall be notified by the City Assessor of the
amount of the cost of the demolition, of making the building safe, or of
maintaining the exterior of the building or structure or grounds adjoining the
building or structure by first class mail at the address shown on the records.
If the owner or party in interest fails to pay the cost within thirty (30) days
after mailing by the City Assessor of the notice of the amount of the cost, the
City shall have a lien for the cost incurred by the City to bring the property
into conformance. The lien shall not take effect until notice of the lien has
been filed or recorded as provided by law. A lien provided for in this section
does not have priority over previously filed or recorded liens and
encumbrances. The lien for the cost shall be collected and treated in the same
manner as provided for property tax liens under the general property tax act
(Act. No. 206 of the Public Acts of 1893, being M.C.L.A. §§ 211.1 to 211.157).
   In addition to other remedies under this section, the City may bring an
action against the owner of the building or structure for the full cost of the
demolition, of making the building safe, or of maintaining the exterior of the
building or structure or grounds adjoining the building or structure. The City
shall have a lien on the property for the amount of a judgement obtained
pursuant to this section. The lien provided for in this section shall not take
effect until notice of the lien is filed or recorded as provided by law. The
lien does not have priority over prior filed or recorded liens and
encumbrances.
   PM-107.8 Penalties: Penalties for noncompliance with orders and notices may
also be subject to the penalties set forth in PM-106.2.
   PM-107.9 Transfer of ownership: It shall be unlawful for the owner of any
premises who has received a compliance order or upon whom a notice of violation
has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of to
another until the provisions of the compliance order or notice of violation has
been complied with, or until such owner shall first furnish the grantee,
transferee, mortgagee or lessee a true copy of any compliance order or notice
of violation issued by the code official and shall furnish to the code official
a signed and notarized statement from the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or
lessee, acknowledging the receipt of such compliance order or notice of
violation and fully accepting the responsibility without condition for making
the corrections or repairs required by such compliance order or notice of
violation.
   SECTION PM-108.0 UNSAFE STRUCTURES AND EQUIPMENT
   PM-108.1 General: When a structure or equipment is found by the code
official to be unsafe, or when a structure is found unfit for human occupancy,
or is found unlawful, such structure shall be condemned pursuant to the
provisions of this code.
      PM-108.1.1 Unsafe structure: An unsafe structure is one that is found to
be dangerous to the life, health, property or safety of the public or the
occupants of the structure by not providing minimum safeguards to protect or
warn occupants in the event of fire, or because such structure contains unsafe
equipment or is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, structurally unsafe, or of
such faulty construction or unstable foundation, that partial or complete
collapse is likely.
      PM-108.1.2 Unsafe equipment: Unsafe equipment includes any boiler,
heating equipment, elevator, moving stairway, electrical wiring or device,
flammable liquid containers or other equipment on the premises or within the
structure which is in such disrepair or condition that such equipment is a
hazard to life, health, property or safety of the public or occupants of the
premises or structure.
      PM-108.1.3 Structure unfit for human occupancy: A structure is unfit for
human occupancy whenever the code official finds that such structure is unsafe,
unlawful or, because of the degree to which the structure is in disrepair or
lacks maintenance, is unsanitary, vermin or rat infested, contains filth and
contamination, or lacks ventilation, illumination, sanitary or heating
facilities or other essential equipment required by this code, or because the
location of the structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants of the
structure or to the public.
      PM-108.1.4 Unlawful structure: An unlawful structure is one found in
whole or in part to be occupied by more persons than permitted under this code,
or was erected, altered or occupied contrary to law.
   PM-108.2 Closing of vacant structures: If the structure is vacant and unfit
for human habitation and occupancy, and is not in danger of structural
collapse, the code official is authorized to post a placard of condemnation on
the premises and order the structure closed up so as not to be an attractive
nuisance. Upon failure of the owner to close up the premises within the time
specified in the order, the code official shall cause the premises to be closed
through any available public agency or by contract or arrangement by private
persons and the cost thereof shall be charged against the real estate upon
which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate.
   PM-108.3 Notice: Whenever the code official has condemned a structure or
equipment under the provisions of this section, notice shall be posted in a
conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice and served
on the owner or the person or persons responsible for the structure or
equipment in accordance with PM-107.3. The notice shall be in the form
prescribed in PM-107.2.
   PM-108.4 Placarding: Upon failure of the owner or person responsible to
comply with the notice provisions within the time given, the code official
shall post on the premises or on defective equipment, a placard bearing the
word “Condemned” and a statement of the penalties provided for occupying the
premises, operating the equipment or removing the placard.
   PM-108.5 Prohibited occupancy: Any person who shall occupy a placarded
premises or shall operate placarded equipment, and any owner or any person
responsible for the premises who shall let anyone occupy a placarded premises
or operate placarded equipment shall be liable for the penalties provided by
this code.
   PM-108.6 Removal of placard: The code official shall remove the condemnation
placard whenever the defect or defects upon which the condemnation and
placarding action were based have been eliminated. Any person who defaces or
removes a condemnation placard without the approval of the code official shall
be subject to the penalties provided by this code.
   SECTION PM-109.0 EMERGENCY MEASURES
   PM-109.1 Imminent danger: When, in the opinion of the code official, there
is imminent danger of failure or collapse of a building or structure which
endangers life, or when any structure or part of a structure has fallen and
life is endangered by the occupation of the structure, or when there is actual
or potential danger to the building occupants or those in the proximity of any
structure because of explosives, explosive fumes or vapors or the presence of
toxic fumes, gases or materials, or operation of defective or dangerous
equipment, the code official is hereby authorized and empowered to order and
require the occupants to vacate the premises forthwith. The code official shall
cause to be posted at each entrance to such structure a notice reading as
follows: “This structure is unsafe and its occupancy has been prohibited by the
Code Official.” It shall be unlawful for any person to enter such structure
except for the purpose of securing the structure, making the required repairs,
removing the hazardous condition, or of demolishing the same.
   PM-109.2 Temporary safeguards: Notwithstanding other provisions of this
code, whenever, in the opinion of the code official, there is imminent danger
due to an unsafe condition, the code official shall order the necessary work to
be done, including the boarding-up of openings, to render such structure
temporarily safe whether or not the legal procedure herein described has been
instituted; and shall cause such other action to be taken as the code official
deems necessary to meet such emergency.
   PM-109.3 Closing streets: When necessary for the public safety, the code
official shall temporarily close structures and close, or order the authority
having jurisdiction to close, sidewalks, streets, public ways and places
adjacent to unsafe structures, and prohibit the same from being utilized.
   PM-109.4 Emergency repairs: For the purposes of this section, the code
official shall employ the necessary labor and materials to perform the required
work as expeditiously as possible
   PM-109.5 Cost of emergency work: Costs incurred in the performance of
emergency work shall be paid from the treasury of the jurisdiction on
certificate of the code official. All costs incurred by the jurisdiction shall
be charged against the real estate and shall be a lien upon such real estate.
   PM-109.6 Hearing: Any person ordered to take emergency measures shall comply
with such order forthwith. Any affected person shall thereafter, upon petition
directed to the appeals board, be afforded a hearing as described in this code.
   SECTION PM-110.0 DEMOLITION
   PM-110.1 General: The code official shall order the owner of any premises
upon which is located any structure, which in the code official’s judgement is
so old, dilapidated or has become so out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe,
unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human habitation or occupancy, and such that
it is unreasonable to repair the structure, to raze and remove such structure;
or if such structure is capable of being made safe by repairs, to repair and
make safe and sanitary or to raze and remove at the owner s option; or where
there has been a cessation of normal construction of any structure for a period
of more than two years, to raze and remove such structure.
   PM-110.2 Order: The order shall specify a time in which the owner shall
comply therewith and specify repairs, if any. The order shall be served in
accordance with PM-107.4.
   PM-110.3 Failure to comply: If the owner of a premises fails to comply with
a demolition order within the time prescribed, the code official shall cause
the structure to be razed and removed, either through an available public
agency or by contract or arrangement with private persons, and the cost of such
razing and removal shall be charged against the real estate upon which the
structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate.
   PM-110.4: Delete without substitution.
   Section PM-110.5: Unreasonable repairs: Whenever the code official
determines that the cost of such repairs would exceed 50 percent of the current
value of such structure, such repairs shall be presumed unreasonable and it
shall be presumed for the purpose of this section that such structure is a
public nuisance which shall be ordered razed without option on the part of the
owner to repair.
   SECTION PM-111.0 MEANS OF APPEAL
   Section PM-111.1 Application for appeal: Any person affected by any notice
which has been issued in connection with the enforcement of any provision of
this code, or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, except a
notice issued in accordance with Section PM-107.0 or Section PM-110.0, shall
have the right to request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before
the board; provided that such person shall file, in the office of the board, a
written petition requesting such hearing and containing a statement of the
grounds therefore within 20 days after the day the notice was served.
   PM-111.2 Membership of the Board: The board of appeals, established by the
City’s Building Code shall serve as the board of appeals for this code and
shall be subject to the same rules and procedures.
   CHAPTER 2: DEFINITIONS
   SECTION PM-201.0 GENERAL
   PM-201.1 Scope: Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms
shall, for the purposes of this code, have the meanings shown in this chapter.
   PM-201.2 Interchangeability: Words stated in the present tense include the
future; words stated in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter;
the singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular.
   PM-201.3 Terms defined in other codes: Where terms are not defined in this
code and are defined in the building, plumbing or mechanical codes, such terms
shall have the meanings ascribed to them as in those codes.
   PM-201.4 Terms not defined: Where terms are not defined, through the methods
authorized by this section, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings
such as the context implies.
   PM-201.5 Parts: Whenever the words “dwelling unit,” “dwelling,” “premises,”
“building,” “rooming house,” “rooming unit” or “story” are stated in this code,
they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words “or any part
thereof.”
   SECTION PM-202.0 GENERAL DEFINITIONS
   Approved: Approved by the code official.
   Basement: See Section PM-302.0.
   Bathroom: See Section PM-502.0.
   Building: Any structure occupied or intended for supporting or sheltering
any occupancy.
   Building code: The building code officially adopted by the legislative body
of this jurisdiction, or other such codes officially designated by the
legislative body of the jurisdiction for the regulation of construction,
alteration, addition, repair, removal, demolition, location, occupancy and
maintenance of buildings and structures.
   Code official: The official who is charged with the administration and
enforcement of this code, or any duly authorized representative.
   Condemn: To adjudge unfit for occupancy.
   Construction documents: All the written, graphic and pictorial documents
prepared or assembled for describing the design, location and physical
characteristics of the elements of the project necessary for obtaining a
building permit. The construction drawings shall be drawn to an appropriate
scale.
   Dangerous buildings: A building or structure that has one or more of the
following defects or is in one or more of the following conditions:
   A.   The building or structure is damaged by fire, wind or flood or is
dilapidated or deteriorated and becomes an attractive nuisance to children who
might play in the building or structure to their danger, or becomes a harbor
for vagrants, criminals or immoral persons, or enables persons to resort to the
building or structure for committing a nuisance or an unlawful or immoral act.
   B.   A building or structure that remains unoccupied for a period of 180
consecutive days or longer, and is not listed as being available for sale,
lease, or rent with a real estate broker licensed under article 25 or the
occupational code (Act No. 299 of the Public Acts of 1980, being M.C.L.A. §§
339.2501 to 339.2515). For purposes of this subdivision, “building or
structure” includes, but is not limited to, a commercial building or structure.
This subdivision does not apply to either of the following:
      (i)   A building or structure as to which the owner or agent does both of
the following:
         (a)   Notifies a local law enforcement agency in whose jurisdiction
the building or structure is located that the building or structure will remain
unoccupied for a period of 180 consecutive days. The notice shall be given to
the local law enforcement agency by the owner or agent not more than 30 days
after the building or structure becomes unoccupied.
         (b)   Maintains the exterior of the building or structure and
adjoining grounds in accordance with the BOCA National Property Maintenance
Code 1993 and amendments adopted by the City of Wyandotte.
      (ii)   A secondary dwelling of the owner that is regularly unoccupied for
a period of 180 days or longer each year, if the owner notifies a local law
enforcement agency in whose jurisdiction the dwelling is located that the
dwelling will remain unoccupied for a period of 180 consecutive days or more
each year. An owner who has given the notice prescribed by this subparagraph
shall notify the law enforcement agency not more than 30 days after the
dwelling no longer qualifies for this exception. As used in this subparagraph
“secondary dwelling” means a dwelling such as a vacation home, hunting cabin,
or summer home, that is occupied by the owner or a member of the owner's family
during part of a year.
   Dwellings: (See PM-201.5.)
      Dormitory: A space in a building where group sleeping accommodations are
provided in one room, or in a series of closely associated rooms, for persons
not members of the same family group.
      Dwelling unit: A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
      Hotel: Any building containing six or more guestrooms, intended or
designed to be occupied, or which are rented or hired out to be occupied, for
sleeping purposes by guests.
      One-family dwelling: A building containing one dwelling unit wit: not
more than two lodgers or boarders.
      Rooming house: A building arranged or occupied for lodging, with or
without meals, for compensation and not occupied as a one-family dwelling or a
two-family dwelling.
      Rooming unit: Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit
occupied or intended to be occupied for sleeping or living, but not for cooking
purposes.
      Two-family dwelling: A building containing two dwelling units with not
more than two lodgers or boarders per family.
   Exterior property: See Section PM-302.0.
   Extermination: See Section PM-302.0.
   Family: One or two persons or parents, with their direct lineal descendants
and adopted children (and including the domestic employees thereof), together
with not more than two persons not so related, living together in the whole or
part of a dwelling unit comprising a single housekeeping unit. Every additional
group of two or less persons living in such housekeeping unit shall be
considered a separate family for the purpose of the code.
   Garbage: See Section PM-302.0.
   Habitable space: See Section PM-402.0.
   Hearing Officer: The hearing officer shall be appointed by the Mayor and
approved by the City Council to serve at his or her pleasure. The hearing
officer shall be a person who has expertise in housing matters including, but
not limited to, an engineer, architect, building contractor, building
inspector, or a member of a community housing organization. An employee of the
enforcing agency shall not be appointed as hearing officer.
   Infestation: See Section PM-302.0.
   Inspection certificate: An identification applied on a product by an
approved agency containing the name of the manufacturer, the function and
performance characteristics, and the name and identification of an approved
agency which indicates that the product or material has been inspected and
evaluated by an approved agency.
   Label: An identification applied on a product by the manufacturer which
contains the name of the manufacturer, the function and performance
characteristics of the product or material, and the name and identification of
an approved agency and which indicates that the representative sample of the
product or material has been tested and evaluated by an approved agency (see
Section 1704.0 of the Building Code, and also Mark, Manufacturer’s Designation
and Inspection Certificate.)
   Let for occupancy or let: See Section PM-302.0.
   Manufacturer’s designation: An identification applied on a product by the
manufacturer indicating that a product or material complies with a specified
standard or set of rules (see also Mark, Label, and Inspection Certificate).
   Mark: An identification applied on a product by the manufacturer indicating
the name of the manufacturer and the function of a product or material (see
also Manufacturer’s Designation, Label, and Inspection Certificate.)
   Occupancy: The purpose for which a building or portion thereof is utilized
or occupied.
   Occupant: See Section PM-302.0.
   Openable area: See Section PM-402.0.
   Operator: See Section PM-302.0.
   Owner: See Section PM-302.0.
   Person: See Section PM-302.0.
   Plumbing: See Section PM-502.0.
   Plumbing fixture: See Section PM-502.0.
   Premises: See Section PM-302.0.
   Public nuisance: See Section PM-302.0.
   Registered design professional: An architect or engineer, registered or
licensed to practice professional architecture or engineering, as defined by
the statutory requirements of the professional registration laws of the state
in which the project is to be constructed.
   Rubbish: See Section PM-302.0.
   Structure: That which is built or constructed or a portion thereof.
   Tenant: See Section PM-302.1.
   Toilet room: See Section PM-502.0.
   Ventilation: See Section PM-402.0.
   Workmanlike: Executed in a skilled manner; e.g., generally plumb, level,
square, in line, undamaged, and without marring adjacent work.
   Yard: See Section PM-302.0.
   CHAPTER 3: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
   SECTION PM-301.0 GENERAL
   PM-301.1 Scope: The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum
conditions and the responsibilities of persons for maintenance of structures,
equipment and exterior property.
   PM-301.2 Responsibility: The owner of the premises shall maintain the
structures and exterior property in compliance with these requirements, except
as otherwise provided for in Sections PM-306.0 and PM-307.0. A person shall not
occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy premises which do
not comply with the requirements of this chapter.
   PM-301.3 Vacant structures and land: All vacant structures and premises
thereof or vacant land shall be maintained in a clean, safe, secure and
sanitary condition as provided herein so as not to cause a blighting problem or
adversely affect the public health or safety.
   SECTION PM-302.0 DEFINITIONS
   PM-302.1 General: The following words and terms shall, for the purposes of
this chapter and as stated elsewhere in this code, have the meanings shown
herein.
   Basement: That portion of a building which is partly or completely below
grade.
   Exterior property: The open space on the premises and on adjoining property
under the control of owners or operators of such premises.
   Extermination: The control and elimination of insects, rats or other pests
by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible
materials that serve as their food; by poison spraying, fumigating, trapping or
by any other approved pest elimination methods.
   Garbage: The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
   Infestation: The presence, within or contiguous to, a structure or premises
of insects, rats, vermin or other pests.
   Let for occupancy or let: To permit, provide or offer possession or
occupancy of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, building, premise or
structure by a person who is or is not the legal owner of record thereof,
pursuant to a written or unwritten lease, agreement or license, or pursuant to
a recorded or unrecorded agreement of contract for the sale of land.
   Occupant: Any person living or sleeping in a building; or having possession
of a space within a building.
   Operator: Any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or
premises which is let or offered for occupancy.
   Owner: Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or
equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the
state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise
having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any
such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if
ordered to take possession of real property by a court.
   Person: An individual, corporation, partnership or any other group acting as
a unit.
   Premises: A lot, plot or parcel of land including any structures thereon.
   Public nuisance: Includes any of the following:
      1.   The physical condition or occupancy of any premises regarded as a
public nuisance at common law;
      2.   Any physical condition or occupancy of any premises or its
appurtenances considered an attractive nuisance to children, including, but not
limited to, abandoned wells, shafts, basements, excavations and unsafe fences
or structures;
      3.   Any premises that has unsanitary sewerage or plumbing facilities;
      4.   Any premises designated as unsafe for human habitation;
      5.   Any premises that is manifestly capable of being a fire hazard, or
is manifestly unsafe or unsecure so as to endanger life, limb or property;
      6.   Any premises from which the plumbing, heating or facilities required
by this code have been removed, or from which utilities have been disconnected,
destroyed, removed or rendered ineffective, or the required precautions against
trespassers have not been provided;
      7.   Any premises that is unsanitary, or that is littered with rubbish or
garbage, or that has an uncontrolled growth of weeds; or
      8.   Any structure that is in a state of dilapidation, deterioration or
decay; faulty construction; overcrowded; open, vacant or abandoned; damaged by
fire to the extent so as not to provide shelter; in danger of collapse or
failure; and dangerous to anyone on or near the premises.
   Rubbish: Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage, the
term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and other
combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber,
leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter,
glass, crockery and dust and other similar materials.
   Tenant: A person, corporation, partnership or group, whether or . not the
legal owner of record, occupying a building or portion thereof as a unit.
   Yard: An open space on the same lot with a structure.
   SECTION PM-303.0 EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS
   PM-303.1 Sanitation: All exterior property and premises shall be maintained
in a clean, safe and sanitary condition. The occupant shall keep that part of
the exterior property which such occupant occupies or controls in a clean and
sanitary condition.
   PM-303.2 Grading and drainage: All premises shall be graded and maintained
to prevent the erosion of soil and to prevent the accumulation of stagnant
water thereon, or within any structure located thereon.
      Exception: Water retention areas and reservoirs approved by the code
official.
   PM-303.3 Sidewalks and driveways: All sidewalks, walkways, stairs,
driveways, parking spaces and similar areas shall be kept in a proper state of
repair, and maintained free from hazardous conditions. Stairs shall comply with
the requirements of Sections PM-304.10 and PM-702.9.
   PM-303.4 Weeds: All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free
from weeds or plant growth in excess of 12 inches (304.8 mm). All noxious weeds
shall be prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and
vegetation, other than trees or shrubs provided; however, this term shall not
include cultivated flowers and gardens.
   PM-303.5 Rat harborage: All structures and exterior property shall be kept
free from rat infestation. Where rats are found, they shall be promptly
exterminated by approved processes which will not be injurious to human health.
After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent
reinfestation.
   PM-303.6 Exhaust vents: Pipes, ducts, conductors, fans or blowers shall not
discharge gases, steam, vapor, hot air, grease, smoke, odors or other gaseous
or particulate wastes directly upon abutting or adjacent public or private
property or that of another tenant.
   PM-303.7 Accessory structures: All accessory structures, including detached
garages, fences and walls, shall be maintained structurally sound and in good
repair.
   SECTION PM-304.0 EXTERIOR STRUCTURE
   PM-304.1 General: The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in good
repair, structurally sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the
public health, safety or welfare.
   PM-304.2 Exterior painting: All wood and metal surfaces, including but not
limited to, window frames, doors, door frames, cornices, porches and trim shall
be maintained in good condition. Peeling, flaking and chipped paint shall be
eliminated and surfaces repainted.
   PM-304.3 Street numbers: Each structure to which a street number has been
assigned shall have such number displayed in a position easily observed and
readable from the public right-of-way. All numbers shall be in arabic numerals
at least 3 inches (76 mm) high and 1/2-inch (13 mm) stroke.
   PM-304.4 Structural members: All structural members shall be maintained free
from deterioration, and shall be capable of safely supporting the imposed dead
and live loads.
   PM-304.5 Foundation walls: All foundation walls shall be maintained plumb
and free from open cracks and breaks and shall be kept in such condition so as
to prevent the entry of rats. All buildings and/or structures shall be provided
with approve foundations, piers, and ratwalls.
   PM-304.6 Exterior walls: All exterior walls shall be free from holes,
breaks, loose or rotting materials; and maintained weatherproof and properly
surface coated where required to prevent deterioration.
   PM-304.7 Roofs and drainage: The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight and
not have defects that admit rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent
dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the structure.
Roof drains, gutters and downspouts shall be maintained in good repair and free
from obstructions. Roof water shall not be discharged in a manner that creates
a public nuisance.
   PM-304.8 Decorative features: All cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra
cotta trim, wall facings and similar decorative features shall be maintained in
good repair with proper anchorage and in a safe condition.
   PM-304.9 Overhang extensions: All canopies, marquees, signs, metal awnings,
fire escapes, standpipes, exhaust ducts and similar overhang extensions shall
be maintained in good repair and be properly anchored so as to be kept in a
sound condition. When required, all exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be
protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application
of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment.
   PM-304.10 Stair and walking surfaces: Every stair, ramp, balcony, porch,
deck or other walking surface shall comply with the provisions of PM-702.9.
   PM-304.11 Stairways, decks, porches and balconies: Every exterior stairway,
deck, porch and balcony, and all appurtenances attached thereto, shall be
maintained structurally sound, in good repair, with proper anchorage and
capable of supporting the imposed loads.
   PM-304.12 Chimneys and towers: All chimneys, cooling towers, smoke stacks,
and similar appurtenances shall be maintained structurally safe and sound, and
in good repair. All exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from
the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-
coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment.
   PM-304.13 Handrails and guards: Every handrail and guard shall be firmly
fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be
maintained in good condition.
   PM-304.14 Window and door frames: Every window, door and frame shall be kept
in sound condition, good repair and weather tight.
      PM-304.14.1 Glazing: All glazing materials shall be maintained free from
cracks and holes.
      PM-304.14.2 Openable windows: Every window, other than a fixed window,
shall be easily openable and capable of being held in position by window
hardware.
   PM-304.15 Insect screens: During the period from April 1 to December 1 every
door, window and other outside opening utilized or required for ventilation
purposes serving any structure containing habitable rooms, food preparation
areas, food service areas, or any areas where products to be included or
utilized in food for human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or
stored, shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of not less
than 16 mesh per inch and every swinging door shall have a self-closing device
in good working condition.
      Exception: Screen doors shall not be required where other approved means,
such as air curtains or insect repellent fans are employed.
   PM-304.16 Doors: All exterior doors and hardware shall be maintained in good
condition. Locks at all entrances to dwelling units, rooming units and
guestrooms shall tightly secure the door.
   PM-304.17 Basement hatchways: Every basement hatchway shall be maintained to
prevent the entrance of rats, rain and surface drainage water.
   PM-304.18 Guards for basement windows: Every basement window that is
openable shall be supplied with ratproof shields, storm windows or other
approved protection against the entry of rats.
   PM-304.19 Boarding of structures: No window, door, or other opening in a
building or structure shall be boarded up without specific prior approval of
the code official. Such boarding of a building or structure will be only for
the purpose of correcting vandalism or the results of a natural disaster and
then only for a duration not to exceed two weeks, unless approved in writing
for a longer duration by the code official. If boarding up is deemed necessary,
the means and material used must be approved by the code official.
   SECTION PM-305.0 INTERIOR STRUCTURE
   PM-305.1 General: The interior of a structure and equipment therein shall be
maintained in good repair, structurally sound and in a sanitary condition.
Every occupant shall keep that part of the structure which such occupant
occupies or controls in a clean and sanitary condition. Every owner of a
structure containing a rooming house, a hotel, a dormitory, two or more
dwelling units or two or more nonresidential occupancies, shall maintain, in a
clean and sanitary condition, the shared or public areas of the structure and
exterior property.
   PM-305.2 Structural members: All structural members shall be maintained
structurally sound, and be capable of supporting the imposed loads.
   PM-305.3 Interior surfaces: All interior surfaces, including windows and
doors, shall be maintained in good, clean and sanitary condition. Peeling
paint, cracked or loose plaster, decayed wood, and other defective surface
conditions shall be corrected.
   PM-305.4 Lead-based paint: Interior and exterior painted surfaces of
dwellings and child and day care facilities, including fences and outbuildings,
which contain lead levels equal to or greater than 1.0 milligram per square
centimeter or in excess of 0.50-percent lead by weight shall be maintained in a
condition free from peeling, chipping and flaking paint or removed or covered
in an approved manner. Any surface to be covered shall first be identified by
approved warnings as to the lead content of such surface.
   PM-305.5 Stairs and railings: All interior stairs and railings shall be
maintained in sound condition and good repair.
   PM-305.6 Stairs and walking surfaces: Every stair, ramp, balcony, porch,
deck or other walking surface shall comply with the provisions of PM-702.9.
   PM-305.7 Handrails and guards: Every handrail and guard shall be firmly
fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be
maintained in good condition.
   PM-305.8 Bathroom and kitchen floors: Every toilet room, bathroom and
kitchen floor surface shall be constructed and maintained so as to be
substantially impervious to water and so as to permit such floor to be easily
kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
   PM-306.1 Accumulation of rubbish or garbage: All exterior property and
premises, and the interior of every structure shall be free from any
accumulation of rubbish or garbage.
   PM-306.2 Disposal of rubbish: Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of
all rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such rubbish in approved
containers.
      PM-306.2.1 Rubbish storage facilities: The owner of every occupied
premises shall supply approved covered containers for rubbish, and the owner of
the premises shall be responsible for the removal of rubbish.
   PM-306.3 Disposal of garbage: Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of
garbage in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such garbage in an approved
garbage disposal facility or approved garbage containers.
      PM-306.3.1 Garbage facilities: The owner of every dwelling shall supply
the following: An approved mechanical food waste grinder in each dwelling unit
and an approved leakproof, covered, outside garbage container.
      PM-306.3.2 Containers: The operator of every establishment producing
garbage shall provide, and at all times cause to be utilized, approved
leakproof containers provided with close-fitting covers for the storage of such
materials until removed from the premises for disposal.
   SECTION PM-307.0 EXTERMINATION
   PM-307.1 Infestation: All structures shall be kept free from insect and rat
infestation. All structures in which insects or rats are found shall be
promptly exterminated by approved processes that will not be injurious to human
health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent
reinfestation.
   PM-307.2 Owner: The owner of any structure shall be responsible for
extermination within the structure prior to renting or leasing the structure.
   PM-307.3 Single occupant: The occupant of a one-family dwelling or of a
single-tenant nonresidential structure shall be responsible for extermination
on the premises.
   PM-307.4 Multiple occupancy: The owner of a structure containing two or more
dwelling units, a multiple occupancy, a rooming house or a nonresidential
structure shall be responsible for extermination in the public or shared areas
of the structure and exterior property. If infestation is caused by failure of
an occupant to prevent such infestation in the area occupied, the occupants
shall be responsible for extermination.
   PM-307.5 Occupant: The occupant of any structure shall be responsible for
the continued rat-free condition of the structure, and if the occupant fails to
maintain the rat-free condition, the cost of extermination shall be the
responsibility of the occupant.
      Exception: Where rat infestations are caused by defects in the structure,
the owner shall be responsible for extermination.
   CHAPTER 4: LIGHT, VENTILATION AND OCCUPANCY LIMITATIONS
   SECTION PM-401.0 GENERAL
   PM-401.1 Scope: The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum
conditions and standards for light, ventilation and space for occupying a
structure.
   PM-401.2 Responsibility: The owner of the structure shall provide and
maintain light, ventilation and space conditions in compliance with these
requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant, or permit another
person to occupy any premises that do not comply with the requirements of this
chapter.
   PM-401.3 Alternative devices: In lieu of the means for natural light and
ventilation herein prescribed, artificial light or mechanical ventilation
complying with the Building Code shall be permitted.
   SECTION PM-402.0 DEFINITIONS
   PM-402.1 General: The following words and terms shall, for the purposes of
this chapter and as stated elsewhere in this code, have the meanings shown
herein.
   Habitable space: Space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating or
cooking. Bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility spaces,
and similar areas are not considered habitable spaces.
   Openable area: That part of a window or door which is available for
unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors.
   Ventilation: The natural or mechanical process of supplying conditioned or
unconditioned air to, or removing such air from, any space.
   SECTION PM-403.0 LIGHT
   PM-403.1 Habitable spaces: Every habitable space shall have at least one
window of approved size facing directly to the outdoors or to a court. The
minimum total window area, measured between stops, for every habitable space
shall be 8 percent of the floor area of such room, except in kitchens where
artificial light is provided in accordance with the provisions of the Building
Code. Wherever walls or other portions of a structure face a window of any room
and such obstructions are located less than 3 feet (914 mm) from the window and
extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such window shall not
be deemed to face directly to the outdoors nor to a court and shall not be
included as contributing to the required minimum total window area for the
room.
   PM-403.2 Common halls and stairways: Every common hall and stairway, other
than in one- and two-family dwellings, shall be lighted at all times with at
least a 60-watt standard incandescent light bulb or equivalent for each 200
square feet (19 m2) of floor area, provided that the spacing between lights
shall not be greater than 30 feet (9144 mm). Every exterior stairway shall be
illuminated with a minimum of 1 footcandle (11 lux) at floors, landings and
treads.
   PM-403.3 Other spaces: All other spaces shall be provided with natural or
artificial light sufficient to permit the maintenance of sanitary conditions,
and the safe occupancy of the space and utilization of the appliances,
equipment and fixtures.
   SECTION PM-404.0 VENTILATION
   PM-404.1 Habitable spaces: Every habitable space shall have at least one
openable window. The total openable area of the window in every room shall be
equal to at least 45 percent of the minimum glazed area required in PM-403.1.
   PM-404.2 Bathrooms and toilet rooms: Every bathroom and toilet room shall
comply with the ventilation requirements for habitable spaces as required by
PM-404.1, except that a window shall not be required in spaces equipped with a
mechanical ventilation system that complies with the following:
      1.   Air exhausted by a mechanical ventilation system from a bathroom
within a dwelling unit shall be exhausted to the exterior and shall not be
recirculated to any space, including the space from which such air is
withdrawn.
      2.   Air exhausted by a mechanical ventilation system from all other
bathrooms or toilet rooms shall be exhausted to the exterior without
recirculation to any space, or not more than 85 percent of the exhaust air
shall be recirculated where the system is provided with effective absorption
and filtering equipment.
   PM-404.3 Cooking facilities: Unless approved through the certificate of
occupancy, cooking shall not be permitted in any rooming unit or dormitory
unit, and a cooking facility or appliance shall not be permitted to be present
in a rooming unit or dormitory unit.
      Exception: Where specifically approved in writing by the code official.
   PM-404.4 Process ventilation: Where injurious, toxic, irritating or noxious
fumes, gases, dusts or mists are generated, a local exhaust ventilation system
shall be provided to remove the contaminating agent at the source. Air shall be
exhausted to the exterior and not be recirculated to any space.
   PM-404.5 Clothes dryer exhaust: Clothes dryer venting systems shall be
independent of all other systems and shall be vented in accordance with the
manufacturer’s instructions. Dryer vent materials shall be of smooth galvanized
steel or aluminum, or of flexible metal exhaust duct material.
   SECTION PM-405.0 OCCUPANCY LIMITATIONS
   PM-405.1 Privacy: Dwelling units, hotel units, rooming units and dormitory
units shall be arranged to provide privacy and be separate from other adjoining
spaces.
   PM-405.2 Access from sleeping rooms: Sleeping rooms shall not constitute the
only means of access to other sleeping rooms or habitable spaces.
      Exception: Dwelling units that contain fewer than two bedrooms.
   PM-405.3 Area for sleeping purposes: Every room occupied for sleeping
purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 70 square feet (6.5 m2) of
floor area, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one
person shall contain at least 50 square feet (4.6 m2) of floor area for each
occupant thereof.
   PM-405.4 Water closet accessibility: Every bedroom shall have access to at
least one water closet and one lavatory without passing through another
bedroom.
   PM-405.5 Overcrowding: Dwelling units shall not be occupied by more
occupants than permitted by the minimum area requirements of Table PM-405.5.
Table PM-405.5 Minimum Area Requirements
Space Minimum Area in Square Feetb
      1 - 2 Occupants 3 to 5 Occupants 6 or More
Table PM-405.5 Minimum Area Requirements
Space        Minimum Area in Square Feetb
             1 - 2 Occupants 3 to 5 Occupants 6 or More
Living rooma No requirements 120              150
Dining rooma No requirements 80               100
Kitchen      50              50               60
Bedrooms     Shall comply with PM-405.3
Notes:
   a   See PM-405.6 for combined living room/dining room spaces
   b   1 square foot = 0.093 m2
 
   PM-405.6 Combined spaces: Combined living room and dining room spaces shall
comply with the requirements of Table PM-405.5 if the total area is equal to
that required for separate rooms and if the space is located so as to function
as a combination living room/dining room.
   PM-405.7 Prohibited occupancy: Kitchens, nonhabitable spaces and interior
public areas shall not be occupied for sleeping purposes.
   PM-405.8 Minimum ceiling heights: Habitable spaces, hallways, corridors,
laundry areas, bathrooms, toilet rooms and habitable basement areas shall have
a clear ceiling height of not less than 7 feet (2134 mm).
   Exceptions
      1.   In one- and two-family dwellings, beams or girders spaced not less
than 4 feet (1219 mm) on center and projecting not more than 6 inches (152 mm)
below the required ceiling height.
      2.   Basement rooms in one- and two-family dwellings occupied exclusively
for laundry, study or recreation purposes, having a ceiling height of not less
than 6 feet 8 inches (2033 mm) with not less than 6 feet 4 inches (1932 mm) of
clear height under beams, girders, ducts and similar obstructions.
      3.   Rooms occupied exclusively for sleeping, study or similar purposes
and having a sloped ceiling over all or part of the room, with a clear ceiling
height of at least 7 feet (2134 mm) over not less than one-third of the
required minimum floor area. In calculating the floor-area of such rooms, only
those portions of the floor area with a clear ceiling height of 5 feet (1524
mm) or more shall be included.
   PM-405.9 Minimum room widths: A habitable room, other than a kitchen, shall
not be less than 7 feet (2134 mm) in any plan dimension. Kitchens shall have a
clear passageway of not less than 3 feet (914 mm) between counterfronts and
appliances or counterfronts and walls.
   PM-405.10 Food preparation: All spaces to be occupied for food preparation
purposes shall contain suitable space and equipment to store, prepare and serve
foods in a sanitary manner. There shall be adequate facilities and services for
the sanitary disposal of food wastes and refuse, including facilities for
temporary storage.
   CHAPTER 5: PLUMBING FACILITIES AND FIXTURE REQUIREMENTS
   SECTION PM-501.0 GENERAL
   PM-501.1 Scope: The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum
plumbing facilities and plumbing fixtures to be provided.
   PM-501.2 Responsibility: The owner of the structure shall provide and
maintain such plumbing facilities and plumbing fixtures in compliance with
these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit
another person to occupy any structure or premises which does not comply with
the requirements of this chapter.
   SECTION PM-502.0 DEFINITIONS
   PM-502.1 General: The following words and terms shall, for the purposes of
this chapter and as stated elsewhere in this code, have the meanings shown
herein.
   Bathroom: A room containing plumbing fixtures including a bathtub or shower.
   Plumbing: The practice, materials and fixtures utilized in the installation,
maintenance, extension and alteration of all piping, fixtures, appliances and
appurtenances within the scope of the Plumbing Code.
   Plumbing fixture: A receptacle or device which is either permanently or
temporarily connected to the water distribution system of the premises, and
demands a supply of water therefrom; or discharges waste water, liquid-borne
waste materials, or sewage either directly or indirectly to the drainage system
of the premises; or which requires both a water supply connection and a
discharge to the drainage system of the premises.
   Toilet room: A room containing a water closet or urinal but not a bathtub or
shower.
   SECTION PM-503.0 REQUIRED FACILITIES
   PM-503.1 Dwelling units: Every dwelling unit shall contain its own bathtub
or shower, lavatory, water closet and kitchen sink which shall be maintained in
a sanitary, safe working condition. The lavatory shall be placed in the same
room as the water closet or located in close proximity to the door leading
directly into the room in which such water closet is located.
   PM-503.2 Rooming houses: At least one water closet, lavatory and bathtub or
shower shall be supplied for each four rooming units.
   PM-503.3 Hotels: Where private water closets, lavatories, and baths are not
provided, one water closet, one lavatory and one bathtub or shower having
access from a public hallway shall be provided for each ten occupants.
   PM-503.4 Employee’s facilities: A minimum of one water closet, one lavatory
and one drinking facility shall be available to employees.
   PM-503.4.1 Drinking facilities: Drinking facilities shall be a drinking
fountain, water cooler, bottled water cooler, or disposable cups next to a sink
or water dispenser. Drinking facilities shall not be located in toilet rooms or
bathrooms.
   SECTION PM-504.0 TOILET ROOMS
   PM-504.1 Privacy: Toilet rooms and bathrooms shall provide privacy and shall
not constitute the only passageway to a hall or other space, or to the
exterior.
   PM-504.2 Location: Toilet rooms and bathrooms serving hotel units, rooming
units or dormitory units, shall have access by traversing not more than one
flight of stairs and shall have access from a common hall or passageway.
   PM-504.3 Location of employee toilet facilities: Toilet facilities shall
have access from within the employees’ regular working area. The required
toilet facilities shall be located not more than one story above or below the
employee’s regular working area and the path of travel to such facilities shall
not exceed a distance of 500 feet (152 m). Employee facilities shall either be
separate facilities or public customer facilities.
      Exception: Facilities that are required for employees in storage
structures or kiosks, and which are located in adjacent structures under the
same ownership, lease or control, shall not exceed a travel distance of 500
feet (152 m) from the employees’ regular working area to the facilities.
   SECTION PM-505.0 PLUMBING FIXTURES
   PM-505.1 General: All plumbing fixtures shall be properly installed and
maintained in working order, and shall be kept free from obstructions, leaks
and defects and be capable of performing the function for which such plumbing
fixtures are designed. All plumbing fixtures shall be maintained in a safe,
sanitary and functional condition.
   PM-505.2 Fixture clearances: Plumbing fixtures shall have adequate
clearances for usage and cleaning.
   SECTION PM-506.0 WATER SYSTEM
   PM-506.1 General: Every sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower, drinking
fountain, water closet or other plumbing fixture shall be properly connected to
either a public water system or to an approved private water system. All
kitchen sinks, lavatories, laundry facilities, bathtubs and showers shall be
supplied with hot or tempered and cold running water.
   PM-506.2 Contamination: The water supply shall be maintained free from
contamination, and all water inlets for plumbing fixtures shall be located
above the flood level rim of the fixture. Shampoo basin faucets, janitor sink
faucets, and other hose bibs or faucets to which hoses are attached and left in
place, shall be protected by an approved atmospheric-type vacuum breaker or an
approved permanently attached hose connection vacuum breaker.
   PM-506.3 Supply: The water supply system shall be installed and maintained
to provide a supply of water to plumbing fixtures, devices and appurtenances in
sufficient volume and at pressures adequate to enable the fixtures to function
properly, safely, and free from defects and leaks.
   PM-506.4 Water heating facilities: Water heating facilities shall be
properly installed, maintained and capable of providing an adequate amount of
water to be drawn at every required sink, lavatory, bathtub, shower and laundry
facility at a temperature of not less than 110 degrees F. (43 degrees C). A
gas-burning water heater shall not be located in any bathroom, toilet room,
bedroom or other occupied room normally kept closed, unless adequate combustion
air is provided. An approved combination temperature and pressure relief valve
and relief valve discharge pipe shall be properly installed and maintained on
water heaters.
   SECTION PM-507.0 SANITARY DRAINAGE SYSTEM
   PM-507.1 General: All plumbing fixtures shall be properly connected to
either a public sewer system or to an approved private sewage disposal system.
   PM-507.2 Maintenance: Every plumbing stack, vent, waste and sewer line shall
function properly and be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects.
   SECTION PM-508.0 STORM DRAINAGE
   PM-508.1 General: Drainage of roofs and paved areas, yards and courts, and
other open areas on the premises shall not be discharged in a manner that
creates a public nuisance.
   CHAPTER 6: MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS
   SECTION PM-601.0 GENERAL
   PM-601.1 Scope: The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum
mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment to be provided.
   PM-601.2 Responsibility: The owner of the structure shall provide and
maintain mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment in compliance with
these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit
another person to occupy any premises which does not comply with the
requirements of this chapter.
   SECTION PM-602.0 HEATING FACILITIES
   PM-602.1 Facilities required: Heating facilities shall be provided in
structures as required by this section.
   PM-602.2 Residential buildings: Every dwelling shall be provided with
heating facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of 65 degrees F.
(18 degrees C.) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms based on the
outside design temperature required for the locality by the Mechanical Code.
      PM-602.2.1 Heat supply: Every owner and operator of any building who
rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling unit, rooming unit, dormitory or
guestroom on terms, either express or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants
thereof shall supply sufficient heat during the period from October 1 to May 15
to maintain the room temperatures specified in PM-602.2 during the hours
between 6:30 a.m. and 10:30 p.m. of each day and not less than 60 degrees F.
(16 degrees C.) during other hours.
      PM-602.2.2 Room temperature exception: When the outdoor temperature is
below the outdoor design temperature required for the locality by the
Mechanical Code, the owner or operator shall not be required to maintain the
minimum room temperatures, provided that the heating system is operating at
full capacity, with supply valves and dampers in a full open position.
   PM-602.3 Nonresidential structures: Every enclosed occupied work space shall
be supplied with sufficient heat during the period from October 1 to May 15 to
maintain a temperature of not less than 65 degrees F. (18 degrees C.) during
all working hours.
   Exceptions
      1.   Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or
special temperature conditions.
      2.   Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical
activities.
   PM-602.4 Room temperature measurement: The required room temperatures shall
be measured at a point 3 feet (914 mm) above the floor and 3 feet (914 mm) from
the exterior walls.
   SECTION PM-603.0 MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT
   PM-603.1 Mechanical equipment: All mechanical equipment, fireplaces and
solid fuel-burning appliances shall be properly installed and maintained in a
safe working condition, and shall be capable of performing the intended
function.
   PM-603.2 Equipment access: Access to outdoor mechanical equipment shall be
maintained under all weather conditions.
   PM-603.3 Cooking and heating equipment: All cooking and heating equipment,
components and accessories in every heating, cooking and water-heating device
shall be maintained free from leaks and obstructions.
   PM-603.4 Flue: All fuel-burning equipment and appliances shall be connected
to an approved chimney or vent.
      Exception: Fuel-burning equipment and appliances which are labeled for
unvented operation.
   PM-603.5 Clearances: All required clearances to combustible materials shall
be maintained.
   PM-603.6 Safety controls: All safety controls for fuel-burning equipment
shall be maintained in effective operation.
   PM-603.7 Combustion air: A supply of air for complete combustion of the fuel
and for ventilation of the space shall be provided for the fuel-burning
equipment.
   PM-603.8 Energy conservation devices: Devices purporting to reduce fuel
consumption by attachment to a fuel-burning appliance, to the fuel supply line
thereto, or to the vent outlet or vent piping therefrom, shall not be installed
unless labeled for such purpose and the installation is specifically approved.
   PM-603.9 Fireplaces: Fireplaces and solid fuel-burning appliances shall be
properly installed and maintained in a safe working condition.
   SECTION PM-604.0 ELECTRICAL FACILITIES
   PM-604.1 Facilities required: Every occupied building shall be provided with
an electrical system in compliance with the requirements of this section and
Section PM-605.0.
   PM-604.2 Service: The size and usage of appliances and equipment shall serve
as a basis for determining the need for additional facilities in accordance
with NFPA 70. Every dwelling shall be served by a main service that is not less
than 60 amperes, three wires.
   PM-604.3 Electrical system hazards: Where it is found that the electrical
system in a structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the structure by
reason of inadequate service, improper fusing, insufficient outlets, improper
wiring or installation, deterioration or damage, or for similar reasons, the
code official shall require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the
hazard.
   SECTION PM-605.0 ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT
   PM-605.1 Installation: All electrical equipment, wiring and appliances shall
be properly installed and maintained in a safe and approved manner.
   PM-605.2 Receptacles: Every habitable space in a dwelling shall contain at
least two separate and remote receptacle outlets. Every laundry area shall
contain at least one grounded-type receptacle. Every bathroom shall contain at
least one receptacle.
   PM-605.3 Lighting fixtures: Every public hall, interior stairway, water
closet compartment, bathroom, laundry room and furnace room shall contain at
least one electric lighting fixture.
   SECTION PM-606.0 ELEVATORS, ESCALATORS AND DUMBWAITERS
   PM-606.1 General: Elevators, dumbwaiters and escalators shall be maintained
to sustain safely all imposed loads, to operate properly, and to be free from
physical and fire hazards.
   PM-606.2 Elevators: In buildings equipped with passenger elevators, at least
one elevator shall be maintained in operation at all times when the building is
occupied.
      Exception: Buildings equipped with only one elevator shall be permitted
to have the elevator temporarily out of service for testing or servicing.
   CHAPTER 7: FIRE SAFETY REQUIREMENTS
   SECTION PM-701.0 GENERAL
   PM-701.1 Scope: The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum
conditions and standards for fire safety relating to structures and exterior
premises, including fire safety facilities and equipment to be provided.
   PM-701.2 Responsibility: The owner of the premises shall provide and
maintain such fire safety facilities and equipment in compliance with these
requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another
person to occupy any premises that do not comply with the requirements of this
chapter.
   SECTION PM-702.0 MEANS OF EGRESS
   PM-702.1 General: A safe, continuous and unobstructed means of egress shall
be provided from the interior of a structure to a public way.
   PM-702.2 Exit capacity: The capacity of the exits serving a floor shall be
sufficient for the occupant load thereof as determined by the Building Code.
   PM-702.3 Number of exits: In nonresidential buildings, every occupied story
more than six stories above grade shall be provided with not less than two
independent exits. In residential buildings, every story exceeding two stories
above grade shall be provided with not less than two independent exits. In
stories where more than one exit is required, all occupants shall have access
to at least two exits. Every occupied story which is both totally below grade
and greater than 2,000 square feet (186 m2) shall be provided with not less
than two independent exits.
      Exception: A single exit is acceptable under any one of the following
conditions:
      1.   Where the building is equipped throughout with an automatic
sprinkler system and an automatic fire detection system with smoke detectors
located in all corridors, lobbies and common areas.
      2.   Where the building is equipped throughout with an automatic fire
detection system and the exit is an approved smokeproof enclosure or
pressurized stairway.
      3.   Where an existing fire escape conforming to the Building Code is
provided in addition to the single exit.
      4.   Where permitted by the Building Code.
   PM-702.4 Arrangement: Exits from dwelling units, rooming units, guestrooms
and dormitory units shall not lead through other such units, or through toilet
rooms or bathrooms.
   PM-702.5 Exit signs: All means of egress shall be indicated with approved
“Exit” signs where required by the Building Code. All “Exit” signs shall be
maintained visible and all illuminated “Exit” signs shall be illuminated at all
times that the building is occupied.
   PM-702.6 Corridor enclosure: All corridors serving an occupant load greater
than 30 and the openings therein shall provide an effective barrier to resist
the movement of smoke. All transoms, louvers, doors and other openings shall be
closed or shall be self-closing.
   Exceptions
      1.   Corridors in occupancies in other than Use Group H which are
equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system.
      2.   Patient room doors in corridors in occupancies in Use Group 1-
2 where smoke barriers are provided in accordance with the Fire Prevention Code
are not required to be self-closing.
      3.   Corridors in occupancies in Use Group E where each room that is
occupied for instruction or assembly purposes has at least one-half of the
required means of egress doors opening directly to the exterior of the building
at ground level.
      4.   Corridors that are in compliance with the Building Code.
   PM-702.7 Dead-end travel distance: All corridors that serve more than one
exit shall provide direct connection to such exits. The length of a dead-end
corridor shall not exceed 35 feet (10668 mm) where the building is not equipped
throughout with an automatic sprinkler system. The dead-end travel distance
limitation shall be increased to 70 feet (21336 mm) where the building is
equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system.
   PM-702.8 Aisles: Arrangements of chairs or tables and chairs shall provide
for ready access by aisle accessways and aisles to each egress door. The
minimum clear width of each aisle in occupancies in Use Groups A, E and 1-
2 shall be maintained in accordance with the requirements of the building code
listed in Chapter 8. In all other occupancies, aisles shall have a minimum
required clear width of 44 inches (1118 mm) where serving an occupant load
greater than 50. and 36 inches (914 mm) where serving an occupant load of 50 or
less. The clear width of aisles shall not be obstructed by chairs, tables or
other objects.
   PM-702.9 Stairways, handrails and guards: Every exterior and interior flight
of stairs having more than four risers, and every open portion of a stair,
landing, balcony, porch, deck, ramp or other walking surface which is more than
30 inches (762 mm) above the floor or grade below shall have guards. Handrails
shall not be less than 30 inches (762 mm) nor more than 42 inches (1067 mm)
high, measured vertically above the nosing of the tread or above the finished
floor of the landing or walking surfaces. Guards shall not be less than 30
inches (762 mm) high above the floor of the landing, balcony, porch, deck, ramp
or other walking surface.
   PM-702.10 Information signs: A sign shall be provided at each floor landing
in all interior stairways more than three stories above grade, designating the
floor level above the floor of discharge. All elevator lobby call stations on
all floor levels shall be identified by approved signs in accordance with the
requirements for new buildings in the Building Code.
      Exception: The emergency sign shall not be required for elevators that
are part of an accessible means of egress complying with the Building Code.
   PM-702.11 Locked doors: All means of egress doors shall be readily openable
from the side from which egress is to be made without the need for keys,
special knowledge or effort, except as provided for in PM-702.11.1.
      PM-702.11.I Locks permitted: Locks or fasteners shall not be installed on
egress doors except in accordance with the following conditions:
      1.   In mental, penal or other institutions where the security of inmates
is necessary, in which case properly trained supervisory personnel shall be
continuously on duty and approved provisions are made to remove occupants
safely in case of fire or other emergency.
      2.   In problem security areas, special-purpose door alarms or locking
devices shall be approved prior to installation. Manually operated edge or
surface-molded flush bolts are prohibited.
      3.   Where the door hardware con forms to that permitted by the Building
Code.
   SECTION PM-703.0 ACCUMULATIONS AND STORAGE
   PM-703.1 Accumulations: Rubbish, garbage or other materials shall not be
stored or allowed to accumulate in stairways, passageways, doors, windows, fire
escapes or other means of egress.
   PM-703.2 Hazardous material: Combustible, flammable, explosive or other
hazardous materials, such as paints, volatile oils and cleaning fluids, or
combustible rubbish, such as wastepaper, boxes and rags, shall not be
accumulated or stored unless such storage complies with the applicable
requirements of the Building Code and the Fire Prevention Code.
   SECTION PM-704.0 FIRERESISTANCE RATINGS
   PM-704.1 General: The fireresistance rating of floors, walls, ceilings, and
other elements and components shall be maintained.
   PM-704.2 Maintenance: All required fire doors and smoke barriers shall be
maintained in good working order, including all hardware necessary for the
proper operation thereof. Fire doors shall not be held open by door stops,
wedges and other unapproved hold-open devices.
   SECTION PM-705.0 FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS
   PM-705.1 General: All systems, devices and equipment to detect a fire,
actuate an alarm, or suppress or control a fire or any combination thereof
shall be properly maintained.
   PM-705.2 Fire suppression system: Fire suppression systems shall be in
proper operating condition at all times.
      PM-705.2.1 Valves: Control valves shall be in the fully open position.
      PM-705.2.2 Sprinklers: Sprinklers shall be clean and free from corrosion,
paint and damage. Stock shall be at least 18 inches (457 mm) below sprinkler
deflectors.
      PM-705.2.3 Piping: Piping shall be properly supported and shall not
support any other loads.
   PM-705.3 Standpipe systems: Standpipe systems shall be in proper operating
condition at all times.
      PM-705.3.1 Valves: Water supply control valves shall be in the fully open
position.
      PM-705.3.2 Hose connections: Hose connections shall be identified and
have ready access thereto.
      PM-705.3.3 Hose: Where provided, the hose shall be properly packed, dry
and free from deterioration.
   PM-705.4 Fire extinguishers: All portable fire extinguishers shall be
visible, provided with ready access thereto, and maintained in an efficient and
safe operating condition. Extinguishers shall be 1A 10BC.
   PM-705.5 Smoke detectors: A minimum of one approved single-station or
multiple-station smoke detector shall be installed in each guestroom, suite or
sleeping area of occupants in Use Groups R-1 and I-1, and in dwelling units in
the immediate vicinity of the bedrooms of occupants in Use Groups R-2 and R-3.
In all residential occupancies, smoke detectors shall be required on every
story of the dwelling unit, including basements. In dwelling units with split
levels and without an intervening door between the adjacent levels, a smoke
detector installed on the upper level shall suffice for the adjacent lower
level, provided that the lower level is less than one full story below the
upper level.
   All smoke detectors located in non-monitored areas such as, but not limited
to, basement and furnace areas, shall be A.C. primary source. In multiple
dwellings, all smoke detectors shall be interconnected with those located in
non-monitored areas.
      PM-705.5.1 Installation: All detectors shall be installed in accordance
with the Building Code. When actuated, the smoke detectors shall provide an
alarm suitable to warn the occupants within the individual room or dwelling
unit.
      PM-705.5.2 Power source: The power source for smoke detectors shall be
either an AC primary power source or a monitorized battery primary power
source.
      PM-705.5.3 Tampering: Anyone tampering or interfering with the
effectiveness of a smoke detector shall be in violation of this code.
   PM-705.6 Fire alarm systems: Fire alarm systems shall be in proper operating
condition at all times.
      PM-705.6.1 Control panel: The “power on” indicator shall be lit. Alarm or
trouble indicator: shall not be illuminated.
      PM-705.6.2 Manual fire alarm boxes: All manual fire alarm boxes shall be
operational and unobstructed.
      PM-705.6.3 Automatic fire detectors: All automatic fire detectors shall
be operational and free from any obstructions that prevent proper operation,
including smoke entry.
   PM-705.7 Records: A complete written record of all tests and inspections of
fire protection systems shall be maintained on the premises by the owner or
occupant in charge of said premises.
   SECTION PM-706.0 ELEVATOR RECALL
   PM-706.1 Required: All elevators having a travel distance of 25 feet (7620
mm) or more above or below the primary level of elevator access for emergency
fire-fighting or rescue personnel shall conform to the requirements of Rule
211.3 of ASME A17.1.
   SECTION PM-707.0 MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT CONTROL
   PM-707.1 Smoke and heat detection: Approved smoke or heat detectors shall be
installed in return air ducts or plenums in each recirculating air system with
a capacity of more than 2,000 cfm (0.94 m3/sec) and serving more than one floor
in buildings that exceed six stories in height in accordance with the
Mechanical Code. Actuation of the detector shall stop the fan(s) automatically
and shall be of the manual-reset type. Automatic fan shutdown is not required
where the system is part of an approved smoke control system.
   Section PM-708.0 Private garages: A private garage located less than ten
(10) feet away from any habitable or occupiable structure, but not another
private garage, shall have the inside wall that parallels said structure
fireproofed with the installation of 5/8" drywall.
(Prior Code, § 7-51) (Ord. 889, passed 7-23-1990; Ord. 1014, passed 4-8-1996;
Ord. 1094, passed 9-11-2000)
PLUMBING CODE
§ 170.080 SHORT TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as and may be cited as the “Plumbing Code of
the City of Wyandotte.”
(Ord. 1508, passed 4-26-2021)
§ 170.081 FEE SCHEDULE.
   The fees for plan review, deposits, permits, inspections, bonds and late
fees shall be established by City Council resolution. The fees shall be
available for viewing in the office of the City Clerk, the Engineering and
Building Department, and published on the city’s website. Any required deposit
shall be made in the form of cash, cashier’s check or bond form approved by the
code official and the City Attorney.
(Ord. 1508, passed 4-26-2021)
§ 170.082 ADOPTION OF MICHIGAN PLUMBING CODE.
   (A)   A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the City Clerk’s
office, being marked and designated as the 2015 Michigan Plumbing Code,
including Appendix A through H, is hereby referred to, adopted by the city and
made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this subchapter, pursuant to the
provisions of the State Construction Code, in accordance with § 8b (6) of
Public Act 230 of 1972, being M.C.LA. § 125.1508b(6).
               
   (B)   The purpose of this code is to establish minimum regulations governing
the design, installation and construction of plumbing systems, by providing
reasonable safeguards for sanitation to protect the public health against the
hazards of inadequate, defective or unsanitary plumbing installations,
providing for the issuance of permits, collection of fees, making of
inspections; and therefore, providing penalties for the violation thereof.
   (C)   The adoption of the 2015 Michigan Plumbing Code is done in accordance
with M.C.L.A. § 117.3(k).
(Ord. 1508, passed 4-26-2021)
§ 170.083 ADDITIONAL PLUMBING CODE REQUIREMENTS.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/84f314df5911a4b8d75bf8da219d5dc254290259/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4401.png]Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new
legislation (Ord. 1554, effective 5-19-2025). The text of the amendment will be
incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
   (A)   Permit applications. Applications for a permit shall be made in
accordance with § 106.4 of the 2015 Michigan Plumbing Code and as follows: A
homeowner who meets the following requirements: A bona fide owner of a single-
family residence which is, or will be on completion, his or her place of
residence, for two years and no part of which is used for rental or commercial
purposes, nor is now contemplated for such purpose, may do his or her own work,
providing he or she applies for and secures a permit, pays the fee, does the
work himself or herself in accordance with the provisions hereof, applies for
inspections and receives approval of the work by the code official. An owner of
existing rental property may install garbage disposals and laundry trays, or
perform minor repairs for which no permit is required, providing all other
requirements of this section and code are complied with. Failure to comply with
these requirements will subject the owner’s permit to cancellation.
   (B)   Permit issuance. Permits shall be issued in accordance with § 106.5 of
the 2015 Michigan Plumbing Code and as follows: Plans submitted for approval
for hospitals, nursing homes, and homes for the aged shall be approved by the
department of public health or the licensing or certifying agency having
jurisdiction, or both, prior to submission to the city.
   (C)   Violation penalties.
      (1)   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate a provision of
this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who
shall design, install and construct plumbing systems in violation of an
approved plan or directive of the code official, or of a permit or certificate
issued under the provisions of this code, shall be cited for a municipal civil
infraction in accordance with Chapter 11 of this code of ordinances and the
defendant, if found responsible, shall be subject to a fine of not more than
$500. Additionally, the court may assess costs incurred in compelling the
appearance of the defendant and to enforce the terms of this code.
      (2)   A second offense for the same violation shall constitute a
misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $500 and/or by imprisonment
not exceeding 90 days. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has
been served, in accordance with the terms and provisions hereof, shall be
deemed a separate offense.
   (D)   Stop work orders. Upon notice from the code official that any plumbing
work on any building or structure, or plumbing systems therein, or adjacent
thereto is being prosecuted contrary to the provisions of this code or in an
unsafe and dangerous manner, such work shall be stopped, except for work that
the person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition.
The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the
property involved, or to the owner’s agent, or to the person doing the work, or
shall be posted on entrances to the building or structure where the work is
being performed.
   (E)   Board of Appeals. The Plumbing Board of Appeals shall consist of five
members and include the City Engineer, registered plumbing inspector, licensed
plumbing contractor, licensed professional engineer or architect. No more than
two members shall be from the same profession or occupation.
   (F)   Size of water service pipe. Water service pipe shall be sized to
supply water to the building in the quantities and at the pressures required in
this code. The minimum diameter of water service pipe shall be one inch. Three
methods for sizing the water service pipe are described in Appendix C of the
2015 Michigan Plumbing Code.
   (G)   Sewer pipe and tap.
      (1)   Requirements. A contractor will be permitted to replace or repair
only existing sewer pipe from five-foot outside of foundation walls to the main
sewer including the replacement of the tap on the main sewer. A homeowner who
meets the requirements of division (A) above will be permitted to work on his/
her own sewer pipe including the tap on the main sewer.
      (2)   Permit and inspection. Work shall not commence until a permit for
such work has been issued. Inspection is required before any work is covered.
      (3)   Specifications. A homeowner and contractor will be required to
perform all work in accordance with the specifications and applicable
requirements as outlined by the City Engineer. Said specifications and
requirements are available at the office of the City Engineer.
      (4)   Bond requirements. Before any contractor (excluding homeowner and
master plumbers) performs any work in the city on sewers he or she must provide
the city with a bond in the amount of $5,000 which shall be known as a sewer
bond and approved by the Department of Legal Affairs.
      (5)   Street/alley pavement removal. Before any homeowner, contractor,
master plumber, or any individual opens any paved street, alley or sidewalk
within the city, they are required to file a cash bond set by the City Engineer
for the replacement of said pavement, said bond to cover replacement of
pavement, in the event the permit holder fails to do so. Said pavement shall be
replaced in accordance with the specifications as set forth by the City
Engineer.
      (6)   Alley excavations. When work is performed in an unpaved public
alley the excavation shall be backfilled with crushed aggregate and compacted
in 12-inch lifts. Aggregate backfill shall be brought level with the
surrounding alley grade.
   (H)   Garbage grinder. All new buildings and all buildings remodeled or
altered which are designed, equipped and used for storing or sheltering food or
foodstuffs for human consumption including fruits, vegetables and meats which
are to be sold either at retail stores, clubs, hotels, restaurants, schools or
other food establishments, or at wholesale, or which are prepared at food
manufacturing or processing plants, whether such places of business are
licensed under the provisions of any city ordinance, or not, and all buildings,
including residences, where foods for human consumption are prepared, sold,
handled, stored or served in any manner whatsoever, shall be equipped with an
appropriate type of garbage grinder, properly connected to the kitchen sink or
sewer drain; which grinder and connection shall be of sufficient size to grind
all garbage and food processing wastes produced in such building, and shall be
suitably located so as to discharge such ground material by flushing it with
water through the drain pipes into the sewer.
(Ord. 1510, passed 4-26-2021)
COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL PROPERTIES
§ 170.095 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CERTIFICATE OF CONFORMITY. A certificate issued by the Department of
Engineering and Building which certifies compliance with the provisions of the
codes and ordinances of the city for commercial or industrial premises to a
person, as herein defined.
   CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY. A certificate issued by the Department of
Engineering and Building in accordance with the provisions of Ch. 190 of this
code of ordinances for an approved use of occupancy.
   COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY. Any premises which is used for the
purpose of conducting any of the following activities: commercial; industrial;
manufacturing; business office; retail; professional services; production;
wholesale; processing; cleaning; storage; testing; repair; assembling;
fabrication; or any other similar type activity.
   PERSON. Includes a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization
and any other group acting as a unit as well as individuals. It shall also
include an executor, administrator, trustee, receiver or other representative
appointed according to law. Whenever the word PERSON is used in any section of
this subchapter prescribing a penalty or fine, as to partnerships or
associations, the word shall include the partners or members thereof, and as to
corporations, shall include the officer, agents or members thereof who are
responsible for any violation of such section.
   PREMISES. A lot, plot or parcel of land including the buildings or
structures thereon.
   STRUCTURE. That which is built or constructed, including without limitation
because of enumeration, buildings for any occupancy or use whatsoever, fences,
signs, billboards, fire escapes, chute escapes, railings, water tank, towers,
open grade steps, sidewalks or stairways, tents or anything erected and framed
of component parts which is fastened, anchored or rests on a permanent
foundation or on the ground.
   TRANSFER. The sale or conveyance title to another for consideration, or the
lease of premises to another. A TRANSFER subject to the terms of a purchase
agreement or lease entered into prior to the effective date of this subchapter
is not included in this definition. A renewal or extension of a lease (which
lease is in effect prior to the adoption of this chapter) between the same
parties is not included in this definition.
(Prior Code, § 7-61) (Ord. 893, passed 7-30-1990)
§ 170.096 CERTIFICATE OF CONFORMITY REQUIRED; ISSUANCE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to transfer a commercial or
industrial premises or liquor license or for any person to act as a broker for
the transfer of any commercial or industrial premises or liquor license within
the city which does not have a current certificate of conformity.
(Prior Code, § 7-62)
   (B)   (1)   The Department of Engineering and Building shall issue a
certificate of conformity only after the commercial or industrial premises has
been inspected and found in compliance with all applicable codes and ordinances
of the city:
         (a)   An inspection report shall be completed by the Building,
Electrical, Plumbing, Mechanical, Police and Fire Departments. The report shall
note all violations found at the commercial or industrial premises;
         (b)   Before a certificate of conformity is issued all violations must
be corrected and approved. In lieu of correcting all violations before
occupancy, for premises not involved with a liquor license transfer for an
existing non-conforming use, as defined in Ch. 190 of this code of ordinances,
and except as outlined in division (B)(1)(c) below, the amount of money
required to correct said violations may be placed in escrow with the Department
of Engineering and Building. For the transfer of any premises involving a
liquor license transfer for an existing non-conforming use, as defined in Ch.
190 of this code of ordinances, and when the weather conditions at the time of
application for the transfer are such that it would be impractical (as
determined by the City Engineer) to bring the property into compliance with all
applicable codes and ordinances of the city, approval of the transfer may be
allowed; provided, the amount of money required to correct such violations is
placed in escrow with the city and subject to the additional requirement that
said code or ordinance violations that are determined impractical to complete
because of the weather must be completed within 90 days of the approval of the
transfer by the City Council. If the applicant prior to the expiration of the
90 days believes that the weather still makes it impractical to complete the
repairs, the applicant may request and the City Engineer may grant one
additional 90-day extension if he determines such an extension is necessary.
The escrow funds will be released only after all violations are corrected and
issuance of certificate of conformity. Said violations shall be corrected
within six months of occupancy for those transfers not involving a liquor
license transfer for an existing non-conforming use, as defined in Ch. 190 of
this code of ordinances. If said violations are not corrected within the time
as required by this section, occupancy may be prohibited;
         (c)   If the inspection reports indicate a dangerous or hazardous
condition and the premises are deemed to constitute an imminent danger to the
health or safety of any person, the Department of Engineering and Building may
order the dangerous or hazardous condition be corrected immediately and may
limit or prohibit occupancy of the premises where necessary. If the Department
of Engineering and Building finds an unusual or questionable condition, they
may require the owner/transferee of the premises to supply the Department with
a report from a qualified inspection agency. All reports shall be in writing
and be certified by a responsible officer of such approved agency or by the
responsible individual. All cost related to the reports to be assumed by the
owner/transferee;
         (d)   If a premises is inspected and the transfer does not occur, the
inspection report is valid for a six-month period; and
         (e)   Where there is a multiple occupancy in a commercial or
industrial premises, the change of any occupancy will require an inspection.
However, if the building has been completely inspected and all violations
corrected and a certificate of conformity issued, only the area to be occupied
by the new transferee and the exterior of the building need be inspected.
      (2)   The person to whom a commercial or industrial premises is to be
transferred (transferee) may assume the responsibility of correcting the
violations provided the amount of money required to correct said violations is
placed in escrow with the Department of Engineering and Building and said
violations are completed within six months of the transferee taking occupancy
pursuant to division (B)(1)(c) above.
      (3)   If the violations are not corrected within the six-month period,
the city has the right and authorization to have said violations corrected with
the escrow funds and any additional funds required to correct said violations
shall be assessed as a lien against the real property. An escrow agreement
signed by both the person occupying the premises and the person owning the
premises shall be executed at the time of placing money in escrow. All
signatures must be notarized.
      (4)   The City Engineer may revoke a certificate of conformity for a
violation of any code, ordinance, rule or regulation of the city.
(Prior Code, § 7-63)
(Ord. 893, passed 7-30-1990; Ord. 1031, passed 3-24-1997; Ord. 1095, passed 9-
18-2000; Ord. 1134, passed 10-22-2001)
§ 170.097 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY BY CITY.
   (A)   A certificate of conformity is not a warranty or guarantee that there
are no defects in the commercial or industrial property and the city shall not
be held responsible for defects or violations not noted in the inspection
report.
   (B)   The inspection of the land use, exterior posture and interior
accessories of the structure is limited to visual inspection only. The city
does not guarantee or approve, by inference, any latent structural or
mechanical defects thereto or such other items that are not apparent by such
visual inspection.
   (C)   Further, potential health impacts from asbestos, carbon dioxide, lead,
carbon monoxide, formaldehyde, nitrogen dioxide, radon, particulates, water
vapor or other chemicals, vapors, fumes or insects are not a part of the city’s
inspection.
   (D)   The city shall not assume any liability to any person by reason of the
inspection required by this subchapter or the issuance of a certificate of
conformity or occupancy.
(Prior Code, § 7-64) (Ord. 893, passed 7-30-1990)
§ 170.098 APPLICATION AND FEE.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/84f314df5911a4b8d75bf8da219d5dc254290259/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4401.png]Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new
legislation (Ord. 1548, effective 12-16-2024). The text of the amendment will
be incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
   Any person that is going to transfer a commercial or industrial premises
must file an application prior to the transfer with the Department of
Engineering and Building for the purpose of setting up an inspection of the
commercial and industrial premises. The fee for the application and inspection
shall be $0.10 per square foot for the first floor and $0.05 per square foot
for the second or each additional floor with the same occupancy. The minimum
fee shall be $200.
(Prior Code, § 7-65) (Ord. 893, passed 7-30-1990; Ord. 1025, passed 9-23-1996;
Ord. 1255, passed 12-12-2005)
ABANDONED RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES
§ 170.110 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of establishing a registration process for vacant or abandoned
properties is to provide requirements for the owners to maintain the property
in accordance with all laws and ordinances in order to protect the public
health, safety and general welfare and to prevent neighborhood blight, and
ensure that the properties are secure and to protect property values.
(Prior Code, § 7-74) (Ord. 1344, passed 4-4-2011)
§ 170.111 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURE. Any building which has been used or was
intended for use as a residential dwelling, in whole or in part, including
accessory building, which has become vacant or abandoned for a period of at
least 28 consecutive days and which also meets at least one of the following
conditions:
      (1)   Is open to casual entry or trespass;
      (2)   Is fire damaged to an extent which prohibits safe human occupancy;
      (3)   Is the site of loitering or vagrancy;
      (4)   Demonstrates a lack of property maintenance and upkeep as evidenced
by one or more violations of the Property Maintenance Code or Building Code;
      (5)   Is under notice for being in violation of city ordinances;
      (6)   Has been secured or boarded up for at least 28 days;
      (7)   Has taxes in arrears to the city for a period of time exceeding 365
days;
      (8)   Has utilities disconnected or not in use for six months;
      (9)   Is under a condemnation notice or legal order to vacate;
      (10)   Is structurally unsound; or
      (11)   Is a potential hazard or danger to a person.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING. A subordinate structure on the same premises as the main
residential structure, the use of which would be naturally and normally
incidental to that of the main structure, whether the main structure is an
abandoned residential structure or not, such as, but not limited to, a garage,
barn or storage shed.
   EVIDENCE OF VACANCY OR ABANDONMENT. Any condition that would lead a
reasonable person that the property is vacant including, but not limited to,
any of the following: overgrown grass or vegetation, accumulation of
newspapers, circulars, flyers or mail, past due utility notices or disconnected
utilities, accumulation of trash, junk or debris, an absence of window
coverings such as curtains, blinds or shutters, the absence of furnishings or
personal items consistent with residential habitation, or statements by
neighbors, passers-by or government employees that the property is vacant.
   OWNER. Any person or entity with a legal or equitable ownership interest in
the structure and/or property. This definition includes, but is not limited to,
any bank, credit union, financial institution, land contract vendor, land
contract vendee or any party who has received a conveyance through a Sheriff’s
deed.
   SECURED. A building which has all points of entry into the structure either:
      (1)   Closed by use of windows and doors which are in proper working
order, intact, without holes, broken elements and are locked; or
      (2)   Are secured by exterior grade plywood in compliance with the city’s
Property Maintenance Code concerning type of material and not to exceed the
time period allowed for the boarding up of the property.
(Prior Code, § 7-75) (Ord. 1344, passed 4-4-2011)
§ 170.112 REGISTRATION; INFORMATION.
   (A)   (1)   Owners of abandoned residential structures shall register such
properties with the City Engineer’s office and pay a registration fee in the
amount set by the City Council resolution when registering the property. The
duty to register an abandoned residential structure shall not require prior
notice to the owner by the city. Registration of an abandoned residential
structure does not preclude the city from taking appropriate actions to secure
the property or to issue orders to repair or abate dangerous, hazardous or
unlawful conditions or from acting to eliminate an imminent hazard to public
health and safety.
      (2)   If the city notified the owner to register an abandoned residential
structure by mail and the owner fails to file the registration information and
fee within ten days of said notice, the owner is responsible for a municipal
civil infraction.
(Prior Code, § 7-76)
   (B)   (1)   For each abandoned residential structure, each owner shall
register with the City Engineer and provide the following information on an
abandoned residential structure registration form available from the city:
         (a)   The address of the abandoned residential structure;
         (b)   The legal names of all owners of the property;
         (c)   The complete mailing address of all owners;
         (d)   Telephone numbers of each owner, including cell phone and mobile
phone numbers;
         (e)   The name, address and telephone number of any local agent or
representative authorized by the owner to handle the affairs of the property;
         (f)   The estimated length of time the structure is expected to remain
vacant;
         (g)   The reason the structure is currently vacant; and
         (h)   Any plans for restoration, reuse or removal of the structure
with an accompanying timeline and work schedule.
      (2)   An owner shall notify the City Engineer and file an amended form
within seven days of any change in the registration information required by
this section.
(Prior Code, § 7-77)
(Ord. 1344, passed 4-4-2011)
§ 170.113 REGISTRATION AND ADMINISTRATIVE FEE.
   (A)   An owner of an abandoned residential structure, whether registered or
not, shall pay an annual abandoned residential structure registration fee in
the amount of which shall be established by City Council resolution, for the
time during which such structure remains an abandoned residential structure.
   (B)   Fees under this section shall be established to support the services
rendered by the city in the course of its duties related to abandoned
residential structures. Failure to register an abandoned residential structure
(or pay the annual administrative fee) shall be cause for penalties to be
assessed and are municipal civil infractions.
   (C)   The annual registration fee shall be paid so that it is received by
the city within ten days after the structure has become abandoned.
   (D)   A late fee, in an amount to be established by the City Council, shall
also be payable by an owner of an abandoned residential structure when the
registration fee is not timely paid.
(Prior Code, § 7-78) (Ord. 1344, passed 4-4-2011)
§ 170.114 RECOVERY OF FEES.
   If all or part of the fees required by this subchapter are not paid or are
overdue, the city may recover such sums by:
   (A)   Directing the City Assessor to add the amount due to the next tax roll
of the city as a single lot assessment under these codified ordinances and
collect said sum in the same manner as provided by law for collection of taxes
and special assessments;
   (B)   Filing suit against the owner for entry of civil money judgment; or
   (C)   Any other means available by law, including, but not limited to, being
included in any fines and costs assessed by the court for the municipal civil
infraction.
(Prior Code, § 7-79) (Ord. 1344, passed 4-4-2011)
§ 170.115 SECURING STRUCTURES.
   A city order to secure an abandoned residential property shall be complied
with by the owner within 72 hours. If the securing has not been completed or
does not comply with the requirements for securing the structure under this
subchapter, the city shall secure the structure and the city shall bill the
owner of record for all costs incurred, including service fee and
administrative costs. The amount so billed shall constitute a personal debt of
the owner and may be recovered in the same manner as permitted for the recovery
of fees under this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 7-80) (Ord. 1344, passed 4-4-2011) Penalty, see §
170.999
§ 170.116 REUSE AND OCCUPANCY.
   No abandoned residential structure shall be reoccupied until inspected and
found to be in full compliance with all applicable city codes and a certificate
of occupancy is issued by the city.
(Prior Code, § 7-81) (Ord. 1344, passed 4-4-2011) Penalty, see §
170.999
§ 170.117 RESPONSIBILITY FOR VIOLATIONS.
   All nuisance, housing, building and related code violations will be cited
and noticed to the owner of record and shall become the owner’s responsibility
to bring the structure in compliance.
(Prior Code, § 7-82) (Ord. 1344, passed 4-4-2011)
SEWER CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR
§ 170.130 OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY.
   Owners of property in the city are responsible for and required to maintain
their sewer systems. Owners are responsible for their sewer system up to and
including the tap on the main.
(Prior Code, § 29-41) (Ord. 862, passed 5-1-1989) Penalty, see §
170.999
§ 170.131 SEWERS TO BE KEPT IN GOOD REPAIR; RECOVERY OF DAMAGES SUSTAINED BY
CITY.
   (A)   Sewers must be maintained in reasonable repair so that they are
reasonably safe and do not cause a hazard to health or safety of the public. No
owner shall permit any sewer which services his or her property to fall into a
state of disrepair or be unsafe or hazardous to health or property.
   (B)   If any owner of land shall fail or neglect to keep any sewer along the
front, rear or side of land owned by him or her so that it is reasonably safe,
he or she shall be liable to the city for any damages recovered against the
city by any person by reason of such sewer being in a condition of disrepair or
otherwise unsafe. This liability of the property owner shall exist even if the
property owner does not receive any prior notice from the city to repair the
sewer abutting his or her property as set forth in §
170.132 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 29-42) (Ord. 862, passed 5-1-1989) Penalty, see §
170.999
§ 170.132 REPAIR, CONSTRUCTION AT EXPENSE OF ABUTTING PROPERTY OWNER.
   (A)   If the City Engineer or his or her designated representatives
determine that a sewer has caused an unsafe condition by a collapse or sinking
condition, he or she shall give written notice to the owner that the owner must
repair the same within 15 days of receipt of the notice to the owner of the
abutting premises by mail, addressed to the last known address of said owner,
or if the owner or his or her address be unknown, by delivering said notice and
leaving same with a person of suitable age and discretion at the premises, or
if such person be not found, by posting such notice in some conspicuous place
on the premises. The notice shall specify the construction of the sewer
required and specifications therefor or the condition to be repaired and the
nature of the repairs to be made. Receipt of notice is considered from the day
after mailing.
   (B)   The City Engineer may dispense with division (A) above if, in his or
her opinion, the condition of the sewer is unsafe and dangerous and requires
immediate repair to assume public safety.
   (C)   If such owner fails to repair said sewer within the time prescribed by
this subchapter, the City Engineer shall have the power to cause the same to be
repaired. The Engineer shall make a detailed report to the Council of the cost
and expense of performing this work, which cost and expense shall be charged to
such owner or occupant in the manner provided by the Charter relative to
special assessments.
(Prior Code, § 29-43) (Ord. 862, passed 5-1-1989)
§ 170.133 CONSTRUCTION OR REPAIR GENERALLY.
   (A)   No person shall construct or repair any sewer without a permit from
the Department of Engineering and Building and in accordance with the
specifications established by the City Engineer. A permit shall be issued upon
the City Engineer being satisfied that construction will be done in accordance
with the city’s specifications. Permits shall be prominently displayed on the
construction site. The City Engineer shall charge and collect for such permit a
fee as outlined in the fee schedule of the Plumbing Code of the city.
(Prior Code, § 29-44)
   (B)   The Department of Engineering and Building may make such additional
rules and regulations subject to the approval of the Council, pertaining to the
making of openings or excavations in streets or alleys, or public rights-of-
way, as are necessary to secure the health and safety of the public and for the
protection of property, and such rules and regulations shall constitute the
standards upon which the permits shall be issued.
(Prior Code, § 29-48)
(Ord. 862, passed 5-1-1989) Penalty, see §
170.999
§ 170.134 BOND REQUIREMENTS FOR PERMITS.
   (A)   No permit shall be granted for doing any work in this subchapter until
a bond or policy of insurance has been filed with the Department of Engineering
and Building, as herein provided.
   (B)   The bond or policy of insurance shall be required by the Council at
the time any permit is granted by it upon appeal.
   (C)   All bonds or policies of insurance shall be conditioned to pay all
damages to the streets, alleys or public rights-of-way of the city and to hold
the city harmless of every other damage of every other nature, whether to
persons or property for which such city may be held liable by reason of, or
which is occasioned by, the doing of a thing or the exercise of the privilege
for which the permit upon which the bond or policy of insurance was based, was
granted.
(Prior Code, § 29-45) (Ord. 862, passed 5-1-1989)
§ 170.135 APPEALS FROM DENIALS OF PERMITS.
   (A)   If the Department of Engineering and Building refuses to issue any
permit required by this subchapter, the applicant may appeal to the Council
which shall grant a hearing thereon and the decision of the Council shall be
final.
   (B)   In granting a permit after such hearing, the Council may impose such
conditions therefor as it may deem desirable to protect the safety of persons
and property during the construction of any sewer and the replacement of any
utility wires, poles and other street appurtenances as may be moved or taken
down therefor.
(Prior Code, § 29-46) (Ord. 862, passed 5-1-1989)
§ 170.136 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMITS.
   All work done pursuant to any permit issued pursuant to this subchapter
shall be inspected by the City Engineer who may suspend or revoke any permit so
granted where the workmanship or materials used does not conform to the plans
and specifications approved or required upon issuance of the permit, or when
the terms of any permit of this subchapter are violated.
(Prior Code, § 29-47) (Ord. 862, passed 5-1-1989)
§ 170.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person who shall fail to obtain a certificate of conformity as
required by §§
170.095 through
170.098 of this chapter, or who shall fail to correct violations within the
time required by §§
170.095 through
170.098 of this chapter, or who shall have had his or her certificate of
conformity revoked and failed to immediately correct all the violations which
caused the revocation, or who shall violate any of the terms of §§
170.095 through
170.098 of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine
of not more than $500 or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both
said fine and imprisonment. The penalties imposed by §§
170.095 through
170.098 of this chapter shall not limit any other statutory or common law right
or action that any person may have.
(Prior Code, § 7-66)
   (C)   (1)   Any owner that fails to register, fails to report changes to the
registration information, fails to pay the registration fee when due, or fails
to comply with any of the provisions of §§
170.110 through
170.117 of this chapter, shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction
and a mandatory fine of $500, plus court costs and all other remedies permitted
under the law for violation of municipal civil infraction.
      (2)   Any person or entity commits a second offense or subsequent
violation of any provision of §§
170.110 through
170.117 of this chapter, such a violation in the discretion of the city
official may be charged as a misdemeanor punishable by a mandatory fine of $500
and/or imprisonment not exceeding 90 days.
      (3)   In addition to any other penalty provided for in this division (C),
§§
170.110 through
170.117 of this chapter may be enforced by suit for injunction, action for
damages or any equitable relief appropriate to the enforcement of §§
170.110 through
170.117 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 7-83)
(Ord. 893, passed 7-30-1990; Ord. 1344, passed 4-4-2011)
CHAPTER 171: HOUSING CODE
Section
General Provisions
   
171.001   Owners’ responsibilities
   
171.002   Lodging house operators’ responsibilities
   
171.003   Occupants’ responsibilities
   
171.004   Inspection of residential dwellings prior to sale or transfer
Administration and Enforcement
   
171.015   Enforcement officials; powers and duties
   
171.016   Inspections
   
171.017   Records
   
171.018   Board of Appeals
General Residential Requirements
   
171.030   Scope
   
171.031   Definitions
   
171.032   Compliance
   
171.033   Occupancy classification of buildings
   
171.034   Access and vertical travel between stories
   
171.035   Equipment requirements generally
   
171.036   Exits
   
171.037   Air conditioning and mechanical ventilation in one- and two-family
dwellings
   
171.038   Elevators, dumbwaiters and escalators in multiple dwellings
   
171.039   Premises to be reasonably safe; compliance with other laws
   
171.040   Interpretation
   
171.041   Maximum occupancy
Habitable Space
   
171.055   Prohibited uses
   
171.056   Size
   
171.057   Basements
   
171.058   Light and ventilation
   
171.059   Miscellaneous requirements
Public Spaces
   
171.070   Height
   
171.071   Light and ventilation
Non-Habitable Spaces
   
171.085   Height
   
171.086   Toilet rooms and bathrooms
   
171.087   Light and ventilation
Structural Requirements
   
171.100   Generally
   
171.101   Exterior protection
   
171.102   Interior protection
General Fire Safety Requirements
   
171.115   Prohibited accumulations and storage
   
171.116   Prevention of fire spread
   
171.117   Interior finishes, trim and decorative materials
   
171.118   Fireplaces
Fire Protection in Multiple Dwellings
   
171.130   Fire alarm systems
   
171.131   Sprinkler equipment
   
171.132   Standpipe systems
   
171.133   Portable extinguishers
Plumbing
   
171.145   Generally
   
171.146   Water supply; cross-connection
   
171.147   Sewage drainage system
   
171.148   Storm drainage
   
171.149   Plumbing facilities
   
171.150   Plumbing fixtures
   
171.151   Swimming pools
   
171.152   Water supply tanks
Fuel Gas
   
171.165   Generally
   
171.166   Shutoff valves
   
171.167   Service equipment for gas supplied from utility mains
   
171.168   Gas refrigerators and ranges
   
171.169   High pressure gas
   
171.170   LP gas
Heating
   
171.185   Generally
   
171.186   Smoke control
   
171.187   Warm air heating
   
171.188   Prohibited locations for heat-producing equipment
   
171.189   Fuel supply connection
   
171.190   Installation and clearance
   
171.191   Air supply
   
171.192   Removal of products of combustion
   
171.193   Safety devices
   
171.194   Heating garages
Chimneys, Flues and Gas Vents
   
171.205   Generally
   
171.206   Fire safety
   
171.207   Spark arresters
Incinerators
   
171.220   Generally
   
171.221   Service openings
Electrical Requirements
   
171.235   Generally
   
171.236   Artificial lighting
   
171.237   Exit and directional signs
Cooking and Refrigeration
   
171.250   Generally
   
171.251   Communal cooking and dining facilities
Air Conditioning and Mechanical Ventilation in Multiple Dwellings
   
171.265   Refrigerants
   
171.266   Ventilating systems
   
171.267   Air intake and exhaust openings
   
171.268   Ventilation requirements
   
171.269   Safety controls
Fuel Oil
   
171.280   Generally
   
171.281   Tanks
   
171.282   Piping
Property Maintenance Requirements
   
171.295   Generally
   
171.296   Open areas
   
171.297   Buildings and structures
   
171.298   Infestation and screening
   
171.299   Garbage and refuse
   
171.300   Domestic animals and pets
 
   
171.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 171.001 OWNERS’ RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   Owners of premises shall be responsible for compliance with this
chapter, and shall remain responsible therefor regardless of the fact that this
chapter may also place certain responsibilities on operators and occupants and
regardless of any agreements between owners and operators or occupants as to
which party shall assume such responsibility.
   (B)   Owners of premises shall be responsible for proper maintenance,
condition and operation of service facilities, and for furnishing adequate heat
and hot water supply in multiple dwellings.
(Prior Code, § 19-1) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963)
§ 171.002 LODGING HOUSE OPERATORS’ RESPONSIBILITIES.
   Lodging house operators shall be responsible for compliance with the
provisions of this chapter in regard to:
   (A)   Limiting occupancy to the maximum permitted by this chapter;
   (B)   Maintenance of safe and sanitary conditions in all parts of lodging
house premises;
   (C)   Maintenance and operation of all required service facilities;
   (D)   Maintenance of all plumbing, cooking and refrigeration fixtures and
appliances within his or her control as well as other building equipment and
facilities, in an operative, clean and sanitary condition;
   (E)   Sanitary maintenance of walls, floors and ceilings;
   (F)   Keeping exits clear and unencumbered;
   (G)   Disposal of building garbage and refuse in a clean and sanitary
manner;
   (H)   Extermination of insects, rodents or other pests on the premises; and
   (I)   Hanging and removing required screens.
(Prior Code, § 19-2) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963)
§ 171.003 OCCUPANTS’ RESPONSIBILITIES.
   Occupants of dwelling units shall be responsible for compliance with this
chapter in regard to:
   (A)   Limiting occupancy of that part of the premises which he or she
occupies or controls to the maximum permitted by this chapter;
   (B)   Maintenance of that part of the premises which he or she occupies or
controls in a clean, sanitary and safe condition;
   (C)   Maintenance of all plumbing, cooking and refrigeration fixtures and
appliances, as well as other building equipment and storage facilities in that
part of the premises which he or she occupies or controls, in a clean and
sanitary condition, and providing reasonable care in the operation and use
thereof;
   (D)   Keeping exits from his or her dwelling unit clear and unencumbered;
   (E)   Disposal of garbage and refuse into provided facilities in a clean and
sanitary manner;
   (F)   Extermination of insects, rodents or other pests within his or her
dwelling unit if his or her unit is the only one infested in the premises;
   (G)   Hanging and removing required screens; and
   (H)   Keeping his or her domestic animals and pets in an appropriate manner
and under control.
(Prior Code, § 19-3) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963)
§ 171.004 INSPECTION OF RESIDENTIAL DWELLINGS PRIOR TO SALE OR TRANSFER.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ACCESSORY USE. Garage, shed, pools, gazebo, pigeon coop, doghouses,
playhouses or similar uses.
      CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL. A certificate issued by the Department of
Engineering and Building which certifies compliance with the provisions of the
codes and ordinances of the city for residential dwellings.
      CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY. A certificate issued by the Department of
Engineering and Building in accordance with the provisions of Ch. 190 of this
code of ordinances for an approved use or occupancy.
      DWELLING. A residential structure and accessory uses located in the city.
A rental dwelling as defined in Ch. 123 of this code of ordinances which has a
current certificate of compliance issued to it is not included in this
definition.
      PERSON. Any individual, partnership, corporation or other legal entity.
      TRANSFER. The sale or conveyance of title to another for consideration,
or the execution of a land contract, or the exercise of an option to purchase a
dwelling. A conveyance by lease, gift, devise or lien foreclosure are not
included in this definition.
   (B)   Certificate of approval required. It shall be unlawful for any person
to transfer a dwelling or for any person to act as a broker for the transfer of
a dwelling which does not have a current certificate of approval issued for
said dwelling, except as otherwise allowed by this section.
   (C)   Issuance of a certificate of approval.
      (1)   The Department of Engineering and Building shall issue a
certificate of approval only after it has inspected the dwelling and finds that
the dwelling meets the requirements of all of the applicable codes and
ordinances of the city. An inspection report shall be completed by the
inspector after completing the inspection of the property. The report shall
note all violations found in the dwelling. Before a certificate of approval is
issued, all violations must be corrected and approved. The inspection report
shall be valid for one year from the date of inspection. In lieu of correcting
all violations before occupancy, except as outlined in division (E) below, the
amount of money estimated to correct said violations may be placed in escrow
with the Department of Engineering and Building, as outlined in division (G)
below. Upon re-inspection and approval of the correction of all violations, a
certificate of approval will be issued and remain valid for a five-year period
at which time a new inspection and certificate of approval will be required for
the subsequent sale or transfer of the property; provided that, conditions of
division (C)(3) below are not applicable. The five-year period shall commence
no later than the expiration date of the inspection report or six months from
the date of the affidavit assuming correction of the violations, whichever is
later.
      (2)   A residential dwelling which has never been occupied will be issued
a certificate of approval upon final inspection of the new construction work.
The certificate of approval shall be valid for five years of issuance.
      (3)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a new
inspection and a new certificate of approval shall be required for any transfer
or sale if the property becomes vacant, or is the subject of foreclosure
proceedings, or is the subject of a police report regarding vandalism, breaking
and entering or open structure, or is determined to be a dangerous building by
the Engineer in accordance with the city’s Property Maintenance Code.
   (D)   Disclaimer of liability by city. A certificate of approval is not a
warranty or guarantee that there are no defects in the dwelling and the city
shall not be held responsible for defects not noted in the inspection report.
      (1)   This inspection of the land use, exterior posture and interior
accessories of the structure is limited to visual inspection only. The city
does not guarantee or approve by inference any latent, structural or mechanical
defects thereto, or such other items that are not apparent by such visual
inspection.
      (2)   The city shall not assume any liability to any person by reason of
the inspections required by this section or the code adopted herein or the
issuance of a certificate of approval or a certificate of occupancy.
   (E)   Dangerous conditions. Should the Department of Engineering and
Building, upon inspection, determine that there are conditions which constitute
an imminent danger to health and safety, it may order the conditions to be
remedied and may limit or prohibit occupancy where appropriate.
   (F)   Registration and fees. Any person that is going to transfer a dwelling
must register with the Department of Engineering and Building for the purpose
of setting up an inspection of the dwelling. The fee for the registration and
inspection shall be in the amount of $190 for a one-family dwelling and $285
for a two-family dwelling.
   (G)   Assumption of violations.
      (1)   The buyer of a residential dwelling may assume the responsibility
for correcting the violations noted on the inspection checklist through the
following procedure:
         (a)   There shall be placed in escrow with the Department of
Engineering and Building an amount of money approximately equal to that
required to complete the repairs; or
         (b)   The buyer shall execute a notarized affidavit, provided by the
Department of Engineering and Building, stating their intent to assume the
responsibility of correcting these violations completely within six months of
the date of the affidavit, or on or before the inspection report expiration
date, whichever is later.
      (2)   The money held in escrow may not be claimed by the buyer/owner
until all violations are corrected and the final inspection of the checklist is
approved as complete. However, the Department of Engineering and Building may
elect to refund portions of the escrow money to the buyer upon inspections
which indicate that a significant portion of the violations noted on the
inspection checklist have been corrected; provided, the repairs and inspections
are scheduled within the specified period. If all the violations are not
corrected and approved within the specified period, occupancy may be prohibited
and in addition, any and all costs that the city may incur in overseeing the
file for that particular property while enforcing the city ordinance concerning
inspection of residential dwellings shall be deducted from the escrow amount,
including, but not limited to, any and all costs involved in bringing legal
proceedings to enforce the ordinance. An extension beyond the specified period
may be granted by the City Engineer in those instances when the weather
conditions are such that it would be impractical (as determined by the City
Engineer) to bring the property into compliance. A written request for an
extension must be submitted to the city prior to the expiration of the
specified period setting forth what violations have been corrected to date and
what items cannot be corrected due to the weather. If the City Engineer
determines that the party making the request has been diligent in correcting
the violations and that the weather makes it impractical to complete all
repairs, an extension may be granted.
      (3)   (a)   Commencing 1-1-2003 (beginning with the oldest files by date
and then proceeding forward), a written notice shall be sent to the last known
address to the persons who provided the escrow (and to the buyer of the home if
the buyer did not deposit the escrow) if the corrections have not been made
within a six-year period of the date of affidavit. The notice shall require the
buyer to submit to the Department of Engineering and Building a violation
correction schedule within one month of notice. The schedule shall not exceed
six months in length and shall include the time necessary to make sure all
required permits are obtained to complete the repairs and notify the city to
conduct a final inspection.
         (b)   The notice shall contain a provision that if the buyer does not:
            1.   Submit a schedule within month to the city setting forth the
repair schedule; or
            2.   Complete all required repairs and arrange a final inspection
by the city within six months of the date of the notice, all funds deposited in
escrow shall be forfeited to the city.
         (c)   If the required schedule is not submitted or if the work is not
completed within the submitted scheduled time frame, the owner of the property
shall be issued a ticket. Nothing in this section prohibits the city from
commencing legal proceedings against a violator of this section sooner than the
above stated six-year period.
(Prior Code, § 19-5) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963; Ord. 840, passed 3-21-1988;
Ord. 921, passed 10-21-1991; Ord. 944, passed 7-20-1992; Ord. 1025, passed 9-
23-1996; Ord. 1033, passed 3-24-1997; Ord. 1162, passed 1-6-2003; Ord. 1257,
passed 5-24-2004; Ord. 1191, passed 5-24-2004; Ord. 1257, passed 12-12-2005;
Ord. 1274, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 1318, passed 11-9-2009; Ord. 1443, passed 12-
19-2016) Penalty, see §
171.999
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 171.015 ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   (1)   As used in this chapter, the term ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL shall
mean the Health Officer or the City Engineer or such other appropriate public
official designated by the Mayor. The term shall also include any aide or
employee of the Health Officer, City Engineer or other appropriate public
official designated by the Mayor when said aide or employee is functioning
under direct orders of said Health Officer, City Engineer or other appropriate
public officer designated by the Mayor.
      (2)   The enforcement official shall administer and shall enforce
compliance with this chapter.
      (3)   The enforcement official shall have, as his or her representatives,
such inspectors and assistants as may be necessary to carry out effectively the
powers and duties bestowed upon him or her; such representatives, inspectors
and assistants shall be selected from within the Department of the Enforcement
Official as much as possible.
      (4)   All inspectors and assistants of the enforcement official shall be
qualified and shall be appointed as prescribed by local law and shall be
furnished with appropriate official badges or identification cards.
      (5)   The enforcement official and his or her inspectors and assistants
shall be free from personal liability for acts done in good faith in the
performance of their official duties.
(Prior Code, § 19-21)
   (B)   (1)   The enforcement official shall be charged with the duty of
administering the provisions of this chapter and securing compliance. He or she
shall be empowered to adopt rules and regulations necessary for securing such;
provided that, such rules and regulations shall not be in conflict with the
ordinance or law.
      (2)   The enforcement official and any personnel duly authorized by him
or her or designated by the Mayor are hereby authorized to conduct surveys of
housing in any area of the city to determine the condition of premises, extent
of deterioration, lack of facilities, inadequate maintenance, unsafe and
insanitary conditions, extent of overcrowding, land use and other relevant
factors.
      (3)   It shall be the duty of the enforcement official:
         (a)   To allow periodic inspections to be made of all premises within
the scope of this chapter;
         (b)   To cause an investigation of all complaints of alleged housing
violations or other unsafe or insanitary conditions;
         (c)   To order in writing the remedying of all conditions found to
exist in or on any premises in violation of provisions of this chapter or of
rules and regulations adopted by the enforcement official, to state in the
violation order a reasonable time limit for compliance therewith and, where
necessary, to order the vacation of premises found unfit for human habitation;
         (d)   To request the City Attorney to take appropriate legal action in
the name of the city upon failure of the responsible party to comply with such
violation order within the time specified therein;
         (e)   To cause a search of records of housing violations existing on
any premises and to issue a certified statement thereof upon receipt of written
request and payment of any fees required by local law;
         (f)   To study housing conditions in the city;
         (g)   To cooperate with other municipal, governmental and private
agencies engaged in the study and improvement of housing conditions and private
officials; and
         (h)   To publish an annual report of housing conditions in the city,
accomplishments of the enforcement official and recommendations for the future.
      (4)   Where violations of this chapter exist and pose an immediate hazard
or danger to the health, safety or welfare of building occupants or of the
public, the enforcement official may issue an order citing the violation and
directing such action by such officer, agent or employee of the city as is
necessary to remove or abate the immediate hazard or danger.
(Prior Code, § 19-22)
(Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963)
§ 171.016 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Inspectors shall be authorized and have the right, in the performance
of their duties, to enter any premises during normal business hours and in
emergencies whenever necessary to protect the public interest.
   (B)   Owners, agents, operators and occupants shall be responsible for
providing access to all parts of the premises within their control to the
enforcement official, his or her duly authorized inspectors and assistants and
any other authorized personnel acting in performance of their duties.
(Prior Code, § 19-23) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963)
§ 171.017 RECORDS.
   (A)   The enforcement official shall keep records of all complaints
received, inspections made and violations found regarding premises regulated by
this chapter.
   (B)   Records shall be kept in a manner and form as prescribed by local law,
and shall be available for public inspection.
(Prior Code, § 19-24) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963)
§ 171.018 BOARD OF APPEALS.
   (A)   In order that the provisions of this chapter may be reasonably applied
and substantial justice done in instances where practical difficulties are
apparent or unnecessary hardship would result in carrying out the strict letter
of this law, a Board of Appeals is hereto created, as hereinafter provided,
whose duty it shall be to consider appeals from the decision of the official
charged with the enforcement of this chapter and to determine if the case
involved will, in its judgment, be in violation of the intent of this chapter
and public health and safety jeopardized.
   (B)   The Board of Appeals, established by the city’s Building Code, shall
serve as the Board of Appeals for this chapter and the appeal procedure shall
be as outlined in the city’s Building Code.
(Prior Code, § 19-25) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963)
GENERAL RESIDENTIAL REQUIREMENTS
§ 171.030 SCOPE.
   (A)   This subchapter shall apply to residential premises as follows:
      (1)   Lots, plots or parcels of land on which residential buildings,
buildings of mixed occupancy or accessory structures are located;
      (2)   Residential buildings, including one- and two-family dwellings and
multiple dwellings, except as specifically excluded in division (B) below;
      (3)   Residential occupancies in buildings of mixed occupancy; and
      (4)   Accessory structures, accessory to residential occupancies.
   (B)   This subchapter shall not apply to mobile homes and mobile home
courts, or to transient type occupancies and uses including, but not limited
to, nursing and convalescent homes, hotels, motels, tourist camps, farm labor
camps, travel trailers and trailer parks and other forms of temporary housing.
(Prior Code, § 19-46) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963)
§ 171.031 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A structure, the use of which is incidental to that of
the residential building, and which is located on the same premises.
   ACCESSORY USE. A use, occupancy or tenancy customarily incidental to the
principal use or occupancy of a residential building. Such ACCESSORY USES may
include, among others, the following:
      (1)   Offices for the building management;
      (2)   Dining rooms, banquet rooms, public kitchens and ballrooms;
      (3)   Recreation and play rooms;
      (4)   Laundries for the use of tenants and occupants, and in connection
with the management and operation of a residential buildings;
      (5)   Maintenance and workshops, storage rooms for linen, bedding,
furniture, supplies and tenants’ equipment and effects;
      (6)   Rooms or space for the incidental sale or display of merchandise to
occupants and tenants, such as newspaper, candy and cigar stands; and
      (7)   Garages within a residential building or on the premises thereof
used primarily for the storage of passenger-type motor vehicles.
   APPROVED. Approved by the administrative officer under the regulations of
this subchapter, or approved by an authority designated by law or this chapter.
   BASEMENT. The space of a building that is partly below grade which has more
than half its height, measured from floor to ceiling, above the average
established curb level or finished grade of the ground adjoining the building.
   BATHROOM. An enclosed space containing one or more bathtubs, or showers, or
both, and which may also contain water closets, lavatories or fixtures serving
similar purposes.
   BUILDING. A structure wholly or partially enclosed within exterior walls, or
within exterior or party walls, and a roof, affording shelter to persons,
animals or property.
   CELLAR. The space of a building that is partly or entirely below grade,
which has more than half of its height, measured from floor to ceiling, below
the average established curb level or finished grade of the ground adjoining
the building.
   DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY. A building containing not more than one dwelling unit
occupied exclusively for residential purposes.
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A building containing not more than two dwelling units
occupied exclusively for residential purposes.
   DWELLING UNIT. One or more rooms with provision for living, cooking,
sanitary and sleeping facilities arranged for the use of one family.
   EXIT. A way of departure from the interior of a building or structure, to
the exterior at street or grade, including doorways, passageways, hallways,
corridors, stairways, ramps, fire escapes and all other elements necessary for
egress or escape.
   FAMILY. A household constituting a single housekeeping unit occupied by one
or more persons.
   GENERALLY ACCEPTED STANDARD. A specification, code, rule, guide or procedure
in the field of construction or related thereto, recognized and accepted as
authoritative.
   GRADE, FINISHED. Natural surface of the ground, or surface of ground after
completion of any change in contour, abutting building or premises.
   HABITABLE SPACE. Space occupied by one or more persons for living, sleeping,
eating or cooking. Kitchenettes shall not be deemed to be HABITABLE SPACES.
   INFESTATION. The presence, within or contiguous to a dwelling, dwelling
unit, lodging house, lodging unit or premises of insects, rodents, vermin or
other pests.
   KITCHEN. Space, 60 square feet or more in floor area, with a minimum width
of five feet, used for cooking or preparation of food.
   KITCHENETTE. Space, less than 60 square feet in floor area, used for cooking
or preparation of food.
   LODGING HOUSE. A multiple dwelling used primarily for the purpose of
furnishing lodging with or without meals, for compensation.
   LODGING UNIT. A room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit, used
or intended to be used for lodging.
   MIXED OCCUPANCY. Occupancy of a building in part for residential use and in
part for some other use not accessory thereto.
   MULTIPLE DWELLING. Any of the following:
      (1)   A building containing three or more dwelling units;
      (2)   A building containing living, sanitary and sleeping facilities
occupied by one or two families and more than four lodgers residing with either
one of such families;
      (3)   A building with one or more sleeping rooms, other than a one- or
two-family dwelling, used or occupied by permanent or transient paying guests
or tenants;
      (4)   A building with sleeping accommodations for more than five persons
used or occupied as a club, dormitory, fraternity or sorority house or for
similar uses; and
      (5)   A building used or occupied as a convalescent, old-age or nursing
home, but not including private or public hospitals or public institutions.
   NON-HABITABLE SPACE. Space used as kitchenettes, pantries, bath, toilet,
laundry, rest, dressing, locker, storage, utility, heater and boiler rooms,
closets and other spaces for service and maintenance of the building, and those
spaces for access and vertical travel between stories.
   PLUMBING SYSTEM. The water supply system, the drainage system, the vent
system, fixtures and traps, including their respective connections, devices and
appurtenances within the property lines of the premises.
   POTABLE WATER. Water which is approved for drinking, culinary and domestic
purposes.
   PUBLIC SPACE. Space within a residential building for public use, such as
lobbies, lounges, reception, ball, meeting, lecture and recreation rooms,
banquet and dining rooms and their kitchens and swimming pools.
   SEWAGE. Liquid waste containing animal or vegetable matter in suspension or
solution, and which may include industrial wastes and liquids containing
chemicals.
   STRUCTURE. An assembly of materials, forming a construction framed of
component structural parts for occupancy or use, including buildings.
   TOILET ROOM. Enclosed space, containing one or more water closets, which may
also contain one or more lavatories, urinals and other plumbing fixtures.
   VENTILATION. Supply and removal of air to and from a space by natural or
mechanical means.
   VENTILATION, MECHANICAL. Ventilation by power-driven devices.
   VENTILATION, NATURAL. Ventilation by opening to outer air through windows,
skylights, doors, louvers or stacks with or without wind-driven devices.
(Prior Code, § 19-47) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963)
§ 171.032 COMPLIANCE.
   Buildings occupied in whole or in part shall comply with the requirements
hereinafter set forth concerning occupancy, size, light and ventilation in
order to provide safe and healthful environment.
(Prior Code, § 19-48) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963)
§ 171.033 OCCUPANCY CLASSIFICATION OF BUILDINGS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, buildings shall be classified in respect
to their occupancies as follows:
   (A)   One- and two-family dwellings, which are buildings containing one or
two dwelling units with two or less lodgers residing with a family in either
one of such dwelling units;
   (B)   Multiple dwellings, which are:
      (1)   Buildings containing one or two dwelling units with more than two
lodgers with a family in either one of such dwelling units;
      (2)   Buildings containing three or more dwelling units; apartment houses
and apartment hotels;
      (3)   Lodging houses;
      (4)   Buildings with sleeping accommodations for more than five persons
used or occupied as a club, dormitory, fraternity or sorority house or for
similar uses; and
      (5)   Garden apartments.
   (C)   Accessory structures, which are garages, carports and similar type
structures on residential premises.
(Prior Code, § 19-49) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963)
§ 171.034 ACCESS AND VERTICAL TRAVEL BETWEEN STORIES.
   (A)   Stairs, both interior and exterior, shall be of sufficient width in
conformity with generally accepted standards so as to serve the occupants.
   (B)   Railings shall be provided on open portions of stairs, balconies,
landings and stairwells.
(Prior Code, § 19-50) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963)
§ 171.035 EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS GENERALLY.
   (A)   Plumbing, heating, electrical, ventilating, air conditioning,
refrigerating, cooking, fire protection and radiation production equipment,
elevators, dumbwaiters, escalators and other mechanical additions,
installations or systems for the use of the building shall be installed,
located and maintained so that under normal conditions of use such equipment
and systems will not be a danger to health or welfare, a danger because of
structural defects, or a source of ignition, or a radiation hazard, and will
not create excessive noise, or otherwise become a nuisance. Equipment and
systems include, but are not limited to, apparatus, devices, fixtures, piping,
pipe hangers, pipe covering, wiring, fittings and materials used as part of, or
in connection with, such installations.
   (B)   Equipment and systems subject to damage from freezing shall be
adequately protected against freezing.
   (C)   Moving parts of equipment which may be a potential hazard shall be
guarded to protect against accidental contact.
(Prior Code, § 19-51) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963)
§ 171.036 EXITS.
   (A)   Safe, continuous and unobstructed exit shall be provided from the
interior of the building to the exterior at street or grade level.
   (B)   Exits shall be arranged, constructed and proportioned to that
occupants may escape safely from the building in case of emergency.
   (C)   In one- and two-family dwellings, in addition to primary exit from
building, there shall be provided a secondary exit or, in lieu thereof, one or
more exit openings for emergency use.
   (D)   In multiple dwellings, approved exits shall be provided.
(Prior Code, § 19-52) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
§ 171.037 AIR CONDITIONING AND MECHANICAL VENTILATION IN ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY
DWELLINGS.
   (A)   Exhaust air from a dwelling unit shall not be circulated to another
dwelling unit.
   (B)   Ducts shall be securely fastened in place and appropriately fire-
stopped.
(Prior Code, § 19-53) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
§ 171.038 ELEVATORS, DUMBWAITERS AND ESCALATORS IN MULTIPLE DWELLINGS.
   (A)   Elevators, dumbwaiters and escalators shall be maintained so as to be
free from physical and fire hazards.
   (B)   Elevator and power operated dumbwaiter cars shall be provided with
durable signs in conspicuous locations on which the rated capacity shall be
indicated.
   (C)   Elevator cars shall be provided with approved means for transmitting a
signal outside the hoistway in case of emergency.
   (D)   Hoistways and pits shall be maintained free of refuse.
   (E)   Machine rooms shall be maintained free of oil and grease and shall not
be used for storage of articles or materials unnecessary for the maintenance of
the elevator or dumbwaiter. Flammable liquids shall not be kept in such rooms.
   (F)   No person shall at any time make any required safety device or
electrical protective device inoperative, except where necessary during tests,
inspections or maintenance.
(Prior Code, § 19-54) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
§ 171.039 PREMISES TO BE REASONABLY SAFE; COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS.
   Installations, alterations and repairs to residential premises and
materials, assemblies and equipment utilized in connection therewith, shall be
reasonably safe to persons and property and in conformity with applicable
ordinances and codes of the city, and resolutions, orders, rules and
regulations issued by authority thereof. Conformity of such work, materials,
assemblies or equipment with the applicable requirements of the city’s Building
Code shall be prima facie evidence that the same is reasonably safe to person
and property.
(Prior Code, § 19-55) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
§ 171.040 INTERPRETATION.
   Where a provision of this subchapter conflicts with a provision of a zoning,
building, electrical, plumbing, fire safety, health, water supply or sewage
disposal law or ordinance, or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, or other
local law, ordinance, code or regulation, the provision or requirement which is
the more restrictive or which establishes the higher standard shall prevail.
(Prior Code, § 19-56) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963)
§ 171.041 MAXIMUM OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   In dwelling units, the maximum number of occupants shall be limited to
the number determined on the basis of the floor areas of habitable rooms, other
than kitchens, as follows:
      (1)   One occupant per room having floor area of at least 80, but less
than 120, square feet;
      (2)   Two occupants per room having floor area of at least 120, but less
than 180, square feet; and
      (3)   Three occupants per room having floor area of 180 or more square
feet.
   (B)   In lodging units, the maximum number of occupants shall be limited to
the number determined on the same basis as for dwelling units.
   (C)   In buildings occupied as clubs, dormitories, sorority or fraternity
houses and providing sleeping accommodations for more than five persons, the
maximum number of occupants so accommodated in any habitable room shall be
limited to the number determined on the basis of the floor area, in square
feet, of the room divided by 50 square feet per occupant.
(Prior Code, § 19-57) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963)
HABITABLE SPACE
§ 171.055 PROHIBITED USES.
   (A)   It shall be prohibited to use for sleeping purposes any kitchen, non-
habitable space or public space.
   (B)   It shall be prohibited, in lodging houses, to use for dining purposes
any communal kitchen containing less than 100 square feet of floor area, or any
non-habitable space or public space other than dining space.
   (C)   It shall be prohibited to prepare or eat meals in lodging units.
   (D)   It shall be prohibited to use any cellar space as habitable space.
(Prior Code, § 19-61) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
§ 171.056 SIZE.
   (A)   Habitable space shall have a minimum ceiling height of seven feet six
inches over 50% of the floor area; the floor area where the ceiling height is
less than five feet shall not be considered in computing floor area.
   (B)   A dwelling unit shall contain at least one habitable room having a
minimum of 150 square feet of floor area and a minimum horizontal dimension of
ten feet.
   (C)   Kitchens shall have a minimum of 60 square feet of floor area, and
other habitable spaces shall contain not less than 80 square feet of floor area
and shall have a minimum horizontal dimension of seven feet.
   (D)   (1)   Every alcove less than 60 square feet in area, except a cooking
space or foyer, shall be deemed to be part of a habitable room.
      (2)   The area of the opening in the dividing partition between the
alcove and the room shall be at least 80% of the wall area of such partition,
measured on the alcove side, but not less than 40 square feet.
      (3)   The depth of such alcove shall not exceed one-half its width. The
floor area of the alcove shall be added to the floor area of the room in
determining light and ventilation requirements for the room.
      (4)   An alcove with an area of 60 square feet or more, but less than the
required area of a habitable room, shall be separately lighted and ventilated
as required for habitable space.
(Prior Code, § 19-62) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
§ 171.057 BASEMENTS.
   Basements shall not be deemed habitable space where required windows are
located only on one wall and the depth of the basement space exceeds four times
its clear height.
(Prior Code, § 19-63) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963)
§ 171.058 LIGHT AND VENTILATION.
   (A)   Habitable space shall be provided with natural light through one or
more windows, skylights, transparent or translucent panels, or any combinations
thereof, that face directly on legal open spaces at least six inches above the
adjoining finished grade, or are above a roof. The amount of light shall be
equivalent to that transmitted through clear glass equal in area to 10% of the
floor area of the habitable space.
   (B)   Habitable space shall be provided with artificial light.
   (C)   Habitable space shall be provided with natural ventilation through
openable parts of windows or other openings in exterior walls that face legal
open spaces above the adjoining finished grade or above a roof, or through
openable parts of skylights, providing total clear ventilation area equal to
not less than 5% of the total floor area of each habitable space.
   (D)   Habitable space may also be provided with mechanical ventilation, in
addition to natural ventilation.
(Prior Code, § 19-64) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
§ 171.059 MISCELLANEOUS REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Dwellings units shall be separated from each other and from other
spaces outside the dwelling unit by an approved partition.
   (B)   Sleeping rooms within dwelling units shall be separated from each
other and from other spaces outside the sleeping rooms to provide privacy by an
approved partition.
   (C)   Lodging units shall be separated from each other and from other spaces
outside the lodging units by an approved partition.
   (D)   A communal kitchen or dining room in a lodging house shall be
accessible to the occupants sharing such kitchen or dining room without going
through a dwelling unit or lodging unit of another occupant.
(Prior Code, § 19-65) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
PUBLIC SPACES
§ 171.070 HEIGHT.
   Public space shall have a minimum height of seven feet six inches measured
from finished floor to finished ceiling.
(Prior Code, § 19-76) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
§ 171.071 LIGHT AND VENTILATION.
   (A)   Public spaces shall be provided with artificial light.
   (B)   In public stairs, stairways and passageways artificial light shall be
electric lighting available at all times so as to afford safe passage for
occupants and users. Such lighting shall conform to the following.
      (1)   A sufficient number of fixtures shall be provided so that the
distance between fixtures is not more than 30 feet and so that no wall is more
than 15 feet distant from a fixture.
      (2)   Incandescent lighting shall be based on not less than one-fourth
watt per square foot of floor area, except that each fixture shall have a lamp
or lamps with a total of not less than 25 watts.
      (3)   Fluorescent lighting shall be based on not less than one-tenth watt
per square foot of floor area; except that, each fixture shall have a lamp or
lamps with a total of not less than 15 watts.
      (4)   Where under these formulas the calculated wattage does not
correspond to that of a standard lamp, the next larger size shall be used.
   (C)   Public spaces shall be provided with either natural ventilation,
conforming to the requirements for habitable space, or with mechanical
ventilation.
(Prior Code, § 19-77) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
NON-HABITABLE SPACE
§ 171.085 HEIGHT.
   Non-habitable space, except crawl spaces and attics, in multiple dwellings
shall have a minimum height of seven feet measured from floor to ceiling.
(Prior Code, § 19-86) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963)
§ 171.086 TOILET ROOMS AND BATHROOMS.
   (A)   Toilet rooms and bathrooms in one- and two-family dwellings shall have
provisions for privacy.
   (B)   Toilet rooms and bathrooms for dwelling units in multiple dwellings
shall be located within the dwelling units and shall be accessible from any
sleeping room without passing through any other sleeping room.
   (C)   Unless located within dwelling units or directly connected with
sleeping rooms, toilet rooms and bathrooms in multiple dwellings shall be
provided in each story containing habitable space, and shall be accessible
thereto.
   (D)   Toilet rooms for employees in multiple dwellings shall be in separate
rooms for each sex where there are five or more employees, shall be readily
accessible to such employees and shall not open directly into any public
kitchen or other public space used for the cooking or preparation of food.
   (E)   In one- and two-family dwellings, bathrooms and toilet rooms shall be
provided with floors of moisture-resistant material.
   (F)   In multiple dwellings, floors of bathrooms, toilet rooms and similar
spaces shall be water- proof; such water-proofing shall extend six inches or
more above floors, except at doors, so that floors can be flushed or washed
without leaking.
(Prior Code, § 19-87) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
§ 171.087 LIGHT AND VENTILATION.
   (A)   Kitchenettes, bathrooms and toilet rooms shall be provided with
artificial light appropriate for the use of such rooms.
   (B)   Laundry rooms, furnace rooms and similar non-habitable space shall be
provided with artificial light appropriate for the intended use of such rooms.
   (C)   Stairs shall be provided with artificial light to allow safe ascent or
descent.
   (D)   Kitchenettes, bathrooms and toilet rooms shall be provided with
ventilation in accordance with either of the following:
      (1)   Natural ventilation as required for habitable space; except that,
such openable areas shall be not less than one and one-half square feet for
bathrooms or toilet rooms and not less than three square feet for kitchenettes;
or
      (2)   Mechanical ventilation exhausting not less than 25 cubic feet per
minute for bathrooms and toilet rooms and not less than 100 cubic feet per
minute for kitchenettes.
   (E)   Spaces in multiple dwellings which contain central heat producing, air
conditioning and other equipment shall be ventilated to the outer air, and air
from these spaces shall not be recirculated to other parts of the building.
   (F)   Ventilation shall be provided in unheated attics, spaces below flat
roofs and crawl spaces. Location and net areas of ventilation openings shall be
such as to minimize deterioration of structural members from condensation or
other causes, in conformity with generally accepted standards.
(Prior Code, § 19-88) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
STRUCTURAL REQUIREMENTS
§ 171.100 GENERALLY.
   (A)   Buildings and parts thereof shall be maintained so as to be capable of
sustaining safely their own weight and the loads to which they may be subject.
   (B)   Buildings shall be maintained so that loads are transmitted to the
soil without undue differential settlement, unsafe deformation or movement of
the building or of any structural part.
   (C)   (1)   Buildings shall be maintained so that protection is provided for
all structural members which may become structurally unsound if left
unprotected.
      (2)   Causes of such deterioration include, among others, action of
freezing and thawing, dampness, corrosion, wetting and drying, and termites and
other destructive insects.
   (D)   Buildings built in soil which is water bearing at any season of the
year shall be maintained so that ground and surface water will not penetrate
into habitable spaces, basements and cellars.
(Prior Code, § 19-101) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
§ 171.101 EXTERIOR PROTECTION.
   (A)   (1)   Foundation walls shall be maintained so as to be structurally
sound and to prevent entrance of moisture, termites and vermin.
      (2)   Such protection shall consist of shoring where necessary, subsoil
drains at footings, grouting of masonry cracks, water-proofing of walls and
joists and other suitable means.
   (B)   Exterior walls and wall components shall be maintained so as to
prevent deterioration due to the elements and destructive insects. Such
maintenance shall consist of painting, installation or repair of walls, copings
and flashings, water-proofing of joints, water-proof coatings, installation or
repair of termite shields, poison treatment of soil or other suitable means.
   (C)   (1)   Roofing shall be maintained in water-tight condition so as to
prevent leakage into the building.
      (2)   Such maintenance shall consist of repairs of roofing, flashings,
water-proof coatings or other suitable means.
(Prior Code, § 19-102) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
§ 171.102 INTERIOR PROTECTION.
   (A)   (1)   Crawl spaces shall be maintained free of moisture and the flow
of air from such spaces into walls above shall be effectively barred so as to
prevent deterioration of structural members.
      (2)   Such provisions shall consist of maintenance of openings in
foundation walls to provide adequate circulation or air in the crawl space,
covering the ground in the crawl space with a moisture barrier, installation of
drains outside the structure if the crawl space is below surrounding grade,
blocking openings in stud walls to prevent flow of air and moisture into walls,
frequent destruction of termite tubes from the soil to wood floor members
above, poison treatment of soil and other suitable means.
   (B)   Structural members shall be maintained so as to be structurally sound.
Such protection shall consist of shoring, reenforcement or repair where
necessary, frequent destruction of termite tubes or other appropriate means.
   (C)   (1)   Chimneys and flues shall be maintained so as to be structurally
sound and to prevent leakage of gases into the structure.
      (2)   Such maintenance shall consist of clearing flue toppages, sealing
open joints, repairing masonry where necessary and other suitable means.
   (D)   Ceilings and walls shall be maintained so that parts which become
loose or defective do not constitute a hazard to occupants. Such maintenance
shall consist of removing and replacing loose or defective sections.
   (E)   (1)   Toilet room and bathroom floors shall be maintained so as to
prevent leakage of water through the floor, under normal conditions of use and
floor washing, and resultant deterioration or defects in structural members and
ceilings below.
      (2)   Maintenance shall consist of repairs which effectively provide the
moisture and water-proof qualities required for the particular floor.
(Prior Code, § 19-103) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
GENERAL FIRE SAFETY REQUIREMENTS
§ 171.115 PROHIBITED ACCUMULATIONS AND STORAGE.
   It shall be prohibited:
   (A)   To accumulate or store on residential premises, except in approved
locations, any highly flammable or explosive matter, such as paints, volatile
oils, cleaning fluids and similar materials, or any combustible refuse liable
to spontaneous combustion, such as wastepaper, boxes, rags or similar
materials; or
   (B)   To accumulate or store materials on fire escapes or stairs, in
stairways or passageways, at doors or windows, or in any other location where
in the event of fire such materials may obstruct egress of occupants or
interfere with firefighting operations.
(Prior Code, § 19-116) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
§ 171.116 PREVENTION OF FIRE SPREAD.
   (A)   Walls and ceilings shall be maintained free from cracks and openings
which would permit flame or excessive heat to enter the concealed space.
   (B)   In buildings of mixed occupancy, non-residential space shall be
separated from residential space by approved fire separations which will retard
the spread of fire.
   (C)   Garages in or attached to a residential building shall be separated
from other spaces in the building by approved fire separations which will
regard the spread of fire and prevent flammable or toxic vapors originating
within the garage from being transmitted to other parts of the building.
(Prior Code, § 19-117) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
§ 171.117 INTERIOR FINISHES, TRIM AND DECORATIVE MATERIALS.
   Interior finish materials for acoustical correction, surface insulation and
decorative treatment on the surfaces of walls and ceilings, and interior trim
shall be of materials that will not, in burning, give off excessive amounts of
smoke or objectionable gases.
(Prior Code, § 19-118) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
§ 171.118 FIREPLACES.
   (A)   Fireplaces and similar construction used, or intended to be used, for
burning fuel in open fires shall be connected to approved chimneys and shall be
installed so that nearby or adjacent combustible material and structural
members shall not be heated to unsafe temperatures.
   (B)   Hearths and linings or other parts of fireplaces exposed directly to
flame shall be of materials that will not melt, disintegrate, spall or shatter
at high temperatures.
   (C)   Wood mantels and trim on fireplaces shall be placed and attached so
that they cannot be heated to unsafe temperatures or ignited by sparks or
embers from the fire.
(Prior Code, § 19-119) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
FIRE PROTECTION IN MULTIPLE DWELLINGS
§ 171.130 FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS.
   Required fire alarm systems shall be maintained in proper operating
condition at all times.
(Prior Code, § 19-131) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
§ 171.131 SPRINKLER EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Required sprinkler equipment shall be maintained in proper operating
condition at all times. Storage of materials shall cause minimum interference
to effective discharge of water.
   (B)   Valves controlling water supply to sprinklers shall be secure in the
open position.
   (C)   Sprinkler heads shall be maintained free of corrosion and paint.
(Prior Code, § 19-132) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
§ 171.132 STANDPIPE SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Standpipe systems shall be maintained in proper operating condition at
all times.
   (B)   Gate valves at hose stations shall be maintained tight against leaks.
   (C)   Hose shall be in proper position ready for operation, dry and free of
deterioration.
(Prior Code, § 19-133) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
§ 171.133 PORTABLE EXTINGUISHERS.
   (A)   Each oil burner for boiler, furnace or central hot water heater shall
be provided with an approved hand fire extinguisher or two rounded-bottom pails
filled with sand.
   (B)   Portable extinguishers required for fire protection shall be in their
designated locations and in a condition which will permit efficient operation
without delay.
(Prior Code, § 19-134) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
PLUMBING
§ 171.145 GENERALLY.
   (A)   Plumbing systems shall be maintained in sanitary and serviceable
condition.
   (B)   Plumbing systems shall be maintained so as not to weaken structural
members, nor cause damage or deterioration to any part of the building through
fixture usage.
(Prior Code, § 19-146) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
§ 171.146 WATER SUPPLY; CROSS-CONNECTION.
   (A)   Water supply.
      (1)   Potable water from an approved source shall be available at all
times in residential buildings. The domestic water supply system of the
building shall be connected to such approved source and shall not be subject to
contamination. When supplied from a public source, the potable water supply
system shall not be connected to private or unsafe water supplies.
      (2)   Water supply systems shall be installed and maintained so as to
provide at all times a supply of water to plumbing fixtures, devices and
appurtenances in sufficient volume and at pressures adequate to enable them to
function satisfactorily and without undue noise under all normal conditions of
use.
      (3)   Water supply systems shall be installed and maintained so that
water used for purposes of cooling or heating shall not be reintroduced into
the domestic water supply system nor be distributed through such equipment to
plumbing fixtures.
      (4)   Hot water supply systems shall be provided with safety devices
arranged to relieve hazardous pressures and excessive temperatures.
   (B)   Cross-connection.
      (1)   The city adopts by reference the Water Supply Cross-Connection
Rules of the state’s Department of Environmental Quality being Mich. Admin.
Code R. §§ 325.11401 to R 325.11407.
      (2)   It shall be the duty of the city’s Water Department to cause
inspections to be made of all properties served by the public water supply
where cross-connections with the public water supply is deemed possible. The
frequency of inspections and reinspections based on potential health hazards
involved shall be as established by the city’s Water Department and as approved
by the state’s Department of Environmental Quality.
      (3)   The representative of the city’s Water Department shall have the
right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to
the public water supply system of the city for the purpose of inspecting the
piping system or systems thereof for cross-connections. On request, the owner,
lessees or occupants of any property so served shall furnish to the inspection
agency any pertinent information regarding the piping system or systems on such
property. The refusal of such information or refusal of access, when requested,
shall be deemed evidence of the presence of cross- connection.
      (4)   The city’s Water Department is hereby authorized and directed to
discontinue water service after reasonable notice to any property wherein any
connection in violation of this section exists and to take such other
precautionary measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of
contamination of the public water supply system. Water service to such property
shall not be restored until the cross-connection(s) has been eliminated in
compliance with the provisions of this section.
      (5)   All testable backflow prevention devices shall be tested initially
upon installation to be sure that the device is working properly. Subsequent
testing of devices shall be conducted at a time interval specified by the
city’s Water Department and in accordance with State Department of
Environmental Quality requirements. Only individuals approved by the city’s
Water Department shall be qualified to perform such testing. The individual(s)
shall certify the results of his or her testing.
      (6)   The potable water supply made available on the properties served by
the public water supply shall be protected from possible contamination as
specified by this section and by the State and the City Plumbing Code. Any
water outlet which could be used for potable or domestic purposes and which is
not supplied by the potable system must be labeled in a conspicuous manner as:
“WATER UNSAFE FOR DRINKING”.
      (7)   This section does not supersede the state’s Plumbing Code and the
city’s Plumbing Ordinance, but is supplementary to them.
(Prior Code, § 19-147) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963; Ord. 1245, passed 10-17-
2005)
§ 171.147 SEWAGE DRAINAGE SYSTEM.
   (A)   Plumbing fixtures shall be drained to a sewage drainage system and
such system shall be connected to a public sewer or to an adequate and approved
system of sewage disposal.
   (B)   Where a public sewer is not available, a system shall be provided to
receive and dispose of sewage without health hazard or nuisance.
   (C)   Sewage or other waste, which may be deleterious to surface or
subsurface waters, shall not be discharged into the ground or into a waterway
unless it has first been rendered harmless through subjection to treatment in
conformity with generally accepted standards.
   (D)   Substances which will clog the pipes, produce explosive mixtures,
destroy the pipes or their joints or interfere unduly with the sewage disposal
process shall not be discharged into the building drainage system unless it is
provided with approved devices suitable for intercepting such substances.
   (E)   Each fixture directly connected to the sewage drainage system shall be
equipped with a water seal trap.
   (F)   Adequate cleanouts shall be provided and maintained so that the pipes
may be readily cleaned.
   (G)   The drainage system and its attendant vent piping shall be maintained
so as to provide adequate circulation of air in all pipes in order that
siphonage, aspiration or pressure will not cause a loss of trap seal under
ordinary conditions of use.
   (H)   Each vent terminal to the outer air shall be installed and maintained
so as to minimize the possibilities of clogging, frost closure, the return of
foul air to the building or the creation of a nuisance to adjacent premises.
   (I)   Drains provided for fixtures, devices, appliances or apparatus
containing food, water, sterile goods or similar materials, shall be equipped
with air breaks, adequate to prevent contamination of such contents from any
possible backup of sewage through the direct or indirect drainage piping.
(Prior Code, § 19-148) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
§ 171.148 STORM DRAINAGE.
   (A)   Roofs and paved areas, including yards and courts, shall be drained.
Storm drainage shall be conveyed to an adequate and approved system of storm
water disposal where available. Storm drains shall be discharged in such manner
that water will not flow onto sidewalks.
   (B)   Where a drainage system may be subject to backwater, suitable
provision shall be made to prevent its overflow into the building.
   (C)   Leaders and gutters, if used, shall be constructed of non-combustible
material; except that, wood leaders and gutters may be used for buildings not
more than three stories high.
(Prior Code, § 19-149) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
§ 171.149 PLUMBING FACILITIES.
   (A)   Buildings and portions thereof shall be provided with plumbing systems
designed to dispose of the sewage from all fixtures and to furnish cold water
to every water closet and urinal, and hot and cold water to every sink,
lavatory, bathtub and shower required therein. In multiple dwellings, hot water
shall be furnished at 130°F to 140°F temperature range from 6:00 a.m. to
midnight.
   (B)   There shall be provided within each dwelling unit, plumbing, fixtures
consisting of at least:
      (1)   One kitchen sink;
      (2)   One water closet;
      (3)   One bathtub or shower; and
      (4)   One lavatory.
   (C)   Where multiple dwellings contain sleeping accommodations arranged as
individual rooms or suites, for each multiple of six sleeping rooms or fraction
thereof, there shall be provided plumbing fixtures consisting of at least:
      (1)   One water closet;
      (2)   One bathtub or shower; and
      (3)   One lavatory.
   (D)   Where multiple dwellings contain sleeping accommodations arranged as a
dormitory, for each multiple of 15 persons or fraction thereof so accommodated
there shall be provided and located adjacent thereto, plumbing fixtures
consisting of at least:
      (1)   One water closet;
      (2)   One bathtub or shower; and
      (3)   One lavatory.
   (E)   Urinals may be substituted in men’s toilet rooms for not more than
one-third of the required number of water closets.
   (F)   Privies, privy vaults and outhouses shall be prohibited on residential
premises.
(Prior Code, § 19-150) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
§ 171.150 PLUMBING FIXTURES.
   (A)   Plumbing fixtures shall be made of smooth non-absorbent material and
shall be free from concealed fouling surfaces.
   (B)   Plumbing fixtures shall be so spaced as to be reasonably accessible
for their intended use.
   (C)   Plumbing fixtures shall be located in spaces that are accessible,
lighted and ventilated.
(Prior Code, § 19-151) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
§ 171.151 SWIMMING POOLS.
   (A)   (1)   Water supply used for filling or for cleaning of a swimming pool
shall be clean.
      (2)   Water supply shall be protected against potential pollution from
all sources, including cross-connection and backflow.
   (B)   Drains shall be provided so that the pool can be safely and adequately
drained. Drains shall be provided in floors surrounding the swimming pool and
arranged so that water from such areas will drain without entering the pool.
   (C)   Filtering, sterilizing and auxiliary equipment, where required, shall
be adequate to maintain the sanitary quality of water during each period the
pool is in use. Equipment containing gases or disinfectants capable of giving
off irritating, toxic or flammable fumes shall be located in ventilated rooms.
   (D)   The installation shall be arranged and maintained to prevent dirt,
sand or other foreign matter from entering the bathing area.
(Prior Code, § 19-152) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
§ 171.152 WATER SUPPLY TANKS.
   (A)   Water supply tanks shall be installed and maintained so as to be
water-tight, vermin-proof, rodent-proof, resistant to corrosion and capable of
withstanding the working pressures under normal operation.
   (B)   Supports for tanks shall be of non-combustible construction.
   (C)   Tanks and their supports shall not be used to support equipment or
structures other than for tank use, except where specially designed for such
other use.
   (D)   Means for emptying water supply tanks shall be provided and maintained
in proper working condition.
   (E)   Potable water supply tanks for domestic supply and standpipe or
automatic sprinkler systems shall be installed and maintained to furnish water
in sufficient quantity and pressure for such systems.
(Prior Code, § 19-153) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
FUEL GAS
§ 171.165 GENERALLY.
   (A)   Fuel gas piping systems shall be installed and maintained so as to
remain gas-tight, safe and operative under conditions of use.
   (B)   Fuel gas piping systems shall provide a supply of gas sufficient to
meet the maximum expected demand of the installed gas-burning appliances
connected thereto.
(Prior Code, § 19-165) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
§ 171.166 SHUTOFF VALVES.
   (A)   Gas piping systems shall have at least one accessible means for
shutting off all gas supply and such means shall be maintained in good
operating condition.
   (B)   An easily accessible shutoff valve or cock shall be provided in the
piping in close proximity to and ahead of every outlet for gas appliance.
(Prior Code, § 19-166) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963)
§ 171.167 SERVICE EQUIPMENT FOR GAS SUPPLIED FROM UTILITY MAINS.
   Gas services, gas meters and gas pressure regulators shall be located so
that they are protected from damage.
(Prior Code, § 19-167) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
§ 171.168 GAS REFRIGERATORS AND RANGES.
   Gas refrigerators and ranges shall be installed with clearance for
ventilation and shall be maintained in good operating condition.
(Prior Code, § 19-168) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
§ 171.169 HIGH PRESSURE GAS.
   Any service connection supplying gas at a pressure in excess of one pound
per square inch gage shall be provided with a device to reduce such pressure to
not more than one-half a pound per square inch gage prior to entering the
meter, except where such service supplies equipment using gas at high
pressures.
(Prior Code, § 19-169) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
§ 171.170 LP GAS.
   (A)   Undiluted liquefied petroleum gas in liquid form shall not be conveyed
through piping equipment and systems in buildings.
   (B)   Liquefied petroleum gas shall not be vaporized by devices utilizing
open flame or open electrical coil.
   (C)   Where two or more containers are installed, connection shall be
arranged so that containers can be replaced without shutting off the flow of
gas to equipment.
   (D)   Containers shall be designed, stored and located so as to be a hazard
to the premises served or to the surrounding property.
   (E)   Systems shall be provided with safety devices to relieve excessive
pressures and shall be arranged so that the discharge terminates at a safe
location.
   (F)   Systems shall have at least one accessible means for shutting off the
gas. Such means shall be located outside the building and shall be maintained
in good operating condition.
(Prior Code, § 19-170) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
HEATING
§ 171.185 GENERALLY.
   (A)   Residential buildings intended for occupancy between November 1 and
May 1 of the following year shall be provided with heating equipment designed
to maintain a temperature of not less than 70°F at a distance of three feet and
more from exterior walls, and at a level of five feet above the floor, in
habitable spaces, kitchenettes, bathrooms and toilet rooms. The capability of
the heating equipment to maintain such indoor temperature shall be based on the
average of the recorded annual minimum outside temperatures for the locality.
   (B)   In multiple dwellings, adequate heat shall be provided to maintain the
indoor temperature in habitable spaces, kitchenettes, bathrooms and toilet
rooms, at 70°F from 6:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. when the outside temperature falls
below 55°F.
(Prior Code, § 19-182) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
§ 171.186 SMOKE CONTROL.
   Fuel-burning heat producing equipment shall be installed and maintained so
that the emission or discharge into the atmosphere of smoke, dust, particles,
odors or other products of combustion will not create a nuisance or be
detrimental to the health, comfort, safety or property of any person.
(Prior Code, § 19-183) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
§ 171.187 WARM AIR HEATING.
   Ducts and other air handling equipment used for heating shall conform to the
requirements of such equipment used for ventilating purposes.
(Prior Code, § 19-184) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
§ 171.188 PROHIBITED LOCATIONS FOR HEAT-PRODUCING EQUIPMENT.
   Fuel-burning water heaters shall not be located in sleeping rooms, bathrooms
or toilet rooms.
(Prior Code, § 19-185) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
§ 171.189 FUEL SUPPLY CONNECTION.
   Fuel-burning equipment shall be permanently fastened and connected in place.
Fuel supply connection to such equipment shall be made with pipe or tubing of
solid metal.
(Prior Code, § 19-186) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
§ 171.190 INSTALLATION AND CLEARANCE.
   Where heat producing equipment is installed on, or adjacent to, combustible
materials, the location, insulation, clearance and the control of the equipment
shall be such that the temperature on the surface of the combustible materials
will not exceed a safe temperature.
(Prior Code, § 19-187) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
§ 171.191 AIR SUPPLY.
   (A)   Direct-fired heat producing equipment and the enclosure in which it is
located shall be provided with a supply of air adequate both for complete
combustion at the rated gross output of the equipment and for the ventilation
of the enclosure to prevent the accumulation of heat.
   (B)   Rooms containing fuel-burning equipment shall have such air supply
provided by means of one or more openings to the exterior, or by means of fixed
openings to interior spaces which open to the exterior.
(Prior Code, § 19-188) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
§ 171.192 REMOVAL OF PRODUCTS OF COMBUSTION.
   (A)   Equipment for burning solid or liquid fuel shall be connected to
suitable chimneys or flues and shall not be connected to gas vents. Unvented
heaters burning liquid fuel shall be prohibited.
   (B)   Fuel-burning space heaters located in sleeping rooms or rooms normally
kept closed shall be connected to a suitable chimney, flue or gas vent.
   (C)   Gas-fired equipment shall be connected to a suitable chimney, flue or
gas vent when the discharge of products of combustion into the space where the
equipment is installed would be a hazard.
(Prior Code, § 19-189) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
§ 171.193 SAFETY DEVICES.
   (A)   Equipment capable of developing hazardous pressures or temperatures
shall be provided with means to relieve safely such pressures and temperatures.
   (B)   Controls for the safe operation of automatically operated heat
producing equipment shall be provided to function as follows.
      (1)   When failure or interruption of flame or ignition occurs, the fuel
supply shall be cut off.
      (2)   When a predetermined temperature or pressure is exceeded, the input
of additional heat shall be prevented or reduced to a safe rate.
      (3)   When the water level in a steam boiler drops below a predetermined
level, the fuel supply shall be cut off.
      (4)   When failure or interruption of pilot light or main burner of
liquefied petroleum gas equipment occurs, the fuel supply to each pilot light
and main burner shall be cut off.
(Prior Code, § 19-190) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
§ 171.194 HEATING GARAGES.
   Fuel-burning equipment for garages servicing multiple dwellings shall be
located in heater rooms; except that, equipment burning gas or liquid fuel,
located in the vehicle storage space, shall be permitted in stories at or above
grade where elevated so as not to be exposed to possible accumulation of
flammable gases.
(Prior Code, § 19-191) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
CHIMNEYS, FLUES AND GAS VENTS
§ 171.205 GENERALLY.
   (A)   Chimneys, flues, gas vents and their supports shall be installed and
maintained so as to be structurally safe, durable, smoke-tight, non-combustible
and capable of withstanding the action of flue gases without softening,
cracking, corroding or spalling.
   (B)   Such facilities shall effectively convey the products of combustion to
the outer air.
   (C)   Masonry chimneys, except approved prefabricated chimneys, shall have
non-combustible foundations.
   (D)   Flue linings shall be capable of withstanding the action of flue gas
without softening, cracking, corroding or spalling at the temperature to which
they will be subjected.
   (E)   Openings for smoke pipes or gas vent connections shall be provided
with means for easy connection without restriction of flue.
   (F)   No flue shall have smoke pipe or gas vent connections in more than one
story of a building.
   (G)   Fuel-burning equipment and fireplaces located in different tenancies
shall not be connected to the same flue.
(Prior Code, § 19-203) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
§ 171.206 FIRE SAFETY.
   Chimneys, flues and gas vents shall be installed and maintained so that
under conditions of use, the temperature of any combustible material adjacent
thereto, insulated therefrom or in contact therewith, does not exceed a safe
temperature.
(Prior Code, § 19-204) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
§ 171.207 SPARK ARRESTERS.
   A chimney or flue connected to an incinerator and a chimney or flue which
may emit sparks, shall be provided with a spark arrester of non-combustible
construction. Spark arresters shall have sufficient total clear area to permit
unrestricted passage of flue gases. Openings in spark arresters shall be of
such size as to prevent passage of embers and to minimize clogging by soot.
(Prior Code, § 19-205) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
INCINERATORS
§ 171.220 GENERALLY.
   (A)   Incinerators shall be of adequate capacity for the intended use.
   (B)   Flue-fed incinerators shall be equipped with means for burning
auxiliary fuel in sufficient quantity to assure complete combustion of refuse.
   (C)   A flue serving an incinerator shall be provided with a substantially
constructed spark arrester.
   (D)   Incinerators shall be connected to a suitable non-combustible chimney,
smokestack or flue.
   (E)   Connections to incinerators shall provide free passage of refuse
without clogging.
(Prior Code, § 19-217) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
§ 171.221 SERVICE OPENINGS.
   (A)   Service openings shall be readily accessible to the building
occupants.
   (B)   Durable signs with plainly legible letters prohibiting disposal of
highly flammable substances in incinerators shall be provided near service
openings.
(Prior Code, § 19-218) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS
§ 171.235 GENERALLY.
   (A)   Electrical wiring and equipment shall be installed in conformity with
generally accepted standards and maintained so as to be a potential source of
ignition of combustible material or a potential source of electrical hazard.
   (B)   Electrical wiring and equipment shall be firmly secured to the surface
on which it is mounted.
   (C)   Electrical wiring and equipment installed in damp or wet locations or
where exposed to explosive or flammable gases, or to excessive temperatures,
shall be of a type approved for the purpose and location.
   (D)   Electrical wiring and equipment shall be protected against excessive
current by properly rated overcurrent devices.
   (E)   Electrical wiring and equipment shall be grounded or otherwise
protected by insulation, isolation or guarding so as to minimize the danger of
high voltages from lightning or other causes.
   (F)   Electrical equipment which, in ordinary operation, produces arcs or
sparks shall be enclosed unless separated and isolated from all combustible
material.
   (G)   Service equipment and overcurrent protection devices shall be
installed and maintained in a readily accessible location.
(Prior Code, § 19-230) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
§ 171.236 ARTIFICIAL LIGHTING.
   (A)   Residential buildings and occupancies shall be wired for electricity,
and lighting equipment shall be installed throughout to provide adequate
illumination for the intended use of each space. Electric wiring system shall
be connected to an adequate source of supply.
   (B)   There shall be a switch or other means for controlling a light in each
dwelling unit near the point of entrance to such unit.
(Prior Code, § 19-231) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
§ 171.237 EXIT AND DIRECTIONAL SIGNS.
   (A)   Exits in multiple dwellings shall be provided with exit and
directional signs, visible from the approach to the exits; except that, such
signs shall not be required in those portions of a building which contain
dwelling units only, or in which exit from sleeping rooms is directly to the
outside.
   (B)   Directional signs shall be provided at locations from which the exit
doorway is not readily discernible.
   (C)   Such signs shall be worded in plainly legible block letters with the
word “EXIT” for exit signs and the words “TO EXIT” with a suitable pointer or
arrow indicating the direction of exit, for directional signs. Letters for
signs shall be conspicuous, readily discernible and at least six inches high;
except that, for internally illuminated signs the height of such letters shall
be at least four and one-half inches.
   (D)   Exit and directional signs shall be illuminated either externally or
internally by electric lights and shall be kept illuminated at all times when
the building is occupied.
(Prior Code, § 19-232) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
COOKING AND REFRIGERATION
§ 171.250 GENERALLY.
   (A)   Each dwelling unit shall be provided with appropriate cooking and
refrigeration equipment.
   (B)   Cooking and refrigeration equipment shall be maintained in good
operating condition.
   (C)   Gas-burning cooking equipment shall be permanently fastened and
connected in place. Gas supply connection to such equipment shall be made with
pipe or tubing of solid metal.
   (D)   Solid fuel-burning cooking equipment shall be appropriately vented.
(Prior Code, § 19-244) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
§ 171.251 COMMUNAL COOKING AND DINING FACILITIES.
   Communal kitchens and dining rooms shall comply with the following
requirements.
   (A)   (1)   Communal kitchens shall contain:
         (a)   At least one kitchen sink;
         (b)   At least one kitchen gas or electric stove equipped with an oven
and not less than four top burners; and
         (c)   At least one electric or gas type refrigerator with adequate
food storage capacity, but in no case less than eight cubic feet nominal size.
      (2)   Dining space and eating facilities where provided in the kitchen
area shall comply with the requirements for communal dining rooms.
   (B)   Communal dining rooms shall contain at least one dining chair and two
lineal feet of dining space for each occupant permitted in a dining room at any
particular time.
(Prior Code, § 19-245) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
AIR CONDITIONING AND MECHANICAL VENTILATION IN MULTIPLE DWELLINGS
§ 171.265 REFRIGERANTS.
   (A)   Refrigerants that are highly flammable shall not be used in multiple
dwellings.
   (B)   Direct systems using refrigerants that are flammable or toxic shall
not be used for air conditioning purposes.
(Prior Code, § 19-257) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
§ 171.266 VENTILATING SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Ventilating systems shall be installed and maintained so that the
rapid spread of heat, flame or smoke through the system will be prevented, and
so that under conditions of use the temperature of any combustible material
adjacent thereto, or in contact therewith, will not exceed a safe temperature.
   (B)   Stairways, passageways, exits, shafts, hoistways or attics shall not
be used as plenum chambers.
   (C)   Ducts shall be securely fastened in place and appropriately fire-
stopped.
   (D)   Ducts and other air handling equipment shall be of non-combustible
material.
   (E)   Filters shall be installed and maintained so as not to constitute a
fire or smoke hazard.
   (F)   Ducts passing through or located within combustible construction shall
be separated from such construction by a clearance of at least one-half inch or
by a non-combustible insulating material at least one-fourth inch thick.
   (G)   Air required for ventilation shall be taken from the exterior or shall
be quality-controlled.
   (H)   Exhaust air from a dwelling unit or space whose contents may emit
odors, fumes or vapors shall not be circulated to other occupied spaces within
the building.
(Prior Code, § 19-258) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
§ 171.267 AIR INTAKE AND EXHAUST OPENINGS.
   (A)   Air intake and exhaust openings shall be installed, located and
maintained so as not to constitute a hazard or nuisance, and so as to prevent
the possibility of fire, smoke, fumes or foreign matter being drawn into the
system.
   (B)   Ventilating systems shall be provided with adequate openings for
incoming and outgoing air to obtain the required circulations. Intake openings
shall provide air from an uncontaminated source.
   (C)   Where openings for mechanical exhaust are located in spaces that also
contain fuel-burning equipment, there shall be provided fixed intake openings
from the exterior to supply sufficient air so that the fuel-burning equipment
is not adversely affected.
   (D)   Exhaust openings shall be located so that the exhaust air will not
create a nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 19-259) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
§ 171.268 VENTILATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Enclosures or spaces where heat, gases, vapors or odors may accumulate
and become a potential source of hazard or nuisance, shall be provided with
adequate means of ventilation to remove such excess.
   (B)   Public spaces shall be provided with means for obtaining air supply
for the maximum number of persons for which such spaces are designed.
(Prior Code, § 19-260) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
§ 171.269 SAFETY CONTROLS.
   (A)   Manually operated controls shall be provided to stop the operation of
all central fan equipment. Such controls shall be conspicuously identified and
in readily accessible locations outside the fan room.
   (B)   Every system using recirculated air and serving an assembly space or
more than one fire area or more than one story of a building shall be provided
with controls arranged so that under abnormal rise in temperature of the air in
the system the fans causing normal circulation shall stop and require manual
restart.
   (C)   Every system for ventilating an assembly space shall be provided with
an emergency switch conveniently located and with a durable sign giving
instruction for shutting down the system in case of fire.
(Prior Code, § 19-261) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
FUEL OIL
§ 171.280 GENERALLY.
   Fuel oil shall be received, stored and conveyed by means of fixed liquid-
tight equipment.
(Prior Code, § 19-273) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
§ 171.281 TANKS.
   Fuel oil tanks shall be provided with means for venting. Tanks shall be
installed and maintained so as not to be a hazard to the premises served or the
surrounding property.
(Prior Code, § 19-274) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
§ 171.282 PIPING.
   (A)   Automatically operated boilers and furnaces using fuel oil shall be
provided with remote control to stop the flow of oil during fire or other
emergency.
   (B)   Filling, emptying and venting of tanks shall be by means of fixed
piping. Pipes to underground tanks shall be pitched toward tanks. Terminals of
fill and vent pipes shall be located outside buildings at a safe distance from
building openings.
(Prior Code, § 19-275) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS
§ 171.295 GENERALLY.
   Residential premises shall be maintained in conformity with the provisions
of this subchapter so as to assure the desirable residential character of the
property.
(Prior Code, § 19-287) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963)
§ 171.296 OPEN AREAS.
   (A)   Surface and subsurface water shall be appropriately drained to protect
buildings and structures and to prevent development of stagnant ponds. Gutters,
culverts, catch basins, drain inlets, storm water sewers, approved combined
storm and sanitary sewers or other satisfactory drainage systems shall be
utilized where deemed necessary.
   (B)   Fences and other minor constructions shall be maintained in safe and
substantial condition.
   (C)   Steps, walks, driveways, parking spaces and similar paved areas shall
be maintained so as to afford safe passage under normal use and weather
conditions.
   (D)   Yards and courts shall be kept clean and free of physical hazards.
   (E)   Heavy undergrowths and accumulations of plant growth which are noxious
or detrimental to health shall be eliminated.
(Prior Code, § 19-288) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
§ 171.297 BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Exterior wood surfaces of buildings and structures that are not
inherently resistant to deterioration shall be periodically treated with a
protective coating of paint or other suitable preservative.
   (B)   Floors, walls, ceilings, furnishing and fixtures of residential
buildings shall be maintained in clean and sanitary condition.
   (C)   Accessory structures shall be maintained so as to be free of
conditions detrimental to safety or health.
(Prior Code, § 19-289) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
§ 171.298 INFESTATION AND SCREENING.
   (A)   Grounds, buildings and structures shall be maintained free of insect,
vermin and rodent harborage and infestation. Methods used for exterminating
insects, vermin and rodents shall conform with generally accepted practice.
   (B)   Where the potential for rodent or vermin infestation exists, windows
and other openings in basements and cellars shall be appropriately screened
with wire mesh or other suitable materials.
   (C)   From May 1 to October 1, entrances to residential buildings shall be
provided with self-closing type devices or screens, and windows and other
openings used for ventilation shall be appropriately screened. Screens shall
not be required in rooms located sufficiently high in the upper stories of
multiple dwellings as to be free of mosquitoes, flies and other flying insects.
(Prior Code, § 19-290) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
§ 171.299 GARBAGE AND REFUSE.
   (A)   Adequate sanitary facilities and methods shall be used for the
collection, storage, handling and disposal of garbage and refuse.
   (B)   In multiple dwellings, it shall be prohibited to store or accumulate
garbage or refuse in public halls and stairways.
(Prior Code, § 19-291) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
§ 171.300 DOMESTIC ANIMALS AND PETS.
   Domestic animals and pets shall be kept in an appropriate manner and shall
not be permitted to run at large.
(Prior Code, § 19-292) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
171.999
§ 171.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Any person who shall fail to obtain a certificate of approval as
required by §
171.004 of this chapter, or who shall fail to correct any violations within the
time required by §
171.004 of this chapter, or who shall violate any of the terms of §
171.004 of this chapter shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction
punishable by a fine of not more than $500 for each violation.
      (2)   The penalties imposed by §
171.004 of this chapter shall not limit any other statutory or common law right
or action that any person or entity may have.
(Prior Code, § 19-5)
   (C)   (1)   Any person or customer found guilty of violating any of the
provisions of §
171.146(B) of this chapter or any written order of the city’s Water Department
or inspection agency, in pursuance thereof, shall be deemed responsible for a
municipal civil infraction punishable by a fine not exceeding $500, plus costs
as allowed by law.
      (2)   Each day upon which a violation of the provision of §
171.146(B) of this chapter shall occur shall be deemed a separate offense and
violation.
(Prior Code, § 19-147)
(Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963; Ord. 840, passed 3-21-1988; Ord. 921, passed 10-
21-1991; Ord. 944, passed 7-20-1992; Ord. 1025, passed 9-23-1996; Ord. 1033,
passed 3-24-1997; Ord. 1162, passed 1-6-2003; Ord. 1257, passed 5-24-2004; Ord.
1191, passed 5-24-2004; Ord. 1245, passed 10-17-2005; Ord. 1257, passed 12-12-
2005; Ord. 1274, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 1318, passed 11-9-2009; Ord. 1443,
passed 12-19-2016)
CHAPTER 172: ELECTRIC CODE AND INSPECTIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
172.001   Presence of master or journeyman at job site
   
172.002   Examination
   
172.003   Display of licenses
   
172.004   Transfer of licenses
   
172.005   Expiration and renewal of licenses
   
172.006   Suspension or revocation of licenses
   
172.007   Reciprocity of licenses
Contractors and Masters
   
172.020   License required
   
172.021   Licenses for out-of-state contractors
   
172.022   License fee
   
172.023   Master to notify Electrical Board of change in employment
   
172.024   Contractors not secure permit holders for others
Journeymen
   
172.035   License required
   
172.036   License fee
Electrical Code
   
172.050   Short title
   
172.051   Fees
   
172.052   Adoption of Electrical Code
Electrical Inspector
   
172.070   Department of Electrical Inspection created
   
172.071   Appointment
   
172.072   Qualifications
   
172.073   Oath
   
172.074   Certificate of insurance
   
172.075   Compensation
   
172.076   Removal from office
   
172.077   Engaging in the business of electrician prohibited
   
172.078   Assistants
   
172.079   Right of access to buildings to turn off current
   
172.080   List of approved appliances
   
172.081   Use of independent contractor
Permits and Inspections
   
172.095   Permit required
   
172.096   Permit application; fraudulent applications
   
172.097   Persons eligible for permits
   
172.098   Permit issuance
   
172.099   Temporary permits
   
172.100   Additional work under permits
   
172.101   Transfer of permits
   
172.102   Permit expiration
   
172.103   Refund of permit fees
   
172.104   Permit revocation
   
172.105   Notification of incomplete installation required
   
172.106   Inspections and reinspections
   
172.107   Posting notices of inspection
   
172.108   Tampering with inspection notices
   
172.109   Permanent equipment not to be installed before roof is covered
   
172.110   Records
   
172.111   Homeowner permits
Board of Electrical Examiners and Review
   
172.125   Board created
   
172.126   Members
   
172.127   Functions
   
172.128   Rules and regulations concerning electrical work
   
172.129   Meetings to conduct examinations
   
172.130   Appeals from decision of Electrical Inspector
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 172.001 PRESENCE OF MASTER OR JOURNEYMAN AT JOB SITE.
   A licensed journeyman electrician or a licensed master electrician shall be
present at all times when electrical construction is in progress.
(Prior Code, § 9-131) (Ord. 597, passed 11-7-1977; Ord. 770, passed 8-27-1984;
Ord. 892, passed 7-20-1990)
§ 172.002 EXAMINATION.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no master or journeyman
electrician’s license shall be issued to any person who does not pass an
examination given by the Board of Electrical Examiners and Review.
   (B)   All applications for examinations shall be in writing. The examination
shall consist of an oral or written examination as the board shall determine
and such other practical tests in examination at the discretion of the Board.
Stenographic notes shall be taken of all oral examinations.
   (C)   A person who fails to pass such examination shall not be eligible for
examination in any reciprocating municipality for at least three months.
   (D)   Due notice shall be given by the Board of Electrical Examiners and
Review to all applicants for licenses of the examination date.
(Prior Code, § 9-132) (Ord. 597, passed 11-7-1977; Ord. 770, passed 8-27-1984;
Ord. 892, passed 7-20-1990)
§ 172.003 DISPLAY OF LICENSES.
   A license issued pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter shall be
displayed upon request.
(Prior Code, § 9-133) (Ord. 597, passed 11-7-1977; Ord. 770, passed 8-27-1984)
§ 172.004 TRANSFER OF LICENSES.
   A license issued pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter shall not be
transferable.
(Prior Code, § 9-134) (Ord. 597, passed 11-7-1977; Ord. 770, passed 8-27-1984)
§ 172.005 EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL OF LICENSES.
   Licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter shall expire
on December 31 of each year and shall be renewed upon application by the
licensee, together with the payment of the required fee. After March 1 of each
year, all licenses not renewed shall be considered cancelled and shall not be
renewed, except upon approval of the Board of Electrical Examiners and Review.
(Prior Code, § 9-135) (Ord. 597, passed 11-7-1977; Ord. 770, passed 8-27-1984)
§ 172.006 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSES.
   Any electrical contractor’s, master’s or journeyman electrician’s license
may, after a hearing, be suspended or revoked by the Board having issued such
license upon evidence presented that the person, firm or corporation holding
such license willfully or by reason of incompetence repeatedly violates any
rules and regulations relating to the inspection, maintenance, alteration or
repair of electrical wiring, devices, appliances or equipment.
(Prior Code, § 9-136) (Ord. 597, passed 11-7-1977; Ord. 770, passed 8-27-1984;
Ord. 892, passed 7-20-1990)
§ 172.007 RECIPROCITY OF LICENSES.
   (A)   The city shall permit electrical contractors lawfully licensed by
other municipalities of the state or by the state to install, alter or repair
electrical wiring, equipment, apparatus or fixtures for light, heat or power
purposes within the city upon payment of $15 registration fee; provided that,
such municipalities reciprocate in recognizing electrical contractors who are
duly licensed under the provisions of this chapter by granting them the same
privilege and charging the same uniform license and registration fees; and,
provided further that, the licensing ordinances are substantially equal to the
requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Journeyman electricians, duly licensed by any municipality cooperating
in the reciprocal arrangement shall be permitted to work in the city without
the payment of a registration fee.
   (C)   No electrical contractor’s licenses shall be recognized, for the
purposes of registration, by the city of applicants who maintain their
principal place of business in a municipality which fails to approve, by
affirmative action of its legislative body, the reciprocal and mutually
interchangeable licensing arrangements covered by this chapter.
   (D)   No license shall be recognized by the city unless it is issued by a
cooperating municipality which has an examining board or by the state.
(Prior Code, § 9-137) (Ord. 597, passed 11-7-1977; Ord. 770, passed 8-27-1984;
Ord. 892, passed 7-23-1990)
CONTRACTORS AND MASTERS
§ 172.020 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to engage as
an electrical contractor or master electrician in the installation, alteration,
maintenance or repair of electrical wiring, equipment, apparatus or fixtures
for light, heat or power purposes, where the electromotive force exceeds 30
volts in or about buildings and/or structures located within the city without
first having procured a contractor’s license.
   (B)   Such license shall be either one issued by the City Engineer upon
recommendation of the Board of Electrical Examiners and Review or one issued by
a reciprocating municipality; provided, however, that:
      (1)   An electrical contractor shall obtain a license from the city if
his of her principal place of business is in the city; and
      (2)   A master electrician shall obtain a license from the city if his or
her residential address is in the city.
(Prior Code, § 9-151) (Ord. 597, passed 11-7-1977; Ord. 770, passed 8-27-1984)
§ 172.021 LICENSES FOR OUT-OF-STATE CONTRACTORS.
   Corporations applying for electrical contractors’ licenses, whose principal
place of business is not in the state may obtain such licenses from the City
Engineer upon approval by the Examining Board and the payment of the prescribed
fee; provided that, the applicant shall file a duly executed bond in the penal
sum of $1,000 running to the city, conditioned upon the faithful performance
observance of all ordinances and rules and regulations controlling the
installation of electrical wiring and equipment. Such bond shall be a surety
bond from a recognized and approved surety company authorized to transact
business in the state.
(Prior Code, § 9-152) (Ord. 597, passed 11-7-1977; Ord. 770, passed 8-27-1984;
Ord. 892, passed 7-23-1990)
Charter reference:
   Power of city to require bond, see §
177
§ 172.022 LICENSE FEE.
   The fee for an electrical contractor’s license shall be $25 per year. The
fee for a master electrician’s license shall be $15 per year.
(Prior Code, § 9-153) (Ord. 597, passed 11-7-1977; Ord. 770, passed 8-27-1984;
Ord. 892, passed 7-23-1990)
Charter reference:
   Power of city to provide for license fee, see §
177
§ 172.023 MASTER TO NOTIFY ELECTRICAL BOARD OF CHANGE IN EMPLOYMENT.
   A master electrician who holds a license issued by the city shall notify the
Board of Electrical Examiners and Review within at least three working days of
a change in his or her employment where such employment was necessary to
qualify his or her employer as an electrical contractor.
(Prior Code, § 9-155) (Ord. 597, passed 11-7-1977)
§ 172.024 CONTRACTORS NOT SECURE PERMITS FOR OTHERS.
   A person who has been issued an electrical contractor’s license under the
terms of this subchapter shall not secure permits for work to be done by any
person not employed by him or her.
(Prior Code, § 9-156) (Ord. 597, passed 11-7-1977; Ord. 770, passed 8-27-1984)
JOURNEYMEN
§ 172.035 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the occupation or trade of
journeyman electrician in the installation, alteration, maintenance or repair
of electrical wiring equipment, apparatus or fixtures for lights, heat, power,
where the electromotive force exceeds 30 volts in or about buildings and/or
structures within the city without having first passed the examination and
obtained a license, as herein provided. This provision shall not apply to
helpers and apprentices; provided, such work as they may do is performed under
the direction and supervision of a licensed journeyman electrician who shall be
on the premises at all times when such helpers or apprentices are performing
such work on the premises. All applications for said examination shall be in
writing. The examination shall consist of an oral or written examination as the
Board shall determine and such other practical tests in examination at the
discretion of the Board. Stenographic notes shall be taken of all oral
examinations.
(Prior Code, § 9-171) (Ord. 597, passed 11-7-1977; Ord. 770, passed 8-27-1984;
Ord. 892, passed 7-23-1990) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 172.036 LICENSE FEE.
   The fee for the license required by the provisions of this subchapter shall
be $5 per year.
(Prior Code, § 9-172) (Ord. 597, passed 11-7-1977; Ord. 770, passed 8-27-1984;
Ord. 892, passed 7-23-1990)
ELECTRICAL CODE
§ 172.050 SHORT TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as and may be cited as the “Electrical Code
of the City of Wyandotte.”
(Ord. 1507, passed 4-26-2021)
§ 172.051 FEES.
   (A)   The fees for plan review, deposits, permits, inspections, bonds and
late fees shall be established by City Council resolution. The fees shall be
available for viewing in the office of the City Clerk, the Engineering and
Building Department, and published on the city’s website.
   (B)   Any required deposit shall be made in the form of cash, cashier’s
check or bond form approved by the code official and the City Attorney.
(Ord. 1507, passed 4-26-2021)
 
§ 172.052 ADOPTION OF ELECTRICAL CODE.
   (A)   A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the City Clerk’s
office, being marked and designated as the 2023 National Electrical Code, is
hereby referred to, adopted by the city and made a part hereof, as if fully set
out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if
any, prescribed herein.
   (B)   A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the City Clerk’s
office, being marked and designated as the Michigan Department of Licensing and
Regulatory Affairs Construction Code Part 8 Electrical Code, is hereby referred
to, adopted by the city and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this
chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed herein.
   (C)   The purpose of these codes are the practical safeguarding of persons
and property from hazards arising from the use of electricity.
   (D)   This adoption of the 2023 National Electric Code and the Michigan
Department of Licensing and Regulatory Affairs Construction Code Part 8
Electrical Code is done in accordance with M.C.L.A. § 117.3(k).
(Ord. 1507, passed 4-26-2021; Ord. 1541, passed 4-22-2024)
ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR
§ 172.070 DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL INSPECTION CREATED.
   There is hereby created the Department of Electrical Inspection.
(Prior Code, § 9-26) (Ord. 597, passed 11-7-1977; Ord. 770, passed 8-27-1984;
Ord. 892, passed 7-23-1990)
§ 172.071 APPOINTMENT.
   The Electrical Inspector shall be appointed for one year by the City
Engineer by and with the advice and consent of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 9-27) (Ord. 597, passed 11-7-1977; Ord. 770, passed 8-27-1984;
Ord. 892, passed 7-23-1990)
§ 172.072 QUALIFICATIONS.
   The person chosen to fill the office of Electrical Inspector shall be a
competent, licensed electrician, of good moral character and shall have at
least four years’ experience as a journeyman in the practice of his or her
trade, or two years’ training in a recognized college of electrical
engineering, and in addition thereto two years of practical experience in
electrical construction, shall be well versed in approved methods of electrical
construction for safety to life and property, and the rules and regulations
issued by the city’s Board of Electrical Examiners and Review. He or she shall
be familiar with the National Electrical Code, as approved by the National Fire
Protection Association, Inc., and other installation and safety rules and
standards approved by the 2023 Edition of the National Electrical Code, as
approved by the National Fire Protection Association, Inc., and other
installation and safety regulations approved by the Reciprocal Electrical
Council, Inc., RECI Manual, including technical amendments to the 2023 Edition
of the National Electric Code. The Inspector shall also maintain a file of
listed inspected electrical appliance cards issued by or for the Underwriters
Laboratories, Incorporated. The Electrical Inspector shall be the electrical
inspection authority as described in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 9-28) (Ord. 597, passed 11-7-1977; Ord. 770, passed 8-27-1984;
Ord. 892, passed 7-23-1990; Ord. 1541, passed 4-22-2024)
§ 172.073 OATH.
   The Electrical Inspector shall take and subscribe an oath which together
with the certificate of his or her appointment shall be filed with the City
Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 9-29) (Ord. 597, passed 11-7-1977; Ord. 770, passed 8-27-1984;
Ord. 892, passed 7-23-1990)
§ 172.074 CERTIFICATES OF INSURANCE.
   Before entering upon the discharge of his or her duties, the Electrical
Inspector shall file certificates of insurance as required by City Council.
(Prior Code, § 9-30) (Ord. 597, passed 11-7-1977; Ord. 770, passed 8-27-1984;
Ord. 892, passed 7-23-1990)
§ 172.075 COMPENSATION.
   The Electrical Inspector shall receive such salary as may be fixed by the
City Council and such additional expense for transportation as may be made
necessary under the provisions of this chapter or be authorized by the City
Council.
(Prior Code, § 9-31) (Ord. 597, passed 11-7-1977; Ord. 770, passed 8-27-1984;
Ord. 892, passed 7-23-1990)
§ 172.076 REMOVAL FROM OFFICE.
   Any violation of the provisions of this subchapter by the Electrical
Inspector shall be sufficient cause for his or her removal from office, but he
or she may be removed for other just cause.
(Prior Code, § 9-32) (Ord. 597, passed 11-7-1977; Ord. 770, passed 8-27-1984;
Ord. 892, passed 7-23-1990)
§ 172.077 ENGAGING IN THE BUSINESS OF ELECTRICIAN PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for the Electrical Inspector to engage in the business
of the installation and/or maintenance of electric wiring, electric devices and
electrical material, either directly or indirectly, and he or she shall have no
financial interest in any concern engaged in such business within his or her
jurisdiction while holding the office of Electrical Inspector.
(Prior Code, § 9-33) (Ord. 597, passed 11-7-1977; Ord. 770, passed 8-27-1984;
Ord. 892, passed 7-23-1990) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 172.078 ASSISTANTS.
   The Electrical Inspector shall have such assistants as may be appointed by
the City Engineer and approved by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 9-34) (Ord. 597, passed 11-7-1977; Ord. 770, passed 8-27-1984;
Ord. 892, passed 7-23-1990)
§ 172.079 RIGHT OF ACCESS TO BUILDINGS TO TURN OFF CURRENT.
   The Electrical Inspector shall have the right during reasonable hours to
enter any building or structure in the discharge of his or her official duties,
or for the purpose of making any inspection or test of the installation of
electric wiring, electric devices and/or electrical material contained therein
and shall have the authority to cause the turning off of all electrical
currents and cut or disconnect in cases of emergency any wiring where such
electrical currents are dangerous to life or property or may interfere with the
work of the Fire Department.
(Prior Code, § 9-35) (Ord. 597, passed 11-7-1977; Ord. 770, passed 8-27-1984;
Ord. 892, passed 7-23-1990)
§ 172.080 LIST OF APPROVED APPLIANCES.
   The Electrical Inspector shall maintain a file of listed inspected
electrical appliance cards issued by or for the Underwriters Laboratories,
Incorporated.
(Prior Code, § 9-36) (Ord. 597, passed 11-7-1977; Ord. 770, passed 8-27-1984;
Ord. 892, passed 7-23-1990)
§ 172.081 USE OF INDEPENDENT CONTRACTOR.
   In lieu of the appointment of an Electrical Inspector under this subchapter,
the City Council may authorize that the duties of the Electrical Inspector be
performed on a contractual basis by an independent contractor who shall be
recommended to the City Council by the City Engineer. Such independent
contractor shall be required to have the same qualifications and powers,
privileges and rights, and shall be required to perform the same duties and
obligations as are granted to, or required of, the Electrical Inspector in this
chapter. Such contract shall not exceed one year in duration, subject a renewal
at the discretion of the City Council upon recommendation of the City Engineer,
and may provide for cancellation by either party; provided, 30 days’ written
notice of such cancellation is given to the other party. Salary, expense
account and all other provisions of this subchapter, except the manner of
appointment, as set forth in §
172.071 of this chapter, shall be applicable to the person who contracts to
perform the duties of Electrical Inspector.
(Prior Code, § 9-37) (Ord. 597, passed 11-7-1977; Ord. 770, passed 8-27-1984;
Ord. 892, passed 7-23-1990)
PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS
§ 172.095 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   All permits shall be secured from the City Engineer.
   (B)   No alterations or additions shall be made in the existing wiring of
any buildings, or structures nor shall any building or structure be wired for
the placing of any electric lights, motors, heating devices or any apparatus
requiring the use of electrical current, nor shall any alterations to be made
in the wiring in any building or structure after inspection without first
notifying the City Engineer and securing a permit thereof.
   (C)   Division (A) above shall not apply to minor repair work such as
repairing flush and snap switches, replacing fuses, changing lamp sockets and
receptacles and taping bare joints.
   (D)   Additional permits shall be required:
      (1)   If more than one inspection is necessary on any violation notice;
and
      (2)   For special inspections required for the investigation of any
ordinance violations.
(Prior Code, § 9-56) (Ord. 597, passed 11-7-1977; Ord. 770, passed 8-27-1984;
Ord. 892, passed 7-23-1990)
§ 172.096 PERMIT APPLICATION; FRAUDULENT APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Applications for the permit required by this subchapter shall describe
the work to be done and be made by the person, firm or corporation doing the
work.
(Prior Code, § 9-57)
   (B)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to present any fraudulent
information in making application for any permit from the inspection authority.
Furthermore, it shall be unlawful to use the name of another person in order to
secure an electrical permit unless regularly employed by and directly
authorized by the holder of such electrical contractor license.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for an independent electrical contractor to
file an electrical permit for work contracted for or performed or to be
performed by others without specific permission of the electrical inspection
authority.
(Prior Code, § 9-58)
(Ord. 597, passed 11-7-1977; Ord. 770, passed 8-27-1984; Ord. 892, passed 7-23-
1990) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 172.097 PERSONS ELIGIBLE FOR PERMITS.
   Permits shall be issued pursuant to this subchapter only to:
   (A)   Holders of contractor’s licenses;
   (B)   Any person employing a licensed electrical journeyman, to supervise
actively the new installation of electrical equipment on premises owned or
occupied and used by the applicant in the conduct of his or her business, and
at which premises the licensed electrician performs his duties in those
instances where business or industrial procedure requires the regular
employment of a licensed electrical journeyman; provided that, all affidavit
forms furnished by the Board of Electrical Examiners and Review are signed by
both the employer and the licensed journeyman. This affidavit shall be kept on
file in the offices of the Board and shall contain the following:
      (1)   Name and business address of the person employing the licensed
electrical journeyman;
      (2)   Name, address and current license number of licensed electrical
journeyman;
      (3)   License numbers of two previous years and of the licensing
authority; and
      (4)   Statement to the effect that the employer and licensed electrical
journeyman will comply with the provisions of the act regulating installation
of electrical equipment in the state. A new affidavit shall be filed before
permits will be issued if the licensed electrical journeyman terminates his or
her employment.
   (C)   A homeowner who comes under the jurisdiction of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 9-59) (Ord. 597, passed 11-7-1977; Ord. 770, passed 8-27-1984)
§ 172.098 PERMIT ISSUANCE.
   No permit shall be issued pursuant to this subchapter for any alterations or
additions to the electrical installation on any property or structure until a
certificate of occupancy or use as required by Ch. 190 of this code of
ordinances has been issued.
(Prior Code, § 9-60) (Ord. 597, passed 11-7-1977; Ord. 770, passed 8-27-1984;
Ord. 892, passed 7-23-1990)
§ 172.099 TEMPORARY PERMITS.
   Temporary permits must be obtained for connection to temporary service drops
and for equipment to be used for construction purposes, a temporary permit is
required for the number of circuits to be used or number of power units to be
installed.
(Prior Code, § 9-61) (Ord. 597, passed 11-7-1977; Ord. 770, passed 8-27-1984;
Ord. 892, passed 7-23-1990)
§ 172.100 ADDITIONAL WORK UNDER PERMITS.
   After a permit has been issued pursuant to this subchapter and the fee
deposited, no additional work shall be included. In cases in which additional
work is to be installed, a new permit shall be secured and the fee paid, except
when additional circuits of wiring, additional sockets or fixtures or
additional units for heat or power are installed, and on which inspection has
been made on the original call but not included in the permit, the fee for such
additional work shall apply.
(Prior Code, § 9-62) (Ord. 597, passed 11-7-1977; Ord. 770, passed 8-27-1984)
§ 172.101 TRANSFER OF PERMITS.
   (A)   From contractor to contractor. In case the permit grantee gives
written permission or appears in person with another contractor and grants
permission, the permit shall be transferred to the latter licensed contractor;
provided, the latter contractor pays established transfer fee. If permission is
not granted by the original permit holder, the contractor who completes the
installation shall secure a permit covering the work he or she does, and the
latter contractor shall be responsible in either case for all work done under
his or her supervision.
(Prior Code, § 9-63)
   (B)   From owner to contractor. An owner who secured a permit to make
installations of electrical equipment in his or her residence may transfer his
or her permit to a licensed contractor, providing the owner notifies the
inspection authority of his or her intention, receives inspection of the work
done by his or her and has his or her contractor pay the established transfer
fee to the inspection authority.
(Prior Code, § 9-64)
(Ord. 597, passed 11-7-1977; Ord. 770, passed 8-27-1984)
§ 172.102 PERMIT EXPIRATION.
   Any permit issued shall become invalid if the authorized work is not
commenced within six months after issuance of the permit or if the authorized
work is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months after the time of
commencing the work.
(Prior Code, § 9-65) (Ord. 597, passed 11-7-1977; Ord. 770, passed 8-27-1984;
Ord. 892, passed 7-23-1990)
§ 172.103 REFUND OF PERMIT FEES.
   If no work has been done, a permit grantee shall be entitled to a refund of
his or her permit fee in accordance with established rules of the city.
(Prior Code, § 9-66) (Ord. 597, passed 11-7-1977; Ord. 770, passed 8-27-1984)
§ 172.104 PERMIT REVOCATION.
   Any permit issued pursuant to this subchapter in violation of state law,
these rules or any ordinance, or as a result of false or fraudulent
information, or misinterpretation of conditions, shall be subject to revocation
at the discretion of the inspection authority. The person holding the permit
shall be notified to appear and show cause why the permit should not be revoked
and failure to appear shall be deemed sufficient to cause the permit to be
revoked.
(Prior Code, § 9-67) (Ord. 597, passed 11-7-1977; Ord. 770, passed 8-27-1984;
Ord. 892, passed 7-23-1990)
§ 172.105 NOTIFICATION OF INCOMPLETE INSTALLATION REQUIRED.
   Should any person to whom a permit has been issued quit the installation for
any reason, he or she shall notify the electrical inspection authority and
request inspection of work completed. If a permit holder fails to notify the
electrical inspection authority the owner may notify the electrical inspection
authority.
(Prior Code, § 9-68) (Ord. 597, passed 11-7-1977; Ord. 770, passed 8-27-1984)
§ 172.106 INSPECTIONS AND REINSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Generally. Upon the completion of the wiring of any building or
structure, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to notify the City
Engineer, who shall instruct the Electrical Inspector to inspect the
installation within 24 working hours of the time such notice is given, and if
it is found to be fully in compliance with this chapter and does not constitute
a hazard to life and property, he or she shall issue to the permit holder, a
certificate of inspection authorizing connection to the electrical service and
the turning on of the current. All wires which are to be hidden from view shall
be inspected before concealment and any person, firm or corporation installing
such wires shall notify the Electrical Inspector giving him or her 24 working
hours in which to make the required inspection before such wires are concealed.
(Prior Code, § 9-69)
   (B)   Right of inspection authority to require contractor’s representative
to be present. The electrical inspection authority reserves the right to
require a representative of the contractor to be on the job when inspection is
made.
(Prior Code, § 9-70)
   (C)   Reinspections. The Electrical Inspector shall make periodically a
thorough reinspection of the installation in buildings and structures of all
electric wiring, electric devices and electric material now installed or that
may hereafter be installed within the city, and when the installation of any
such wiring, devices and/or material is found to be in a dangerous or unsafe
condition, the person, firm or corporation owning, using or operating same
shall be notified and shall make the necessary repairs or changes required to
place such wiring, devices and material in a safe condition, and have such work
completed within ten days, or in the time period specified by the Electrical
Inspector in said notices. The Electrical Inspector is hereby empowered to
disconnect or order the discontinuance of electrical service to such wiring,
devices and/or material so found to be defectively installed until the
installation of such wiring, devices and material has been made safe as
directed by the Electrical Inspector.
(Prior Code, § 9-71)
(Ord. 597, passed 11-7-1977; Ord. 770, passed 8-27-1984; Ord. 892, passed 7-23-
1990)
§ 172.107 POSTING OF NOTICES OF INSPECTION.
   Any notice of inspection of electrical equipment shall be posted in or on
the job by the Electrical Inspector only.
(Prior Code, § 9-72) (Ord. 597, passed 11-7-1977; Ord. 770, passed 8-27-1984;
Ord. 892, passed 7-23-1990)
§ 172.108 TAMPERING WITH INSPECTION NOTICES.
   Inspection notices shall not be defaced, nor shall they be removed or
altered by anyone, except by a representative of the electrical inspection
authority.
(Prior Code, § 9-73) (Ord. 597, passed 11-7-1977; Ord. 770, passed 8-27-1984;
Ord. 892, passed 7-23-1990)
§ 172.109 PERMANENT EQUIPMENT NOT TO BE INSTALLED BEFORE ROOF IS COVERED.
   Electrical contractors shall not install permanent electrical equipment
before the roof is covered.
(Prior Code, § 9-74) (Ord. 597, passed 11-7-1977; Ord. 770, passed 8-27-1984;
Ord. 892, passed 7-23-1990)
§ 172.110 RECORDS.
   The City Engineer shall keep complete records of all permits issued and
inspections made and other official work performed under the provisions of this
chapter. He or she shall be provided with the necessary office space and
clerical help to carry out the provisions of this section.
(Prior Code, § 9-75) (Ord. 597, passed 11-7-1977; Ord. 770, passed 8-27-1984;
Ord. 892, passed 7-23-1990)
§ 172.111 HOMEOWNER PERMITS.
   A bona fide owner of a single-family residence which is, or will be on
completion, his or her place of residence, for not less than two years; and no
part of which is used for rental or commercial purposes, nor is now
contemplated for such purpose, may do his or her own work, providing he or she
applies for and secures a permit, pays the fee, does the work himself or
herself in accordance with the provisions hereof, applies for inspections and
receives approval of the work by the electrical inspection authority. Failure
to comply with these requirements will subject the owner’s permit to
cancellation.
(Prior Code, § 9-76) (Ord. 597, passed 11-7-1977; Ord. 770, passed 8-27-1984;
Ord. 892, passed 7-23-1990)
BOARD OF ELECTRICAL EXAMINERS AND REVIEW
§ 172.125 BOARD CREATED.
   There is hereby created a Board of Electrical Examiners and Review (herein
referred to as the “Board”).
(Prior Code, § 9-91) (Ord. 597, passed 11-7-1977; Ord. 770, passed 8-27-1984;
Ord. 892, passed 7-23-1990)
§ 172.126 MEMBERS.
   The Board of Electrical Examiners and Review shall consist of the Electrical
Inspector, a licensed journeyman electrician of at least four years’
experience, a representative of the Department of Municipal Service who holds a
journeyman’s license for at least four years, a licensed electrical contractor
having his or her own master license and a person connected with the electrical
industry, but not actively engaged in the installation of electrical equipment.
Members of the Board shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the
Council for terms of one year each.
(Prior Code, § 9-92) (Ord. 597, passed 11-7-1977; Ord. 770, passed 8-27-1984;
Ord. 892, passed 7-23-1990)
§ 172.127 FUNCTIONS.
   The Board of Electrical Examiners and Review shall perform the following
functions:
   (A)   Prescribe and conduct the examinations for master or journeymen
electricians;
   (B)   Prepare license application blanks;
   (C)   Act as an arbitration board as specified in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 9-93) (Ord. 597, passed 11-7-1977; Ord. 770, passed 8-27-1984;
Ord. 892, passed 7-23-1990)
§ 172.128 RULES AND REGULATIONS CONCERNING ELECTRICAL WORK.
   The Board is empowered and it shall be their duty to make such rules and
regulations concerning electrical work in the city as may be required to
properly provide for the situation therein. The rules and regulations so made
shall be effective upon approval by the Mayor and City Council.
(Prior Code, § 9-93.1) (Ord. 770, passed 8-27-1984; Ord. 892, passed 7-23-1990)
§ 172.129 MEETINGS TO CONDUCT EXAMINATIONS.
   The Board of Electrical Examiners and Review shall meet at least once a
month or on call of the Chairperson to hold examinations for master or
journeymen electrician.
(Prior Code, § 9-94) (Ord. 597, passed 11-7-1977; Ord. 770, passed 8-27-1984;
Ord. 892, passed 7-23-1990)
§ 172.130 APPEALS FROM DECISION OF ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR.
   When the Electrical Inspector condemns all or part of any electrical
installation, the permit holder may, within five days after receiving written
notice from the Electrical Inspector and after all discussion with the
Electrical Inspector has been exhausted, file a petition in writing stating the
section or sections of the code involved, also permit number, if any, with the
Board of Electrical Examiners and Review, for review of said action of the
Electrical Inspector, upon receipt of which, the Board shall at once proceed to
determine whether said electrical installation complies with this chapter, and
within three days shall make a decision in accordance with its findings. When
acting as an arbitration board, the Electrical Inspector shall not sit as a
member of such Board.
(Prior Code, § 9-95) (Ord. 597, passed 11-7-1977; Ord. 770, passed 8-27-1984;
Ord. 892, passed 7-23-1990)
CHAPTER 173: MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME COURTS
Section
General Provisions
   
173.001   Scope
   
173.002   Interpretation
   
173.003   Definitions
   
173.004   Reasonable safety required
Mobile Homes
   
173.015   Generally
   
173.016   Design and construction generally
   
173.017   Body and body framing
   
173.018   Chassis
   
173.019   Placement
   
173.020   Maximum occupancy
   
173.021   Height of habitable space
   
173.022   Bathrooms and toilet rooms
   
173.023   Prohibited uses
   
173.024   Exits
   
173.025   Light and ventilation
   
173.026   Plumbing
   
173.027   Heating, ventilating and air conditioning
   
173.028   Electrical requirements
   
173.029   Cooking and refrigeration
   
173.030   Maintenance
Mobile Home Courts
   
173.045   Certificate of occupancy
   
173.046   Design and construction
   
173.047   Storm water drainage
   
173.048   Surfacing of streets, sidewalks and the like
   
173.049   Overhead wires
   
173.050   Exterior lighting
   
173.051   Electrical system
   
173.052   Travel or vacation trailers
   
173.053   Required utilities
   
173.054   Water supply system
   
173.055   Sewage disposal system
   
173.056   Gas piping system
   
173.057   Utility connections
   
173.058   Mobile home stand
   
173.059   Accessory structures
   
173.060   Patios
   
173.061   Storage lockers
   
173.062   Community areas
   
173.063   Community structures
   
173.064   Community fuel storage
   
173.065   Maintenance requirements
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 173.001 SCOPE.
   This chapter shall apply to mobile homes used, or intended to be used, for
year-round dwellings accommodations in fixed locations and to mobile home
courts.
(Prior Code, § 19-304) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963)
§ 173.002 INTERPRETATION.
   In a case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with
a provision of a zoning, building, electrical, plumbing, fire, safety, health,
water supply or sewage disposal law or ordinance, or regulation adopted
pursuant thereto, or other local law, ordinance, code or regulation, the
provision or requirement which is the more restrictive or which establishes the
higher standard shall prevail.
(Prior Code, § 19-305) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963)
§ 173.003 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A structure, the use of which is incidental to that of
the mobile home, and which is attached thereto or located on the same mobile
home lot. ACCESSORY STRUCTURES include, but are not limited to, portable,
demountable or permanent enclosures, shade structures and carports.
   APPROVED. Approved by the administrative officer under the regulations of
this chapter, or approved by an authority designated by law or this chapter.
   COMMUNITY AREA. An area or space within a mobile home court, including
fences, walls and other minor constructions, which is designed for joint use of
occupants or restricted to non-residential use.
   COMMUNITY STRUCTURE. A structure within a mobile home court providing
laundry, toilet, recreation, parking or other common facilities; including
management office and storage buildings.
   GENERALLY ACCEPTED STANDARD. A specification, code, rule, guide or procedure
in the field of construction of mobile homes or mobile home courts or related
thereto, recognized and accepted as authoritative.
   HABITABLE SPACE. Space used for living, sleeping, eating or cooking,
purposes; excluding kitchenettes, bathrooms, toilet rooms, storage spaces and
enclosures for equipment installations.
   MECHANICAL SYSTEMS AND EQUIPMENT. Mobile home electrical, plumbing, heating,
ventilating, air conditioning systems and equipment used for living purposes,
including cooking and refrigeration equipment.
   MOBILE HOME. A movable living unit equipped with a chassis and provided with
the following mechanical systems and equipment: plumbing, heating, electrical,
cooking and refrigeration.
   MOBILE HOME COURT. A parcel of land which has been planned and improved for
the placement of two or more mobile homes.
   MOBILE HOME LOT. A designated site within a mobile home court for the
exclusive use of the occupants of a single mobile home.
   MOBILE HOME STAND. The part of an individual mobile home lot which has been
reserved for the placement of the mobile home.
   PATIO. A paved outdoor living space designed to supplement the mobile home
living area.
   STORAGE LOCKER. An enclosed space designed to provide auxiliary general
storage space for an individual mobile home.
   TRAILER (TRAVEL OR VACATION). A movable living unit equipped with a chassis,
but lacking any of the following mechanical systems and equipment: plumbing,
heating, electrical, cooking and refrigeration.
(Prior Code, § 19-306) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963)
§ 173.004 REASONABLE SAFETY REQUIRED.
   (A)   Installations, alterations and repairs to mobile homes and mobile home
courts, and materials, assemblies and equipment utilized in connection
therewith, shall be reasonably safe to persons and property and shall comply
with applicable ordinances and codes of the city and resolutions, orders, rules
and regulations issued by authority thereof.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, conformity of
installations, alterations and repairs of mobile home court buildings and their
accessory structures, and of materials, assemblies and equipment utilized in
connection with such buildings and structures, with the applicable requirements
of the city’s Building Code shall be prima facie evidence that such work,
material, assembly or equipment is reasonably safe to persons and property.
(Prior Code, § 19-307) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963)
MOBILE HOMES
§ 173.015 GENERALLY.
   (A)   Mobile home design and construction shall conform to generally
accepted standards of the mobile home industry.
   (B)   Materials, assemblies and equipment shall conform to generally
accepted standards with respect to strength, durability, corrosion and fire
resistance, and other qualities recognized under such standards.
   (C)   Habitable and non-habitable space shall be arranged, located, lighted
and ventilated so as to be appropriate for the intended use.
   (D)   Mechanical systems and equipment shall be designed, installed and
located so that under normal conditions of use such systems and equipment shall
be capable of functioning safely and efficiently without being forced to
operate beyond the designed capacity.
   (E)   Equipment requiring operation, inspection or maintenance shall be
located so that easy access to it is provided.
   (F)   Plumbing, heating and electrical systems shall be properly connected
to approved sources of supply when a mobile home is in a fixed location and
occupied for living purposes.
   (G)   Mobile home units, including mechanical systems and equipment shall be
maintained and operated so as to be free of conditions conducive to personal
injury or detrimental to health or welfare.
(Prior Code, § 19-319) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963)
§ 173.016 DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION GENERALLY.
   Mobile homes shall be structurally sound, effectively insulated and capable
of sustaining designed dynamic loading.
(Prior Code, § 19-320) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963)
§ 173.017 BODY AND BODY FRAMING.
   (A)   Body frames shall be designed and constructed as complete units. Wall
and floor surfaces shall be firmly attached to body framing members. Doors and
windows shall be securely framed in place. Framing and exterior skin shall be
surface treated or painted to prevent deterioration.
   (B)   Roofs shall be pitched for proper drainage and shall be weather-tight.
Roof decks shall be of metal or non-combustible materials.
   (C)   Wood body framing shall be of seasoned lumber and shall provide
adequate support and rigidity. Members shall be joined so as to ensure
permanent attachment to each other.
   (D)   Metal body framing shall be of structural formed sections, riveted,
bolted or welded together. Where different metals are joined, precaution shall
be taken to prevent electrolytic action.
   (E)   Insulation of floors, roof and exterior walls shall consist of non-
combustible materials.
   (F)   Ventilation shall be provided to minimize deterioration of structural
members from condensation or other causes.
(Prior Code, § 19-321) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963)
§ 173.018 CHASSIS.
   (A)   Chassis shall extend substantially the length of the body and shall be
capable of supporting the live and dead loads to which subjected.
   (B)   Tongue or drawbar shall be secured to the chassis and shall be capable
of supporting the weight of the forward end of the mobile home. If designed to
support gas cylinders, the tongue shall be of sufficient strength and shall
permit secure attachment.
   (C)   The hitch shall be securely attached to the tongue so as to become an
integral part of the tongue.
   (D)   Axles, spring assemblies and wheels shall be capable of supporting the
calculated loads.
(Prior Code, § 19-322) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963)
§ 173.019 PLACEMENT.
   Placement of mobile home on mobile home stand by jacks or supports shall be
such as to ensure the retention of the mobile home in a fixed position.
(Prior Code, § 19-323) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963)
§ 173.020 MAXIMUM OCCUPANCY.
   The maximum number of occupants of a mobile home shall be limited to the
number determined on the basis of the square feet of floor area of habitable
space, exclusive of habitable space used for cooking purposes, in accordance
with the following:
   (A)   One hundred fifty square feet for one or two occupants;
   (B)   Two hundred fifty square feet for three occupants; and
   (C)   Eighty square feet additional for each occupant thereafter.
(Prior Code, § 19-324) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963)
§ 173.021 HEIGHT OF HABITABLE SPACE.
   Habitable space shall have a minimum ceiling height of seven feet over 50%
of the floor area; and the floor area where the ceiling height is less than
five feet shall not be considered in computing gross floor area.
(Prior Code, § 19-325) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963)
§ 173.022 BATHROOMS AND TOILET ROOMS.
   Bathrooms and toilet rooms shall have provisions for privacy and shall be
provided with floors of moisture-resistant material.
(Prior Code, § 19-326) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963)
§ 173.023 PROHIBITED USES.
   Bathrooms, toilet rooms, kitchens and kitchenettes shall not be used for
sleeping purposes.
(Prior Code, § 19-327) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963)
§ 173.024 EXITS.
   A mobile home shall have a safe and unobstructed primary exit and an
emergency exit located remote from the primary exit.
(Prior Code, § 19-328) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963)
§ 173.025 LIGHT AND VENTILATION.
   (A)   A mobile home shall be provided with natural light and ventilation
adequate for the intended use of each habitable space in accordance with the
following:
      (1)   Window area shall equal at least 10% of the floor area of each
habitable space; and
      (2)   Openable area of windows and other openings used for natural
ventilation of each habitable space shall equal at least 45% of the required
window area, or mechanical ventilation shall be provided as set forth in §
173.027(P) of this chapter.
   (B)   A mobile home shall be provided with light and ventilation adequate
for the intended use of non-habitable space in accordance with the following.
      (1)   Kitchenettes, bathrooms and toilet rooms shall be provided with
light of sufficient intensity and so distributed as to permit the maintenance
of sanitary conditions and the safe use of space and the appliances, equipment
and fixtures.
      (2)   Kitchenettes, bathrooms and toilet rooms shall be provided with
natural ventilation consisting of openable areas of not less than one and one-
half square feet for bathrooms and toilet rooms, and not less than three square
feet for kitchenettes; or mechanical ventilation shall be provided as set forth
in §
173.027(P) of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 19-329) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963)
§ 173.026 PLUMBING.
   (A)   A mobile home shall contain a kitchen sink, a flush-type water closet,
a bathtub or shower and a lavatory.
   (B)   Hot and cold water supply shall be provided at kitchen sink, bathtub
or shower and lavatory. Cold water shall be supplied to the water closet.
   (C)   Plumbing system shall be designed and arranged so as to facilitate
connecting to approved exterior water supply and sewage disposal systems,
provide adequate water supply to all plumbing fixtures and dispose of all
liquid wastes therefrom.
(Prior Code, § 19-330) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963)
§ 173.027 HEATING, VENTILATING AND AIR CONDITIONING.
   (A)   A mobile home shall contain space-heating equipment and water-heating
equipment.
   (B)   Areas allocated for installation of space-heating and water-heating
equipment shall provide adequate clearance so that the surface of adjacent
combustible materials will not exceed a safe temperature. Curtains and
draperies shall not be used in such areas.
   (C)   Space- and water-heating units shall be of an approved type for
installation in a mobile home. Fuel-burning water heaters and furnaces other
than those having a sealed combustion space shall not be located in sleeping
rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms.
   (D)   Space heating units shall have sufficient capacity to maintain a
minimum inside temperature of 70°F, based on the average of the recorded annual
minimum outside temperatures for the locality, and shall be provided with
manual or automatic temperature-control devices.
   (E)   Water heating units shall have sufficient capacity to deliver at each
hot water outlet an ample supply of water at a minimum temperature range of
130°F to 140°F, and such units shall be provided with safety devices arranged
to relieve hazardous pressures and excessive temperatures.
   (F)   Electrical space and water heating equipment shall be of an approved
type and shall have adequate circuit protection devices.
   (G)   Gas and liquid fuel-burning equipment shall be specifically designed
for the type of fuel used. Flues and vents shall be suitable for the type of
fuel used and shall be installed so that the surface of adjacent combustible
material will not exceed a safe temperature.
   (H)   Automatically operated heat-producing equipment using utility gas
shall have a valve that will automatically shut off the flow of gas to the main
burner when the pilot flame is extinguished.
   (I)   Automatically operated heat-producing equipment using liquefied
petroleum gas shall have a valve that will automatically shut off the flow of
gas to the pilot light and main burner when the pilot flame is extinguished.
   (J)   Fuel-burning space and water heating units shall be vented. Other
fuel-burning equipment shall be vented where the discharge of products of
combustion into the space where the equipment is installed would be unsafe.
   (K)   Liquid fuel-burning equipment shall be vented and shall be provided
with means to prevent spilling of fuel.
   (L)   Fuel storage containers and gas cylinders shall be mounted outside the
mobile home, or in a space that is vented to the outside and is vapor-tight to
the inside.
   (M)   Warm air supply ducts and fittings shall be of non-combustible
material.
   (N)   Return air ducts shall be of non-combustible material where exposed to
temperatures which are unsafe for combustible materials.
   (O)   Return air grilles in doors and partitions shall be of a permanent
non-closable type. Openings for return air shall not be located in bathrooms,
toilet rooms or kitchenettes.
   (P)   Mechanical ventilation, where required, shall exhaust air at rates not
less than the following:
      (1)   For habitable space: two air changes per hour;
      (2)   For bathrooms and toilet rooms: 25 cubic feet per minute; and
      (3)   For kitchenettes: 100 cubic feet per minute.
   (Q)   Air conditioning for habitable space provided in lieu of mechanical
ventilation shall supply an amount of air not less than that set forth in
division (P) above, with at least 25% of the required quantity taken from the
outside.
(Prior Code, § 19-331) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963)
§ 173.028 ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   A mobile home shall contain an electrical wiring system and service
equipment.
   (B)   Electrical wiring shall have adequate capacity for designed lighting
and appliance equipment. Individual circuits shall contain overload protection
devices.
   (C)   At least one receptacle outlet shall be provided for each multiple of
12 linear feet of wall space or major fraction thereof in each habitable space
and kitchenette. Bathrooms and toilet rooms shall have permanently installed
lighting fixtures and switches located so as not to be an electrical hazard.
   (D)   Exterior equipment shall be weather-proofed to ensure protection of
equipment from the elements. Service equipment shall have means for quick
disconnection from the source of supply.
   (E)   Provision shall be made for grounding non-current carrying metallic
parts of the electrical system. Such grounding shall be common to one external
supply point. Provisions shall be made for exterior source grounding of
electrical system.
(Prior Code, § 19-332) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963)
§ 173.029 COOKING AND REFRIGERATION.
   (A)   A mobile home shall contain cooking equipment and refrigeration
equipment.
   (B)   Electrical cooking and refrigeration equipment shall be of an approved
type for installation in a mobile home and shall have adequate circuit
protection devices.
   (C)   Gas-burning cooking and refrigeration equipment shall be of an
approved type for mobile home installation and connections to rigid pipe shall
be made with approved flexible metal gas appliance connectors.
   (D)   Fuel storage shall conform to the requirements of fuel storage for
heating.
(Prior Code, § 19-333) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963)
§ 173.030 MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   A mobile home shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition.
   (B)   Floors, walls, ceilings, furnishings and fixtures shall be maintained
in a clean and sanitary condition. Exits shall be maintained free of
obstructions.
   (C)   Suitable containers shall be provided for the temporary storage of
garbage and refuse within the mobile home.
   (D)   From May 1 to October 1, entrances to the mobile home shall be
provided with self-closing type devices or screens, and windows and other
openings used for ventilation shall be appropriately screened.
   (E)   Mobile home shall be maintained free of insects, vermin and rodents.
Extermination shall be effected in conformance with generally accepted
practice.
   (F)   Flammable cleaning liquids and other flammable materials shall be
stored in a safe, approved manner.
(Prior Code, § 19-334) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963)
MOBILE HOME COURTS
§ 173.045 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   No person shall maintain or operate a mobile home court without a
certificate of occupancy from the city’s Engineering Department.
(Prior Code, § 19-34) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 173.046 DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   The design and construction of mobile home courts shall conform to
applicable zoning and building regulations and generally accepted standards for
mobile home courts.
   (B)   Open areas shall be adequate to assure privacy, natural light and
ventilation for each mobile home and sufficient for essential outdoor uses.
(Prior Code, § 19-347) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 173.047 STORM WATER DRAINAGE.
   (A)   Mobile home courts shall have adequate facilities for drainage of
surface and subsurface water.
   (B)   Grading of the entire property shall be such as to facilitate the safe
and efficient drainage of surface water.
   (C)   Gutters, culverts, catch basins, drain inlets, storm water sewers,
approved combined storm and sanitary sewers or other satisfactory drainage
systems shall be utilized where deemed necessary.
(Prior Code, § 19-348) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 173.048 SURFACING OF STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND THE LIKE.
   Walks, driveways and parking spaces shall be provided with paved and durable
surfacing so as to provide safe and easy access under normal use and weather
conditions.
(Prior Code, § 19-349) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 173.049 OVERHEAD WIRES.
   Wires installed above driveways and parking spaces shall have a clearance of
not less than 18 feet.
(Prior Code, § 19-350) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 173.050 EXTERIOR LIGHTING.
   Artificial lighting shall be provided to illuminate walks, driveways and
parking spaces for the safe movement of pedestrians and vehicles at night.
(Prior Code, § 19-351) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 173.051 ELECTRICAL SYSTEM.
   The electrical system shall be designed to provide adequate capacity to
supply the connected load without exceeding the allowable current carrying
capacity of the conductors.
(Prior Code, § 19-352) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 173.052 TRAVEL OR VACATION TRAILERS.
   No occupied travel or vacation trailer or other form of temporary-type
living units shall be permitted in a mobile home court.
(Prior Code, § 19-353) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 173.053 REQUIRED UTILITIES.
   (A)   A mobile home court shall be provided with a water supply system, a
sewage disposal system and a electrical system.
   (B)   Utilities, including gas piping system where provided, shall have
sufficient capacity to supply the requirements of the mobile home court for the
maximum number of connected mobile homes.
(Prior Code, § 19-354) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 173.054 WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM.
   (A)   The water supply system shall be designed to provide a sufficient
supply of potable water, under adequate pressure, to outlets servicing mobile
homes, community structures, drinking fountains, hose connections, hydrants and
the like.
   (B)   Where a public water supply system is not available, an adequate
private water supply system, approved by the state, county or city health
department having jurisdiction, shall be provided.
(Prior Code, § 19-355) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 173.055 SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM.
   (A)   The sewage disposal system shall provide each mobile home and
community structures containing plumbing fixtures with an adequate and safe
method of sewage disposal.
   (B)   No sewage from a plumbing system shall be disposed of, except where
approved by the authority having jurisdiction.
   (C)   Where a public sewage disposal system is not available, an adequate
private sewage disposal system, approved by the state, county or city health
department having jurisdiction, shall be provided.
(Prior Code, § 19-356) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 173.056 GAS PIPING SYSTEM.
   The gas piping system shall be designed to provide a supply of gas
sufficient to meet the maximum demand without undue loss of pressure at the
connection to the mobile home furthest from the source of supply.
(Prior Code, § 19-357) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 173.057 UTILITY CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   A mobile home lot shall be provided with the following utility
connections for water supply connection, sanitary drainage connection and
electrical receptacle.
   (B)   Utility connections, including gas connection where provided, shall be
readily accessible at the mobile home stand and shall be means for safe and
efficient hookup to the mobile home.
   (C)   Water supply connection shall be located a safe distance from sanitary
drainage connection and shall not be subject to surface drainage. Means shall
be provided for a suitable water-tight connection, without cross-connection and
danger of freezing.
   (D)   The sanitary drainage connection shall be at proper location relative
to the mobile home and piping shall have a continuous grade to the point of
disposal. Drainage connection shall be provided with suitable fittings to
permit a water-tight junction to be made with the mobile home outlet.
   (E)   The gas connection shall provide a suitable gas-tight connection to
the mobile home.
   (F)   The electric system connection receptacle or terminal box shall be of
an approved weather- proof type. Such receptacle shall have provision for an
equipment ground.
(Prior Code, § 19-358) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 173.058 MOBILE HOME STAND.
   (A)   A mobile home lot shall contain a mobile home stand capable of
retaining the mobile home in a fixed position.
   (B)   The mobile home stand shall be adequately compacted and at such
elevation, distance and angle, in relation to the accessway, as to facilitate
the safe and efficient placement and removal of the mobile home.
(Prior Code, § 19-359) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 173.059 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES.
   Accessory structures shall be of durable construction and appropriate for
intended use and location.
(Prior Code, § 19-360) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 173.060 PATIOS.
   Patios shall be located so as to provide safe and easy access from the
mobile home.
(Prior Code, § 19-361) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 173.061 STORAGE LOCKERS.
   Storage lockers shall be designed to provide adequate storage facilities
convenient to the mobile home.
(Prior Code, § 19-362) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 173.062 COMMUNITY AREAS.
   (A)   The community area, including community facilities, shall be
appropriate for intended use and location.
   (B)   Fences, walls and other minor constructions shall be capable of
sustaining anticipated loads.
   (C)   Swimming pools, playground equipment and the like shall be designed so
as not to be a potential hazard.
(Prior Code, § 19-363) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 173.063 COMMUNITY STRUCTURES.
   Community structures shall be structurally sound and appropriate for
intended use and location.
(Prior Code, § 19-364) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 173.064 COMMUNITY FUEL STORAGE.
   (A)   A mobile home court shall be provided with facilities for the safe and
efficient storage of required fuels.
   (B)   Liquefied petroleum gas storage containers having a capacity exceeding
125 gallons shall be located not less than 25 feet from the nearest mobile
home, structure, building and lot line and shall not be subject to damage from
moving vehicles.
   (C)   Fuel oil and other flammable materials shall be stored so as not to be
a fire hazard.
(Prior Code, § 19-365) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 173.065 MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   A mobile home court shall be properly maintained so as to assure the
desirable residential character of the property.
   (B)   A mobile home court shall be maintained in a safe, sanitary and
orderly condition.
   (C)   Premises shall be kept clean and free of physical hazards.
   (D)   Open areas shall be maintained free of heavy undergrowths.
Accumulations of plant growth which are noxious or detrimental to health shall
be eliminated.
   (E)   All grounds and structures shall be maintained free of insect, vermin
and rodent harborage and infestation. Methods used for purposes of
extermination shall conform with generally accepted practice.
   (F)   Exterior wood surfaces of structures that are not inherently resistant
to deterioration shall be periodically treated with a protective coating of
paint or other suitable preservative.
   (G)   Adequate sanitary facilities and methods shall be used for the
collection, storage, handling and disposal of garbage and refuse.
   (H)   Domestic animals and pets shall be kept in an appropriate manner and
shall not be permitted to run at large.
(Prior Code, § 19-366) (Ord. 312, passed 3-25-1963) Penalty, see §
10.999
CHAPTER 174: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
General Provisions
   
174.001   Obstructions and encumbrances prohibited
   
174.002   Injury to streets, alleys, barricades and the like
   
174.003   Suspension of objects above street or sidewalk
   
174.004   Abandoned shopping carts
   
174.005   Work to be in accordance with approved plans and specifications
   
174.006   Supervision of work
   
174.007   Bond requirement for permits
   
174.008   Appeals from denial of permits
   
174.009   Suspension or revocation of permits
   
174.010   Sidewalk construction or repair generally
   
174.011   Sidewalks to be kept in good repair; recovery of damages sustained by
city
   
174.012   Repair or construction of sidewalks at expense of abutting property
owner
   
174.013   Permit for construction or repair of crosswalks or driveway aprons or
for curb cuts
   
174.014   Repair of unsafe driveways and crosswalks
   
174.015   Paving of driveway aprons
Street Cuts and Excavations
   
174.030   Permit
   
174.031   Barricades and guards
   
174.032   Payment in advance of costs of street restoration
   
174.033   Additional construction regulations
Snow and Ice Removal
   
174.045   Required
   
174.046   Removal by City Engineer
   
174.047   Record of expenses
   
174.048   Collection of expenses
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 174.001 OBSTRUCTIONS AND ENCUMBRANCES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall obstruct or encumber any public wharf, street, alley or any
public space with any article or thing whatsoever.
(Prior Code, § 32-1) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 174.002 INJURY TO STREETS, ALLEYS, BARRICADES AND THE LIKE.
   No unauthorized person shall move, alter, deface, injure or destroy any part
or accessory of any street or alley or any sign or barricade erected or placed
to protect, warn or guide the public.
(Prior Code, § 32-2) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 174.003 SUSPENSION OF OBJECTS ABOVE STREET OR SIDEWALK.
   No person shall suspend anything above any sidewalk or street unless
expressly authorized by this chapter, except an awning or marquee no part of
which is less than seven feet above the sidewalk grade.
(Prior Code, § 32-3) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 174.004 ABANDONED SHOPPING CARTS.
   The Superintendent of the Department of Public Works and any person duly
authorized by him or her or designated by the Mayor are hereby authorized to
impound any shopping carts or similar device, commonly used by markets, stores
and other businesses, which appear to be abandoned on any public or private
property, and to notify the owner of such shopping cart or device to reclaim
the same within one week of such notification; notice may be by telephone,
United States mail or personal contact. A fee of $5 per cart shall be paid to
the city when the shopping cart or device is reclaimed. Any shopping cart or
device that has not been reclaimed within the time specified shall be disposed
of as rubbish.
(Prior Code, § 32-4) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 174.005 WORK TO BE IN ACCORDANCE WITH APPROVED PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.
   No work for which a permit is required under this chapter shall be done by
any person, except in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the
City Engineer.
(Prior Code, § 32-5) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 174.006 SUPERVISION OF WORK.
   All work for which a permit is required by the provisions of this chapter
shall be done under the supervision of the City Engineer.
(Prior Code, § 32-6) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 174.007 BOND REQUIREMENT FOR PERMITS.
   (A)   No permit shall be granted for the doing of any work under this
chapter until a bond or policy of insurance has been filed with the Department
of Engineering and Building, as herein provided.
   (B)   The bond or policy of insurance shall be in the sum of $1,000, unless
a larger bond shall be required by the Council at the time any permit is
granted by it upon appeal.
   (C)   All bonds or policies of insurance shall be conditioned to pay all
damages to the streets of the city or to hold the city harmless of every other
damage of every other nature, whether to persons or property for which such
city may be held liable by reason of, or which is occasioned by, the doing of a
thing or the exercise of the privilege for which the permit upon which the bond
or policy of insurance was based, was granted.
(Prior Code, § 32-7)
§ 174.008 APPEALS FROM DENIAL OF PERMITS.
   (A)   If the Department of Engineering and Building refuses to issue any
permit required by this chapter, the applicant may appeal to the Council which
shall grant a hearing thereon and the decision of the Council shall be final.
   (B)   In granting a permit after such hearing, the Council may impose such
conditions therefor as it may deem desirable to protect the safety of persons
and property during the moving of any building and the replacement of any
utility wires, poles and other street appurtenances as may be moved or taken
down therefor.
(Prior Code, § 32-8)
§ 174.009 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMITS.
   All work done pursuant to any permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall
be inspected by the City Engineer who may suspend or revoke any permit so
granted where the workmanship or materials used does not conform to the plans
and specifications approved or required upon issuance of the permit or when the
terms of any permit or of this chapter are violated.
(Prior Code, § 32-9)
§ 174.010 SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION OR REPAIR GENERALLY.
   (A)   No person shall construct or repair any sidewalk, except in accordance
with the lines, grade, slope and specifications established by the City
Engineer. No person shall construct or repair any sidewalk without a permit
from the Department of Engineering and Building. Permits shall be prominently
displayed on the construction site. The City Engineer shall charge and collect
for such permit a fee of:
 
Sidewalk
   Up to 50 ft. (10 square$40
   Over 50 ft.            $40, plus $1 per additional lineal foot
   Late fee               $125
 
   (B)   If a permit is not obtained before the work is started, a late fee of
$125 will be charged in addition to the regular permit fee
   (C)   Grinding of sidewalks to remove unsafe conditions shall be prohibited
unless authorized by permit by the City Engineer in accordance with Rules and
Regulations for Tree Removal, Trimming and Planting as promulgated by the
Department of Building and Engineering and approved by City Council.
(Prior Code, § 32-10) (Ord. 809, passed 3-23-1987; Ord. 860, passed 3-27-1989;
Ord. 1185, passed 10-20-2003; Ord. 1260, passed 12-12-2005; Ord. 1533, passed
5-22-2023) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 174.011 SIDEWALKS TO BE KEPT IN GOOD REPAIR; RECOVERY OF DAMAGES SUSTAINED BY
CITY.
   (A)   Sidewalks must be maintained in reasonable repair so that it is
reasonably safe and convenient for public travel. No person shall permit any
sidewalk which adjoins or abuts property owned by him or her to fall into a
state of disrepair or be unsafe.
   (B)   If any owner of land shall fail or neglect to keep any sidewalk along
the front, rear or side of land owned by him or her so that it is reasonably
safe and convenient for public travel, he or she shall be liable to the city
for any damages recovered against the city by any person by reason of such
sidewalk being in a condition of disrepair or otherwise unsafe. This liability
of the property owner shall exist even if the property owner does not receive
any prior notice from the city to repair the sidewalk abutting his or her
property as set forth in § 174.012(A) of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 32-11) (Ord. 829, passed 10-12-1987) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 174.012 REPAIR OR CONSTRUCTION OF SIDEWALKS AT EXPENSE OF ABUTTING PROPERTY
OWNER.
   (A)   If the City Engineer determines that a sidewalk is unsafe for use, or
required to be constructed for the public safety, he or she shall give written
notice thereof to the owner of the abutting premises by mail, addressed to the
last known address of said owner, or if the owner or his or her address be
unknown, by delivering said notice and leaving same with a person of suitable
age and discretion at the premises, or if such person be not found, by posting
such notice in some conspicuous place on the premises. The notice shall specify
the construction of the sidewalk required and specifications therefor, or the
condition to be repaired and the nature of the repairs to be made.
   (B)   If such owner fails to repair or construct such sidewalk within 30
days, the City Engineer shall report same to the Council with the request that
he or she be authorized to repair or construct the same. The City Engineer may
dispense with said notice and report, and request the Council for authority to
repair or construct the sidewalk if, in his or her opinion, the sidewalk
condition is unsafe and dangerous and requires immediate repair to assure
public safety and to prevent the possibility of city liability for personal
injury or property damage. Upon receipt of any such report of the failure of
such owner to repair the sidewalk within the time specified in such notice, or
such request for authority for immediate construction or repair, the Council
may determine to construct or repair same by resolution and order the City
Engineer to proceed with the required work. The cost of repairs or construction
hereunder if made by the city shall be charged against the premises abutting
such sidewalk and the owner thereof in accordance with the provisions of the
Charter relative to special assessments.
   (C)   Grinding of sidewalks to remove unsafe conditions shall be prohibited
unless authorized by permit by the City Engineer in accordance with Rules and
Regulations for Tree Removal, Trimming and Planting as promulgated by the
Department of Building and Engineering and approved by City Council.
(Prior Code, § 32-12) (Ord. 1533, passed 5-22-2023) Penalty, see §  
10.999
§ 174.013 PERMIT FOR CONSTRUCTION OR REPAIR OF CROSSWALKS OR DRIVEWAY APRONS OR
CURB CUTS.
   (A)   No person shall construct, alter or change any crosswalk, driveway
apron or any opening in or through any curb in any street or public way without
a permit from the Department of Engineering and Building. The City Engineer
shall charge and collect for such a permit a fee of:
 
Feet     Fee
Up to 12 $15
Over 12  $15, plus $1 per lineal foot
 
   (B)   No permit to cut any curb shall be issued by the Department unless the
applicant shall agree in such application, as a condition of the issuance of
the permit, to install a driveway apron of concrete or other material of
comparable quality within 90 days after completion of the cut.
(Prior Code, § 32-13) (Ord. 809, passed 3-23-1987) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 174.014 REPAIR OF UNSAFE DRIVEWAYS AND CROSSWALKS.
   If the City Engineer determines that a driveway, crosswalk or other paved
area is not reasonably safe or fit for travel, he or she shall give the owner
or occupant of the premises adjacent to such driveway, crosswalk or other paved
area, notice to repair the same within 30 days. If such owner fails to do so,
the City Engineer shall have the power to cause the same to be repaired; the
Engineer shall make a detailed report to the Council of the cost and expense of
performing this work, which cost and expense shall be charged to such owner or
occupant in the manner provided by the Charter relative to special assessments.
(Prior Code, § 32-14) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 174.015 PAVING OF DRIVEWAY APRONS.
   If any driveway apron is not paved with concrete or other comparable
material, the City Engineer shall give the owner or occupant 30 days’ notice to
pave the same. If such person neglects or refuses to do so the City Engineer
shall cause said driveway apron to be paved; he or she shall make a detailed
report to the Council of the cost and expense of performing this work, which
cost and expense shall be charged to such owner or occupant in the manner
provided by the Charter, relative to special assessments.
(Prior Code, § 32-15) Penalty, see §
10.999
STREET CUTS AND EXCAVATIONS
§ 174.030 PERMIT.
   No person shall make any excavation or opening in or under any street, or
public place without first procuring a permit from the Department of
Engineering and Building.
(Prior Code, § 32-32) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 174.031 BARRICADES AND GUARDS.
   No person making an opening in a street, alley or public place shall fail to
guard the same fully during the period of construction. No person causing any
such opening to be used, or the user thereof, shall fail to guard or barricade
the same while in use, so as to protect the safety of the public. No person
using any street opening, or causing the same to be used, shall fail to close
the opening in accordance with the directions of the City Engineer immediately
after use.
(Prior Code, § 32-33) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 174.032 PAYMENT IN ADVANCE OF COSTS OF STREET RESTORATION.
   Each applicant for a permit which involves the opening of a street shall pay
in addition to the required permit fee the estimated cost of restoring the
surface of the street to its proper condition, which cost shall be determined
by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 32-34)
§ 174.033 ADDITIONAL CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS.
   The Department of Engineering and Building may make such additional rules
and regulations subject to the approval of the Council, pertaining to the
making of openings or excavations in streets, in the building of any vault,
stair or area-way in or under the streets, as are necessary to secure the
health and safety of the public and for the protection of property, and such
rules and regulations shall constitute the standards upon which the permits
shall be issued.
(Prior Code, § 32-35)
SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL
§ 174.045 REQUIRED.
   The occupant of any premises, or the owner of any unoccupied premises shall
keep the sidewalks in front of or adjacent to such premises cleared, so far as
is practicable and reasonable, from snow and ice to facilitate pedestrian use.
Where there are no sidewalks, the occupant or owner as aforementioned shall
clear a path free from snow and ice where a sidewalk would otherwise be, to
facilitate pedestrian use. Whenever any snow or ice has fallen or accumulated,
it shall be cleared within 12 hours after it has fallen or accumulated.
(Prior Code, § 32-52) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 174.046 REMOVAL BY CITY ENGINEER.
   If the occupant of any premises, or the owner of any unoccupied premises,
within the area known as the CBD Central Business District as established on
the zoning district map of Ch. 190 of this code of ordinances, fails to comply
with the provisions of §
174.045 of this chapter, the City Engineer shall assign employees to clear any
snow or ice that has fallen or accumulated and has not been cleared away in
compliance with §
174.045 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 32-53)
§ 174.047 RECORD OF EXPENSES.
   The City Engineer shall keep an accurate account of the expenses incurred in
clearing snow and ice with respect to each premises so cleared, and shall make
a sworn statement of said account and deliver it to the City Clerk. The Clerk
shall present all such accounts to the Council not later than the third
Thursday in May of each year. The Council shall audit and, if correct, allow
such accounts and order the same paid from the General Fund of the city. The
sworn statement of the Engineer shall give the date or dates when such snow or
ice was removed, the owner and description of the land involved and the cost of
such labor.
(Prior Code, § 32-54)
§ 174.048 COLLECTION OF EXPENSES.
   After accounts have been audited, allowed and paid as herein provided, it
shall be the duty of the City Clerk to certify them forthwith to the City
Assessor. All expenditures represented by said accounts shall be severally
spread upon the tax roll next in preparation, levied on the land on which such
expenditures were made, be a lien and collected in the same manner as other
city taxes and paid into the General Fund of the city.
(Prior Code, § 32-55)
CHAPTER 175: TREES AND VEGETATION
Section
   
175.001   Definitions
   
175.002   Authority of Department of Building and Engineering
   
175.003   Permit applications
   
175.004   Permit to plant certain trees
   
175.005   Plants in public ways generally
   
175.006   Cutting, mutilating and the like trees in public ways
   
175.007   Attaching wires, signs and the like to trees in public ways
   
175.008   Tree trimming by public utilities
   
175.009   Protection during excavation
   
175.010   Obstructions prohibited; trimming
   
175.011   Protection from stones, bricks, sand and the like
   
175.012   Maintenance of vacant lots in Central Business District
 
   
175.999   Penalty
§ 175.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GROWTH. Includes any or all thereof unless the context otherwise requires.
   SHRUBS. Under 15 feet in height, may include vines and plants.
   TREES. Includes shrubs which grow higher than 15 feet.
(Prior Code, § 36-1)
§ 175.002 AUTHORITY OF DEPARTMENT OF BUILDING AND ENGINEERING.
   The Department of Building and Engineering shall have complete charge and
control over the planting, cutting, trimming and removal of trees and other
growth upon all public highways and places, and the Department may promulgate
and adopt rules and regulations for the control of same.
(Prior Code, § 36-2)
§ 175.003 PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   An application for any permit required by the provisions of this chapter
shall be made in accordance with the terms and provisions of this code of
ordinances and the rules and regulations promulgated by the Department of
Building and Engineering and as approved by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 36-3) (Ord. 1534, passed 6-5-2023)
§ 175.004 PERMIT TO PLANT CERTAIN TREES.
   No person, except authorized city employees, shall plant any poplar, box
elder, basswood, cottonwood, willow, soft maple, common catalpa, horse chestnut
or “ailanthus glandulosa” tree without a permit from the Department of Building
and Engineering. The Department of Building and Engineering shall issue permits
authorizing the species and size of trees to be planted in public rights-of-way
as set forth in the rules and regulations approved by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 36-4) (Ord. 1534, passed 6-5-2023) Penalty, see §  
175.999
§ 175.005 PLANTS IN PUBLIC WAYS GENERALLY.
   No person other than authorized city employees, shall plant or destroy any
ornamental shade tree or shrub located in any public way unless authorized to
do so in accordance with the rules and regulations promulgated by the
Department of Building and Engineering.
(Prior Code, § 36-5) (Ord. 1534, passed 6-5-2023; Ord. 1539, passed 11-6-2023)
Penalty, see §  
175.999
§ 175.006 CUTTING, MUTILATING AND THE LIKE TREES IN PUBLIC WAYS.
   No person other than authorized city employees shall plant or destroy any
ornamental shade tree or shrub located in any public way. If a person or
property owner removes a tree from the public right- of-way without a permit,
or damages a tree by improper trimming and pruning such that the tree life
expectancy is shortened or the tree is now a danger to the public and requires
removal, the person or property owner responsible shall be in violation of this
section and subject to the requirements and penalties of the rules and
regulations promulgated by the Department of Building and Engineering.
(Prior Code, § 36-6) (Ord. 1534, passed 6-5-2023) Penalty, see §
175.999
Statutory reference:
   Destruction of trees, see M.C.L.A. § 247.241 and 324.35105(1)(a)
§ 175.007 ATTACHING WIRES, SIGNS AND THE LIKE TO TREES IN PUBLIC WAYS.
   No person shall attach, place or fasten any wire, rope, chain, cable, signs,
card, board, poster or other article or any animal to any tree located in a
public way.
(Prior Code, § 36-7) Penalty, see §
175.999
Statutory reference:
   Attaching articles to trees, see M.C.L.A. § 247.241
§ 175.008 TREE TRIMMING BY PUBLIC UTILITIES.
   No person owning or operating any bus lines or other motor transportation
over the city streets, or any public utility lines upon, above or below the
surface, shall trim, cut or cause it to be trimmed or cut, along any public way
or park, without first having submitted to the department of building and
engineering a plan of the work to be done and having procured a permit for such
work; provided, however, that, nothing in this section shall be construed to
apply to the removal, under the direction of the Department, of any stump,
roots, tree, shrub, vine, plant or part thereof, wherever such removal shall be
found necessary in the construction or repair of any street, sidewalk, sewer,
pavement or other public improvement.
(Prior Code, § 36-8) Penalty, see §
175.999
Statutory reference:
   Removal of trees by public utilities, see M.C.L.A. § 560.190
§ 175.009 PROTECTION DURING EXCAVATION.
   In any excavation, or the erection, alteration or repair of any building or
structure, or other work, the owner thereof, or someone for him or her, shall
place or cause to be placed such guards around all nearby trees, shrubs and
plants in the public way as will effectually prevent injury to them.
(Prior Code, § 36-9) Penalty, see §
175.999
§ 175.010 OBSTRUCTIONS PROHIBITED; TRIMMING.
   (A)   No person shall maintain upon any land which he owns or occupies any
tree which is so located as to extend its branches over a public alley or
public street or public sidewalk unless the same shall be kept trimmed so that
there shall be a clear height of not less than 12 feet above that portion of
the surface of said alley, street or sidewalk, unobstructed by branches. No
such person shall fail to remove all dead branches or stubs on such trees which
are or may become a menace to persons on any public alley, public street or
public sidewalk.
   (B)   No person shall allow, upon any corner lot which he or she owns or
occupies, any trees, bushes, shrubs or plants which bear foliage which would
obstruct the view of a driver of a vehicle approaching a street intersection
above a height of three feet above the grade of the surface of the intersecting
streets. No such person shall allow any trees, bushes, shrubs or plants located
on any land which extends in front of the building setback line of the
subdivision and which bears foliage that would obstruct the view of a driver of
a vehicle approaching a public street from a public or private driveway to grow
to a height of more than three feet above the grade of the surface of the
public street.
   (C)   No person shall plant any tree, bush, shrub or plant in the right-of-
way of any street, between the sidewalk and curb of said right-of-way and
within 30 feet of the nearest sidewalk parallel to any intersecting street
right-of-way.
   (D)   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of divisions (A),
(B) or (C) above shall be given a written notice of such violation, which
notice shall allow seven calendar days from the date of the notice in which a
remedy the violation and to comply with this section. It shall be unlawful for
any person to fail to comply with said notice.
(Prior Code, § 36-10) Penalty, see §
175.999
§ 175.011 PROTECTION FROM STONES, BRICKS, SAND AND THE LIKE.
   No person shall place or maintain upon the ground in any public way or place
of the city, any stone, brick, sand, concrete or other material or article
which may injure or which may in any way impede the full and free passage of
water, air or fertilizer to the roots of any tree, shrub, vine or plant,
without leaving an open space of ground not less than four feet in diameter
around the same.
(Prior Code, § 36-11) Penalty, see §
175.999
§ 175.012 MAINTENANCE OF VACANT LOTS IN CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   (A)   (1)   Any person or entity owning, leasing, occupying or having charge
or control of any vacant parcel of land located in the central business
district of the city shall be required to maintain a lawn on said parcel of
land by either planting seed or laying sod in such a manner so as to avoid
dusty and/or muddy conditions on said parcel of land.
      (2)   In addition, said grass or lawn shall be maintained so as to be in
compliance with all city ordinances and to prevent the accumulation of litter
on said parcel of land.
   (B)   Upon the failure of any person or entity to maintain a lawn of any
vacant parcel of land in the Central Business District as set forth above, the
city shall proceed to abate such condition and prepare a statement of cost
incurred in the abatement thereof. Any and all costs incurred by the city in
the abatement of this condition shall constitute a lien against the property on
which such unlawful condition exists, which lien shall be filed, proven and
collected as provided for by law and said lien shall bear interest at the legal
rate thereafter until satisfied. Such costs may be collected as a special
assessment pursuant to the City Charter or any other means provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 36-12) (Ord. 943, passed 6-22-1992) Penalty, see §
175.999
Charter reference:
   Collection of expenses as a special assessment, see §
222
§ 175.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person or entity who violates §
175.012 of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor subject to a fine not
exceeding $500 and/or imprisonment not exceeding 90 days in jail.
(Prior Code, § 36-12) (Ord. 943, passed 6-22-1992)
CHAPTER 176: GRADING AND SOIL EROSION CONTROL
Section
General Provisions
   
176.001   Legislative findings
   
176.002   Purposes
   
176.003   Definitions
   
176.004   Site plan plat approval
   
176.005   Compliance required for occupancy
   
176.006   General requirements
   
176.007   Maintenance requirements
   
176.008   Minimum design standards
   
176.009   Modifications of approved plans
   
176.010   Certificate of completion
   
176.011   Failure to complete work
   
176.012   Enforcement; authority
Permit Requirements
   
176.025   Permit required
   
176.026   Application
   
176.027   Fee
   
176.028   Denial
   
176.029   Bond
   
176.030   Extension of time
   
176.031   Permittee’s responsibility
   
176.032   Exceptions
 
   
176.999   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Planning and Development, see
Ch. 177
   Streets and Sidewalks, see
Ch. 174
   Trees and Vegetation, see
Ch. 175
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 176.001 LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS.
   The City Council hereby finds that the possibility that excessive quantities
of soil may be eroding from certain areas that may undergo development for non-
agricultural uses such as housing developments, industrial areas, recreational
uses and public work construction. This erosion makes necessary costly repairs
to gullies, washed-out fills, roads and embankments. The resulting sediment
clogs storm sewers and road ditches, muddies streams and leaves deposits of
silts in lakes, streams, rivers, wetlands and reservoirs, and is considered a
major water pollutant.
(Prior Code, § 16-1) (Ord. 1311, passed 3-16-2009)
§ 176.002 PURPOSES.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to prevent soil erosion and off-site
sedimentation from earth change activities within the city by requiring proper
provisions for water disposal and the protection of soil surfaces during and
after construction, in order to promote the safety, public health, convenience
and general welfare of the community.
   (B)   This chapter also incorporates by reference the rules promulgated
under part 91, Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control of the Natural Resources
and Environmental Protection Act, Public Act 451 of 1994, as amended, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 324.9101 et seq.
   (C)   The city’s Department of Engineering and Building is designated as the
municipal enforcing agency (MEA) and shall administer and implement soil
erosion and sedimentation control in compliance with this chapter, part 91
(M.C.L.A. §§ 324.9101 et seq.), as amended from time to time, and all current
rules, within the municipal limits of the city.
(Prior Code, § 16-2) (Ord. 1311, passed 3-16-2009)
§ 176.003 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCELERATED SOIL EROSION. The increased loss of the land surface that occurs
as a result of human activities.
   ACCEPTABLE EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PROGRAM. The activities of a county
or local enforcing agency or authorized public agency that are conducted in
accordance with the rules and part 91 (M.C.L.A. §§ 324.9101 et seq.) regarding
staff training, developing and reviewing plans, issuing permits, conducting
inspections and initiating compliance and enforcement actions to effectively
minimize erosion and off-site sedimentation.
   AUTHORIZED PUBLIC AGENCY. A state agency or an agency of a local unit of
government authorized under § 9110 of part 91 (M.C.L.A. §§ 324.9101 et seq.) to
implement soil erosion and sedimentation control procedures with regard to
earth changes undertaken by it.
   CERTIFICATION OF COMPLETION. A signed certificate issued by the City
Engineer that the specific construction has been inspected and found to comply
with all approved soil erosion and sedimentation control plans and
specifications and requirements of this chapter.
   CITY ENGINEER. The City Engineer of the city or his or her duly authorized
and designated representative in the Department of Engineering and Building.
   EARTH CHANGE. A human-made change in the natural cover or topography of
land, including cut and fill activities, which may result in or contribute to
soil erosion or sedimentation of the waters of the state. EARTH CHANGE does not
include the practice of plowing and filling for crop production.
   EROSION. The process by which the ground surface is worn away by action of
wind, water, gravity or a combination thereof.
   EXCAVATION or CUT. Any act by which soil is cut into, dug, uncovered,
removed, displaced or relocated, and shall include the conditions resulting
therefrom.
   FLOODPLAIN. The area which would be inundated by storm run-off or flood
water equivalent to that which would occur with a rainfall or flood of 100-year
recurrence frequency after total development of the watershed.
   GRADING. Any stripping, excavating, filling, stockpiling, or any combination
thereof, and shall include the land in its excavated or filled condition.
   LAKE. The Great Lakes and all natural and artificial inland lakes or
impoundments that have definite banks, a bed, visible evidence of a continued
occurrence of water and a surface area of water that is equal to, or greater
than, one acre. LAKE does not include sediment basins and basins constructed
for the sole purpose of storm water retention, cooling water or treating
polluted water.
   MUNICIPAL ENFORCING AGENCY. The City of Wyandotte Department of Engineering
and Building.
   NON-EROSIVE VELOCITY. The surface water velocity which is not conducive to
the development of accelerated soil erosion.
   PERMANENT SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL MEASURE. Those control
measures which are installed or constructed to control soil erosion and
sedimentation, and which are maintained after project completion.
   SEDIMENT. Any solid particulate matter, mineral or organic that has been
deposited in water, is in suspension in water, is being transported or has been
removed from its site of origin by the process of soil erosion and deposited
elsewhere.
   SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL (SESC) PERMIT. A permit issued to
authorize work to be performed under this chapter.
   STABILIZATION. The proper placing, grading and/or covering of soil or rock
to ensure their resistance to erosion, sliding or other movement.
   STREAM. A river, creek or other surface watercourse which may or may not be
serving as a drain as defined in Public Act 40 of 1956, as amended, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 280.1 et seq., and which has definite banks, a bed and visible
evidence the continued flow or continued occurrence of water, including the
connecting waters of the Great Lakes.
   STRIPPING. Any activity which removes or significantly disturbs the
vegetative surface cover, including clearing and grubbing operations.
   TEMPORARY SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL MEASURES. Interim control
measures which are installed or constructed to control soil erosion and
sedimentation and are not maintained after project completion.
(Prior Code, § 16-3) (Ord. 1311, passed 3-16-2009)
§ 176.004 SITE PLAN PLAT APPROVAL.
   No site plan, plot plan or plat shall be approved unless said site plan,
plot plan or plat shall include soil erosion and sediment control measures
consistent with the requirements of this chapter and related land development
regulations.
(Prior Code, § 16-4) (Ord. 1311, passed 3-16-2009)
§ 176.005 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED FOR OCCUPANCY.
   No certificate of occupancy for any new building will be issued unless the
applicant for said certificate shall have obtained a certification of
completion indicating compliance with all soil erosion and sedimentation
control plans and specifications and completion of all permanent soil erosion
control measures.
(Prior Code, § 16-5) (Ord. 1311, passed 3-16-2009)
§ 176.006 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Any earth changes shall be conducted in such a manner which will
effectively reduce accelerated soil erosion and resulting sedimentation.
   (B)   All persons engaged in earth changes shall design, implement and
maintain acceptable soil erosion and sedimentation and control measures, in
conformance with part 91 (M.C.L.A. §§ 324.9101 et seq.), the rules and
regulations which may have been duly adopted for the purpose of reducing
accelerated soil erosion and off-site sedimentation.
   (C)   All earth changes shall be designed, constructed and completed in such
a manner which shall limit the exposed area of any disturbed land for the
shortest possible period of time.
   (D)   Sediment caused by accelerated soil erosion shall be removed from
runoff water before it leaves the site of the earth change.
   (E)   Any temporary or permanent facility designed and constructed for the
conveyance of water around, through or from the earth change area shall be
designed to limit the water flow to a non-erosive velocity.
   (F)   Temporary soil erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be
installed before or upon commencement of the earth change activity and the
measures shall be maintained on a daily basis. Temporary soil erosion control
measures shall be removed after earth change areas are stabilized and permanent
soil erosion control measures are installed. The area shall be stabilized with
permanent soil erosion control measures under approved standards and
specifications as prescribed by R 323.1710.
   (G)   Permanent soil erosion control measures for all slopes, channels,
ditches or any disturbed land area shall be completed within five calendar days
after final grading or the final earth change has been completed. When it is
not possible to permanently stabilize a disturbed area after an earth change
has been completed or where significant earth change activity ceases, temporary
soil erosion control measures shall be maintained until permanent soil erosion
control measures are implemented and the area is stabilized.
(Prior Code, § 16-6) (Ord. 1311, passed 3-16-2009)
§ 176.007 MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   Persons carrying out soil erosion and sediment control measures, and all
subsequent owners of property concerning which such measures have been taken
shall maintain all permanent erosion and sedimentation control measures.
(Prior Code, § 16-7) (Ord. 1311, passed 3-16-2009)
§ 176.008 MINIMUM DESIGN STANDARDS.
   All soil erosion and sedimentation control plans and specifications,
including extensions of previously approved plans, shall include provisions for
erosion and sediment control in accordance with, but not limited to, the
standards contained in the state’s Department of Management and Budget Soil
Erosion and Sedimentation Control Guidebook, dated February 2003, or subsequent
versions of such standards, and comply with part 91 (M.C.L.A. §§ 324.9101 et
seq.). Copies of said standards shall be available for inspection in the office
of the City Engineer.
(Prior Code, § 16-8) (Ord. 1311, passed 3-16-2009)
§ 176.009 MODIFICATIONS OF APPROVED PLANS.
   All modifications of the approved soil erosion and sedimentation control
plan must be submitted and approved by the City Engineer. All necessary
sustaining reports shall be submitted with any proposal to modify the approved
SESC plan. No grading work in connection with any proposed modification shall
be permitted without the approval of the City Engineer.
(Prior Code, § 16-9) (Ord. 1311, passed 3-16-2009)
§ 176.010 CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION.
   Upon satisfactory execution of all approved soil erosion and sedimentation
control plans and other requirements, the City Engineer shall issue a
certification of completion. If the City Engineer finds any existing conditions
not as stated in any application, approved plan or permit, he or she may refuse
to approve further work until approval of a revised plan which will conform to
the existing conditions.
(Prior Code, § 16-10) (Ord. 1311, passed 3-16-2009)
§ 176.011 FAILURE TO COMPLETE WORK.
   In the event of failure to complete the work or failure to comply with all
the requirements, conditions and terms of a soil erosion and sedimentation
control permit and approved plans, this chapter, part 91 (M.C.L.A. §§ 324.9101
et seq.), as amended, and all current rules, the City Engineer may order such
work as is necessary to eliminate any danger to persons, property or water of
the state and to leave the site in a safe condition, and he may authorize
completion of all necessary temporary or permanent soil erosion control
measures. The permittee and the surety executing the bond or persons issuing
the instrument of credit or making the cash deposit shall continue to be firmly
bound under a continuing obligation for the payment of all necessary costs and
expense that may be incurred or expended by the city in causing any and all
such work to be done. In the case of a cash deposit, any unused portion thereof
shall be refunded to the permittee.
(Prior Code, § 16-11) (Ord. 1311, passed 3-16-2009)
§ 176.012 ENFORCEMENT; AUTHORITY.
   (A)   (1)   The requirements of this chapter shall be enforced by the City
Engineer or his or her authorized representative. The City Engineer shall
inspect the work and shall require adequate inspection of compaction by a soil
engineer or by a soil testing agency, approved by the City Engineer, unless he
or she determines that such inspection requirements may be waived due to the
non-hazardous nature of the grading.
      (2)   The City Engineer or his or her duly authorized agents may enter at
all reasonable times in or upon any private or public property for the purpose
of inspecting and investigating conditions and practices which may be a
violation of this chapter, or the latest rules of the Department of
Environmental Quality, promulgated pursuant to part 91 (M.C.L.A. §§ 324.9101 et
seq.), as amended, and all current rules.
      (3)   The City Engineer may seek to enforce a violation of this chapter
by notifying the person who owns the land on which the violation is occurring
by certified mail. The notice shall contain a description of the violation and
what must be done to remedy the violation and shall specify a time to comply
with this chapter.
      (4)   Within five days after a notice of violation has been issued under
this section, a person who owns land subject to this chapter shall implement
and maintain soil erosion and sedimentation control measures in conformance
with this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 16-12)
   (B)   The City Engineer and his or her designees are hereby authorized to
issue municipal civil infraction citations or notices of municipal civil
infractions pursuant to Ch. 11 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 16-14)
(Ord. 1311, passed 3-16-2009)
PERMIT REQUIREMENTS
§ 176.025 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Except as exempted by sections of this chapter, or by part 91 of Public Act
451 of 1994, as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 324.9101 et seq., no person shall do
any grading, stripping, excavating or filling, nor undertake any earth change
which disturbs one or more aces of land, or if the earth change is within 500
feet of the water’s edge of a lake or stream unless he or she has a valid soil
erosion and sedimentation control permit issued by the municipal enforcing
agency.
(Prior Code, § 16-31) (Ord. 1311, passed 3-16-2009)
§ 176.026 APPLICATION.
   (A)   A separate application shall be required for each soil erosion and
sedimentation control permit. Plans, specifications and timing schedules shall
be submitted with each application for a permit. The plans shall be prepared or
approved and signed by a registered professional engineer, architect, landscape
architect or other person, who has experience in soil erosion and sedimentation
control.
   (B)   The plans and specifications accompanying the soil erosion and
sedimentation control permit application shall contain the following data:
      (1)   A legal description of the site on which the work is to be
performed;
      (2)   A site plan at a scale of one inch to 200 feet of the site location
and adjacent properties within 500 feet of the site property lines;
      (3)   A soil survey or written description of the soil types of the
exposed land area proposed for the earth change; and
      (4)   A detailed plan of the site at a scale of not more than one inch
equals 100 feet prepared by a licensed land surveyor in the state showing:
         (a)   Name, address and telephone number of the owner, developer and
petitioner;
         (b)   A description and the location of the physical limits of each
proposed earth change;
         (c)   A timing schedule indicating the anticipated starting and
completion dates of the development sequence and the time of exposure of each
area prior to the completion of effective erosion and sediment control
measures;
         (d)   A certified statement of the quantity of excavation and fill
involved;
         (e)   Existing and proposed topography at a maximum of five-foot
contour intervals;
         (f)   Location of any structure or natural feature on the site and on
the land adjacent to the site and within 50 feet of the site boundary line;
         (g)   Location of any proposed additional structures or development on
the site;
         (h)   The location and description for installing and removing all
proposed temporary soil erosion and sedimentation control measures;
         (i)   A description and location of fall proposed permanent soil
erosion and sedimentation control measures;
         (j)   Elevations, dimensions, location, extent and the slope of all
proposed earth changes (including building and driveway grades);
         (k)   The estimated total cost of the required temporary and permanent
soil erosion control measure;
         (l)   Plans of all existing and proposed de-watering facilities and
drainage provisions, retaining walls, cribbing, planting, anti-erosion devices
or other temporary or permanent soil erosion control measures to be constructed
in connection with, or as a part of, the proposed work, together with a map
showing the drainage area of land tributary to the site and estimated runoff of
the area served by any drains;
         (m)   A proposed program for continuous maintenances of all permanent
soil erosion and sedimentation control measures that remain after project
completion and designation of party responsibility for the maintenance.
Continuous maintenance shall be part of any sales agreement or transfer of the
property; and
         (n)   Other information or data as may be required by the City
Engineer such as a soil investigation report which shall include, but not be
limited to, data regarding the nature, distribution and supporting ability of
existing soils and rock on the site.
   (C)   The municipal enforcing agency shall approve or disapprove an
application for a soil erosion and sedimentation control permit within 30 days
of the filing of a complete application.
   (D)   All modifications or revisions to the approved plans, and any
substantiating reports, shall be submitted and approved by the municipal
enforcing agency prior to the implementation of such modifications or
revisions.
(Prior Code, § 16-32) (Ord. 1311, passed 3-16-2009)
§ 176.027 FEE.
   At the time of filing an application for a soil erosion and sedimentation
control permit a non-refundable fee will be charged for plan review and site
inspections. This fee will be determined by resolution by the City Council and
amended from time to time as recommended by the City Engineer.
(Prior Code, § 16-33) (Ord. 1311, passed 3-16-2009)
§ 176.028 DENIAL.
   Soil erosion and sedimentation control permits shall not be issued where:
   (A)   The proposed work would cause hazards to the public safety and
welfare;
   (B)   The work as proposed by the applicant will damage any public or
private property or interfere with any existing drainage course in such a
manner as to cause damage to any adjacent property or result in the deposition
of debris or sediment on any public way or into any waterway or create an
unreasonable hazard to person or property;
   (C)   The land area for which the earth change is proposed is subject to
geological hazard to the extent that no reasonable amount of corrective work
can eliminate or sufficiently reduce settlement, slope instability or any other
such hazard to persons or property; or
   (D)   The land area for which the earth change is proposed may lie within
the flood plain of any stream or watercourse (not specifically designated and
delineated by the city as an area subject to floor hazard), unless a hydrologic
report, prepared by a professional engineer, is submitted to certify that the
proposed grading will have, in his or her opinion, no detrimental influence on
the public welfare or upon the total development of the watershed.
(Prior Code, § 16-34) (Ord. 1311, passed 3-16-2009)
§ 176.029 BOND.
   (A)   A soil erosion and sedimentation control permit shall not be issued
unless the permittee shall first post with the municipal enforcing agency a
bond executed by the owner and a corporate surety with authority to do business
in the state as a surety.
   (B)   The bond shall be in a form approved by the City Attorney, payable to
the city, and in the amount of the estimated total cost of all temporary or
permanent soil erosion control measures. The total cost shall be estimated by
the City Engineer. The bond shall include penalty provisions for failure to
complete the work on schedule as specified on the soil erosion and
sedimentation control permit. These funds shall be used to install and complete
the soil erosion/sedimentation control measures if the permittee fails to
complete the work. In lieu of a surety bond, the applicant may file with the
city a cash bond or an instrument of credit approved by the City Attorney in
the amount equal to that which would be required for the surety bond.
   (C)   Every bond and instrument of credit shall include, and every cash
deposit shall be made on, the conditions that the permittee shall comply with
all of the provisions of this chapter and all of the terms and conditions of
the soil erosion and sedimentation control permit, and shall complete all of
the work contemplated under said permit within the time limit specified in the
soil erosion and sedimentation control permit, or if no time limit is
specified, within 180 days after the date of the issuance of said permit.
   (D)   A bond shall not be required by the City Engineer for construction of
accessory structures for a residential dwelling, construction of a minor
addition to a residential dwelling, or if a bond is posted with the city in
conjunction with a building permit.
(Prior Code, § 16-35) (Ord. 1311, passed 3-16-2009)
§ 176.030 EXTENSION OF TIME.
   (A)   (1)   If the permittee is unable to complete the work within the
specified time, he or she may, at least ten days prior to the expiration of the
soil erosion and sedimentation control permit, present in writing to the
municipal enforcing agency a request for an extension of time, setting forth
the reasons for the requested extension.
      (2)   In the event such an extension is warranted, the municipal
enforcing agency may grant additional time for the completion of the work, but
no such extension shall release the owner, permittee or the surety, from the
requirements of this chapter, part 91 (M.C.L.A. §§ 324.9101 et seq.), the
rules.
   (B)   If the permittee fails to extend the permit as set forth above and
allows the permit to expire, all work shall be ordered to stop by issuing a
stop work order until the permit is properly extended. The permittee shall be
bound to maintain all temporary and permanent soil erosion and sedimentation
control measures during the stop work order in conformance with this chapter,
part 91 (M.C.L.A. §§ 324.9101 et seq.), as amended, and all current rules.
   (C)   The municipal enforcing agency may require submittal of a new soil
erosion and sedimentation control plan and application if, in the opinion of
the agency, the conditions of the original permit are no longer valid due to
substantial changes in the site conditions.
(Prior Code, § 16-36) (Ord. 1311, passed 3-16-2009)
§ 176.031 PERMITTEE’S RESPONSIBILITY.
   During soil erosion and sedimentation control operations, the permittee
hereunder shall be responsible for:
   (A)   The prevention of damage to any public utilities or services within
the limits of grading and along any routes of travel of the equipment;
   (B)   The prevention of damage to adjacent property. No person shall allow
sediment to onto adjacent property or grade on land so close to the property
line as to endanger any adjoining public street, sidewalk, alley or any public
or private property without supporting and protecting such property from
settling, cracking or other damage which might result;
   (C)   Carrying out the proposed work in accordance with the approved plans
and in compliance with all the requirements of the permit and this chapter; and
   (D)   The prompt removal of all soil, miscellaneous debris or other
materials applied, dumped or otherwise deposited on public streets, highways,
sidewalks, or other public thoroughfares during transit to and from the
construction.
(Prior Code, § 16-37) (Ord. 1311, passed 3-16-2009)
§ 176.032 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No permits shall be required for the following:
      (1)   Plowing and tilling for crop production;
      (2)   Grading or an excavation below finished grade for basements,
footings, retaining walls or other structures on plots zoned residential of
less than one acre, 43,560 square feet, and more than 500 feet from any lake,
stream or drainage course; or
      (3)   Exemption and waivers set forth in part 91, M.C.L.A. §§ 324.9115
and 324.9115a, and R 1705.
   (B)   Although no permits are required under this section, the operations
and constructions exempted from obtaining permits must comply with the rules
and regulations concerning soil erosion and sedimentation control specified in
this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 16-38) (Ord. 1311, passed 3-16-2009)
§ 176.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
responsible for a municipal civil infraction and may be ordered to pay a civil
fine of not more than $2,500.
   (B)   Any person who knowingly violates the provisions of this chapter, part
91 (M.C.L.A. §§ 324.9101 et seq.), as amended, and all current rules, or
knowingly makes a false statement in an application for a soil erosion and
sedimentation control permit or in a soil erosion and sedimentation control
plan is responsible for the payment of a civil fine of not more than $10,000
for each day of the violation.
   (C)   Any person who knowingly violates the provisions of this chapter, part
91 (M.C.L.A. §§ 324.9101 et seq.), as amended, and all current rules after
receiving notification under §
115.012(A) of this chapter, is responsible for the payment of a civil fine of
not less than $2,500 or more than $25,000 for each day of violation.
   (D)   A default in payment of a civil fine or costs ordered under this
section or an installment of the fine or costs may be remedied by any means
authorized under the Revised Judicature Act, Public Act 236 of 1961, as
amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 600.101 et seq.
   (E)   In addition to a fine assessed under this section, a person who
violates part 91 (M.C.L.A. §§ 324.9101 et seq.), as amended, and all current
rules, or this chapter, is liable to the state for damages for injury to,
destruction of or loss of natural resources resulting from the violation. The
court may order a person who violates this chapter to restore the area or areas
affected by the violation to their condition as existing immediately prior to
the violation.
   (F)   Lessees, contractors or other individuals undertaking any earth
changes, as well as the landowner and on-site authorized agent, are liable for
civil penalties prescribed in this section.
(Prior Code, § 16-13) (Ord. 1311, passed 3-16-2009)
CHAPTER 177: PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT
Section
City Planning Commission
   
177.001   Creation
   
177.002   Members
   
177.003   Officers, rules and meetings
   
177.004   Quarterly report
   
177.005   Powers and duties
Downtown Development Authority
   
177.020   Establishment
   
177.021   Organization
   
177.022   Powers
   
177.023   Limitations on power and authority
   
177.024   Development and tax increment financing plan
   
177.025   Development plans
   
177.026   Development Area Citizens’ Council
   
177.027   Governing procedure
   
177.028   Boundaries
   
177.029   Financial reports
Historic Districts
   
177.040   Short title
   
177.041   Statement of purpose
   
177.042   Definitions
   
177.043   Historic District Study Committee; report
   
177.044   Establishing additional, modifying or eliminating historic districts
   
177.045   Historic District Commission; meetings; delegation of minor classes
of work; ordinary maintenance; review
   
177.046   Permit applications
   
177.047   Denials
   
177.048   Notice to proceed
   
177.049   Appeal of Commission decision
   
177.050   Work without a permit
   
177.051   Demolition by neglect
   
177.052   Review of work in proposed districts
   
177.053   Emergency moratorium
   
177.054   Acceptance of gifts or grants
   
177.055   Acquisition of historic resources
   
177.056   Historic districts designated
 
   
177.999   Penalty
CITY PLANNING COMMISSION
§ 177.001 CREATION.
   Pursuant to Public Act 33 of 2008, as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.3801 et
seq.), a city Planning Commission is hereby created and shall be known as the
“Planning Commission”.
(Prior Code, § 28-16) (Ord. 1295, passed 5-19-2008)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to create Planning Commission, see M.C.L.A. § 125.3811
§ 177.002 MEMBERS.
   (A)   (1)   The city’s Planning Commission shall be composed of nine
members, whom shall insofar as possible, represent different professions and
occupations. Members shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to the approval
of the Council. The term of each member shall be three years and until his or
her successor is appointed.
      (2)   Vacancies occurring otherwise than through the expiration of the
term shall be filled for the unexpired term by appointment by the Mayor,
subject to the approval of the Council.
      (3)   The members shall serve without compensation; except that, they may
be reimbursed for any actual expense paid in the performance of their duties.
   (B)   Members may be suspended and removed after a public hearing in
accordance with the provisions of the Charter.
   (C)   Vacancies occurring other than through the expiration of a term shall
be filled for the unexpired portion of the term by appointment of the Mayor,
subject to the approval of the Council.
   (D)   Members shall serve without compensation; except that, they may be
reimbursed for actual expenses paid in the performance of their duties.
(Prior Code, § 28-17) (Ord. 1295, passed 5-19-2008)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. § 125.3815
§ 177.003 OFFICERS, RULES AND MEETINGS.
   The Commission created herein shall select its President and the Vice
President and Secretary. The Commission shall hold meetings monthly and shall
designate the time and place thereof. It shall adopt its own rules of
parliamentary procedure and shall keep a record of its proceedings. Five
persons shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
(Prior Code, § 28-18)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.3817 and 125.3821
§ 177.004 QUARTERLY REPORT.
   The Commission created in this subchapter shall make a quarterly report to
the Council on its work.
(Prior Code, § 28-19) (Ord. 1295, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 177.005 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Commission created in this subchapter shall have such powers and perform
such duties as are provided by law and shall in addition thereto:
   (A)   Conduct investigations and surveys and make analysis of existing land
uses in the city;
   (B)   Make recommendations to the City Council or any board, department or
enforcement agency of the city, the functions of which affect the subject
matter of this subchapter, relating to the following:
      (1)   Building requirements, zoning provisions, neighborhood development,
the renovation, rehabilitation, demolition or removal of existing
uninhabitable, unsightly or unsafe structures;
      (2)   Most suitable allocation of land for industrial, commercial and
residential use;
      (3)   Housing and building conditions; provisions of the Housing and
Building Code;
      (4)   Park and recreational needs;
      (5)   Promotion of neighborhood and community groups to sponsor
neighborhood conservation and a cooperative program of cleaning, painting,
repairing, beautifying, rehabilitating, demolishing or removing uninhabitable,
unsightly or unsafe structures; and
      (6)   Any public question or problem involving the health, safety or
welfare of the residents of the city.
(Prior Code, § 28-20) (Ord. 1295, passed 5-19-2008)
DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
§ 177.020 ESTABLISHMENT.
   In recognition of the fact that it is in the best interests of the public to
halt property value deterioration and increase property tax valuation where
possible in its business district to eliminate the causes of that deterioration
and to encourage historic preservation and promote economic growth, a downtown
development authority is hereby established pursuant to Public Act 57 of 2018,
as amended, to be known as the “Wyandotte Downtown Development Authority within
the City of Wyandotte”.
(Prior Code, § 28-31) (Ord. 1223-B, passed 4-4-2005 )
§ 177.021 ORGANIZATION.
   (A)   Formation.
      (1)   The authority shall be under the supervision and control of a board
consisting of the Mayor of the city and the number of members required by this
subchapter, who shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to approval by the
City Council. Upon the expiration of the terms of three of the current members
in June 2005, the current membership of ten members shall be reduced to eight.
At least five of the members shall be persons having an interest in property
located in the downtown district. At least one of the members shall be a
resident of the downtown district (who shall not have an interest in non-
residential property in the district or in a business located in the district)
if the downtown district has 100 or more persons residing within it. All of the
members must either reside in the downtown district, have an interest in
property located in the downtown district or have an interest in a business
located in the downtown district. Any member who sells, conveys or removes
their interest in property or a business or residency in the downtown district
shall become ineligible to continue on the Board thereby creating a vacancy. A
member shall hold office until the member’s successor is appointed. Each member
shall serve for a term of four years. An appointment to fill a vacancy shall be
made by the Mayor for the unexpired term only. Members of the Board shall serve
without compensation, but shall be reimbursed for actual and necessary
expenses. The Chairperson of the Board shall be elected by the Board.
      (2)   Before assuming the duties of office, a member shall qualify by
taking and subscribing to the constitutional oath of office.
   (B)   Open Meetings Act compliance. The business which the Board may perform
shall be conducted at a public meeting of the Board held in compliance with the
Open Meeting Act, Act 267 of 1976, being M.C.L.A. §§ 15.261 to 15.275 (“OMA”).
The OMA shall apply to all meetings at which a quorum of members of the Board
are in attendance and to any committee which has been given decision making
authority by the Board. Public notice of time, date and place of the meeting
shall be given in the manner required by Public Act 267 of 1976. With the
exception of meetings held under M.C.L.A. § 15.268(a), at the request of the
employee, any public meeting may be closed to the public after a roll call vote
of two-thirds majority of the Board members. Minutes of all closed sessions
shall be kept pursuant to the requirements of the OMA. Minutes of all public
meetings of the Board shall be filed with the City Clerk within eight days of
the public meeting. The Board shall adopt rules consistent with Public Act 267
of 1976 governing its procedure and the holding of regular meetings, subject to
the approval of the City Council. Special meetings may be held if called in the
manner provided in the rules of the Board.
   (C)   Removal of members. Pursuant to notice and after having been given an
opportunity to be heard, a member of the Board may be removed for cause by the
City Council. Removal of a member is subject to review by the Circuit Court.
(Prior Code, § 28-32) (Ord. 1223-B, passed 4-4-2005)
§ 177.022 POWERS.
   (A)   Power. The Board of the Downtown Development Authority, as herein
created, shall have the following powers and may:
      (1)   Prepare an analysis of economic changes taking place in the
downtown district;
      (2)   Study and analyze the impact of metropolitan growth upon the
downtown district;
      (3)   Plan and propose the construction, renovation, repair, remodeling,
rehabilitation, restoration, preservation or reconstruction of a public
facility, an existing building or a multiple-family dwelling unit which may be
necessary or appropriate to the execution of a plan which, in the opinion of
the Board, aids in the economic growth of the downtown district;
      (4)   Plan, propose and implement an improvement to a public facility
within the development area to comply with the barrier-free design requirements
of the state construction code promulgated under the state’s Construction Code
Act of 1972, Public Act 230 of 1972, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1501 to 125.1531;
      (5)   Develop long-range plans, in cooperation with the city’s Planning
and Rehabilitation Commission, designed to halt the deterioration of property
values in the downtown district and to promote the economic growth of the
downtown district and take such steps as may be necessary to persuade property
owners to implement the plans to the fullest extent possible;
      (6)   Implement any plan of development in the downtown district
necessary to achieve the purposes of this act, in accordance with the powers of
the authority as granted by this act;
      (7)   Make and enter into contracts necessary or incidental to the
exercise of its powers and the performance of its duties;
      (8)   Acquire by purchase or otherwise, on terms and conditions and in a
manner the authority deems proper or own, convey or otherwise dispose of, or
lease as lessor or lessee, land and other property, real or personal, or rights
or interests therein, which the authority determines is reasonably necessary to
achieve the purposes of this act, and to grant or acquire licenses, easements
and options with respect thereto;
      (9)   Improve land and construct, reconstruct, rehabilitate, restore and
preserve, equip, improve, maintain, repair and operate any building, including
multiple-family dwellings and any necessary or desirable appurtenances thereto,
within the downtown district for the use, in whole or in part, of any public or
private person or corporation, or a combination thereof;
      (10)   Fix, charge and collect fees, rents and charges for the use of any
building or property under its control or any part thereof, or facility
therein, and pledge the fees, rents and charges for the payment of revenue
bonds issued by the authority;
      (11)   Lease any building or property under its control, or any part
thereof;
      (12)   Accept grants and donations of property, labor or other things of
value from a public or private source; and
      (13)   Acquire and construct public facilities.
   (B)   Financing.
      (1)   The activities of the Authority shall be financed from one or more
of the following sources:
         (a)   Donations to the authority for the performance of its functions;
          (b)   Proceeds of a tax imposed pursuant to § 12 of Public Act 57 of
2018, as amended, being M.C.L.A. § 125.1662;
          (c)   Monies borrowed and to be repaid as authorized by § 13 of
Public Act 57 of 2018, as amended, being M.C.L.A. § 125.1663;
         (d)   Revenues from any property, building or facility owned, leased,
licensed or operated by the authority or under its control, subject to the
limitations imposed upon the authority by trusts or other agreements;
         (e)   Proceeds of a tax increment financing plan established under §§
14 to 16 of Public Act 57 of 2018, as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1664 and
125.1666;
         (f)   Proceeds from a special assessment district created as provided
by law; and
         (g)   Money obtained from other sources approved by the City Council.
      (2)   Money received by the authority and not covered under the above
provisions shall immediately be deposited to the credit of the authority,
subject to disbursement pursuant to Public Act 57 of 2018, as amended. Except
as provided in Public Act 57 of 2018, as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1651
through 125.1680, the city shall not obligate itself nor shall it ever be
obligated to pay any sums from public funds, other than money received by the
city pursuant to this section, for or on account of the activities of the
authority.
(Prior Code, § 28-33) (Ord. 1194, passed 6-21-2004; Ord. 1223-B, passed 4-4-
2005)
§ 177.023 LIMITATIONS ON POWER AND AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Any contract necessary or incidental to the exercise of its powers set
forth in §
177.022(A)(7) of this chapter shall require the approval of the City Council.
   (B)   Any expenditure of tax increment funds on a contract for the purchase,
lease, construction, renovation, repair, remodeling, rehabilitation,
restoration, preservation or reconstruction of a public facility, existing or
new building, or a multiple-family dwelling unit or for professional
consultation or services which in total is for an amount in excess of $100,000
shall require a public hearing to be held before City Council and the approval
of the City Council prior to the expenditure of any TIF dollars.
   (C)   All expenditures of the Authority must authorized by the budget.
Before the budget of the Authority may be adopted by the Board, it shall be
approved by City Council.
   (D)   Any and all plans for development in the downtown development
authority district necessary to achieve the purpose of this act shall be
compatible with the master plan of the city, the master plan for central
business district and any other city planning document adopted by the City
Council applicable to the downtown development authority district.
   (E)   All proposals to purchase or lease property shall be presented to the
Board and City Council with the complete information required by the master
plan for strategic property purchases.
   (F)   Failure to adhere to the limitations set forth in this section shall
be considered misconduct or malfeasance of office and be sufficient cause to
remove a Board member under § 4(4) of the Act.
(Prior Code, § 28-34) (Ord. 1223-B, passed 4-4-2005)
§ 177.024 DEVELOPMENT AND TAX INCREMENT FINANCING PLAN.
   (A)   Adoption. A development and tax increment financing plan, approved by
the Authority pursuant to the procedures set forth in the act, an any
amendments thereto, shall be submitted in ordinance form to City Council for
its approval after proper notice and public hearing.
   (B)   Reaffirmation. The “Development and Tax Increment Financing Plan of
the Downtown Development Authority for the City of Wyandotte”, adopted on 3-22-
1988, pursuant to Act 57 of 2018, as amended, and as amended on 7-31-2003, is
hereby reaffirmed and continues to constitute a public purpose, based on all of
the considerations set forth M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1669 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 28-34.1) (Ord. 1223-B, passed 4-4-2005)
Editor's note:
   The Development and Tax Increment Financing Plan of the Downtown Development
Authority was subsequently amended by Ord. 1522, passed 2-28-2022.
§ 177.025 DEVELOPMENT PLANS.
   (A)   When the Board decides to finance a project in the downtown district
by the use of revenue bonds as authorized in § 13 or tax increment financing as
authorized in §§ 14, 15 and 16 of Public Act 57 of 2018, as amended, it shall
prepare a development plan.
   (B)   The development plan shall contain:
      (1)   The designation of boundaries of the development area in relations
to highways, streets, streams or otherwise;
      (2)   The location and extent of existing streets and other public
facilities within the development area and shall designate the location,
character and extent of the categories of public and private land uses then
existing and proposed for the development area, including residential,
recreational, commercial, industrial, educational and other uses, and shall
include a legal description of the development area;
      (3)   A description of existing improvements in the development area to
be demolished, repaired or altered, a description of any repairs and
alterations and an estimate of the time required for completion;
      (4)   The location, extent, character and estimated cost of the
improvements including rehabilitation contemplated for the development area and
an estimate of the time required for completion;
      (5)   A statement of the construction or stages of construction planned
and the estimated time of completion of each stage;
      (6)   A description of any parts of the development area to be left as
open space and the use contemplated for the space;
      (7)   A description of any portions of the development area which the
authority desires to sell, donate, exchange or lease to or from the
municipality and the proposed terms;
      (8)   A description of desired zoning changes and changes in streets,
street levels, intersections and utilities;
      (9)   An estimate of the cost of the development, a statement of the
proposed method of financing the development and the ability of the authority
to arrange the financing;
      (10)   Designation of the person or persons, natural or corporate, to
whom all or a portion of the development is to be leased, sold or conveyed in
any manner and for whose benefit the project is being undertaken if that
information is available to the authority;
      (11)   The procedures for bidding for the leasing, purchasing or
conveying in any manner of all or a portion of the development upon its
completion, if there is no express or implied agreement between the authority
and persons, natural or corporate, that all or a portion of the development
will be leased, sold or conveyed in any manner to those persons;
      (12)   Estimates of the number of persons residing in the development
area and the number of families and individuals to be displaced. If occupied
residences are designated for acquisition and clearance by the authority, a
development plan shall include a survey of the families and individuals to be
displaced, including their income and racial composition, a statistical
description of the housing supply in the community, including the number of
private and public units in existence or under construction, the condition of
those in existence, the number of owner-occupied and renter-occupied units, the
annual rate of turnover of the various types of housing and the range of rents
and sale prices, an estimate of the total demand for housing in the community
and the estimated capacity of private and public housing available to displace
families and individuals;
      (13)   A plan for establishing priority for the relocation of persons
displaced by the development in any new housing in the development area;
      (14)   Provision for the costs of relocating persons displaced by the
development and financial assistance and reimbursement of expenses, including
litigation expenses and expenses incident to the transfer of title, in
accordance with the standards and provisions of the Federal Uniform Relocation
Assistance and Real Property Acquisition Policies Act of 1970, being Pub. Law
No. 91-646, 42 U.S.C. §§ 46001 et seq.;
      (15)   A plan for compliance with Public Act 227 of 1972, being M.C.L.A.
§§ 213.321 to 213.332; and
      (16)   Other material which the authority, local public agency or City
Council deems pertinent.
(Prior Code, § 28-35) (Ord. 1223-B, passed 4-4-2005)
§ 177.026 DEVELOPMENT AREA CITIZENS’ COUNCIL.
   (A)   If a proposed development area has residing within it 100 or more
residents, a Development Area Citizens’ Council shall be established at least
90 days before the public hearing on the development or tax increment financing
plan. The Development Area Citizens’ Council shall be established by the City
Council and shall consist of not less than nine members. The members of the
Development Area Citizens’ Council shall be residents of the development area
and shall be appointed by the City Council. A member of a Development Area
Citizens’ Council shall be at least 18 years of age. The Development Area
Citizens’ Council shall be representative of the development area.
   (B)   The Development Area Citizens’ Council shall act as an advisory body
to the Authority and the City Council in the adoption of the development or tax
increment financing plans.
(Prior Code, § 28-36) (Ord. 1223-B, passed 4-4-2005)
§ 177.027 GOVERNING PROCEDURE.
   (A)   The Downtown Development Authority shall have all the powers and
duties prescribed by Public Act 57 of 2018, as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§
125.1651 through 125.1680, which shall become incorporated herein as the
amendments become effective by this reference.
   (B)   Any questions of interpretation of the powers and duties and
responsibilities of the authority shall be resolved by reference to Public Act
57 of 2018, as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1651 through 125.1680.
(Prior Code, § 28-37) (Ord. 1223-B, passed 4-4-2005)
§ 177.028 BOUNDARIES.
   (A)   The Authority shall exercise its powers within the downtown district
described in “Addendum A” attached to Ord. 1223-B and incorporated herein by
this reference.
   (B)   The City Council may alter or amend the boundaries of the downtown
district to include or exclude lands from the downtown district pursuant to the
same requirements for adopting the ordinance creating the authority.
(Prior Code, § 28-38) (Ord. 1223-B, passed 4-4-2005)
§ 177.029 FINANCIAL REPORTS.
   All expense items of the authority shall be publicized monthly with copies
being provided to the City Clerk and the financial records shall always be open
to the public.
(Prior Code, § 28-39) (Ord. 1223-B, passed 4-4-2005)
HISTORIC DISTRICTS
§ 177.040 SHORT TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as the “Historic District Ordinance of the
City of Wyandotte”.
(Prior Code, § 28-61) (Ord. 1332, passed 9-13-2010)
§ 177.041 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   (A)   Historic preservation is hereby declared to be a public purpose and
the City Council may hereby regulate the construction, addition, alteration,
repair, moving, excavation and demolition of resources in historic districts
within the city limits. The purpose of this subchapter is to:
      (1)   Safeguard the heritage of the city by preserving districts which
reflect elements of its history, architecture, archaeology, engineering or
culture;
      (2)   Stabilize and improve property values in each district and
surrounding areas;
      (3)   Foster civic beauty;
      (4)   Strengthen the local economy; and
      (5)   Promote the use of historic districts for the education, pleasure
and welfare of the citizens of the city and of the state.
   (B)   The city may, by ordinance, establish one or more historic districts.
The historic district(s) shall be administered by the Historic District
Commission and pursuant to this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 28-62) (Ord. 1332, passed 9-13-2010)
§ 177.042 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT. Public Act 169 of 1970, as amended.
   ALTERATION. Work that changes the detail of a resource, but does not change
its basic size or shape.
   CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS. The written approval of a permit application
for work that is appropriate and does not adversely affect a resource.
   COMMISSION. The Historic District Commission of the city.
   DEMOLITION. The razing or destruction, whether entirely or in part, of a
resource and includes, but is not limited to, demolition by neglect.
   DEMOLITION BY NEGLECT. Neglect in maintaining, repairing or securing a
resource that results in deterioration of an exterior feature of the resource
or the loss of structural integrity of the resource.
   DENIAL. The written rejection of a permit application for work that is
inappropriate and that adversely affects a resource.
   FIRE ALARM SYSTEM. A system designed to detect and annunciate the presence
of fire or byproducts of fire. FIRE ALARM SYSTEM includes smoke alarms.
   HISTORIC DISTRICT. An area, or group of areas, not necessarily having
contiguous boundaries, that contains one resource or a group of resources that
are related by history, architecture, archaeology, engineering or culture.
   HISTORIC PRESERVATION. The identification, evaluation, establishment and
protection of resources significant in history, architecture, archaeology,
engineering or culture.
   HISTORIC RESOURCE. A publicly or privately owned building, structure, site,
object, feature or open space that is significant in the history, architecture,
archaeology, engineering or culture of the city, state or the United States.
   NOTICE TO PROCEED. The written permission to issue a permit for work that is
inappropriate and that adversely affects a resource, pursuant to a finding
under § 399.205(6) of Public Act 169 of 1970, as amended.
   OPEN SPACE. Undeveloped land, a naturally landscaped area or a formal or
human-made landscaped area that provides a connective link or buffer between
other resources.
   ORDINARY MAINTENANCE. Keeping a resource unimpaired and in good condition
through ongoing minor intervention, undertaken from time to time, in its
exterior condition. ORDINARY MAINTENANCE does not change the external
appearance of the resource, except through the elimination of the usual and
expected effects of weathering. ORDINARY MAINTENANCE does not constitute work
for the purposes of this subchapter.
   PROPOSED HISTORIC DISTRICT. An area, or group of areas not necessarily
having contiguous boundaries, that has delineated boundaries and that is under
review by a committee or a standing committee for the purpose of making a
recommendation as to whether it should be established as a historic district or
added to an established historic district.
   REPAIR. To restore a decayed or damaged resource to good or sound condition
by any process. A REPAIR that changes the external appearance of a resource
constitutes work for the purposes of this subchapter.
   RESOURCE. One or more publicly or privately owned historic or non-historic
buildings, structures, sites, objects, features or open spaces located within a
historic district.
   SMOKE ALARM. A single-station or multiple-station alarm responsive to smoke
and not connected to a system. As used in this subchapter, “single-station
alarm” means an assembly incorporating a detector, the control equipment and
the alarm sounding device into a single unit, operated from a power supply
either in the unit or obtained at the point of installation. “Multiple-station
alarm” means two or more single-station alarms that are capable of
interconnection such that actuation of one alarm causes all integrated separate
audible alarms to operate.
   WORK. Construction, addition, alteration, repair, moving, excavation or
demolition.
(Prior Code, § 28-63) (Ord. 1332, passed 9-13-2010)
§ 177.043 HISTORIC DISTRICT STUDY COMMITTEE; REPORT.
   (A)   Before establishing a historic district(s), the City Council shall
appoint a Historic District Study Committee. A majority of the persons
appointed to the Study Committee shall have a clearly demonstrated interest in
or knowledge of historic preservation. The Study Committee shall contain
representation of at least one member appointed from one or more duly organized
local historic preservation organizations.
   (B)   The Study Committee shall do all of the following:
      (1)   Conduct a photographic inventory of resources within each proposed
historic district following procedures established by the state’s Historic
Preservation Office;
      (2)   Conduct basic research of each proposed historic district and
historic resources located within that district;
      (3)   Determine the total number of historic and non-historic resources
within a proposed historic district and the percentage of historic resources of
that total. In evaluating the significance of historic resources, the Committee
shall be guided by the selection criteria for evaluation issued by the United
States Secretary of the Interior for inclusion of resources in the National
Register of Historic Places, as set forth in 36 C.F.R. part 60, and criteria
established or approved by the state historic preservation office;
      (4)   Prepare a preliminary Historic District Study Committee report that
addresses at a minimum all of the following:
         (a)   The charge of the Committee;
         (b)   The composition of Committee membership;
         (c)   The historic district(s) studied;
         (d)   The boundaries of each proposed historic district in writing and
on maps;
         (e)   The history of each proposed historic district;
         (f)   The significance of each district as a whole, as well as a
sufficient number of its individual resources to fully represent the variety of
resources found within the district, relative to the evaluation criteria;
         (g)   Transmit copies of the preliminary report for review and
recommendations to the local planning body, the state’s Historic Preservation
Office, the state’s Historical Commission and the state’s Historic Preservation
Review Board; and
         (h)   Make copies of the preliminary report available to the public
pursuant to § 399.203(4) of Public Act 169 of 1970, as amended.
      (5)   Not less than 60 calendar days after the transmittal of the
preliminary report, the Historic District Study Committee shall hold a public
hearing in compliance with Public Act 267 of 1976, as amended. Public notice of
the time, date and place of the hearing shall be given in the manner required
by Public Act 267 of 1967, being M.C.L.A. §§ 15.261 et seq. Written notice
shall be mailed by first class mail not less than 14 calendar days prior to the
hearing to the owners of properties within the proposed historic district, as
listed on the most current tax rolls. The report shall be made available to the
public in compliance with Public Act 442 of 1976, being M.C.L.A. §§ 15.231 et
seq., as amended;
      (6)   After the date of the public hearing, the Committee and the City
Council have not more than one year, unless otherwise authorized by the City
Council, to take the following actions:
         (a)   The Committee shall prepare and submit a final report with its
recommendations and the recommendations, if any, of the local planning body to
the City Council as to the establishment of a historic district(s). If the
recommendation is to establish a historic district(s), the final report shall
include a draft of the proposed ordinance(s); and
         (b)   After receiving a final report that recommends the establishment
of a historic district(s), the City Council, at its discretion, may introduce
and pass or reject an ordinance(s). If the City Council passes an ordinance(s)
establishing one or more historic districts, the city shall file a copy of the
ordinance(s), including a legal description of the property or properties
located within the historic district(s) with the Register of Deeds. The City
Council shall not pass an ordinance establishing a contiguous historic district
less than 60 days after a majority of the property owners within the proposed
historic district, as listed on the tax rolls of the local unit, have approved
the establishment of the historic district pursuant to a written petition.
      (7)   A writing prepared, owned, used, in the possession of or retained
by a Committee in the performance of an official function shall be made
available to the public in compliance with Public Act 442 of 1976, as amended.
(Prior Code, § 28-64) (Ord. 1332, passed 9-13-2010)
§ 177.044 ESTABLISHING ADDITIONAL, MODIFYING OR ELIMINATING HISTORIC DISTRICTS.
   (A)   The City Council may at any time establish by ordinance additional
historic districts, including proposed districts previously considered and
rejected, may modify boundaries of an existing historic district or may
eliminate an existing historic district. Before establishing, modifying or
eliminating a historic district, a Historic District Study Committee appointed
by the City Council shall follow the procedures as stated in § 399.203(1-3) of
Public Act 169 of 1970, as amended. To conduct these activities, the City
Council may retain the initial Committee, establish a standing committee or
establish a committee to consider only specific proposed districts and then be
dissolved. The Committee shall consider any previously written committee
reports pertinent to the proposed action.
   (B)   In considering elimination of a historic district, a Committee shall
follow the procedures set forth in § 399.203(1-3) of Public Act 169 of 1970, as
amended for the issuance of a preliminary report, holding a public hearing and
issuing a final report, but with the intent of showing one or more of the
following:
      (1)   The historic district has lost those physical characteristics that
enabled the establishment of the district;
      (2)   The historic district was not significant in the way previously
defined; and/or
      (3)   The historic district was established pursuant to defective
procedures.
(Prior Code, § 28-65) (Ord. 1332, passed 9-13-2010)
§ 177.045 HISTORIC DISTRICT COMMISSION; MEETINGS; DELEGATION OF MINOR CLASSES
OF WORK; ORDINARY MAINTENANCE; REVIEW.
   (A)   Establishment; members.
      (1)   The City Council hereby establishes the Historic District
Commission pursuant to Public Act 169 of 1970, being M.C.L.A. §§ 399.201 et
seq., as amended. Each member of the Commission shall reside within the city
limits. The Commission shall consist of seven members. Members shall be
appointed by the City Council. A majority of the members shall have a clearly
demonstrated interest in or knowledge of historic preservation. Members shall
be appointed, subject to approval by City Council, for a term of three years,
except the initial appointments of three members for a term of two years and
two members for a term of one year. Subsequent appointments shall be for three-
year terms.
      (2)   Members shall be eligible for reappointment. In the event of a
vacancy on the Commission, interim appointments shall be made by the City
Council within 60 calendar days to complete the unexpired term of such
position. Two members shall be appointed from a list submitted by duly
organized local historic preservation organizations. If such a person is
available for appointment, one member shall be an architect who has two years
of architectural experience or who is duly registered in the state.
      (3)   The City Council may prescribe powers and duties of the Commission,
in addition to those prescribed in this subchapter, that foster historic
preservation activities, projects and programs in the local unit.
(Prior Code, § 28-66)
   (B)   Meetings, recordkeeping and rules of procedure.
      (1)   The Historic District Commission shall meet at least quarterly or
more frequently at the call of the Commission.
      (2)   The business that the Commission may perform shall be conducted at
a public meeting held in compliance with the Open Meetings Act, Public Act 267
of 1976, being M.C.L.A. §§ 15.261 et seq., as amended. Public notice of the
date, time and place of the meeting shall be given in the manner required by
Public Act 267 of 1976, being M.C.L.A. §§ 15.261 et seq. A meeting agenda shall
be part of the notice and shall include a listing of each permit application to
be reviewed or considered by the Commission.
      (3)   The Commission shall keep a record of its resolutions, proceedings
and actions. A writing prepared, owned, used, in the possession of or retained
by the commission in the performance of an official function shall be made
available to the public in compliance with the Freedom of Information, Public
Act 442 of 1976, being M.C.L.A. §§ 15.231 et seq., as amended.
      (4)   The Commission shall adopt its own rules of procedure and shall
adopt design review standards and guidelines to carry out its duties under this
Act.
(Prior Code, § 28-67)
   (C)   Delegation of minor classes of work. The Commission may delegate the
issuance of certificates of appropriateness for specified minor classes of work
to its staff or to another delegated authority. The Commission shall provide to
its delegated authority specific written standards for issuing certificates of
appropriateness under this section. The Commission shall review the
certificates of appropriateness issued by the delegate on at least a quarterly
basis to determine whether or not the delegated responsibilities should be
continued.
(Prior Code, § 28-68)
   (D)   Ordinary maintenance. Nothing in this article shall be construed to
prevent ordinary maintenance or repair of a resource within a historic district
or to prevent work on any resource under a permit issued by the Inspector of
Buildings or other duly delegated authority before the ordinance was enacted.
(Prior Code, § 28-69)
   (E)   Review by the Commission. The Commission shall review and act upon
only exterior features of a resource and shall not review and act upon interior
arrangements unless specifically authorized to do so by the City Council or
unless interior work will cause visible change to the exterior of the resource.
The Commission shall not disapprove an application due to considerations not
prescribed in § 399.205(3) of Public Act 169 of 1970, as amended.
(Prior Code, § 28-70)
   (F)   Design review standards and guidelines.
      (1)   In reviewing plans, the Commission shall follow the U.S. Secretary
of Interior’s standards for rehabilitation and guidelines for rehabilitating
historic buildings as set forth in 36 C.F.R. part 67. Design review standards
and guidelines that address special design characteristics of historic
districts administered by the Commission may be followed if they are equivalent
in guidance to the Secretary of Interior’s standards and guidelines and are
established or approved by the state’s Historic Preservation Office.
      (2)   In reviewing plans, the Commission shall also consider all of the
following:
         (a)   The historic or architectural value and significance of the
resource and its relationship to the historic value of the surrounding area;
         (b)   The relationship of any architectural features of the resource
to the rest of the resource and to the surrounding area;
         (c)   The general compatibility of the design, arrangement, texture
and materials proposed to be used;
         (d)   Other factors, such as aesthetic value, that the Commission
finds relevant; and
         (e)   Whether the applicant has certified in the application that the
property where the work will be undertaken has, or will have before the
proposed project completion date, a fire alarm system or a smoke alarm
complying with the requirements of the Stille-DeRossett-Hale Single State
Construction Code Act, Public Act 230 of 1972, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1501 to
125.1531.
(Prior Code, § 28-71)
(Ord. 1332, passed 9-13-2010)
§ 177.046 PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   A permit shall be obtained before any work affecting the exterior
appearance of a resource is performed within a historic district. The person,
individual, partnership, firm, corporation, organization, institution or agency
of government proposing to do that work shall file an application for a permit
with the Building Inspector. Upon receipt of a complete application, the
Inspector of Buildings shall immediately refer the application, along with all
required supporting materials that make the application complete to the
Commission. A permit shall not be issued and proposed work shall not proceed
until the Commission has acted on the application by issuing a certificate of
appropriateness or a notice to proceed as prescribed in this subchapter. A
Commission shall not issue a certificate of appropriateness unless the
applicant certifies in the application that the property where work will be
undertaken has, or will have before the proposed project completion date, a
fire alarm system or a smoke alarm complying with the requirements of the
Stille-DeRossett-Hale Single State Construction Code Act, Public Act 230 of
1972, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1501 to 125.1531.
   (B)   The Commission shall file certificates of appropriateness, notices to
proceed and denials of applications for permits with the Inspector of
Buildings. A permit shall not be issued until the Commission has acted as
prescribed by this subchapter.
   (C)   If an application is for work that will adversely affect the exterior
of a resource the Commission considers valuable to the city, the state or the
nation, and the Commission determines that the alteration or loss of that
resource will adversely affect the public purpose of the city, state or nation,
the Commission shall attempt to establish with the owner of the resource an
economically feasible plan for the preservation of the resource.
   (D)   The failure of the Commission to act on an application within 60
calendar days after the date a complete application is filed with the
Commission, unless an extension is agreed upon in writing by the applicant and
the Commission, shall be considered to constitute approval.
   (E)   The Commission may charge a reasonable fee to process a permit
application.
(Prior Code, § 28-72) (Ord. 1332, passed 9-13-2010)
§ 177.047 DENIALS.
   If a permit application is denied, the decision shall be binding on the
inspector or other authority. A denial shall be accompanied by a written
explanation by the Commission of the reasons for denial and, if appropriate, a
notice that an application may be resubmitted for Commission review when the
suggested changes have been made. The denial shall also include the
notification of the applicant’s right to appeal to the state’s Historic
Preservation Review Board and to the Circuit Court.
(Prior Code, § 28-73) (Ord. 1332, passed 9-13-2010)
§ 177.048 NOTICE TO PROCEED.
   Work within a historic district shall be permitted through the issuance of a
notice to proceed by the Commission if any of the following conditions prevail
and if the proposed work can be demonstrated by a finding of the Commission to
be necessary to substantially improve or correct any of the following
conditions:
   (A)   The resource constitutes a hazard to the safety of the public or to
the structure’s occupants;
   (B)   The resource is a deterrent to a major improvement program that will
be of substantial benefit to the community and the applicant proposing the work
has obtained all necessary planning and zoning approvals, financing and
environmental clearances;
   (C)   Retaining the resource will cause undue financial hardship to the
owner when a governmental action, an act of God or other events beyond the
owner’s control created the hardship, and all feasible alternatives to
eliminate the financial hardship, which may include offering the resource for
sale at its fair market value or moving the resource to a vacant site within
the historic district, have been attempted and exhausted by the owner; and
   (D)   Retaining the resource is not in the interest of the majority of the
community.
(Prior Code, § 28-74) (Ord. 1332, passed 9-13-2010)
§ 177.049 APPEAL OF COMMISSION DECISION.
   (A)   An applicant aggrieved by a decision of the Commission concerning a
permit application may file an appeal with the state’s Historic Preservation
Review Board. The appeal shall be filed within 60 calendar days after the
decision is furnished to the applicant. The appellant may submit all or part of
the appellant’s evidence and arguments in written form. The state’s Historic
Preservation Review Board shall consider an appeal at its first regularly
scheduled meeting after receiving the appeal. A permit applicant aggrieved by
the decision of the state’s Historic Preservation Review Board may appeal the
decision to the county’s Circuit Court.
   (B)   Any citizen or duly organized historic preservation organization in
the city, as well as resource property owners, jointly or severally aggrieved
by a decision of the Historic District Commission may appeal the decision to
the Circuit Court; except that, a permit applicant aggrieved by a decision
rendered under this subchapter may not appeal to the court without first
exhausting the right to appeal to the state’s Historic Preservation Review
Board.
(Prior Code, § 28-75) (Ord. 1332, passed 9-13-2010)
§ 177.050 WORK WITHOUT A PERMIT.
   (A)   When work has been done upon a resource without a permit, and the
Commission finds that the work does not qualify for a certificate of
appropriateness, the Commission may require an owner to restore the resource to
the condition that the resource was in before the inappropriate work or to
modify the work so that it qualifies for a certificate of appropriateness.
   (B)   (1)   If the owner does not comply with the restoration or
modification requirement within a reasonable time, the Commission may seek an
order from the Circuit Court to require the owner to restore the resource to
its former condition or to modify the work so that it qualifies for a
certificate of appropriateness.
      (2)   If the owner does not comply or cannot comply with the order of the
court, the Commission or its agents may enter the property and conduct work
necessary to restore the resource to its former condition or modify the work so
that it qualifies for a certificate of appropriateness in accordance with the
court’s order.
   (C)   The costs of the work done shall be charged to the owner and may be
levied by the city as a special assessment against the property. When acting
pursuant to an order of the Circuit Court, the Commission or its agents may
enter a property for purposes of this section.
(Prior Code, § 28-76) (Ord. 1332, passed 9-13-2010)
§ 177.051 DEMOLITION BY NEGLECT.
   Upon a finding by the Commission that a historic resource within a historic
district or a proposed historic district subject to its review and approval is
threatened with demolition by neglect, the Commission may do either of the
following:
   (A)   Require the owner of the resource to repair all conditions
contributing to demolition by neglect; and/or
   (B)   If the owner does not make repairs within a reasonable time, the
Commission or its agents may enter the property and make such repairs as
necessary to prevent demolition by neglect. The costs of the work shall be
charged to the owner and may be levied by the city as a special assessment
against the property. The Commission or its agents may enter the property for
purposes of this section upon obtaining an order from the Circuit Court.
(Prior Code, § 28-77) (Ord. 1332, passed 9-13-2010)
§ 177.052 REVIEW OF WORK IN PROPOSED DISTRICTS.
   Upon receipt of substantial evidence showing the presence of historic,
architectural, archaeological, engineering or cultural significance of a
proposed historic district, the City Council may, at its discretion, adopt a
resolution requiring that all applications for permits within the proposed
historic district be referred to the Historic District Commission, as
prescribed in §
177.046 of this chapter. The Historic District Commission shall review permit
applications with the same powers that would apply if the proposed historic
district was an established historic district. The review may continue in the
proposed historic district for not more than one year, or until such time as
the City Council approves or rejects the establishment of the historic district
by ordinance, whichever occurs first.
(Prior Code, § 28-78) (Ord. 1332, passed 9-13-2010)
§ 177.053 EMERGENCY MORATORIUM.
   If the City Council determines that pending work will cause irreparable harm
to resources located within an established or proposed historic district, the
City Council may, by resolution, declare an emergency moratorium on all such
work for a period not to exceed six months. The City Council may extend the
emergency moratorium for an additional period not to exceed six months, upon
finding that the threat of irreparable harm to resources is still present. Any
pending permit application concerning a resource subject to an emergency
moratorium may be summarily denied.
(Prior Code, § 28-79) (Ord. 1332, passed 9-13-2010)
§ 177.054 ACCEPTANCE OF GIFTS OR GRANTS.
   The City Council: may accept state or federal grants for historic
preservation purposes; may participate in state and federal programs that
benefit historic preservation; and may accept public or private gifts for
historic preservation purposes. The City Council may appoint the Historic
District Commission to accept and administer grants, gifts and program
responsibilities.
(Prior Code, § 28-81) (Ord. 1332, passed 9-13-2010)
§ 177.055 ACQUISITION OF HISTORIC RESOURCES.
   If all efforts by the Commission to preserve a resource fail, or if it is
determined by the City Council that public ownership is most suitable, the City
Council, if considered to be the public interest, may acquire the resource
using public funds, public or private gifts, grants or proceeds from the
issuance of revenue bonds. The acquisition shall be based upon the
recommendation of the Commission. The Commission is responsible for maintaining
publicly owned resources using its own funds, if not specifically designated
for other purposes, or public funds committed for that use by the City Council.
Upon recommendation of the Commission, the city may sell resources acquired
under this section with protective easements included in the property transfer
documents, if appropriate.
(Prior Code, § 28-82) (Ord. 1332, passed 9-13-2010)
§ 177.056 HISTORIC DISTRICTS DESIGNATED.
   The boundaries of the I.O.O.F. Temple Historic District are shown on the map
on file in the office of the City Clerk, which is incorporated into and made a
part of this chapter, and is comprised of the following parcel: Lot 3 Plat of
part of Wyandotte, Part 2, Block 56 T3S R11E, L57 of Deeds P5 WCR, also known
as “81 Chestnut Street”.
(Prior Code, § 28-83) (Ord. 1332, passed 9-13-2010)
§ 177.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   A person, individual, partnership, firm, corporation,
organization, institution or agency of government that violates §§
177.040 through
177.056 of this chapter is responsible for a civil violation and may be fined
not more than $5,000. If a court determines the penalty as set forth in this
division (B) is unlawful, then the fine shall be the maximum amount allowed by
law.
      (2)   A person, individual, partnership, firm, corporation, organization,
institution or agency of government that violates §§
177.040 through
177.056 of this chapter may be ordered by the court to pay the costs to restore
or replicate a resource unlawfully constructed, added to, altered, repaired,
moved, excavated or demolished.
(Prior Code, § 28-80) (Ord. 1332, passed 9-13-2010)
CHAPTER 178: URBAN RENEWAL
Section
General Provisions
   
178.001   Designation of district area
   
178.002   Development area and surrounding territory
   
178.003   Determination of significant effect of plan for the development area
   
178.004   Residents
Citizens’ District Council
   
178.015   Creation
   
178.016   Members
   
178.017   Meetings; rules; records; quorum
   
178.018   Powers and duties
Cross-reference:
   Planning and Development, see
Ch. 177
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 178.001 DESIGNATION OF DISTRICT AREA.
   A district area is hereby designated for the Penn Biddle Urban Renewal
Project, Mich. R-174 in the city the boundaries of said district area being as
follows: bounded by Pennsylvania Road on the south, Biddle Avenue on the east,
the railroad right-of-way on the west and on the north by the public streets
and alleys from the intersection of Biddle Avenue, Third and Plum Streets, west
to Fourth Street, thence southerly to the alley between Plum and Orchard,
thence west to Fifth Street, thence southerly to the alley between Forest and
Grove Streets, thence westerly to Seventh Street, thence north to Forest
Street, thence west to Eighth Street, thence northerly to Orchard Street,
thence westerly to the railroad right-of-way.
(Prior Code, § 37-1)
§ 178.002 DEVELOPMENT AREA AND SURROUNDING TERRITORY.
   Included within urban renewal district area is:
   (A)   The development area known as the Penn Biddle Urban Renewal Project,
Mich. R-174; and
   (B)   Surrounding territory which is bounded by the railroad right-of-way on
the west, Pennsylvania Road on the south, Grove Street on the north, and on the
east by public streets beginning at the intersection of Pennsylvania Road and
Seventh Street and proceeding thence northeasterly down Seventh Street to
Central Avenue, thence southwesterly down Central Avenue to Eighth Street,
thence northeasterly down Eighth Street to Grove Street, which is the northern
boundary of the surrounding territory.
(Prior Code, § 37-2)
§ 178.003 DETERMINATION OF SIGNIFICANT AFFECT OF PLAN FOR THE DEVELOPMENT AREA.
   (A)   It is hereby determined that the above-described surrounding territory
will be significantly affected by the plan for the development area, and the
basis for such determination is as follows: properties in such surrounding
territory are industrial in nature and use, contain industrial storage
facilities, railroad facilities and vacant land.
   (B)   In addition, there are certain public streets within the development
area which provide access to, or traverse, the surrounding territory as above
designated, and which contain, or are capable of containing, within their
right-of-way lines, gas, water, electric, sewer and drain facilities, all of
which are essential to the present use and to the future potential use of the
surrounding territory.
   (C)   Because of the nature of the improvements on said properties, and of
the uses presently being made thereof, together with the potential uses of the
improved and vacant portions thereof, the proposed changes provided for in the
development plan in land use, elimination of certain streets, changes and
improvements in sewers, electric and water services within the development
area, will have a significant affect on the herein described surrounding
territory.
(Prior Code, § 37-3)
§ 178.004 RESIDENTS.
   It is hereby determined that a majority of residents in the district area
reside in the development area, there being, in fact, no residential units or
residential land in that part of the district area herein described as
surrounding territory.
(Prior Code, § 37-4)
CITIZENS’ DISTRICT COUNCIL
§ 178.015 CREATION.
   A Citizens’ District Council is hereby created for each district area
designated by the city in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 37-21)
§ 178.016 MEMBERS.
   (A)   The members of the Citizens’ District Council shall be appointed by
the Mayor. Each Citizens’ District Council shall consist of at least ten
members and no more than 25 members, selected in a manner that ensures that the
Citizens’ District Council is to the maximum extent possible representative of
the residents of the area and of other persons with a demonstrable and
substantial interest in the area. The majority of the members of the Citizens’
District Council shall be composed of citizens living in the development areas
contained in the district area. Appointments to the Citizens’ District Council
shall be determined with the approval of the City Council after a public
hearing has been held. Public notice of such hearing shall be distributed
throughout the district area at least 20 days prior to the date of hearing.
   (B)   The term of office of the members of the Citizens’ District Council
shall be for a term of two years. Members of the Citizens’ District Council
shall serve without compensation.
   (C)   Members of the Citizens’ District Council shall be subject to removal
from office by the Mayor. Any vacancy in such office shall be filled by the
Mayor, subject to approval of the City Council, for the remainder of the
unexpired term.
(Prior Code, § 37-22)
§ 178.017 MEETINGS; RULES; RECORDS; QUORUM.
   Each Citizens’ District Council shall hold meetings regularly at least once
each month and shall designate the time and place thereof. It shall adopt its
own rules of procedure and shall keep a record of its proceedings. All meetings
and records of the Citizens’ District Council shall be public. A majority of
the members of the Citizens’ District Council shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business.
(Prior Code, § 37-23)
§ 178.018 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The general powers and duties of the Citizens’ District Council shall be in
accordance with the provisions of Public Act 344 of 1945, being M.C.L.A. §§
125.71 et seq., as amended, and the ordinances of the city.
(Prior Code, § 37-24)
CHAPTER 179: SWIMMING POOLS
Section
Private Pools
   
179.001   Definition
   
179.002   Equipment and maintenance requirements
   
179.003   Permits and fees required
   
179.004   Location
   
179.005   Fence
   
179.006   Grading adjacent to pool
   
179.007   Overhead wires
   
179.008   Walls and bottoms
   
179.009   Slope of bottom
   
179.010   Side walls
   
179.011   Diving boards
   
179.012   Egress requirements
   
179.013   Water supply
   
179.014   Drains
   
179.015   Water treatment equipment
   
179.016   Bacterial control
   
179.017   Vacuum connection
   
179.018   Safety requirements
   
179.019   Inspections
PRIVATE POOLS
§ 179.001 DEFINITION.
   As used in this subchapter, the term PRIVATE POOL shall mean any constructed
pool used for swimming or bathing which exceeds 24 inches in depth or 250
square feet in surface area.
(Prior Code, § 33-16)
§ 179.002 EQUIPMENT AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   All private pool material and equipment, and the construction and
installation thereof, shall be provided in such a manner that the water can be
maintained free from undue chemical irritations and in compliance with such
standards for bacteriological qualities as the Department of Health may
prescribe.
(Prior Code, § 33-17) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 179.003 PERMITS AND FEES REQUIRED.
   (A)   A building permit and all other applicable permits shall be required
for the construction or repair of private pools. Plans, specifications and a
copy of the owner operating manual shall be submitted for approval of the
Engineering and Health Departments.
   (B)   The fee for constructing or altering a swimming pool governed by this
subchapter shall be based on the estimated cost of construction, and shall be
in the same amount as determined by the Building Code. The fee for permits
involving the building trades shall be as determined in the respective
ordinances governing such trade.
   (C)   Construction shall not begin until all permits have been obtained.
(Prior Code, § 33-18)
§ 179.004 LOCATION.
   (A)   Private pools shall not be built less than four feet from any lot line
or building, nor shall the fence for the same be built within the required
front yard or within the required corner lot side yard as outlined in
Ch. 190 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   This provision shall not apply to facilities existing of 7-14-1959.
(Prior Code, § 33-19) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 179.005 FENCE.
   (A)   Private pools shall be enclosed by an adequate fence not less than
four feet in height and of a type not readily climbed by children.
   (B)   The fence shall not be less than four feet from the edge of the pool
and shall be equipped with a self-closing, self-latching gate or gates, which
shall be securely locked with a tamper-proof lock when the pool is not in use.
(Prior Code, § 33-20) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 179.006 GRADING ADJACENT TO POOL.
   (A)   The surface adjacent to a private pool shall be so graded that
overflow from the pool and adjacent area shall not discharge into the pool or
onto neighboring property.
   (B)   There shall be at least four feet of hard surfaced slip-resistant walk
adjacent to the pool edge.
(Prior Code, § 33-21) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 179.007 OVERHEAD WIRES.
   (A)   Overhead electric wires shall not pass over the pool area.
   (B)   The pool area shall be considered as the private pool’s surface and
the walkways within ten feet of the pool.
(Prior Code, § 33-22) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 179.008 WALLS AND BOTTOM.
   The surface of a private pool’s walls and bottom shall be smooth and easily
cleanable.
(Prior Code, § 33-23) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 179.009 SLOPE OF BOTTOM.
   (A)   The slope of the bottom of any part of a private pool in which the
water is less than five feet deep shall not be more than one foot in each seven
feet.
   (B)   Deep and shallow water shall be designated either by numerals or
dividers.
(Prior Code, § 33-24) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 179.010 SIDE WALLS.
   The side walls of a private pool shall not slope more than one foot
horizontally to five feet vertically within five feet of the water surface.
(Prior Code, § 33-25) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 179.011 DIVING BOARDS.
   Diving boards shall conform to the following requirements:
 
Elevation of Diving Board or Platform above Water Minimum Depth of Water (Feet)
Surface (Feet)
1 - 3                                             7
3 - 5                                             8
5 - 8                                             9
8 - 10                                            10
 
(Prior Code, § 33-26) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 179.012 EGRESS REQUIREMENTS.
   An adequate means of egress shall be provided at each end of a private pool.
(Prior Code, § 33-27) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 179.013 WATER SUPPLY.
   The line from the city water supply to a private pool shall be protected
against backflow of a polluted water by means of an air gap or a vacuum breaker
installed at least six inches above the flood stage of the pool.
(Prior Code, § 33-28) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 179.014 DRAINS.
   A private pool shall have a drain at the lowest point of the pool floor and
shall have no direct connection to the sewer.
(Prior Code, § 33-29) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 179.015 WATER TREATMENT EQUIPMENT.
   A private pool shall be equipped with a recirculating system which shall be
capable of filtering and recirculating the entire volume content of the pool
during a 12-hour period. The rate of application of pool water on the filters
shall not be greater than three gallons per minute per square foot of filter
area. The Health Department may approve other rates of recirculation or rates
of application of water on the filters.
(Prior Code, § 33-30) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 179.016 BACTERIOLOGICAL CONTROL.
   (A)   A provision in private pools shall be made for positive germicidal or
bacterial control by the use of chlorine, or other such disinfecting agents as
may be approved. Such disinfecting agents shall be applied to pool water at a
uniform rate.
   (B)   Provisions shall be made for adjusting the application thereof so as
to keep the germicidal or bacterial protection of the water in the pool equal
to a standard of 0.5 parts per million to 1.0 parts per million free chlorine
residual.
   (C)   Testing devices capable of accurately measuring such residual shall be
provided.
(Prior Code, § 33-31) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 179.017 VACUUM CONNECTION.
   A vacuum connection shall be provided at the pool edge to allow cleaning of
the pool bottom.
(Prior Code, § 33-32) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 179.018 SAFETY REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   A ring buoy and bamboo reaching pole should be provided near the edge
of a private pool.
   (B)   An alarm system shall be installed to signal any unauthorized use of
the pool.
   (C)   Pools not covered by this subchapter should be emptied each night and
cleaned and filled with fresh water for the next use. The water should meet the
standards for bacteriological qualities prescribed by this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 33-33) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 179.019 INSPECTIONS.
   The Health Officer or City Engineer or their authorized representatives are
hereby authorized to enter, at a reasonable time, and inspect any private
swimming pool for the purpose of determining whether the requirements of this
subchapter are being complied with.
(Prior Code, § 33-34)
CHAPTER 180: GEOTHERMAL SYSTEMS
Section
General Provisions
   
180.001   Short title
   
180.002   Definitions
   
180.003   System to be controlled by the Department of Municipal Service
   
180.004   Rates and charges; fixing and collecting
   
180.005   Disposition of funds
   
180.006   Accounts and reports
   
180.007   Civil liability
   
180.008   Violations
Permits and Inspections
   
180.020   Permit required
   
180.021   Application; fraudulent applications
   
180.022   Persons eligible for permits
   
180.023   Additional work under permit
   
180.024   Permit expiration
   
180.025   Refund of permit fees
   
180.026   Permit revocation
   
180.027   Notification of incomplete installation required
   
180.028   Inspections
   
180.029   Records
Standards and Conditions
   
180.040   Codes and standards
   
180.041   Construction requirements
   
180.042   Materials, appurtenances and the like
 
   
180.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 180.001 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Wyandotte Geothermal Ordinance”.
(Prior Code, § 9.1-1) (Ord. 1337, passed 11-22-2010)
§ 180.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADMINISTRATION FEES AND CHARGES. Reasonable reimbursement to the city for
all services rendered by the various city departments and employees to the
geothermal system and all reasonable direct and indirect costs and expenses the
city may incur as a result of the installation, operation, maintenance,
administration and/or use of the geothermal system, including, but not limited
to, costs of police and fire protection, use of streets, payment in lieu of
taxes.
   CITY. The City of Wyandotte.
   DEPARTMENT. The Department of Municipal Service of the City of Wyandotte.
   GEOTHERMAL SYSTEM. All the pipes, valves, headers, and other equipment and
material, required for the purpose of constructing a vertical heat exchanger
(VHE), or ground source heat pump loop system, installed in the city right-of-
way for the purpose of providing a renewable source of energy for heating and
cooling systems in residential, commercial and industrial buildings.
   INSTALLATION CHARGE. The amount to be charged to a customer for the
installation of and connection to the geothermal system.
   OPERATOR OF SUCH SYSTEM. The Department of Municipal Service of the city, or
the geothermal utility designated by the Department of Municipal Service.
   PERSON. Any individual, person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
   PRIVATE GEOTHERMAL SYSTEM. All the pipes, valves, headers and other
equipment and material, required for the purpose of constructing a vertical
heat exchanger (VHE), or ground source heat pump loop system, installed on
private property for the purpose of providing a renewable source of energy for
heating and cooling systems in residential, commercial and industrial
buildings.
(Prior Code, § 9.1-2) (Ord. 1337, passed 11-22-2010)
§ 180.003 SYSTEM TO BE CONTROLLED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF MUNICIPAL SERVICE.
   The Department of Municipal Service, or its designated geothermal utility,
is charged and entrusted with the construction, management, supervision and
control of the geothermal system constructed in the city right-of-way to be
owned by the city. The Municipal Service Commission shall make and enforce all
necessary specifications, rules and regulations for the construction and
operation of the geothermal system, including the setting of guidelines and
requirements to authorize a person to install a geothermal system.
(Prior Code, § 9.1-3) (Ord. 1337, passed 11-22-2010)
§ 180.004 RATES AND CHARGES; FIXING AND COLLECTING.
   The Municipal Service Commission shall, from time to time, fix and cause to
be assessed the reasonable monthly rates and such installation charge as may be
fixed, to be paid by the customer to the geothermal system. The Commission may
make, subject to the approval of Council, and enforce all necessary rules and
regulations for the collection of the monthly geothermal rates. The rates shall
be promptly collected by and paid to the Commission and all moneys so received
shall be turned over when and as collected, to the City Treasurer on daily
balances and the City Treasurer shall give duplicate receipts therefor, one of
which shall be filed with the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 9.1-4) (Ord. 1337, passed 11-22-2010)
§ 180.005 DISPOSITION OF FUNDS.
   The money paid into the city treasury by the Municipal Service Commission
shall be deposited in a separate account and applied on the payment of
administrative fees and charges, and costs and expenses incurred by the
geothermal system. The customer rates and installation charges determined by
the Commission shall be sufficient to pay the operating, administrative and
maintenance costs, charges and expenses of the geothermal system.
(Prior Code, § 9.1-5) (Ord. 1337, passed 11-22-2010)
§ 180.006 ACCOUNTS AND REPORTS.
   The Commission shall make quarterly reports to the council which reports
shall embrace an itemized statement of all the revenues and expenditures
relating to or connected with the geothermal system and an accurate list of all
customer rates. This statement shall be certified by the Commission, entered
into record by the City Clerk and published in such a manner as the Council may
direct. The Commission shall also make such other reports as the Council may,
from time to time, require. The Council shall cause all the accounts and
records of the Commission to be audited at least once a year and at such other
times as it shall see fit.
(Prior Code, § 9.1-6) (Ord. 1337, passed 11-22-2010)
§ 180.007 CIVIL LIABILITY.
   (A)   This chapter shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the
responsibility of any party owning, operating, controlling or installing any
geothermal system in the city right-of-way for damages to persons or property
caused by any defect therein, nor shall the city be held as assuming any such
liability by reason of the specifications or inspection authorized herein or
permit issued, as herein provided.
   (B)   Should any section, division, sentence, clause or phrase of this
chapter be declared by the courts to be invalid, the same shall not affect the
validity of this chapter as a whole or any part thereof other than the part so
invalidated.
(Prior Code, § 9.1-7) (Ord. 1337, passed 11-22-2010)
§ 180.008 UNAUTHORIZED USE OF SYSTEM.
   (A)   Unauthorized physical connections. It shall be unlawful for any person
to make any physical connection to the Department’s geothermal system operating
within the city right-of-way that is not expressly authorized by the operator
of the system.
   (B)   Unauthorized physical installation. It shall be unlawful for any
person to install any geothermal system in the right-of-way of the city without
the express authorization of the Department.
   (C)   Unauthorized modification to equipment or system. It shall be unlawful
for any person to make any modification to the geothermal system in the city
right-of-way so as to induce any uncompensated system service or level of
service for which the operator has established a compensation rate without the
express authorization of the operator of such system.
   (D)   Theft of renewable energy source. It shall be unlawful for any person
to obtain, by any reason whatsoever, any renewable energy from any geothermal
system operating within the city right-of-way without the express authorization
of the operator of such system.
(Prior Code, § 9.1-9) (Ord. 1337, passed 11-22-2010) Penalty, see §
180.999
PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS
§ 180.020 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   A plumbing permit shall be required prior to the installation, alteration or
modification of vertical heat exchangers and ground source heat pump loop
systems.
   (A)   The permit shall be secured from the City Engineer.
   (B)   No alterations or additions shall be made to an existing vertical heat
exchanger or ground source heat pump loop system after installation and
inspection without first notifying the City Engineer and securing a permit
thereof.
   (C)   Division (A) above shall not apply to repair work of valves and
fittings.
(Prior Code, § 9.1-20) (Ord. 1337, passed 11-22-2010)
§ 180.021 APPLICATION; FRAUDULENT APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Applications for the permit required by this subchapter shall describe
the work to be done and be made by the person, firm or corporation doing the
work.
(Prior Code, § 9.1-21)
   (B)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to present any fraudulent
information in making application for any permit from the inspection authority.
Furthermore, it shall be unlawful to use the name of another person in order to
secure a geothermal permit unless regularly employed by and directly authorized
by the person approved by the Municipal Service Commission.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for an independent person to file for a
geothermal permit for work contracted for or performed or to be performed by
others in the city right-of-way without specific permission of the Municipal
Service Commission.
(Prior Code, § 9.1-22)
(Ord. 1337, passed 11-22-2010) Penalty, see §
180.999
§ 180.022 PERSONS ELIGIBLE FOR PERMITS.
   Permits shall be issued pursuant to this subchapter only to:
   (A)   Holders of a contractor’s license who are approved for the
installation of a geothermal system in the city right-of-way by the Municipal
Service Commission;
   (B)   Any person or homeowner employing a person approved by the Municipal
Service Commission to install a geothermal system in the city right-of-way who
shall supervise actively the new installation in the public right-of-way, which
is to be used by the applicant to provide a renewable energy source at the
premises adjacent to the public right-of-way;
   (C)   Holders of a contractor’s license, for the installation of a private
geothermal system; and
   (D)   Any person or homeowner employing a person who shall supervise
actively the new installation on private property, which is to be used by the
applicant to provide a renewable energy source at the premises on the private
property.
(Prior Code, § 9.1-23) (Ord. 1337, passed 11-22-2010)
§ 180.023 ADDITIONAL WORK UNDER PERMITS.
   After a permit has been issued pursuant to this subchapter and the fee
deposited, no additional work shall be included. In cases in which additional
work is to be installed, a new permit shall be secured and the fee paid.
(Prior Code, § 9.1-24) (Ord. 1337, passed 11-22-2010)
§ 180.024 PERMIT EXPIRATION.
   Any permit issued shall become invalid if the authorized work is not
commenced within six months after issuance of the permit or if the authorized
work is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months after the time of
commencing the work.
(Prior Code, § 9.1-25) (Ord. 1337, passed 11-22-2010)
§ 180.025 REFUND OF PERMIT FEES.
   If no work has been done, a permit grantee shall be entitled to a refund of
his or her permit fee in accordance with established rules of the city.
(Prior Code, § 9.1-26) (Ord. 1337, passed 11-22-2010)
§ 180.026 PERMIT REVOCATION.
   Any permit issued pursuant to this subchapter in violation of state law,
these rules or any ordinance, or as a result of false or fraudulent
information, or misinterpretation of conditions, shall be subject to revocation
at the discretion of the inspection authority. The person holding the permit
shall be notified to appear and show cause why the permit should not be revoked
and failure to appear shall be deemed sufficient to cause the permit to be
revoked.
(Prior Code, § 9.1-27) (Ord. 1337, passed 11-22-2010)
§ 180.027 NOTIFICATION OF INCOMPLETE INSTALLATION REQUIRED.
   Should any person to whom a permit has been issued quit the installation for
any reason, that person shall notify the inspection authority and request
inspection of work completed and secured. If a permit holder fails to notify
the inspection authority, the property owner for whom the system is being
installed for may notify the inspection authority.
(Prior Code, § 9.1-28) (Ord. 1337, passed 11-22-2010)
§ 180.028 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   Within 24 working hours of commencement of the installation of the
geothermal system, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to notify the City
Engineer, who shall instruct the inspector to inspect, from time to time for
the duration of the work, the installation.
      (2)   Upon completion, if it is found to be fully in compliance with this
chapter and does not constitute a hazard to life and property, the inspector
shall issue to the permit holder, a certificate of inspection authorizing
connection to the geothermal system.
(Prior Code, § 9.1-29)
   (B)   Right of inspection authority to require contractor’s representative
to be present. The inspection authority reserves the right to require a
representative of the approved person or contractor to be on the job when
inspection is made.
(Prior Code, § 9.1-30)
(Ord. 1337, passed 11-22-2010)
§ 180.029 RECORDS.
   (A)   The City Engineer shall keep complete records of all permits issued
and inspections made and other official work performed under the provisions of
this chapter.
   (B)   The City Engineer shall be provided with the necessary office space
and clerical help to carry out the provisions of this section.
(Prior Code, § 9.1-31) (Ord. 1337, passed 11-22-2010)
STANDARDS AND CONDITIONS
§ 180.040 CODES AND STANDARDS.
   All materials and devices or appurtenances and all construction and
maintenance shall comply with the following:
   (A)   A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the
City Clerk, being marked and designated as the 2015 Michigan Mechanical Code,
is hereby referred to, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this
chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, as
prescribed herein;
   (B)   A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the
City Clerk, being marked and designated as the “Standards and Specifications
for the Installation of Geothermal Systems”, as adopted by the Department of
Municipal Services of the city, is hereby referred to, and made a part hereof,
as if fully set out in this chapter;
   (C)   Specifications, guidelines, rules and regulations for the construction
and operation of private geothermal systems, as determined to be equal to those
adopted by the Department of Municipal Services by the City Engineer; and
   (D)   The purpose of this chapter is the practical safeguarding of persons
and property from hazards arising from the installation of a geothermal system.
(Prior Code, § 9.1-40) (Ord. 1337, passed 11-22-2010)
§ 180.041 CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
   No certificate of inspection shall be issued unless the installations are in
strict conformity with the provisions of this chapter, and the rules and
regulations issued by the Department of Municipal Services, and, unless they
are in conformity with the approved methods of construction for safety to life
and property. The regulations as set forth in the 2006 Edition of the Michigan
Mechanical Code and other installation and safety regulations approved by the
Department of Municipal Services or, in the case of private geothermal systems,
the plans and documents approved by the City Engineer, shall be prima facie
evidence of such approved methods.
(Prior Code, § 9.1-41) (Ord. 1337, passed 11-22-2010)
§ 180.042 MATERIALS, APPURTENANCES AND THE LIKE.
   No materials, devices or appurtenances shall be used or installed unless
they are in conformity with the provisions of this chapter and the rules and
regulations issued by the Department of Municipal Services, or in the case of
private geothermal systems, materials, devices or appurtenances determined as
equal by the City Engineer. Conformity of materials, devices and appurtenances
with the standards of Underwriter’s Laboratories, Inc., as approved by the
American Engineering Standards Committee, and other standards approved by the
American Engineering Standards Committee, shall be prima facie evidence that
such materials, devices and appurtenances comply with the requirements of this
chapter. The manufacturer’s name, trademark or other identification symbol
shall be placed on all materials, devices and appurtenances used or installed
under this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 9.1-42) (Ord. 1337, passed 11-22-2010)
§ 180.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who shall violate a provision of this chapter or code shall
fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect,
construct, alter or repair geothermal systems or private geothermal systems in
violation of an approved plan, specification or directive of the code official,
or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this chapter or
code, shall be guilty of a municipal civil infraction. A defendant who is found
responsible for an ordinance violation designated as a municipal civil
infraction, whether by admission or by court determination, is subject to a
civil fine not to exceed $500 per offense, plus court costs. Any subsequent
violation of this chapter may be prosecuted as a misdemeanor with fines not
exceeding $500 and/or 90 days in jail. Each day that the violation occurs
constitutes a separate violation.
(Prior Code, § 9.1-8)
   (B)   Any person using any such geothermal system in the city right-of-way,
without the authority of the operator of such system, for the purpose of using
the renewable energy source or any violation of any provision of this chapter
shall be guilty of a municipal civil infraction. A defendant who is found
responsible for an ordinance violation designated as a municipal civil
infraction, whether by admission or by court determination, is subject to a
civil fine not to exceed $500 per offense, plus court costs. Any subsequent
violation of this chapter may be prosecuted as a misdemeanor with fines not
exceeding $500 and/or 90 days in jail. Each day that the violation occurs
constitutes a separate violation.
(Prior Code, § 9.1-9)
(Ord. 1337, passed 11-22-2010)
CHAPTER 181: RENTAL DWELLINGS AND UNITS
Section
Registration Requirements
   
181.001   Definitions
   
181.002   Registration required
   
181.003   Registration forms and fees
   
181.004   Registration term and renewal
   
181.005   Responsible local agent
   
181.006   Notification to lessee by owner
   
181.007   Transfer of ownership
Certificate of Compliance
   
181.020   Certificate required
   
181.021   Application form and fee
   
181.022   Posting certificate
   
181.023   Exemption
Short-Term Rentals
   
181.030   Definitions
   
181.031   Licensing
   
181.032   Regulations
   
181.033   Violations and penalties
 
   
181.999   Penalty
Charter reference:
   Power of city to regulate rooming houses, see §
4
Statutory reference:
   Hotels, see M.C.L.A. §§ 427.1 et seq.
REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS
§ 181.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE. A certificate issued by the Department of
Engineering and Building which certifies compliance with the provisions of the
codes and ordinances of the city for all rental dwelling and rental units. A
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE is valid for a period of five years for one-family
and two-family dwellings and four years for multiple dwellings from its date of
issuance if issued within six months of the date of the inspection report;
provided that, the rental dwelling and rental units remain in compliance with
all applicable codes and ordinances and are not sold or transferred.
   FAMILY. A domestic family; that is, one or more persons living together and
related by the bonds of consanguinity, marriage or adoption, together with
servants of the principal occupants and not more than one additional unrelated
person, with all of such individuals being domiciled together as a single,
domestic, housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit.
   LEASE. Any written or oral agreement that sets forth any and all conditions
concerning the use and occupancy of rental dwellings or rental units.
   MULTIPLE DWELLING. Dwelling occupied otherwise than as a one-family dwelling
or two-family dwelling.
   NEW RENTAL DWELLING. Any structure, building or other facility promised and/
or leased to a residential tenant or tenants for use as a home, residence or
sleeping unit which has never been occupied and excluding any addition or
modification of an existing structure and is not owner occupied. This
definition includes, but without limitation, one- and two-family dwellings,
multiple dwellings, apartment units, boarding houses, rooming houses, hotels,
motels and flats.
   NOTICE OF VIOLATION. A notice issued to the owner or responsible local agent
stating that there has been a violation of a provision of this chapter or any
other applicable codes, ordinances, rules or regulations concerning said
premises. Service of violation notices and other notices shall be by first
class mail to the address as furnished under §
181.003(A)(2) of this chapter.
   OCCUPANCY. Includes all tenants, lessees and persons residing within a
rental dwelling or rental unit.
   ONE-FAMILY DWELLING. Dwelling occupied by one family, and so designed and
arranged as to provide cooking and kitchen accommodations for one family only.
   OWNER. Any person, agent, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable
interest in the premises.
   PREMISES. Any lot or piece of land inclusive of the rental dwelling or
rental unit.
   RENTAL DWELLING. Any structure, building or other facility promised and/or
leased to a residential tenant or tenants for use as a home, residence or
sleeping unit and is not owner occupied. This definition includes, but without
limitation, one- and two-family dwellings, multiple dwellings, apartment units,
boarding houses, rooming houses, hotels, motels and flats.
   RENTAL UNIT. Any one area, room, structure, flat, apartment or facility of a
rental dwelling including a one-family or two-family dwelling that is being
leased or rented to only one tenant, group of tenants or family under one lease
and is not owner occupied.
   TWO-FAMILY DWELLING. Dwelling occupied by two families, and so designed and
arranged to provide cooking and kitchen accommodations for two families only.
(Prior Code, § 31.1-1) (Ord. 820, passed 7-6-1987; Ord. 945, passed 7-20-1992;
Ord. 1034, passed 3-24-1997; Ord. 1273, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 1473, passed 3-
25-2019)
§ 181.002 REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   The owner of any rental dwelling or rental unit shall register each rental
dwelling and all rental units contained within the rental dwelling with the
city and shall designate a person, as defined in §
181.005 of this chapter, as the responsible local agent who shall be legally
responsible for operating the registered rental dwelling or rental unit and
shall also be responsible for providing access to such premises for making the
inspections necessary to ensure compliance with the terms of this chapter and
all applicable codes and ordinances adopted by the city. A certificate of
compliance shall not be issued if the registration provisions of this chapter
are not complied with.
(Prior Code, § 31.1-2) (Ord. 820, passed 7-6-1987; Ord. 832, passed 1-18-1988)
§ 181.003 REGISTRATION FORMS AND FEES.
   (A)   Applications for registration shall be made in such form and in
accordance with such instructions as may be provided by the City Clerk and
shall include at least the following information:
      (1)   The name and address of applicant;
      (2)   The names and addresses of all owners of the rental dwelling and no
post office box addresses shall be accepted;
      (3)   The name, local address and telephone number of the responsible
local agent;
      (4)   The number of rental units in each rental dwelling and the address
of the rental dwelling; and
      (5)   The authorization appointing a responsible local agent signed by
both the owner and the responsible local agent.
   (B)   The fee of $35 for each rental dwelling registered shall be paid at
the time of registration. No post office boxes will be accepted as a legal
address. Upon registration, the City Clerk shall forward one copy of the
registration to the office of the City Engineer and inform applicants of
compliance requirements.
(Prior Code, § 31.1-3) (Ord. 820, passed 7-6-1987; Ord. 832, passed 1-18-1988;
Ord. 1025, passed 9-23-1996; Ord. 1034, passed 3-24-1997; Ord. 1355, passed 9-
19-2011)
§ 181.004 REGISTRATION TERM AND RENEWAL.
   Registration shall be made prior to the use or occupancy of any rental
dwelling or rental unit. The term of the registration shall be valid as long as
the owner remains unchanged. Any new owner shall register in accordance with §
181.002 of this chapter and apply to have the certificate of compliance for
each rental dwelling and rental unit transferred into the new owner’s name
within ten days of the date of the transfer of ownership. A fee of $15 shall be
paid at the time of registering the transfer of ownership.
(Prior Code, § 31.1-4) (Ord. 820, passed 7-6-1987; Ord. 832, passed 1-18-1988;
Ord. 1025, passed 9-23-1996; Ord. 1355, passed 9-19-2011)
§ 181.005 RESPONSIBLE LOCAL AGENT.
   The responsible local agent shall be a person or representative of a
corporation, partnership, firm, joint venture, trust, association, organization
or other entity, having his or her place of residence in the county or within a
50-mile radius of the city, and shall be designated by the owner as responsible
for operating such premises in compliance with all the provisions of the city
codes and ordinances. The owner may act as the responsible local agent;
provided, he or she resides in the county or within a 50-mile radius of the
city. All official notices of the city may be issued to the responsible local
agent, and any notice so issued shall be deemed to have been issued upon the
owner of record.
(Prior Code, § 31.1-1) (Ord. 820, passed 7-6-1987; Ord. 832, passed 1-18-1988)
§ 181.006 NOTIFICATION TO LESSEE BY OWNER.
   (A)   The owner of a leasehold shall notify the lessee of the city’s request
to inspect a leasehold, shall make a good-faith effort to obtain the lessee’s
consent for an inspection, and, if the owner obtains the lessee’s consent for
an inspection, shall arrange for the inspection by the city.
   (B)   The owner of a leasehold shall provide the city access to the
leasehold for an inspection during reasonable hours if any of the following
apply:
      (1)   The lease authorizes city inspector to enter the leasehold for an
inspection;
      (2)   The lessee has made a complaint to the city;
      (3)   The leasehold is vacant;
      (4)   The city serves an administrative warrant ordering the owner to
provide access; and
      (5)   The lessee has consented to an inspection. If a lessee is not
present during the inspection, the city may rely on the owner’s representation
to the city that the lessee has consented to the city’s inspection.
   (C)   The lessee shall provide the city access to the leasehold for an
inspection during reasonable hours if any of the following apply:
      (1)   The lease authorizes the city inspector to enter the leasehold for
an inspection;
      (2)   The lessee has made a complaint to the city;
      (3)   The city serves an administrative warrant ordering the lessee to
provide access; and
      (4)   The lessee has given consent.
   (D)   If a lessee who refused an inspection by the city vacates a leasehold
before an inspection by the city, the owner of the leasehold shall notify the
city within ten days after the leasehold is vacated.
   (E)   (1)   Before entering a leasehold regulated by this section, the owner
of the leasehold shall request and obtain permission to enter the leasehold.
      (2)   However, in the case of an emergency, including, but not limited
to, fire, flood or other threat of serious injury or death, the owner may enter
at any time.
(Prior Code, § 31.1-5) (Ord. 1473, passed 3-25-2019)
§ 181.007 TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP.
   (A)   Before a rental dwelling or rental unit can be transferred, conveyed,
leased or sold (including by land contract), a new inspection shall be
required.
   (B)   The inspection fee will follow the same guidelines as stated in §
181.021(B) of this chapter.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any rental dwelling or rental
unit who has received a notice of violation to transfer, convey, lease or sell
(including by land contract) his or her ownership and/or interest in any way to
another, unless such owner shall have first furnished to the grantee, lessee or
vendee, or transferee a true copy of any notice of violation and shall have
furnished to the Building Official a signed and notarized statement from the
grantee, vendee or lessee, or transferee acknowledging the receipt of such
notice of violation.
(Prior Code, § 31.1-6) (Ord. 820, passed 7-6-1987; Ord. 945, passed 7-20-1992)
Penalty, see §
181.999
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE
§ 181.020 CERTIFICATE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall lease, rent or cause to be occupied a rental dwelling
or rental unit unless there is a valid certificate of compliance issued by the
Department of Engineering and Building in the name of the owner/responsible
local agent and issued for the specific rental dwelling and rental unit. The
certificate shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in each rental dwelling
and rental unit at all times or in a common area shared by all occupants of a
rental dwelling and rental unit. The certificate shall be issued after making
application with the building department and an inspection by the code
enforcement inspectors to determine that each rental dwelling and rental unit
complies with the provisions of the codes and ordinances of the city. An
inspection report shall be completed by the inspectors after completing the
inspection of the property. The report shall note all violations found in the
dwelling.
   (B)   Before a certificate of compliance is issued, either all violations
must be corrected and approved by the city or the amount of money estimated by
the city to correct said violations must be placed in escrow with the
Department of Engineering and Building together with a signed escrow agreement;
provided, there are no dangerous conditions as determined by the city existing
on the premises. If all of the said violations are not corrected within six
months of issuance of the certificate of compliance, the city may revoke the
certificate of compliance. The escrow funds will be released only after all
violations are corrected.
   (C)   A certificate of compliance is valid for a period of five years for
one-family and two-family dwellings and four years for multiple dwellings from
its date of issuance if issued within six months of the date of the inspection
report; provided that, the rental dwelling and rental units remain in
compliance with all applicable codes and ordinances and are not sold or
transferred. If the violations are corrected more than six months of the date
of the inspection report, then the certificate of compliance will be valid for
a period of five years and six months for one-family and two-family dwellings
and four years and six months for multiple dwellings from the date of the
inspection report. For a new rental dwelling, a certificate of compliance shall
be issued simultaneously with the certificate of occupancy, and shall remain
valid for five years for one-family and two-family dwellings and four years for
multiple dwellings; provided that, the rental dwelling and rental units remain
in compliance with all the applicable codes and ordinances and are not sold or
transferred. When the rental dwelling or rental units are going to be sold or
transferred, a new inspection and a new certificate of compliance shall be
required. The inspection fees will follow the same guidelines as stated in §
181.021(B) of this chapter. The City Engineer may revoke a certificate of
compliance for a violation of any code, ordinance or rule or regulation of the
city. The certificate of compliance must be renewed every five years for one-
family and two-family dwellings and four years for multiple dwellings at the
Department of Engineering and Building. Any existing certificate of compliance
that contains an expiration date prior to the adoption of this section shall
remain in effect until the expiration date; provided that, the rental dwelling
and rental units remain in compliance with all applicable codes and ordinances,
are not sold or transferred within five years for one-family and two-family
dwellings and four years for multiple dwellings of the expiration date of the
current certificate of compliance; and, provided that, the property is not
vacant or subject to foreclosure proceedings, or is the subject of a police
report regarding vandalism, breaking and entering or open structure, or is
determined to be a dangerous building by the Engineer in accordance with the
city’s Property Maintenance Code.
(Prior Code, § 31.1-11) (Ord. 820, passed 7-6-1987; Ord. 832, passed 1-18-1988;
Ord. 945, passed 7-20-1992; Ord. 1273, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 1317, passed 11-
9-2009; Ord. 1473, passed 3-25-2019)
§ 181.021 APPLICATION FORM AND FEE.
   (A)   Applications for certificate of compliance shall be made in such form
and in accordance with such instructions as may be provided by the City
Engineer and shall include at least the following information:
      (1)   Name, address and phone number of the owner(s);
      (2)   Name, address and phone number of responsible local agent; and
      (3)   Address and number of units applied for under the certificate of
compliance.
   (B)   The inspection fee for a certificate of compliance shall be $190 for
each rental dwelling and $95 for each additional rental unit contained within
said rental dwelling. Future fees shall be determined by resolution of City
Council. Fee to be paid prior to inspection of unit(s).
   (C)   The renewal inspection fee every four years for multiple dwellings and
every five years for one-family and two-family dwellings shall be $190 for each
rental dwelling and $95 for each additional rental unit contained within said
rental dwelling. Future fees shall be determined by resolution of City Council.
Fees are to be paid prior to inspection of unit(s).
   (D)   Multiple dwelling with more than 25 units shall pay a minimum fee of
$2,470; provided, the city inspection does not exceed 26 hours for the team of
inspectors. Additional hours beyond 26 shall be charged at the rate of $120 per
hour. Future fees shall be determined by resolution of City Council. Fee to be
paid prior to inspection of unit(s).
(Prior Code, § 31.1-12) (Ord. 820, passed 7-6-1987; Ord. 832, passed 1-18-1988;
Ord. 922, passed 10-21-1991; Ord. 1025, passed 9-23-1996; Ord. 1192, passed 5-
24-2004; Ord. 1259, passed 12-12-2005; Ord. 1444, passed 12-19-2016; Ord. 1473,
passed 3-25-2019)
§ 181.022 POSTING CERTIFICATE.
   The following information shall be posted in a conspicuous place either
within each rental dwelling and rental unit or in a common area shared by all
occupants of a rental dwelling and rental unit:
   (A)   A copy of the current certificate of compliance; and
   (B)   The name, address and telephone number of the responsible local agent.
(Prior Code, § 31.1-13) (Ord. 820, passed 7-6-1987)
§ 181.023 EXEMPTION.
   The provisions of this chapter concerning registration and inspection shall
not apply to senior housing premises which are inspected by any federal agency.
(Prior Code, § 31.1-14) (Ord. 1215, passed 1-10-2005)
SHORT-TERM RENTALS
§ 181.030 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
   BEDROOM. A room intended for sleeping or placement of a bed separated from
other spaces in the dwelling unit by one or more functional doors. The
following spaces, which must be included in every dwelling unit, do not qualify
as bedrooms: Kitchens; dining areas; gathering spaces such as living rooms,
dens, family rooms, and attics or basements without egress meeting standards in
applicable building, residential, and fire codes.
   CALENDAR YEAR. January 1 to December 31.
   DWELLING UNIT. A self-contained unit within a building that is designed for
human occupancy and provides complete living facilities, including permanent
provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation. DWELLING UNIT does
not include bed and breakfasts, hotels and motels, and boarding houses.
   LICENSE. An annual short-term rental license duly issued by the City of
Wyandotte in accordance  with the provisions of this subchapter.
   LOCAL AGENT or RESPONSIBLE LOCAL AGENT. As defined in this code of
ordinances §
181.005, Responsible local agent.
   MAXIMUM OCCUPANCY. The maximum number of allowable tenants for a short-term
rental, as  established by this subchapter.
   SHORT-TERM RENTAL. A property that offers the rental of a dwelling unit for
compensation for more than 28 days total per calendar year for terms no greater
than 29 consecutive nights.
(Ord. 1546, passed 10-14-2024)
§ 181.031 LICENSING.
   An owner of any property located within the City of Wyandotte shall not
rent, or allow to be rented, a dwelling unit as a short-term rental unless the
owner has obtained a short-term rental license for that dwelling unit in
accordance with the requirements of this subchapter.
   (A)   A short-term rental license shall only be issued to a dwelling or
rental unit which has a current Certificate of Approval or Certificate of
Compliance.
   (B)   The City Council, by resolution, may lower or amend the number and
location of short-term rental licenses issued at any time, but not to the
detriment of existing licensed short-term rentals.
   (C)   License applications for short-term rental units shall be processed on
a first come, first served basis.
   (D)   Application form. The short-term rental application form shall be
available at the Department of Engineering and Building, Wyandotte City Hall
and on the City of Wyandotte website. A person seeking a short-term rental
license under this subchapter shall submit a complete short-term rental
application to the Department of Engineering and Building. The application
shall be forwarded to the City Engineer, or his or her duly authorized
representative, for review and appropriate action. The application shall
include all of the information specified on the short-term rental application
form and any other information deemed reasonably necessary to determine whether
the short-term rental standards and regulations under this subchapter have been
met. The license application form shall contain the following information, and
other items as the city may deem necessary, for compliance with this
subchapter:
      (1)   Name, permanent address, email, and telephone number of the
property owner, and name, email and telephone number of the responsible local
agent for the short-term rental unit;
      (2)   The street address of the short-term rental unit, along with other
identification if more than one dwelling unit shares the same street address;
      (3)   The number of bedrooms in each dwelling unit;
      (4)   The number of available on-site parking spaces on site; and
      (5)   A signed statement certifying that each dwelling unit has a fire
extinguisher, each bedroom has a working smoke alarm, each floor has a working
carbon monoxide detector, and that the local agent will check these devices for
proper location and operation prior to each new lease agreement.
   (E)   Application fee. An application shall be accompanied by an application
fee as established and set forth by the City Council.
   (F)   Complete application. Submittal of an application does not mean an
application is considered complete. If an applicant submits an incomplete
application, a license will not be issued.
   (G)   A short-term rental application shall not be considered accepted or
complete until the City Engineer deems it to be complete. Applicants will be
notified within ten business days of submittal if an application is incomplete.
If the applicant fails to provide all the information required by this
subchapter and/or fails to pay the required fee, then the application shall be
deemed incomplete and will be denied by the City Engineer on that basis.
   (H)   Once the application is deemed to be complete, if an application
complies with all the standards and regulations of this subchapter and a
license is available, the City Engineer shall approve the license. The approval
of the license shall be based on the following:
      (1)   Complete application;
      (2)   Current Certificate of Approval or Certificate of Compliance, all
inspections must be completed and all violations must be corrected and
approved;
      (3)   No outstanding property maintenance violations;
      (4)   A written report from the Wyandotte Police Department regarding
complaints, responses and actions taken by the Wyandotte Police Department at
this location in the previous 365 days. Three violations issued by the
Wyandotte Police Department in the previous 365 days shall be cause for denial
of the short-term rental license; and
      (5)   All taxes, utilities and fees owing to the city must be paid in
full.
   (I)   Licenses shall become void upon expiration of the Certificate of
Approval or Certificate of Compliance, property transfer, or revocation by the
City Engineer, according to §
181.033(D).
(Ord. 1546, passed 10-14-2024)
§ 181.032 REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Compliance with codes. Short-term rental unit must meet all applicable
residential building, health department, nuisance, and safety codes to protect
the safety of occupants.
   (B)   All short-term rental owners and tenants are subject to the City of
Wyandotte code of ordinances.
   (C)   Proposed short-term rental unit shall be in compliance with this
chapter of this code of ordinances.
   (D)   Short-term rentals shall be permitted in all zoning districts except
I-1, I-2, I-3, and IRO.
   (E)   Short-term rentals in a one-, two- or three-family dwelling shall be
limited to one in a 500- foot radius.
   (F)   Short-term rentals shall be limited to 10% of the number of units in a
multiple-family complex such as an apartment building, co-op, or condominium
association.
   (G)   A short-term rental unit shall consist of a minimum of: one bedroom,
one full bathroom, a kitchen/dining area, and a living room.
   (H)   Occupancy in a short-term rental shall conform with §
171.041, Maximum occupancy, divisions (A) and (B), with a maximum of ten total
occupants.
   (I)   Each short-term rental shall provide a minimum of two off-street
parking spaces which are accessed from a public street.
   (J)   No recreation vehicles, travel trailers, boats, tents or other
temporary shelters, may be used or stored by tenants on the premises in
connection with the short-term rental use.
   (K)   Local agent. All licensed short-term rentals shall have a designated
local agent, as defined by this subchapter.
   (L)   The property owner, or local agent, shall prohibit the short-term
rental unit tenants from hosting a gathering of non-tenants at the unit.
   (M)   Advertising of licensed short-term rental must include the maximum
occupancy permitted in the unit.
   (N)   The property owner or responsible local agent shall reference in, or
attach to, the short-term rental lease agreement, the page “APPLICABLE CODES”
attached to the short-term rental application. Applicable codes include:
      (1)   Trash. 
Ch. 51, Garbage and Trash.
      (2)   Parking. 
Ch. 72, Parking and Stopping Rules; §§
72.001 through
72.013, General Provisions; §§
72,045 through
72.049, Parking During Snow Emergencies.
      (3)   Animals. 
Ch. 90, Downriver Central Animal Control; § 90.004, Animal care standards; §§
90.035 through
90.041, Rules and Regulations; §§
90.055 through
90.062, Violations and Prohibitions Generally; §§
90.075 through
90.080, Dangerous and Potentially Dangerous Dogs.
      (4)   Fire pits. §
91.023, Fire pits and recreational fires.
      (5)   Fireworks. 
Ch. 93, Fireworks.
      (6)   Nuisance. 
Ch. 94, Health and Safety; Nuisances.
      (7)   Noise. §
153.014, Unreasonable noise prohibited.
      (8)   Behavior. §
153.015, Disruptive behavior.
      (9)   Certificate of Approval. §
171.004, Inspection of residential dwellings prior to sale or transfer.
      (10)   Occupancy. §
171.041, Maximum occupancy, divisions (A) and (B).
      (11)   Certificate of Compliance, rental dwellings. 
Ch. 181, Rental Dwellings and Units.
   (O)   The property owner, or local agent, shall mail a written notice to all
properties within a 500- foot radius of the short-term rental unit of its use
once approved. A copy of this notification, and the address to which it has
been sent, shall be submitted to the City Engineer.
(Ord. 1546, passed 10-14-2024)
§ 181.033 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   A person who violates any provision of this subchapter shall be
subject to this code of ordinances §
10.999. Each day on which any violation of this subchapter continues may
constitute a separate offense and subject to penalties as a separate offense.
   (B)   Tenants of short-term rentals are subject to this code of ordinances,
including, but not limited to, noise, fireworks, fire pits, trash, animals, and
parking.
   (C)   Property owners of short-term rentals are responsible for violations
relating to: false or misleading statements in the registration process;
violations of the Wyandotte code of ordinances without limitation, including
property maintenance violations; short-term rental local agent not responding
to complaint/call within specified time period; and advertising and/or hosting
greater occupancy than permissible.
   (D)   Short-term rental licenses may be revoked under the following
circumstances:
      (1)   A first owner violation of §
181.033(B) and/or §
181.033(C) within any calendar year, shall result in a written warning. A
second owner violation of §
181.033(B) and/or §
181.033(C) within the same calendar year, shall result in a municipal fine as
set by resolution of the Wyandotte City Council.
      (2)   A third owner violation of §
181.033(B) and/or §
181.033(C) within the same calendar year shall result in revocation of the
license until the end of the calendar year. A minimum 14-day notice will be
given to an owner for any revocation. As of one day following the notice of the
third violation, no additional bookings may be made of the short-term rental
through the year-end. If there is a short-term rental license waiting list,
revocation of a license will cause the property owner to be placed at the
bottom of the waiting list.
   (E)   The property owner and/or agent may appeal the revocation of the
short-term rental license as
follows:
      (1)   Appeal procedure. Upon a determination by the Building Official
that the short-term rental license of a dwelling unit is subject to revocation
pursuant to §
181.033 (D), the Building Official shall issue a notice to the owner and agent
of the licensed short-term rental stating that the city intends to revoke the
license.
      (2)   The notice shall inform the owner and local agent of a right to a
hearing to show cause as to why the license should not be revoked. If a hearing
is requested within 14 days of the service of the notice, the city shall
schedule the hearing and notify the owner and agent in writing of a time and
place for that hearing.
      (3)   At the hearing, the owner and/or agent may present evidence that
the violations have been corrected, or that the property owner and agent should
not be held responsible for the violations due to extenuating circumstances.
“Extenuating circumstances” may include circumstances that the owner or the
owner's agent could not reasonably anticipate and prevent, and could not
reasonably control.
      (4)   The Building Official shall independently determine whether there
is competent, material and substantial evidence establishing a violation, and/
or whether there is competent, material and substantial evidence establishing
that extenuating circumstances exist.
(Ord. 1546, passed 10-14-2024)
§ 181.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Any person who shall fail to obtain a certificate of compliance
as required by §
181.020 of this chapter, or who shall fail to correct any violations within the
time required by
Chapter 181 "Rental Dwellings and Units," or who shall violate any of the terms
of this chapter, shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction
punishable by a fine of not more than $500 for each violation.
      (2)   The penalties imposed by this
Chapter 181 shall not limit any other statutory or common law right or action
that any person or entity may have.
   (C)   (1)   Each day upon which a violation of the provision of §
181.020 of this chapter shall occur shall be deemed a separate offense and
violation.
      (2)   If any person commits a second offense, or subsequent violation of
the same ordinance listed in
Chapter 181, such a violation constitutes a misdemeanor punishable by a fine
not exceeding $500 and/or imprisonment not exceeding 90 days; provided the
authorized city official issues an appearance ticket, and not a municipal civil
infraction citation or notice, and marks it as a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 31.1-21)
(Ord. 820, passed 7-6-1987; Ord. 1523, passed 3-14-2022)
TITLE XIX: ZONING
   Chapter
      
190.   ZONING
CHAPTER 190: ZONING
Section
General Provisions
   
190.001   Short title
   
190.002   Purpose
   
190.003   Intent
   
190.004   Definitions
   
190.005   Interpretation
   
190.006   Vested right
Zoning Districts and Map
   
190.020   Districts
   
190.021   Boundaries
   
190.022   Zoning of vacated areas
   
190.023   District requirements
RA One-Family Residential Districts
   
190.035   Principal uses permitted
   
190.036   Special land uses
   
190.037   Required conditions
RT One- and Two-Family Residential Districts
   
190.050   Principal uses permitted
   
190.051   Special uses
   
190.052   Required conditions
RM-1 Multiple-Family Residential Districts
   
190.065   Principal uses permitted
   
190.066   Special uses
   
190.067   Required conditions
RM-1A Multiple-Family Residential Districts
   
190.080   Principal uses permitted
   
190.081   Special uses
   
190.082   Required conditions
RM-2 Townhouse Residential Districts
   
190.095   Principal uses permitted
   
190.096   Special uses
   
190.097   Required conditions
RM-3 Multiple-Family Residential Districts
   
190.110   Principal uses permitted
   
190.111   Special uses
   
190.112   Required conditions
RU Recreation Unit Districts
   
190.125   Principal uses permitted
   
190.126   Special uses
   
190.127   Required conditions
O-S Office Service Districts
   
190.140   Principal uses permitted
   
190.141   Special uses
   
190.142   Required conditions
B-1 Neighborhood Business Districts
   
190.155   Principal uses permitted
   
190.156   Special uses
   
190.157   Required conditions
CBD Central Business District
   
190.170   Principal uses permitted
   
190.171   Special uses
   
190.172   Required conditions
B-2 General Business Districts
   
190.185   Principal uses permitted
   
190.186   Special uses
   
190.187   Required conditions
I-1 Industrial Districts
   
190.200   Principal uses permitted
   
190.201   Special uses
   
190.202   Required conditions
I-2 Industrial Districts
   
190.215   Principal uses permitted
   
190.216   Special uses
   
190.217   Required conditions
I-3 Industrial Districts
   
190.230   Principal uses permitted
   
190.231   Special uses
   
190.232   Required conditions
IRO Industrial Research Office Districts
   
190.245   Principal uses permitted
   
190.246   Special uses
   
190.247   Required conditions
P-1 Vehicular Parking Districts
   
190.260   Principal uses permitted
   
190.261   Required conditions
   
190.262   Minimum distances and setbacks
PD Planned Development
   
190.275   Procedure for application
   
190.276   Stage I preliminary site plan
   
190.277   Stage II final site plan
   
190.278   Stage III final site plan approval
   
190.279   Required conditions
Schedule of Regulations
   
190.290   Limiting height, bulk, density and area by land use
Special Land Uses
   
190.305   Purpose
   
190.306   General provisions
   
190.307   Special land use designated
Supplemental Regulations
   
190.320   Design review
   
190.321   Conflicting regulations
   
190.322   Non-conformities
   
190.323   Accessory buildings and uses
   
190.324   Parking requirements
   
190.325   Off-street parking space layout, standards, construction and
maintenance
   
190.326   Performance standards
   
190.327   Fences
   
190.328   Landscape planting
   
190.329   Signs
   
190.330   Newsracks/drop-boxes
   
190.331   Lot and parcel splits
   
190.332   Area, height and use exceptions
Conditional Rezoning
   
190.345   Application and offer of conditions
   
190.346   Planning Commission review
   
190.347   City Council review
   
190.348   Approval
   
190.349   Compliance with conditions
   
190.350   Time period for establishing development or use
   
190.351   Reversion of zoning
   
190.352   Subsequent rezoning of land
   
190.353   Amendment of conditions
   
190.354   City right to rezone
   
190.355   Failure to offer conditions
Administration
   
190.370   Administrating officer
   
190.371   Records
   
190.372   Building permit
   
190.373   Certificate of occupancy
   
190.374   Existing uses
   
190.375   Temporary certificates
   
190.376   Application for certificates
   
190.377   Site plan review
   
190.378   Public hearings
Board of Appeals
   
190.390   Establishment of Board
   
190.391   Officers
   
190.392   Rules and procedure
   
190.393   Appeals, how taken
   
190.394   Powers and duties
   
190.395   Standards
   
190.396   Miscellaneous
   
190.397   Changes and amendments
 
   
190.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 190.001 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Zoning Ordinance of the City of
Wyandotte”, under the powers provided by Public Act 110 of 2006, being M.C.L.A.
§§ 125.3101 et seq. and Public Act 285 of 1931, as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§
125.31 through 125.45.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 100) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 190.002 PURPOSE.
   In interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be
held to minimum requirements to provide adequate light, air, access,
circulation, open yard spaces, off-street parking areas and protection to
property values from incompatible uses; to secure safety from fire and other
dangers; to lessen congestion in the streets; to limit the density and
intensity of use of land; to promote the most appropriate and compatible uses
of land in various districts of the city; to provide for enforcement of and
variations to these provisions; and to impose penalties for violations thereof.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 101) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 190.003 INTENT.
   Pursuant to the authority conferred by the public acts of the state in such
case, made and provided and for the purpose of promoting and protecting the
public health, safety, peace, morals, comfort, convenience, and general welfare
of the inhabitants of the city by protecting and conserving the character and
social and economic stability of the residential, commercial, industrial and
other use areas; by securing the most appropriate use of land, preventing
overcrowding the land and undue congestion of population; providing adequate
light, air and reasonable access; and facilitating adequate and economical
provision of transportation, water, sewers, schools, recreation and other
public requirements, and by other means, all in accordance with a comprehensive
plan.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 102) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 190.004 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms or words used
herein shall be interpreted as follows. All words used in the present tense
shall include the future; all words in the singular number include the plural
number and all words in the plural number include the singular number; and the
word “building” includes the word “structure”, and “dwelling” includes
“residence”; the word “person” includes “corporation”, “co-partnership”,
“association”, as well as an “individual”; the word “shall” is mandatory and
the word “may” is permissive; the word “lot” includes the words “plot” or
“parcel”; the words “used” or “occupied” includes the words “intended”,
“designated” or “designed”, or “arranged to be used or occupied”.
      (2)   Terms not herein defined shall have the meaning customarily
assigned to them.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 200)
   (B)   Specific terms. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ABANDONMENT. The cessation of activity in, or use of a dwelling,
structure or lot, other than that which would normally occur on a seasonal
basis, for a period of six months or longer.
      ABUTTING. Having property or district line in common (e.g., two lots are
abutting if they have property lines in common).
      ACCESSORY USE. A use which is clearly incidental to, customarily found in
connection with and located on the same zoning lot, unless otherwise specified,
as the principal use to which it is related. When ACCESSORY is used in this
text, it has the same meaning as ACCESSORY USE. An ACCESSORY USE includes, but
is not limited to, the following:
         (a)   Residential accommodations for servants and/or caretakers;
         (b)   Outdoor swimming pools, hot tubs and saunas for the use of
occupants of a residence or their guests;
         (c)   Domestic storage in a barn, shed, tool room or similar accessory
building or other structure;
         (d)   A newsstand primarily for the convenience of the occupants of a
building, which is located wholly within such building and has no exterior
signs or displays;
         (e)   Storage of merchandise normally carried in stock in connection
with a business or industrial use, unless such storage is excluded in the
applicable district regulations;
         (f)   Storage of goods used in or produced by industrial uses or
related activities, unless such storage is excluded in the applicable district
regulations;
         (g)   Accessory off-street parking spaces, open or enclosed, subject
to the accessory off-street parking regulations for the district in which the
zoning lot is located;
         (h)   Uses clearly incidental to a main use, such as but not limited
to, offices of an industrial or commercial complex located on the site of the
commercial or industrial complex;
         (i)   Accessory off-street loading, subject to the off-street loading
regulations for the district in which the zoning lot is located;
         (j)   Accessory signs, subject to the sign regulations for the
district in which the zoning lot is located;
         (k)   Common household gardening in a residential district when
located only in the rear yard and/or non-required side yard areas. For purposes
of this chapter, common household gardening shall include the growing of fruits
and vegetables for consumption, solely by members of the family residing in the
dwelling unit located on the same zoning lot; and
         (l)   Solar panels, wind generators, television reception antenna and
air conditioning units.
      ADULT ENTERTAINMENT FACILITIES. Facilities which exclude minors by virtue
of age and further defined as follows.
         (a)   ADULT BOOKSTORE. An establishment having a substantial portion
of its stock in trade for sale, barter or rental, books, magazines, other
periodicals, films, posters, video tapes or other materials or means for the
recording or reproduction of a visual display on a video screen or other
display device which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on
matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas (as defined herein), or an establishment with a
segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such material.
         (b)   ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER. An enclosed building with a
capacity for less than 50 persons, used for presenting on-premises viewing, by
use of motion picture devices or any coin-operated means, material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing
or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas (as
defined herein), for observation by patrons therein.
         (c)   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. An enclosed building, with a
capacity of 50 or more persons, used for presenting on-premises viewing, by use
of motion picture devices or any coin-operated means, material distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas (as defined herein),
for observation by patrons therein.
         (d)   ADULT MOTEL. A motel which presents materials distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical area (as defined below),
for the entertainment of its patrons.
         (e)   ADULT PERSONAL SERVICE BUSINESS. A business whose activities
include a person, while partially nude, providing personal service for another
person on an individual bases in a closed room. It includes, but is not limited
to, the following activities and services: modeling studios; photographic
studios; wrestling studios; individual theatrical performances; body painting
studios; and massage studios.
         (f)   ADULT CABARET. An establishment which features topless dancers
and/or bottomless dancers, partially nude or seminude dancers, go-go dancers,
exotic dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators or similar
entertainers, or topless and/or bottomless and/or partially nude or seminude
waitpersons or employees or any other form of nude or partially nude or semi-
nude service or entertainment.
         (g)   PARTIALLY NUDE or SEMI-NUDE. A person having any or all of the
following body parts exposed: buttocks; genitals; anus; pubic area; or female
breasts.
         (h)   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.
            1.   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation;
            2.   Acts of masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; and
            3.   Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttock or female breast.
         (i)   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.
            1.   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals,
public region, buttock, anus and female breast below a point immediately above
the top of the areola; and
            2.   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
         (j)   PERSON. A person shall mean an individual, proprietorship,
partnership, corporation, association or other legal entity.
      ADULT FOSTER CARE HOME. A private home licensed by the state for care of
sick, elderly or handicapped adults. A “family home” is defined as having one
to six adults; a group home seven to 20 adults.
      ALLEY. A public way that affords only secondary access to abutting
property and not intended for general traffic circulation.
      ALTERATIONS. Any change, addition or modification in construction or type
of occupancy, or in the structural members of a building such as walls or
partitions, columns, beams or girders, the consummated act of which may be
referred to in this chapter as “altered” or “reconstructed”.
      APARTMENTS. The dwelling units in a multiple dwelling, as defined herein.
         (a)   EFFICIENCY APARTMENT. A dwelling unit containing a minimum of at
least 150 square feet of floor area consisting of not more than one room in
addition to kitchen and sanitary facilities.
         (b)   ONE-BEDROOM UNIT. A dwelling unit containing a minimum floor
area of at least 400 square feet consisting of not more than three rooms in
addition to kitchen and necessary sanitary facilities.
         (c)   TWO-BEDROOM UNIT. A dwelling unit containing a minimum floor
area of at least 500 square feet, consisting of not more than four rooms in
addition to kitchen and necessary sanitary facilities.
         (d)   THREE- OR MORE BEDROOM UNIT. A dwelling unit wherein, for each
room in addition to the four rooms permitted in a two-bedroom unit, there shall
be provided an additional area of 100 square feet to the minimum floor area of
500 square feet in addition to kitchen and necessary sanitary facilities.
      APPEALS. The process, as prescribed in the ordinance, for contesting a
zoning interpretation made by the Engineering Department or Building Official.
      AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION (GAS STATION). A building used for the retail
sale of fuel (stored only in underground tanks and to be dispensed from fixed
equipment), lubricants, air, water and other commodities designed for motor
vehicles, aircraft and boats. Such an operation includes space and facilities
for selling, installing or adjusting tires, batteries, parts and accessories
within a completely enclosed building; provided that, such repair and
installation are of minor vehicle repair nature and may include convenience
store merchandise primarily sold to patrons purchasing gasoline and/or
services.
      AUTO WASH. A building or portion thereof, where motor vehicles are washed
as a commercial enterprise, or where facilities are available for the self-
service cleaning of motor vehicles.
      BASEMENT. A story of a building which is partly below grade but so
located that the vertical distance from average grade to the floor is not
greater than the vertical distance from the average grade to the ceiling. If
the vertical distance from the grade to the ceiling is over five feet, such
BASEMENT shall be rated as a first story.
      BED AND BREAKFAST DWELLINGS. A use which is subordinate to the principal
use of a dwelling unit as a single-family dwelling unit and a use in which
transient guests are provided a sleeping room and a breakfast in return for
payment.
      BERM, OBSCURING. An earthen mound of definite height and location to
serve as an obscuring device in carrying out the requirements of this chapter.
      BOARD OF APPEALS. The Zoning Board of Appeals of the city.
      BUFFER. A strip of land used to visibly separate one land use from
another, or to shield or block noise, lights or other nuisances.
      BUILDABLE AREA. The space remaining on a lot or lots of record after the
minimum setback and open space requirements have been met.
      BUILDING. Any structure, either temporary or permanent, having a roof
supported by columns or walls, and intended for the shelter or enclosure of
persons, animals, chattel or property of any kind.
      BUILDING, ACCESSORY. A subordinate building, the use of which is clearly
incidental to that of the main building or to the use of the land.
      BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from the established
grade of the center of the front of the building to the highest point of the
roof surface for flat roofs; to the deck-line of mansard roofs; and to the
average height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs; and to
the average height between the lowest point and the highest point on a shed
roof. The BUILDING HEIGHT for accessory buildings is the vertical distance
measured from the floor slab to the ridge line of the roof.
      BUILDING LINE. A line formed by the face of the building, and for the
purposes of this chapter, building line is the same as a front setback line.
      BUILDING, MAIN OR PRINCIPAL. A building in which is conducted the
principal use of the lot on which it is situated.
      BUILDING OFFICIAL. The City Engineer or his or her designee who is
registered as a Building Official with the state.
      BUILDING PERMIT. A permit signifying compliance with the provisions of
this chapter as to use, activity, bulk and density, and with the requirements
of all other codes and ordinances currently in effect in the city.
      CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY. A document which allows the occupancy or use
provided such occupancy or use is in compliance with the provisions of this
chapter.
      CHANGE OF USE GROUP. Any use which substantially differs from the
previous use of a building or land, or which imposes other special provisions
of law governing building construction, equipment, egress or ingress, off-
street parking and the like.
      CHILD CARE ORGANIZATION. A facility for the care of children under 18
years of age, as licensed and regulated by the state under Public Act 116 of
1973 and the associated rules promulgated by the state’s Department of Consumer
and Industry Service. Such organizations shall be further defined as follows.
         (a)   CHILD CARE CENTER or DAY CARE CENTER. A facility, other than a
private residence, receiving more than six preschool age or school age children
for group care for periods of less than 24 hours a day, and where the parents
or guardians are not immediately available to the child. It includes a facility
which provides care for not less than two consecutive weeks, regardless of the
number of hours of care per day. The facility is generally described as a child
care center, day care center, day nursery, nursery school, parent cooperative
preschool, play group or drop-in center. CHILD CARE CENTER or DAY CARE CENTER
does not include a Sunday School conducted by a religious institution or a
facility operated by a religious organization where children are cared for
during short periods of time while persons responsible for such children are
attending religious services.
         (b)   FOSTER FAMILY HOME. A private home in which one, but not more
than four, minor children, who are not related to an adult member of the
household by blood, marriage or adoption, are given care and supervision for 24
hours a day, for four or more days a week, for two or more consecutive weeks,
unattended by a parent or legal guardian.
         (c)   FOSTER FAMILY GROUP HOME. A private home in which more than
four, but less than seven children, who are not related to an adult member of
the household by blood, marriage or adoption, are provided care for 24 hours a
day, for four or more days a week, for two or more consecutive weeks,
unattended by a parent or legal guardian.
         (d)   FAMILY DAY CARE HOME. A private home in which one, but less than
seven, minor children are received for care and supervision for periods of less
than 24 hours a day, unattended by a parent or legal guardian, except children
related to an adult member of the family by blood, marriage or adoption. It
includes a home that gives care to an unrelated child for more than four weeks
during a calendar year.
         (e)   GROUP DAY CARE HOME. A private home in which more than six, but
not more than 12, children are given care and supervision for periods of less
than 24 hours a day unattended by a parent or legal guardian, except children
related to an adult member of the family by blood, marriage or adoption. It
includes a home that gives care to an unrelated child for more than four weeks
during a calendar year.
      CHURCH, TEMPLE and MOSQUE. A building or structure, or groups of building
or structures, which by design and construction are primarily intended for
organized religious services and accessory uses associated therewith.
      CLEAR VISION. An area along each street at its intersection with another
street, drive or alley where no visual obstruction of sight may exist.
      CLINIC, DENTAL OR MEDICAL. A building in which a group of physicians,
dentists or physicians and dentists and allied professional assistants are
associated for the purpose of carrying out their profession. The CLINIC may
include a medical or dental laboratory.
      CLUB. A club, group or organization created for recreational, artistic,
athletic, academic, political, charitable or other social purpose, and whose
activities are not conducted for profit or material gain and do not involve
merchandising, vending or other commercial activities, except as required
incidentally for the membership and purpose of the social club.
      COMMERCIAL. A term relating to the use of property in connection with the
purchase, sale or trading of goods or service.
      COMMERCIAL OUTDOOR RECREATION. Children’s amusement parks, carnivals,
miniature golf and similar outdoor recreation facilities requiring payment for
their utilization.
      CONDOMINIUM. The following definitions are related to condominiums:
         (a)   CONDOMINIUM ACT. Public Act 59 of 1978, as amended, being
M.C.L.A. § 559.101.
         (b)   CONDOMINIUM DOCUMENTS. The master deed, recorded pursuant to the
Condominium Act, and any other instrument referred to in the master deed or
bylaws which affects the rights and obligations of a co-owner in the
condominium.
         (c)   CONDOMINIUM SUBDIVISION (SITE CONDOMINIUM). A method of
subdivision where land ownership of sites is regulated by the Condominium Act
(Public Act 59 of 1978, as amended, being M.C.L.A. § 559.101), as opposed to
the Subdivision Control Act of 1967 (M.C.L.A. § 560.101). CONDOMINIUM
SUBDIVISION shall be equivalent to the term SUBDIVISION, as used in this
chapter and the city’s Subdivision Regulations Ordinance.
         (d)   CONDOMINIUM SUBDIVISION PLAN. The drawings and information
prepared in accordance with § 66 of the Condominium Act. Such drawings and
information typically include the site, survey and utility plans, floor plans
and sections, as appropriate, showing the existing and proposed structures and
improvements including the location thereof on the land.
         (e)   CONDOMINIUM UNIT. The portion of a condominium project designed
and intended for separate ownership and use, as described in the master deed,
regardless of whether it is intended for residential office, industrial,
business, recreational, use as a time-share unit or any other type of use.
         (f)   CONSOLIDATING MASTER DEED. The final amended master deed for a
contractible or expandable condominium project, or a condominium project
containing convertible land or convertible space, which final amended master
deed fully describes the condominium projects as completed.
         (g)   CONTRACTIBLE CONDOMINIUM. A condominium project from which any
portion of the submitted land or building may be withdrawn in accordance with
this title and the Condominium Act.
         (h)   CONVERSION CONDOMINIUM. A condominium project containing
condominium units some or all of which were occupied before the filing of a
notice of taking reservations under § 71 of the Condominium Act.
         (i)   EXPANDABLE CONDOMINIUM. A condominium project to which
additional land may be added in accordance with this chapter and the
Condominium Act.
         (j)   MASTER DEED. The condominium document recording the condominium
project to which are attached as exhibits and incorporated by reference the
bylaws for the project and the condominium subdivision plan for the project,
and all other information required by § 8 of the Condominium Act.
         (k)   NOTICE OF PROPOSED ACTION. The notice required by § 71 of the
Condominium Act, to be filed with the city and other agencies.
         (l)   SITE CONDOMINIUM. A development concept for a condominium
development containing residential, commercial, office, industrial or other
structure for uses permitted in the zoning district in which located, in which
each co-owner owns exclusive rights in a condominium unit as described in the
master deed.
         (m)   LOT. The same as home-site and condominium unit in site
condominium developments.
      CONVALESCENT OR NURSING HOME. A structure with sleeping rooms, where
persons are housed or lodged and are furnished with meals, nursing and limited
medical care.
      DECK. A horizontal structure of a single elevation or varying elevations,
commonly used as a floor attached or adjacent to the main building.
      DENSITY. The intensity of development in any given area, measured in this
chapter by the number of dwelling units per square foot.
      DESIGN REVIEW. Building and site review required within a design review
district. See §
190.320 of this chapter for definitions related to design review.
      DEVELOPMENT. The construction of a new building or other structure on a
zoning lot, the relocation of an existing building on another zoning lot or the
use of open land for a new use.
      DISH-TYPE SATELLITE SIGNAL-RECEIVING ANTENNAS. Also referred to as “earth
stations” or “ground stations” shall mean one, or a combination of two or more,
of the following:
         (a)   A signal-receiving device (antenna, dish antenna or dish-type
antenna), the purpose of which is to receive communication or other signals
from satellites in earth orbit and other extra-terrestrial sources;
         (b)   A low-noise amplifier (LNA) which is situated at the focal point
of the receiving component and the purpose of which is to magnify, store,
transfer and/or transmit electronic or light signals; and/or
         (c)   A coaxial cable the purpose of which is to carry or transmit
said signals to a receiver.
      DISH. The part of satellite signal receiving antenna characteristically
shaped like a saucer or dish.
      DISTRICT (ZONING). A portion of the city in which certain building and
activities are permitted and in which certain regulations, in accordance with
this chapter, are applicable.
      DOMESTICATED COMPANION ANIMAL. An animal that has traditionally, through
a long association with humans, lived in a state of dependence upon humans or
has been traditionally kept as a household pet, including but not limited to:
dogs, cats, hamsters, gerbils, guinea pigs, ferrets, mice, rabbits, parakeets,
parrots, cockatiels, cockatoos, canaries, love birds, finches, and tropical
fish.
      DOMESTICATED COMPANION ANIMAL LODGING FACILITY. An establishment where
domesticated companion animals are kept or confined for the purpose of
providing training, boarding, sale or day care or extended sheltering and
includes kennels.
      DRIVE-IN. A business so developed that its retail or service character is
dependent on providing a driveway approach or parking spaces for motor vehicles
so as to service patrons while in the motor vehicle rather than within a
building or structure or to permit patron self-service.
      DRIVE-THROUGH. An establishment so developed that some portion of its
retail or service character is dependent upon providing a driveway approach and
staging area specifically designed for motor vehicles so as to serve patrons
while in their motor vehicles rather than within a building or structure, for
carry-out and consumption or use after the vehicle is removed from the
premises.
      DROP-BOX. Any self-service container or storage unit installed, used or
maintained for the deposit of envelopes and packages.
      DUMPSTER. An enclosed trash container capable of being moved by a
vehicle.
      DWELLING UNIT. A building, or portion thereof, designed for occupancy by
one family for residential purposes and having cooking facilities, which may
include studio apartments or condominiums.
      DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY. A building designed exclusively for and occupied
exclusively by one family.
      DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A building designed exclusively for occupancy by
two families living independently of each other.
      DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY. A building, or a portion thereof, designed
exclusively for occupancy by three or more families living independently of
each other. (Refer to “apartments” definitions for dwelling unit types.)
      DWELLING UNIT, MANUFACTURED. A dwelling unit which is substantially
built, constructed, assembled and finished off the premises upon which it is
intended to be located.
      DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE. A single-family attached dwelling designed as a part
of a series of three or more dwellings, all of which are either attached to the
adjacent dwelling or dwellings by common separating walls or located
immediately adjacent thereto with no visible separation between walls or roofs.
TOWNHOUSE DWELLINGS shall also:
         (a)   Have common or adjacent walls fully dividing each dwelling unit
from any other and extending from the basement or foundation to roof;
         (b)   Not exceed eight units in any series or maximum of 180 feet in
overall building length;
         (c)   Be designed and arranged so that any unit shall adjoin any other
unit only along the longer dimension of the building (side) if an end unit or
both sides if an interior unit; and
         (d)   Have two separate and private means of ingress and egress which
shall be located at opposite ends of the dwelling unit.
      DWELLING UNIT, SITE BUILT. A dwelling unit which is substantially built,
constructed, assembled and finished on the premises which are intended to serve
as its final location. SITE BUILT DWELLING UNITS shall include dwelling units
constructed of pre-cut materials, and panelized wall, roof and floor sections
when such sections require substantial assemble and finishing on the premises
which are intended to serve as its final location.
      ELDERLY HOUSING, DEPENDENT. A multiple-family housing form with central
dining facilities provided as a basic service to each dwelling unit. Each
dwelling unit shall not contain cooking facilities, but must contain sanitary
facilities.
      ELDERLY HOUSING, INDEPENDENT. A multiple-family housing form with full
facilities for self-sufficiency in each individual dwelling unit.
      ERECTED. Includes built, constructed, altered, reconstructed, moved upon
or any physical operation on the premises required for the construction.
Excavation, fill, drainage, installation of utilities and the like shall be
considered a part of ERECTION.
      ESSENTIAL SERVICES. The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance
by public utilities or municipal departments underground, surface or overhead
gas, electrical, steam or water transmission or distribution systems,
collection, supply or disposal systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains,
sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic
signals, hydrants and other similar equipment and accessories in connection
therewith, but not including buildings which are necessary for the furnishing
of adequate service by such utilities or municipal departments for the general
public health, safety or welfare. ESSENTIAL SERVICES does not include wireless
communication towers.
      FAMILY.
         (a)   A domestic family; that is, one or more persons living together
and related by the bonds of consanguinity, marriage or adoption, together with
servants of the principal occupants and not more than one additional unrelated
person, with all of such individuals being domiciled together as a single,
domestic, housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit; or
         (b)   The functional equivalent of a domestic family, that is, persons
living together in a dwelling unit whose relationship is of a permanent and
distinct character and is the functional equivalent of a domestic family, with
a demonstrable and recognizable bond which constitutes the functional
equivalent bonds which render the domestic family a cohesive unit. All persons
of the functional equivalent of the domestic family must be cooking and
otherwise housekeeping as a single, non-profit unit. This definition shall not
include any society, club, fraternity, sorority, association, lodge, coterie,
organization or group where the common living arrangements and/or the basis for
the establishment of the functional equivalency of the domestic family is
likely or contemplated to exist for a limited or temporary duration. For the
purposes of enforcement, the Building Official shall presume that a functional
equivalent of a domestic family is limited to six or fewer persons. A property
owner may rebut this presumption to allow more than six persons by submitting
an application for special land use approval subject to the standards set forth
in this chapter.
      FENCE. Any structure or partition of definite height and location to
serve as an enclosure or as a barrier in carrying out the requirements of this
chapter.
      FENCE, OBSCURING. A structure of definite height and location to service
as an obscuring screen in carrying out the requirements of this chapter.
      FENCE, ORNAMENTAL. A manmade structure the surface area of which is
partially open.
      FLOOR AREA. For the purposes of computing the minimum allowable floor
area in a residential dwelling unit, the sum of the horizontal areas of each
story of the building shall be measured from the exterior faces of the exterior
walls. The FLOOR AREA measurement is exclusive of areas of basements,
unfinished attics, attached garages, breezeways and enclosed and unenclosed
porches.
      FLOOR AREA USEABLE (FOR THE PURPOSE OF COMPUTING PARKING). The area used
for or intended to be used for the sale of merchandise or services or for use
to serve patrons, clients or customers. Such floor area which is used for or
intended to be used principally for the storage or processing of merchandise,
or for utilities, shall be excluded from this computation of USEABLE FLOOR
AREA. Measurement of floor area shall be the sum of the gross horizontal areas
of the several floors of the building measured from the interior faces of the
exterior walls. For the purposes of computing parking for those uses not
enclosed within a building, the area used for the sale of merchandise, display
of merchandise and/or area used to serve patrons or clients shall be measured
to determine necessary parking spaces.
      GARAGE, PRIVATE. An accessory building not over one story or 15 feet in
height from the floor slab to the ridge line of the roof and used for parking
or storage of motor vehicles, but not for commercial servicing or repair.
      GLARE. The effect produced by brightness sufficient to cause annoyance,
discomfort or loss in visual performance and visibility.
      GRADE. The level of the earth at the front of the building which shall be
assumed to be the mean established level of the sidewalk against which it
abuts, plus a rise of not over one inch per foot of distance from the street
line to the nearest part of the building. Where a building abuts on two or more
streets, the GRADE shall be taken as a mean of grades calculated from the
different streets.
      GRAFFITI. Unauthorized inscribing, spraying of paint or making symbols
using chalk, dye, ink, paint, spray paint or similar materials on public or
private places, structures or other surfaces.
      GREENBELT. A strip of land of definite width and location reserved for
planting of shrubs and/or trees to serve as an obscuring screen or buffer strip
in carrying out the requirements of this chapter.
      HIGH-RISE CONDOMINIUM(S) OR APARTMENT(S). A building consisting of over
eight stories that are used exclusively as dwelling units.
      HOME OCCUPATION. An occupation or profession customarily carried on for
monetary gain exclusively by the occupant of a dwelling unit as a secondary use
which is clearly subservient to the use of the dwelling for residential
purposes.
      HOTEL. A facility offering transient lodging accommodations to the
general public and providing additional services such as restaurants, meeting
rooms and recreation facilities.
      IMPROVEMENTS. Those features and actions associated with a project which
are considered necessary by the municipality to protect natural resources or
the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city and future users or
inhabitants of the proposed project or project area, including parking areas,
landscaping, roadways, lighting, utilities, sidewalks, fences, walls, screening
and drainage. IMPROVEMENTS do not include the entire project which is the
subject of zoning approval.
      INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE. An automobile, truck or other motor vehicle
which has been damaged, dismantled or is deteriorated to such an extent that it
cannot be operated under its own power and will require repairs before being
made useable; or such a vehicle which does not comply with state or city laws
or ordinances.
      INTERNET CAFÉ. Also called CYBERCAFÉ. A retail establishment that rents
computers by the hour or at a one-time fee where people can pay to use the
internet, send e-mails and the like. It may provide computers only or also sell
a variety of accessories as well as provide food and drink.
      JUNKYARD. An open area where waste, used or secondhand materials are
bought and sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled or handled
including, but not limited to, scrap iron and other metals, used building
materials, paper, rags, tires and bottles. A JUNKYARD includes automobile
wrecking yards and includes any area of more than 100 square feet for storage,
keeping or abandonment of junk, but does not include uses established entirely
within enclosed buildings. An unlicensed vehicle which is rusted, wrecked,
junked, partially dismantled, whether attended or not, and which is parked,
stored or left on lands zoned for residential purposes, unless same is
completely enclosed within a suitable building, shall be considered “junk”
under this chapter.
      KENNEL. An establishment wherein or whereon three or more dogs are
confined and kept for sale, boarding, breeding, or training purposes.
      KENNEL, COMMERCIAL. Any lot or premises on which three or more dogs or
cats are either permanently or temporarily boarded.
      LEGISLATIVE BODY. The City Council.
      LOADING SPACE. An off-street space on the same lot with a building, or
group of buildings, for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while
loading and unloading merchandise or materials.
      LOT. A parcel of land occupied, or intended to be occupied, by a main
building or a group of such buildings and accessory buildings, or utilized for
the principal use and uses accessory thereto, together with such yards and open
spaces as are required under the provisions of this chapter. A LOT may or may
not be specifically designated as such on public records. LOT means the same as
“homesite” and “condominium” in site condominium developments.
      LOT AREA. The total horizontal area included within lot lines.
      LOT, CORNER. A lot where the interior angle of two adjacent sides at the
intersection of two streets is less than 135 degrees. A lot abutting upon a
curved street or streets shall be considered a CORNER LOT for the purposes of
this chapter if the arc is of less radius than 150 feet and the tangents to the
curve at the two points where the lot lines meet the curve or the straight
street line extended, form an interior angle of less than 135 degrees.
      LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE. An interior lot having frontages on two more or
less parallel streets as distinguished from a corner lot. In the case of a row
of DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOTS, all sides of said lots adjacent to streets shall be
considered frontage and front yards shall be provided as required.
      LOT, INTERIOR. Any lot other than a corner lot.
      LOT LINES. Any lines bounding a lot, including the following.
         (a)   FRONT LOT LINE. In the case of an interior lot, the line
separating said lot from the street. In the case of a corner lot, the FRONT LOT
LINE is that line separating said lot from that street which is designated as
the front street in the plat and in the application for the building permit or
zoning compliance permit. In the case of a double frontage lot, both lot lines
abutting on streets shall be treated as FRONT LOT LINES.
         (b)   REAR LOT LINE. The lot line opposite the front lot line. In the
case of a lot pointed at the rear, the REAR LOT LINE shall be an imaginary line
parallel to the front lot line, not less than ten feet long lying farthest from
the front lot line and wholly within the lot. On waterfront lots, a REAR LOT
LINE shall be considered the water’s edge.
         (c)   SIDE LOT LINE. Any lot line other than the front lot line or
rear lot line. A SIDE LOT LINE separating a lot from a street is a side street
lot line. A SIDE LOT LINE separating a lot from another lot or lots is an
interior side lot line. On waterfront lots, a SIDE LOT LINE shall be considered
the water’s edge.
      LOT COVERAGE. The part or percent of the lot occupied by buildings,
including accessory building or structures.
      LOT DEPTH. The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines
measured along the median between the side lot lines.
      LOT OF RECORD. A parcel of land, the dimensions of which are shown on a
document or map on file with the county’s Register of Deeds or in common use by
city or county officials, and which actually exists as so shown, or any part of
such parcel held in record ownership separate from that of the remainder
thereof.
      LOT WIDTH. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured
between the two points where the front setback line intersects the side lot
lines.
      LOT, ZONING. A single tract of land, located within a single block which
at the time of filing for a building permit is designated by its owner or
developer as a tract to be used, developed or built upon as a unit, under
single ownership or control. A ZONING LOT may not coincide with a lot of
record, but may include one or more lots of record.
      MASTER PLAN (COMPREHENSIVE PLAN). A comprehensive long-range plan
intended to guide the growth and development of a community or region and one
that includes analysis, recommendations, and proposals for the community’s
population, economy, housing, transportation, community facilities and land
use. Such plan may or may not be adopted by the Planning Commission or City
Council.
      MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE. Any machine which, upon the insertion of a
coin, slug, token, plate or disc, or the payment of a price, may be operated by
the public generally for use as a game, entertainment or amusement, whether or
not registering a score and whether operated by hand, electricity or any other
form of power. It shall include such devices as video and electronic machines,
marble machines, pinball machines, skill ball machines, mechanical grab
machines, coin-operated bowling alleys, shuffleboard game machines or devices,
whether played with disks, weights, pucks, balls, mechanical guns, coin-
operated motion picture machines, any so-called claw, crane or digger machine,
or any other games, devices, operations or transactions similar thereto, under
whatever name they may be indicated, which, when operated do not deliver as a
result of the application of an element of chance, any money or property, or by
the operation of which a person may not be entitled to receive as a result of
the application of an element of chance, any money or property.
      MECHANICAL MUSIC DEVICE. A piano, phonograph, jukebox or any similar
machine or contrivance which emits recitations, songs, speeches or music upon
the insertion of a coin.
      MID-RISE CONDOMINIUM(S) OR APARTMENT(S). A building consisting of four to
eight stories that are used exclusively as dwelling units.
      MIXED USE. The development of a tract of land with two or more different
uses such as residential, office and business in a coordinated urban form.
      MOBILE HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is
built on a chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a
permanent foundation, and which includes the plumbing, heating, air-
conditioning and electrical systems contained in the structure. MOBILE HOME
does not include a recreational vehicle.
      MODULAR AND SECTIONAL HOME. A dwelling unit consisting of two or more
transportable factory-fabricated units designed to be assembled as a single
residential structure on a foundation as required for conventional residences.
      MOTOR VEHICLE. A self-propelled device used for transportation of people
or goods and licensed as a motor vehicle.
      MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR, MAJOR. The general repair, engine rebuilding,
rebuilding or reconditioning of motor vehicles; collisions service, such as
body, frame or fender straightening and overall painting of vehicles.
      MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR, MINOR. Repairs other than major repair, including
engine tune-up, muffler shops, shock absorber replacement shops, undercoating
shops, tire stores, cleaning, waxing and buffing.
      MOTOR VEHICLE SALES AREA. An area used for the display, sales and rental
of new and used motor vehicles, boats, trailers, farm equipment, construction
equipment, mobile homes and recreational equipment all in operable condition.
      MOTEL. A series of attached, semi-detached or detached rental units
containing bedroom, bathroom and closet space. Units shall provide overnight
lodging and are offered to the public for compensation and shall cater
primarily to the public traveling by motor vehicles.
      MUNICIPALITY. The City of Wyandotte.
      MURALS. A painting or graphic art or combination thereof which is
professionally applied to a building wall that does not contain any brand name,
product name or abbreviation of the name of any product, company, profession or
business, or any logo, trademark, trade name or other commercial message.
      NEWSPAPER RACK. Any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage
unit or other dispenser installed, used or maintained for the display and sale
of newspapers or other news periodicals.
      NON-CONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE. A building, structure or portion
thereof, which was lawful prior to the adoption of this chapter, or amendments
thereto, that does not conform to the provisions of this chapter, nor to the
use regulations of the district in which it is located.
      NON-CONFORMING LOT. A lot the area dimensions or location of which was
lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of this chapter, but which
fails, by reason of such adoption, revisions or amendment, to conform to
current requirements of this chapter.
      NON-CONFORMING SIGN. A sign which was lawful prior to the adoption,
revision, or amendment of this chapter, which renders the sign non-conforming,
because it does not conform to all the standards and regulations of the adopted
or amended ordinance.
      NON-CONFORMING USE. A use which occupied a building or land which was
lawful prior to the adoption of this chapter, or amendments thereto, that does
not conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is located.
      NUISANCE. An offensive, annoying, unpleasant or obnoxious thing or
practice, a cause or source of annoyance, especially a continuing or repeating
invasion of any physical characteristics of activity or use across a property
line which can be perceived by or affects a human being, or the generation of
an excessive or concentrated movement of people or things, such as, but not
limited to: noise; dust; smoke; odor; glare; fumes; flashes; vibration; shock
waves; heat electronic or atomic radiation; objectionable effluent; noise or
congregation of people; and animals particularly at night; passenger traffic;
invasion of non-abutting street frontage by traffic; a burned-out structure; a
condemned structure; and is further defined in Ch. 94 of this code of
ordinances.
      NURSERY, PLANT MATERIALS. Any lot or structure used for the growing,
harvesting, processing, storing and/or selling of plants, shrubs, trees and
flowers, including products used for gardening and landscaping, but not
including fruit, vegetable and Christmas tree sales.
      NURSERY SCHOOL. A daytime facility which has as its main objective a
development program for preschool children and whose staff meets the
educational requirements established by the state.
      NURSING OR CONVALESCENT HOME. A structure with sleeping rooms where
persons are housed or lodged and are furnished with meals and nursing care for
hire.
      OCCUPIED. Includes the meaning of intent, design or arranged for
occupancy.
      OFF-STREET PARKING LOT. A facility providing vehicular parking spaces
along with adequate drives or aisles for maneuvering so as to provide access
for entrance and exit for the parking of automobiles.
      OPEN STORAGE. The storage of any materials or objects outside the
confines of a building, including trailers or vehicles used for storage.
      OUTDOOR CAFÉ. An area set up adjacent to a restaurant or private club for
the purpose of selling or service of food and/or drink.
      PARKING SPACE. An area of definite length and width. Such area shall be
exclusive of drives, aisles or entrances giving access thereto and shall be
fully accessible for the parking of permitted vehicles.
      PERSONAL SERVICE. Establishments primarily engaged in providing services
involving the care of a person or his or her apparel.
      PLANNING COMMISSION. The Planning Commission of the city.
      PRELIMINARY PLAN. A preliminary site plan indicating the proposed layout
of a subdivision, or planned development, which is submitted to the proper
review authority for consideration and preliminary approval.
      PRINCIPAL BUILDING. A building in which is conducted the principal use
allowed on the premises or lot in the district in which it is situated.
      PRINCIPAL USE. The primary or predominate use of the premises or lot.
      PROFESSIONAL SERVICES. Services offered to the general public by the
traditional professions, such as law, medicine, engineering, accounting,
architecture and landscape architecture.
      PUBLIC ART. Works of art in any media that have been planned and executed
with the specific intention of being sited or staged in the physical public
domain, usually outside and accessible to all.
      PUBLIC UTILITY. Any person, firm, corporation, municipal department,
board or commission duly authorized to furnish and furnishing under federal,
state or municipal regulations to the public: gas, steam, electricity, sewage
disposal, communication, telegraph, transportation or water. PUBLIC UTILITY
shall not include wireless communications or towers.
      QUASI-PUBLIC AGENCY. A service owned and operated by a non-profit,
religious or missionary institution and providing educational cultural,
recreational or similar types of public programs.
      REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION USE. Housing accommodation for handicapped
persons in residential districts.
      RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT. Includes travel trailers, pickup campers, motor
homes, tent trailers, tents, boats and boat trailers and similar equipment and
cases or boxes used for transporting recreational equipment whether occupied by
the equipment or not and as further defined in this code of ordinances.
      RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle primarily designed and used as temporary
living quarters for recreational camping or travel purposes, including a
vehicle having its own motor power or a vehicle mounted on or drawn by another
vehicle.
      RESIDENTIAL, RESIDENTIAL USE or RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT. The use of land
parcels for human habitation under the terms of this chapter. RESIDENTIAL shall
not be construed or interpreted to mean the storage, sale (wholesale or
retail), trade, transfer, fabrication, production, manufacture or development
of goods and services.
      RESIDENTIAL BOUTIQUE. A residential dwelling permitted to be occupied for
business use without occupancy for residential purposes in designated areas of
the city.
      RESTAURANT. A place where food and drink is prepared and served.
      RESTAURANT, FAST FOOD. Any establishment whose principal business is the
sale of foods, frozen desserts or beverages to the customer in a ready-to-
consume state for consumption either within the restaurant building or for
carry-out with the consumption off the premises, and whose design or principal
method of operation includes one or both of the following:
         (a)   Food, frozen desserts or beverages usually served in edible
containers or in paper, plastic or other disposable containers; and/or
         (b)   More than 45% of the available floor space is devoted to food
preparation, related activities and other floor space not available to the
public.
      RESTAURANT, FULL SERVICE. An establishment whose principal business is
the sale of foods, frozen desserts or beverages to the customer in a ready-to-
consume state for consumption on the premises and whose design or principal
method of operation includes the following:
         (a)   Customers are normally provided with an individual menu; are
served their foods, frozen desserts or beverages by a restaurant employee at
the same table or counter at which the items are consumed within the restaurant
building; or
         (b)   Caféteria-type operation where foods, frozen desserts or
beverages are consumed within the restaurant building.
      RIDGE LINE. The intersection of roof surfaces forming the highest
horizontal line of the roof.
      ROOF. The top outside covering of a building.
      SALVAGE YARD, JUNKYARD. A place where waste or discarded or salvaged
materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packaged, disassembled,
cleaned or handled including house and vehicle wrecking yards, used lumber
yards and places or yards for use of salvaged house and vehicle parts, and
structural steel materials and equipment. SALVAGE YARD or JUNKYARD shall not
include uses conducted entirely within a completely-enclosed building; pawn
shops and establishments for the sale, purchase or storage of used cars in
operable condition, salvaged machinery, used furniture and household equipment;
and the processing of used, discarded or salvaged materials as part of
manufacturing operations.
      SATELLITE DISH ANTENNAS. A satellite dish antennas is any apparatus
capable of receiving communications from a transmitter or a transmitter relay
located in planetary orbit.
      SEASONAL RECREATION UNIT. A cottage, boat, kiosk or similar structure
which may be used during one or more seasons of the year but not occupied as a
year-round dwelling unit and not serving as a permanent place of residence.
      SETBACK. The distance required to obtain front, side or rear yard open
space provisions of this chapter.
      SIGN. See §
190.329 of this chapter for sign definitions.
      SINGLE HOUSEKEEPING UNIT. An arrangement whereby all of the associated
rooms in a dwelling unit available to and occupied by all of the occupants with
a single set of cooking facilities also available to and utilized by all of the
occupants of the dwelling unit.
      SITE CONDOMINIUM (CONDOMINIUM SUBDIVISION). A method of subdivision where
land ownership of sites is regulated by the Condominium Act (Public Act 59 of
1978, as amended, being M.C.L.A. § 559.101) as opposed to the Subdivision
Control Act of 1967 (M.C.L.A. § 560.101). CONDOMINIUM SUBDIVISION shall be
equivalent to the term SUBDIVISION, as used in this chapter.
      SITE PLAN. The development plan for one or more lots, on which is shown
the existing and proposed conditions of the lot under the terms of §
190.377 of this chapter.
      SKETCH PLAN. A map of a subdivision or site plan, of sufficient accuracy
to be used for the purpose of discussion and classification.
      SPECIAL LAND USE. A use permitted in a given zone when the use is
specified in §§
190.305 through
190.307 of this chapter and has been reviewed by the Engineering Department,
Building Official and/or Planning Commission, after application, to assure that
all specified conditions are met.
      STATE LICENSED RESIDENTIAL FACILITY. A structure constructed for
residential purposes that is licensed by the state under the Adult Foster Care
Licensing Act, Public Act 218 of 1979 or Public Act 116 of 1973, and provides
residential services for six or fewer persons under 24-hour supervision or
care.
      SPOT ZONING. Rezoning of a lot or parcel of land to benefit an owner for
a use incompatible with surrounding uses and not for the purpose or effect of
furthering the objectives of the city’s Master Plan.
      STORY. The part of a building (except a mezzanine as defined herein)
included between the surface of one floor and the surface of the next floor or,
if there is no floor, then the ceiling next above.
      STORY, HALF. An uppermost story lying under a sloping roof, the floor
area of which at a height of four feet above the floor does not exceed one-half
of the floor area in the story directly below, and the ceiling height above at
least 200 square feet of floor-space is seven feet six inches.
      STREET. A public thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access
to abutting properties.
      STRUCTURE. Any thing constructed or erected, the use of which requires
location on the ground or attachment to something having location on the
ground, except driveways and pavement.
      TEMPORARY BUILDING OR USE. A structure or use permitted by the Board of
Appeals to exist during periods of construction of the main building or use or
for special events.
      THOROUGHFARES.
         (a)   MAJOR THOROUGHFARE. An arterial street which is intended to
serve as a large volume trafficway for both the immediate city area and the
region beyond, and may be designated as a major thoroughfare, parkway, freeway,
expressway or equivalent term to identify those streets comprising the basic
structure of the street plan. For purposes of this chapter, MAJOR THOROUGHFARES
shall be considered to be:
            1.   Streets of 120 feet right-of-way or more;
            2.   High volume traffic arteries serving local and through
traffic; and
            3.   Including the following streets: Fort Street; Biddle Avenue;
Pennsylvania Avenue; Eureka Avenue; Ford Avenue; and Oak Street.
         (b)   SECONDARY THOROUGHFARE. An arterial street which is intended to
serve as a trafficway serving primarily the immediate city area and serving to
connect with major thoroughfares.
      TRANSITION. For the purposes of this chapter, one or more of the
following:
         (a)   A zoning district which may serve as a district of transition
(i.e., a buffer zone between various land use districts or land use types);
         (b)   A residential rear or side yard, lot or land parcel arrangement
abutting a land use of more intense development character; and/or
         (c)   A device such as an earth berm, wall, screening fence, heavy
shrub and tree planting or a combination of such devices providing a buffer
between land use types.
      USE. The purpose for which land or a building is designed, arranged or
intended to be used, for which land or a building is or may be occupied.
      USE, ACCESSORY. A use subordinate to the main use of a lot, and used for
purposes clearly incidental to those of the main use.
      USE, MAIN. The principal use to which the premises are devoted and the
principal purpose for which the premises exist.
      USED CAR LOT. A lot or portion thereof to be used only for the display
and sale of automobiles that are in condition to be driven off the lot. A USED
CAR LOT shall not be used for the storage of wrecked automobiles, the
dismantling of automobiles, the repair of automobiles or the storage of
automobile parts.
      VARIANCE. See §§
190.390 through
190.396 of this chapter.
      WALL. A completely obscuring masonry structure of definite height and
location to serve as an obscuring screen in carrying out the requirements of
this chapter.
      WHOLESALE TRADE. Establishments or places of business primarily engaged
in selling merchandise to retailers to industrial, commercial, institutional or
professional business users, or to other wholesalers; or acting as agents or
brokers and buying merchandise for, or selling merchandise to such individuals
or companies.
      WIND ENERGY SYSTEM. A wind conversion system which converts wind energy
into electricity through use of a wind turbine generator and includes the
turbine, blades and tower as well as related electrical equipment.
      WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES. Structures and accessory facilities
relating to the use of the radio frequency spectrum for the purpose of
transmitting or receiving radio signals. WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES
include, but shall not be limited to, radio towers, television towers,
telephone devices and exchanges, microwave relay facilities, telephone
transmission equipment buildings and private and commercial mobile radio
services facilities. WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES do not include citizen
band radio facilities, short wave reviewing facilities, radio and television
broadcast reception facilities, federally licensed amateur (ham) radio
facilities, satellite dishes or governmental facilities that are subject to
state or federal law or regulations which pre-empt municipal regulatory
authority.
      YARDS. The open space on the same lot with a main building or main use,
unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise
provided in this chapter and as defined in this section.
         (a)   FRONT YARD. An open space extending the full width of the lot,
the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the front lot
line and the nearest point of the main building.
         (b)   REAR YARD. An open space extending the full width of the lot,
the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line
and the nearest point of the main building.
         (c)   SIDE YARD. An open space between a main building and the side
lot line, extending from the front yard to the rear yard, the width of which is
the horizontal distance from the nearest point on the side lot line to the
nearest point of the main building.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 201) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007; Ord. 1320, passed 1-
25-2010; Ord. 1373, passed 10-8-2012; Ord. 1381, passed 3-11-2013; Ord. 1467,
passed 11-12-2018; Ord. 1498, passed 9-28-2020)
§ 190.005 INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public
health, morals, safety, comfort, convenience or general welfare. It is not
intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or
interfere with any existing provision of law or ordinance other than the above
described zoning ordinance, or with any rules, regulations or permits
previously adopted or issued or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to
the law relating to the use of buildings or premises; provided, however, that,
where this chapter imposes a greater restriction than is required by existing
ordinance or by rules, regulations or permits, the provisions of this chapter
shall control.
(Prior Code, App. A, Art. XXX) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 190.006 VESTED RIGHT.
   It is hereby expressly declared that nothing in this chapter shall be held
or construed to give or grant to any person, firm or corporation any vested
right, license, privilege or permit.
(Prior Code, App. A, Art. XXXI) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP
§ 190.020 DISTRICTS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the city is hereby divided into the
following districts:
B-1   Neighborhood Business Districts
B-2   General Business Districts
CBD   Central Business Districts
I-1   Industrial Districts
I-2   Industrial Districts
I-3   Industrial Districts
IRO   Industrial/Research/Office Districts
O-S   Office Service Districts
P-1   Vehicular Parking Districts
PD    Planned Development Districts
RA    One-Family Residential Districts
RM-1  Multiple-Family Residential Districts
RM-1A Multiple-Family Residential Districts
RM-2  Townhouse Residential Districts
RM-3  Multiple-Family Residential Districts
RT    One- and Two-Family Residential Districts
RU    Recreation Unit Districts
 
(Prior Code, App. A, § 300) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 190.021 BOUNDARIES.
   The boundaries of these districts are hereby established as shown on the
city’s Zoning Map, which accompanies this chapter, and which map with all
notations, references and other information shown thereon shall be as much a
part of this chapter as if fully described herein.
   (A)   The boundaries of the districts are lot lines, the centerlines of
streets, alleys, roads or such lines extended, centerlines of streams or creeks
or the corporate limits of the city.
   (B)   Where unzoned property may exist, or where, due to the scale, lack of
detail or illegibility of the zoning map accompanying this chapter, there is
any uncertainty, contradiction or confliction as to the intended location of
any district boundaries shown thereon, interpretation concerning where the
exact location of district boundary lines shall be determined, upon written
application or upon its own motion, by the Board of Appeals.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 301) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 190.022 ZONING OF VACATED AREAS.
   Whenever any street, alley or other public way within the city shall be
vacated, such street, alley or other public way or portion thereof shall
automatically be classified in the same zoning district as the property to
which it attaches.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 302) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 190.023 DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS.
   All buildings and uses in any district shall be subject to the provisions of
§§
190.290,
190.320,
190.321 through
190.331 and 190.332 of this chapter. Uses for enterprises or purposes that are
contrary to federal, state or local laws or ordinances are prohibited.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 303) (Ord. 1324, passed 4-12-2010)
RA ONE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Editor’s note:
   These residential districts are designed to provide for one-family dwelling
sites and residentially related uses in keeping with the density character of
the city.
§ 190.035 PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED.
   In a RA One-Family Residential District, no building or land shall be used
and no building shall be erected, except for one or more of the following
specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this chapter:
   (A)   One-family detached dwellings;
   (B)   Churches, mosques and synagogues;
   (C)   Publicly-owned and operated libraries;
   (D)   Municipal buildings and uses, without storage yards;
   (E)   Public, parochial and other private elementary, intermediate and/or
high schools offering courses in general education, and not operated for
profit;
   (F)   Cemeteries;
   (G)   Essential services;
   (H)   Childcare facilities limited to foster family homes, foster family
group homes and family day care homes and state licensed residential
facilities;
   (I)   Home occupations subject to the following:
      (1)   Home occupations that create the following conditions shall not be
permitted:
         (a)   Changes the outside appearance of the dwelling or is visible
from the street;
         (b)   Generates traffic, parking, sewerage or water use in excess of
what is normal in the residential neighborhood;
         (c)   Creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or results in
electrical interference or becomes a nuisance;
         (d)   Results in outside storage or display of any thing other than a
sign in accordance with §
190.329 of this chapter;
         (e)   Requires the employment of anyone other than the occupant of the
dwelling;
         (f)   Requires exterior building alterations to accommodate the
occupation;
         (g)   Occupies more than 25% of the floor area of the dwelling or 50%
of a detached garage;
         (h)   Requires parking for customers that cannot be accommodated on
the site;
         (i)   Requires the delivery of goods or the visit of customers before
6:00 a.m. and after 8:00 p.m.; and
         (j)   Requires the parking outside an accessory building of any
vehicle connected with a commercial business.
      (2)   The following are permitted home occupations; provided, they do not
violate any of the provisions of division (I)(1) above:
         (a)   Dressmaking, sewing and tailoring;
         (b)   Painting, sculpting or writing;
         (c)   Telephone answering;
         (d)   Home crafts, such as model making, rug weaving and lapidary
work;
         (e)   Tutoring limited to four students at a time;
         (f)   Computer application including software, but not including sale
of computers, software or accessories;
         (g)   Salespersons office or home office of a professional person;
         (h)   Laundering and ironing;
         (i)   Repair of clocks, instruments or other small appliances which do
not create a nuisance due to noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or results
in electrical interference;
         (j)   Barber shops and beauty parlors and nail salons, limited to one
operator;
         (k)   Dance studios, limited to four students; and
         (l)   Instruction in crafts or fine arts.
      (3)   The following are prohibited as home occupations:
         (a)   Private clubs;
         (b)   Repair shops which may create a nuisance due to noise,
vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electoral interference;
         (c)   Restaurants;
         (d)   Animal boarding, stables and kennels;
         (e)   Tourist homes;
         (f)   Motor vehicle repair or paint shops; and
         (g)   Retail sales that require visits of customers to the home.
      (4)   Any proposed home occupation that is neither specifically permitted
by division (I)(2) above, nor specifically prohibited by division (I)(3) above
shall be considered a special use and be granted or denied upon consideration
of those standards contained in §§
190.306 and
190.307 of this chapter; and
      (5)   A permit shall be required and shall not be transferable.
   (J)   Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to the above
permitted uses; provided, such buildings and uses are located on the same
zoning lot with a permitted use; and
   (K)   Recreational vehicle storage shall be in accord with §
190.324 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 400) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 190.036 SPECIAL LAND USES.
   The following uses may be permitted by the Planning Commission subject to
the conditions hereinafter imposed in §§
190.305 through
190.307 of this chapter for each use and subject to the review and approval of
a site plan in accord with §
190.377 of this chapter and after a public hearing in accord with §
190.378 of this chapter by the Planning Commission.
   (A)   Public utility facilities;
   (B)   Private outdoor recreation areas and institutional recreation centers;
   (C)   Parks and recreational facilities;
   (D)   Functional equivalent family;
   (E)   Reasonable accommodation use;
   (F)   Satellite dish antennas over 39 inches in diameter;
   (G)   Bed and breakfast dwellings; and
   (H)   Residential boutiques.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 401) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 190.037 REQUIRED CONDITIONS.
   The following conditions shall be required in all RA Districts.
   (A)   Site plan review. Site plan review and approval must be obtained for
all new construction, other than single- and two-family dwellings, for uses
requiring six or more parking spaces in accord with §
190.377 of this chapter.
   (B)   Dwelling unit review. All dwelling units shall be reviewed by the
Building Official subject to the following conditions.
      (1)   Dwelling units shall conform to all applicable city codes and
ordinances. Any such local requirements are not intended to abridge applicable
state or federal requirements with respect to the construction of the dwelling.
      (2)   Dwelling units shall be permanently attached to a perimeter
foundation. In instances where the applicant elects to set the dwelling on
piers or other acceptable foundations which are not at the perimeter of the
dwelling, then a perimeter wall should also be constructed. Any such perimeter
wall shall be constructed of durable materials and shall also meet all local
requirements with respect to materials, construction and necessary foundations
below the frost line. Any such wall shall also provide an appearance that is
compatible with the dwelling and other homes in the area.
      (3)   Dwelling units shall be provided with exterior finish materials
similar to the dwelling units on adjacent properties or in the surrounding
residential neighborhood.
      (4)   Dwelling units shall be provided with roof designs and roofing
material similar to the dwelling units on adjacent properties or in the
surrounding residential neighborhood.
      (5)   Dwelling units shall be provided with an exterior building wall
configuration which represents an average width to depth or depth to width
ratio which does not exceed three to one, or is in reasonable conformity with
the configuration of dwelling units on adjacent properties or in the
surrounding residential neighborhood.
      (6)   The dwelling shall contain storage capability in a basement located
under the dwelling, in an attic area, in closet areas or in a separate
structure of standard construction similar to or of better quality than the
principal dwelling, which storage area shall be equal to 10% of the square
footage of the dwelling or 100 square feet, whichever shall be less.
      (7)   Any such home shall be anchored by an anchoring system approved by
the city.
      (8)   (a)   The Building Official may request a review by the Planning
Commission of any dwelling unit with respect to this section. The Building
Official or Planning Commission shall not seek to discourage architectural
variation, but seek to promote the reasonable compatibility of the character of
dwelling units and accessory buildings and including garages, thereby
protecting the economic welfare and property value of surrounding residential
uses and the city at large.
         (b)   In reviewing any such proposed dwelling unit, the Building
Official may require the applicant to furnish such plans, elevations and
similar documentation as he or she deems necessary to permit a complete review
and evaluation of the proposal. When comparing the proposed dwelling unit to
similar types of dwelling units consideration shall be given to comparable
types of homes within 300 feet.
         (c)   If the area within 300 feet does not contain any such homes,
then the nearest 25 dwellings shall be considered.
      (9)   The Planning Commission in reviewing any such proposed dwelling
unit with respect to divisions (B)(3), (B)(4) and (B)(5) above shall not seek
to discourage architectural variation, but shall seek to promote the reasonable
compatibility of the character of dwelling units, thereby protecting the
economic welfare and property of surrounding residential uses.
   (C)   Design review. Design review for properties within the design review
district in accord with §
190.320 of this chapter unless otherwise exempt.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 402) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
RT ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Editor’s note:
   These districts are designed to provide for predominantly single-family home
development with provisions for two-family homes already existing and to
accommodate a limited number of new two-family dwelling on lots of suitable
size so as not to increase dwelling unit density in an otherwise single-family
neighborhood.
§ 190.050 PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED.
   In a RT District, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be
erected, except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless
otherwise provided in this chapter:
   (A)   All principal uses permitted in the One-Family Residential District
and subject to all regulation and requirements of the RA District, except as
hereinafter modified;
   (B)   Two-family dwellings;
   (C)   Group day care homes;
   (D)   Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to the above
permitted uses; provided, such buildings and uses are located on the same
zoning lot with a permitted use; and
   (E)   Recreational vehicle storage shall be in accord with §
190.324 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 500) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 190.051 SPECIAL USES.
   The following uses may be permitted by the Planning Commission subject to
the conditions hereinafter imposed in §§
190.305 through
190.307 of this chapter for each use and subject to the review and approval of
a site plan in accord with §
190.377 of this chapter and after a public hearing in accord with §
190.378 of this chapter by the Planning Commission: uses permitted as special
uses and as regulated in the RA Districts.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 501) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 190.052 REQUIRED CONDITIONS.
   The following conditions shall be required in all RT Districts: all required
conditions of the RA District shall apply in all RT Districts.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 502) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
RM-1 MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Editor’s note:
   The RM-1 Multiple-family Residential District are designed to provide sites
for low to moderate density one- and two-story planned attached multiple
dwelling structures. The multiple dwelling is further provided to serve the
limited needs for the apartment type of unit and as a transition use of
property between single-family and non-residential districts.
§ 190.065 PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED.
   In a RM-1 Multiple-Family District, no building or land shall be used and no
building shall be erected, except for one or more of the following specified
uses, unless otherwise provided in this chapter:
   (A)   All principal uses permitted and all special uses permitted in the RT
One- and Two-Family Residential Districts and subject to all regulations and
requirements of the RT Districts, except as hereinafter modified;
   (B)   Multiple dwellings; and
   (C)   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above
permitted uses; provided, such buildings and uses are located on the same
zoning lot with a permitted use.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 600) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 190.066 SPECIAL USES.
   The following uses may be permitted by the Planning Commission subject to
the conditions hereinafter imposed in §§
190.305 through
190.307 of this chapter for each use and subject to the review and approval of
a site plan in accord with §
190.377 of this chapter and after a public hearing in accord with §
190.378 of this chapter by the Planning Commission:
   (A)   Uses permitted as special uses and as regulated in the RA District;
   (B)   General hospitals;
   (C)   Convalescent homes;
   (D)   Funeral homes; and
   (E)   Child care center or day care center.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 601) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 190.067 REQUIRED CONDITIONS.
   The following conditions shall be required in all RM-1 Districts:
   (A)   All required conditions of the RM-1A Districts shall apply in all RM-
1 Districts; and
   (B)   An outdoor patio or an outdoor deck of not less than 40 square feet in
area shall be provided for each dwelling unit. Such patio or deck shall have
direct access from the dwelling unit.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 602) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
RM-1A MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Editor’s note:
   The RM-1A Multiple-Family Residential Districts are designed to provide
sites for medium density one-, two- and three-story multiple dwelling
structures. This multiple dwelling district is further provided to serve the
limited needs for the apartment type of unit as a transition use of property
between single-family and non-residential districts.
§ 190.080 PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED.
   In a RM-1A Multiple-Family District, no building or land shall be used and
no building shall be erected, except for one or more of the following specified
uses, unless otherwise provided in this chapter:
   (A)   All principal uses permitted in the RM-1 District and subject to all
regulations and requirements of the RM-1 District, except as hereinafter
modified; and
   (B)   Accessory building and uses customarily incidental to any of the above
permitted uses; provided, such buildings and uses are located on the same
zoning lot with a permitted use.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 700) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 190.081 SPECIAL USES.
   The following uses may permitted by the Planning Commission subject to the
conditions hereinafter imposed in §§
190.305 through
190.307 of this chapter for each use and subject to the review and approval of
a site plan and in accord with §
190.377 of this chapter and after a public hearing in accord with §
190.378 of this chapter by the Planning Commission: uses permitted as special
uses and as regulated in the RA and RM-1 Districts.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 701) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 190.082 REQUIRED CONDITIONS.
   The following conditions shall be required in all RM-1A Districts:
   (A)   All required conditions of the RM-1 District shall apply to the RM-1A
District; and
   (B)   Multiple-family dwellings shall be permitted after review and approval
of the site plans for such dwellings by the Planning Commission. Subsequent
development of the site shall comply with the approved site plan. Such review
of the site plan is required in order to minimize the possibility of adverse
effects upon adjacent property; and furthermore to develop relationships
between development features as they relate to traffic, safety, driveways and
parking areas, and also to properly relate principal buildings, accessory
buildings and uses, and open spaces to one another, and to the traffic pattern
within and surrounding such development. Site plan review shall be conducted in
accord with all requirements of this district and §
190.377 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 702) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
RM-2 TOWNHOUSE RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Editor’s note:
   The RM-2 Townhouse Residential Districts is designed as an intermediate
density zoning district that allows a variety of housing types, including the
single-family attached dwelling commonly termed the “townhouse”. It is intended
that this district be used primarily on collector thoroughfares on smaller land
parcels and in situations where the close proximity of single-family detached
housing developments would be adversely influenced by the higher density
traditional multiple-family complex.
§ 190.095 PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED.
   In a RM-2 Townhouse Residential District, no building or land shall be used
and no building shall be erected, except for one or more of the following
specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this chapter:
   (A)   Townhouse residential dwellings; and
   (B)   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any of the
above permitted uses; provided, such buildings and uses are located on the same
zoning lot with a permitted use.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 800) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 190.096 SPECIAL USES.
   The following uses may be permitted by the Planning Commission subject to
conditions hereinafter imposed in §§
190.305 through
190.307 of this chapter for each use and subject to the review and approval of
a site plan and in accord with §
190.377 of this chapter and after a public hearing in accord with §
190.378 of this chapter by the Planning Commission:
   (A)   Uses permitted as special uses and as regulated in the RM-1A
Districts; and
   (B)   Churches, mosques and synagogues.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 801) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007; Ord. 1414, passed 8-
10-2015; Ord. 1479, passed 9-23-2019)
§ 190.097 REQUIRED CONDITIONS.
   The following conditions shall be required in all RM-2 Districts: all
required conditions of the RM-1A District shall apply to the RM-2 District.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 802) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007; Ord. 1414, passed 8-
10-2015)
RM-3 MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Editor’s note:
   The RM-3 Multiple-family Residential Districts are designed to provide for
multiple dwellings for those areas with existing multi-family units which have
established the character of these districts and for areas on the border of the
central business area and in keeping with the objectives of the master plan.
§ 190.110 PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED.
   In RM-3 Multiple-Family Residential Districts, no building or land shall be
used and no building shall be erected, except for one or more of the following
specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this chapter:
   (A)   All principal uses permitted in the RM-2 Multiple-Family Residential
Districts;
   (B)   All principal uses permitted in the RM-1 Multiple-Family Residential
District and subject to all regulations and requirements of the RM-1 District;
and
   (C)   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any of the
above permitted uses; provided, such buildings and uses are located on the same
zoning lot with a permitted use.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 900) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007; Ord. 1483, passed 11-
18-2019)
§ 190.111 SPECIAL USES.
   The following uses may be permitted by the Planning Commission subject to
the conditions hereinafter imposed in §§
190.305 through
190.307 of this chapter for each use and subject to the review and approval of
a site plan in accord with §
190.377 of this chapter and after a public hearing in accord with §
190.378 of this chapter by the Planning Commission: uses permitted as special
uses and as regulated in the RM-2 Districts.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 901) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 190.112 REQUIRED CONDITIONS.
   The following conditions shall be required in all RM-3 Districts: all
required conditions of the RA Districts shall apply in all RM-3 Districts.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 902) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
RU RECREATION UNIT DISTRICTS
Editor’s note:
   These districts are designed to provide for recreational structures,
recreational uses and accessory uses thereto in areas of the city which are
suited for recreational amenities. It being the intent of this district to
provide for the development of new areas and to upgrade existing areas of the
city which have potential for recreational development.
§ 190.125 PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED.
   In a RU Recreation District, no building or land shall be used and no
building shall be erected, except for one or more of the following specified
uses, unless otherwise provided in this chapter:
   (A)   Seasonal recreation units;
   (B)   Parks, parkways and recreational facilities, open to the general
public; provided that, fees may be charged for the use of such facilities;
   (C)   Municipal uses;
   (D)   Utility and public service facilities (without storage yards) when
operating requirements necessitate the locating of said facilities within the
district in order to serve the immediate vicinity; and
   (E)   Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to the above
permitted uses; provided, such buildings and uses are located on the same
zoning lot with a permitted use.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 1000) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 190.126 SPECIAL USES.
   Outdoor cafés.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 1001) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 190.127 REQUIRED CONDITIONS.
   The following conditions shall be required in all RU Districts:
   (A)   Exterior design and improvement of units shall be in accord with a
unified plan for the area and exterior materials shall be kept in a permanent
state of repair and shall be kept painted or provided with siding of a
maintenance free material; and
   (B)   All required conditions of the RA District shall apply to all RU
Districts.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 1002) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
O-S OFFICE SERVICE DISTRICTS
Editor’s note:
   The O-S Office Service Districts are designed to accommodate office
buildings and uses necessary to the servicing of the office district.
§ 190.140 PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED.
   In an Office Service District, no building or land shall be used and no
building shall be erected, except for one or more of the following specified
uses, unless otherwise provided in this chapter:
   (A)   Office buildings for any of the following occupations: executive,
administrative, professional and sales offices;
   (B)   Medical and dental offices, including clinics;
   (C)   Banks;
   (D)   Funeral homes (mortuaries);
   (E)   Churches;
   (F)   Municipal buildings and public utility offices without storage yards;
   (G)   Other uses similar to the above uses; and
   (H)   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any of the
above permitted uses; provided, such uses are located on the same zoning lot
with a permitted use.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 1100) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 190.141 SPECIAL USES.
   The following uses may be permitted by the Planning Commission subject to
the conditions hereinafter imposed in §§
190.305 through
190.307 of this chapter for each use and subject to the review and approval of
a site plan in accord with §
190.377 of this chapter and after a public hearing in accord with §
190.378 of this chapter by the Planning Commission:
   (A)   Business services;
   (B)   Limited dwellings;
   (C)   Bed and breakfast dwellings;
   (D)   Satellite dish antennas; and
   (E)   Utility and public service facilities.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 1101) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 190.142 REQUIRED CONDITIONS.
   The following conditions shall apply in all O-S Districts:
   (A)   Design review for properties within the design review district in
accord with §
190.320 of this chapter; and
   (B)   Site plan review and approval shall be obtained for all new
construction, other than single- and two-family dwellings, for uses requiring
six or more parking spaces in accord with §
190.377 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 1102) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
B-1 NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICTS
Editor’s note:
   The B-1 Neighborhood Business Districts are designed for the convenience
shopping of persons residing in adjacent residential areas to permit only such
uses as are necessary to satisfy basic day to day shopping and/or service
needs.
§ 190.155 PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED.
   In a B-1 Neighborhood Business District, no building shall be used and no
building shall be erected, except for one or more of the following specified
uses, unless otherwise provided in this chapter:
   (A)   All principal uses permitted in the O-S Office Service District and
subject to all regulations and requirements of the O-S District, except as
hereinafter modified;
   (B)   Any generally recognized retail business which supplies commodities on
the premises, for persons residing in adjacent residential areas, such as:
groceries; meats; dairy products; baked goods or other foods; drugs; dry goods
and notions; or hardware;
   (C)   Full service restaurants, but not including bars or drive-in or drive-
through restaurants;
   (D)   Any personal service establishment which performs services, on the
premises, for persons residing in adjacent residential areas, such as: shoe
repair, tailor shops, beauty parlors or barber shops;
   (E)   Business schools, or private schools operated for profit. Examples of
private schools permitted herein include, but are not limited to, the
following: dance studios; music and voice schools; and art studios;
   (F)   Other uses which are similar to the above uses; and
   (G)   Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to the above
permitted uses; provided, such buildings and uses are located on the same
zoning lot with a permitted use.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 1200) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007; Ord. 1415, passed 8-
10-2015)
§ 190.156 SPECIAL USES.
   The following uses may be permitted by the Planning Commission subject to
the conditions hereinafter imposed in §§
190.305 through
190.307 of this chapter for each use and subject to the review and approval of
a site plan in accord with §
190.377 of this chapter and after a public hearing in accord with §
190.378 of this chapter by the Planning Commission:
   (A)   Uses permitted as special uses and as regulated in the O-S Office
Service District;
   (B)   Private clubs and lodge halls; and
   (C)   Stores that sell alcoholic beverages.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 1201) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007; Ord. 1341, passed 3-
14-2011)
§ 190.157 REQUIRED CONDITIONS.
   The following conditions shall apply to all B-1 Districts: all required
conditions of the O-S District shall apply.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 1202) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
CBD CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
Editor’s note:
   The CBD Central Business District is designed to provide for office
buildings and the great variety of retail stores and related activities which
occupy the prime retail frontage by serving the comparison, convenience and
service needs of the entire city area as well as a substantial area of the
adjacent and surrounding residential developments beyond the city limits. The
district regulations are designed to promote convenient pedestrian shopping and
the stability of retail development by encouraging a continuous retail frontage
all within a building design context which reflects the historic character of
the city’s early history.
§ 190.170 PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED.
   In a CBD Central Business District, no building or land shall be used and no
building shall be erected, except for one or more of the following specified
uses, unless otherwise provided in this chapter:
   (A)   Multiple dwellings as permitted and controlled in §§
190.110 through
190.112 of this chapter, except as hereinafter modified and further excepting
the uses of the RA and RT Districts;
   (B)   Any generally recognized retail business which supplies commodities on
the premises within a completely enclosed building, such as, but not limited
to: foods; drugs; furniture; clothing; dry goods; notions; or hardware;
   (C)   Any personal service establishment which performs services on the
premises within a completely enclosed building, such as, but not limited to:
repair shops (watches, radio, television, shoe and the like); tailor shops;
beauty parlors; barber shops; interior decorators; photographers; and dry
cleaners;
   (D)   Hotels;
   (E)   Restaurants and taverns where the patrons are served within the
building occupied by such establishment, and wherein said establishment does
not extend as an integral part of, or accessory thereto, any service of a
drive-in restaurant and subject further to the requirements of §
190.172 of this chapter and §
190.320 of this chapter;
   (F)   Theaters when completely enclosed;
   (G)   Offices and office buildings of an executive, administrative,
professional or medical nature;
   (H)   Banks, with drive-in facilities permitted when said drive-in
facilities are incidental to the principal function;
   (I)   Municipal, state and federal buildings;
   (J)   Offices and showrooms of plumbers, electricians, decorating or similar
trades, in connection with which not more than 25% of the floor area of the
building or part of the building occupied by said establishment is used for
making, assembling, remodeling, repairing, altering, finishing or refinishing
its products or merchandise; and, provided that, the ground floor premises
facing upon, and visible from any abutting street shall be used only for
entrances, offices or display. All storage materials shall be within the
confines of a building or part thereof occupied by said establishment;
   (K)   Business schools, or private schools operated for profit. Examples of
private schools permitted herein include, but are not limited to, the
following: dance studios; music and voice schools; and art studios;
   (L)   Newspaper offices;
   (M)   Storage space when accessory to any principal use permitted; provided
that, such space is within the confines of the building or part thereof
occupied by said establishment;
   (N)   Parking lots and parking structures;
   (O)   Other uses which are similar to the above uses;
   (P)   Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to the above
permitted uses; provided, such buildings and uses are located on the same
zoning lot with a permitted use; and
   (Q)   Churches, mosques and synagogues.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 1300) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007; Ord. 1479, passed 9-
23-2019)
§ 190.171 SPECIAL USES.
   The following uses may be permitted by the Planning Commission subject to
the conditions hereinafter imposed in §§
190.305 through
190.307 of this chapter for each use and subject to the review and approval of
a site plan in accord with §
190.377 of this chapter and after a public hearing in accord with §
190.378 of this chapter by the Planning Commission:
   (A)   Outdoor café;
   (B)   Bed and breakfast dwellings;
   (C)   Satellite dish antennas;
   (D)   Second floor dwellings and above;
   (E)   Murals; and
   (F)   Public art.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 1301) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007; Ord. 1373, passed 10-
8-2012; Ord. 1393, passed 2-10-2014)
§ 190.172 REQUIRED CONDITIONS.
   The following conditions shall be required in all CBD Districts:
   (A)   All required conditions of the O-S District shall apply;
   (B)   All business establishments shall be retail or service establishments
dealing directly with consumers. All goods produced on the premises shall be
sold at retail from premises where produced;
   (C)   All business activities, except for off-street parking or loading,
shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings;
   (D)   Outdoor storage of commodities shall be expressly prohibited;
   (E)   Design review shall be required in accord with §
190.320 of this chapter; and
   (F)   Location of establishments that sell alcoholic beverages.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (B) above, a new application for a
license to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, or a
request to transfer the location of such license between the east side of Third
Street to the Detroit River and the south side of Chestnut to the north side of
Pine Street within the city, shall be denied if the contemplated location of
the premises to be licensed is within 1,500 feet of any other premises licensed
to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. The distance
between the licensed premises and the contemplated location shall be measured
along the centerline of the street or streets of address between two fixed
points on the center line determined by projecting straight lines at right
angles to the center line from the part of the licensed premises nearest to the
contemplated location and from the part of the contemplated location nearest to
licensed premises.
      (2)   Division (F)(1) above shall not apply if it can be established that
the total gross receipts of the contemplated location for which the application
is being made will or does derive over 50% of its total gross receipts from the
sale of food or other goods and services.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 1302) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
B-2 GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICTS
Editor’s note:
   The B-2 General Business Districts are designed to furnish areas served
typically by the Central Business District with a variety of automotive
services and goods incompatible with the uses and with the pedestrian movement
in such Central Business District. The General Business Districts are
characterized by more diversified business types and are     often located to
serve passerby traffic.
§ 190.185 PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED.
   In a General Business District, no building or land shall be used and no
building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified
uses, unless otherwise provided in this chapter:
   (A)   All principal uses permitted in the Central Business District subject
to all requirements of the district; provided, the maximum height controls of
the B-2 District are complied with and provided dwellings above stores
constructed after the adoption date of this chapter shall meet minimum lot area
requirements of the RM-1 District;
   (B)   Wholesale and retail activities;
   (C)   Indoor sales for new automobiles, boats and recreation vehicles;
   (D)   Minor automobile repair;
   (E)   Automobile car wash, when completely enclosed in building;
   (F)   Bus passenger stations;
   (G)   Governmental offices or other governmental uses;
   (H)   Clinics;
   (I)   Tattoo and body piercing;
   (J)   Self-service laundry and dry cleaning establishments;
   (K)   Bowling alleys;
   (L)   Other uses which are similar to the above uses;
   (M)   Parking lots and parking structures;
   (N)   Utility and public service facilities;
   (O)   Stores that sell alcoholic beverages; and
   (P)   Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to any of the
above permitted uses; provided, such structures and uses are located on the
same zoning lot with a permitted use.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 1400) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 190.186 SPECIAL USES.
   The following uses may be permitted by the Planning Commission subject to
the conditions hereinafter imposed in §§
190.305 through
190.307 of this chapter for each use and subject to the review and approval of
a site plan in accord with §
190.377 of this chapter and after a public hearing in accord with §
190.378 of this chapter by the Planning Commission:
   (A)   Outdoor café zoned B-2 and abutting Eureka, Biddle Avenue or east of
Biddle Avenue only;
   (B)   Satellite antennas;
   (C)   Pool halls and amusement arcades;
   (D)   Bed and breakfast dwelling;
   (E)   Automobile service station with major vehicle repair;
   (F)   Motels;
   (G)   Commercial outdoor recreation;
   (H)   Outdoor sales spaced for new or used automobiles, trucks, recreational
vehicles, mobile homes and boats shall only be allowed on Fort Street (M-85)
and no used car lot shall be permitted within 750 feet of another used car lot;
   (I)   Private clubs and lodges;
   (J)   Funeral homes;
   (K)   Drive-in and drive-through restaurants;
   (L)   Auto wash;
   (M)   Marina and boat livery facilities; and
   (N)   Uses authorized by special license including the following:
      (1)   Adult bookstore;
      (2)   Adult mini-motion picture theater;
      (3)   Adult motion picture theater;
      (4)   Adult motel;
      (5)   Adult personal service business;
      (6)   Cabaret; and
      (7)   Similar type of uses.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 1401) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007; Ord. 1423, passed 3-
14-2016; Ord. 1479, passed 9-23-2019)
§ 190.187 REQUIRED CONDITIONS.
   The following conditions shall be required in all B-2 Districts: all
required conditions of the O-S District shall apply.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 1402) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
I-1 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
Editor’s note:
   The I-1 Industrial District is designed so as to accommodate wholesale
activities, warehouses and industrial operations whose external, physical
effects are restricted to the area of the district and in no manner affect in a
detrimental way any of the surrounding districts.
§ 190.200 PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED.
   (A)   Uses permitted in B-2 General Business District (except dwellings
other than a dwelling for a manager or security personnel) when such uses are
for the convenience of persons in the I-1 Industrial District, subject to the
regulations applicable to such uses.
   (B)   Any of the following uses when conducted wholly within a completely
enclosed building, or within a designated area enclosed on all sides with an
eight-foot fence. Said fence shall be obscuring on those sides which abut upon
or are adjacent to districts zoned for residential use. However, provisions of
this division (B) notwithstanding, the City Council may, by resolution, declare
an area a “proposed industrial park” within which the requirement of an
obscuring fence may be waived on a year-to-year basis by the City Engineer
until such time as abutting residential property no longer exists:
      (1)   Warehousing and wholesale establishments and trucking facilities;
      (2)   The manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging or treatment of
such products as: Bakery goods, candy, cosmetics, chemicals (excluding heavy
chemical manufacturing such as, but not limited to, soda ash manufacturing,
cement manufacturing and the like), pharmaceuticals, toiletries, food products;
hardware and cutlery; tool, die, gauge and machine shops, grinding, welding,
reprocessing or reconditioning of manufacturing equipment;
      (3)   The manufacture, compounding, assembling or treatment of articles
or merchandise from the following previously prepared materials: bone; canvas;
cellophane; chemicals; cloth; cork; feathers; felt; fiber; fur; glass; hair;
horn; leather; paper; plastics; precious or semi-precious metals or stones;
shell; textiles; tobacco; wax; wood (excluding rough saw and rough planning
mills); and yarns;
      (4)   The manufacture of articles or merchandise from sheet metal
(including stampings of metals of seven gauge or lighter), hot or cold forging
of products made from wire or no greater diameter than five-sixteenths inch;
      (5)   The manufacture of pottery and figurines or other similar ceramic
products using only previously pulverized clay and kilns fired only by
electricity or gas;
      (6)   Manufacture of musical instruments, toys, novelties and metal or
rubber stamps or other small molded rubber products;
      (7)   Manufacture or assembly of electrical appliances, electronic
instruments and devices, radio and phonographs;
      (8)   Laboratories (experimental, film or testing);
      (9)   Manufacture and repair of electronic or neon signs, light sheet
metal products, including heating and ventilating equipment, cornices, eaves
and the like;
      (10)   Outdoor storage upon issuance of a permit by the Department of
Engineering as follows: on a permanent basis if annually renewed for contained
scrap materials generated from on-site operations; on a temporary basis for
obsolete machinery if stored for more than 30 days and inventory which is part
of the principal activity if stored for more than 30 days;
      (11)   Building material sales;
      (12)   Bottling and canning of beverages and bottling works, which may
include the processing of used beverage containers as an accessory use thereto,
provided such processing meets all requirements as provided for in §
190.307 of this chapter;
      (13)   Major vehicle repair;
      (14)   Painting and varnishing shops when set back at least 75 feet from
any adjacent residential district; and, provided further that, such operation
be conducted within a completely enclosed building;
      (15)   Metal plating, buffing and polishing, subject to appropriate
measures to control the type of process to prevent noxious results and/or
nuisances;
      (16)   Other uses of a similar and no more objectionable character, and
which will not be injurious or have an adverse effect on adjacent areas, and
may therefore be permitted subject to such conditions, restrictions and
safeguards as may be deemed necessary in the interest of public health, safety
and welfare; and
      (17)   Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to the above
permitted uses; provided, such buildings and uses are located on the same lot
as a permitted use.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 1500) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 190.201 SPECIAL USES.
   The following uses may be permitted by the Planning Commission subject to
the conditions hereinafter imposed in §§
190.305 through
190.307 of this chapter for each use and subject to the review and approval of
a site plan in accord with §
190.377 of this chapter and after a public hearing in accord with §
190.378 of this chapter by the Planning Commission:
   (A)   Auto assembly and machinery assembly plants;
   (B)   Towers and antennas for wireless communication facilities;
   (C)   Wind turbines;
   (D)   Domesticated companion animal lodging facility; and
   (E)   Kennel.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 1501) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007; Ord. 1498, passed 9-
28-2020)
§ 190.202 REQUIRED CONDITIONS.
   The following conditions shall be required in all I-1 Districts:
   (A)   Any use established shall be operated so as to comply with the
performance standards set forth hereinafter in §
190.326 of this chapter; and
   (B)   Site plan review and approval shall be obtained for all new
construction, other than single- and two-family dwellings, for uses requiring
six or more parking spaces in accord with §
190.377 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 1502) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
I-2 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
Editor’s note:
   The I-2 Industrial District is designed primarily for manufacturing,
assembling and fabrication activities including large scale or specialized
industrial operations, whose external physical effects will be felt to some
degree by surrounding districts.
§ 190.215 PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED.
   (A)   Any principal or special use first permitted in an I-1 District;
   (B)   Any production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing, repair or
storage of materials, goods or products which shall conform with the
performance standards set forth in §
190.320 of this chapter and which shall not be injurious or offensive to the
occupants of adjacent premises by reason of the emission or creation of noise,
vibration, smoke, dust or other particulate matter, toxic and noxious
materials, odors, fire or explosive hazards, or glare or heat;
   (C)   Warehouse, storage and transfer and electric and gas service buildings
and yards; water supply, water and gas tank holders; railroad transfer and
storage tracks; heating and electric power generating plants and all necessary
uses; railroad rights-of-way;
   (D)   Storage facilities for building materials, sand, lumber and similar
materials, open storage of contractor’s equipment and supplies; provided, such
is enclosed within an obscuring wall or fence on those sides abutting all
residential, business or office district, and on any yard abutting a public
thoroughfare. In any I-2 District the extent of such fence or wall shall be
eight feet in height. A chain link type fence, with heavy shrubbery, in a
continuous greenbelt five-foot-wide inside of said fence, shall be considered
to be an obscuring fence. However, provisions of this division (D)
notwithstanding, the City Council may, by resolution, declare an area a
“proposed industrial park” within which the requirement of an obscuring fence
may be waived on a year-to-year basis by the City Engineer until such time as
abutting residential property no longer exists;
   (E)   Other uses of a similar or no more objectionable character but not
including uses allowed in the I-3 District; and
   (F)   Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to the above
permitted uses; provided, such buildings and uses are located on the same
zoning lot with a permitted use.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 1600) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 190.216 SPECIAL USES.
   The following uses may be permitted by the Planning Commission subject to
the conditions hereinafter imposed or each use and subject to the review and
approval of a site plan in accord with §
190.377 of this chapter and in §§
190.305 through
190.307 of this chapter after a public hearing in accord with §
190.378 of this chapter by the Planning Commission: beverage container
processing.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 1601) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 190.217 REQUIRED CONDITIONS.
   The following conditions shall be required for all I-2 Districts: all
required conditions of the I-1 District shall apply.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 1602) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
I-3 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
Editor’s note:
   The I-3 Industrial District is designed to provide for locations for
industrial uses which due to the nature of activities conducted is not well
suited to location within I-1 or I-2 Districts and whose effects to abutting
industrial property as well as beyond the district may impair proper use of
such abutting property.
§ 190.230 PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED.
   (A)   Any principal use and special use first permitted in an I-2 District;
   (B)   Activities involving storage, utilization or manufacturing of
materials or products which decompose by detonation shall not be permitted
within the city, except such as are approved by the Fire Chief and the Board of
Appeals and subject further to all other laws and ordinances of the state and
the city;
   (C)   Incinerators for the disposal or burning of garbage and/or refuse;
provided, all requirements of §
190.326 of this chapter are complied with and, provided, all other ordinances
of the city are complied with. No incinerator shall be located closer than 200
feet to a residential district;
   (D)   Any of the following uses provided they are located not less than 500
feet distant from any residential district:
      (1)   Blast furnace, steel furnace, blooming or rolling mill;
      (2)   Petroleum or other flammable liquids, production or refining; and
      (3)   Smelting or refining of metals or ores.
   (E)   Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to the above
permitted uses; provided, such buildings and uses are located on the same
zoning lot with a permitted use.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 1700) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 190.231 SPECIAL USES.
   The following uses may be permitted by the Planning Commission subject to
the conditions hereinafter imposed in §§
190.305 through
190.307 of this chapter for each use and subject to the review and approval of
a site plan in accord with §
190.377 of this chapter and after a public hearing in accord with §
190.278 of this chapter by the Planning Commission:
   (A)   Junk yards; and
   (B)   Sewage disposal plants.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 1701) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 190.232 REQUIRED CONDITIONS.
   The following conditions shall be required in all I-3 Districts: all
required conditions of the I-1 District shall apply.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 1702) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
IRO INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH OFFICE DISTRICTS
Editor’s note:
   The IRO Industrial Research Office districts are designed to provide for
uses which are office or research type or industrial uses which have limited
impact outside of the industrial building.
    The district is intended to encourage uses which have a high value per acre
of land that will supplement the city’s tax base. Certain businesses are
permitted within office buildings as secondary uses.
§ 190.245 PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED.
   In an IRO Industrial Research Office district, no building or land shall be
used and no building shall be erected, except for one or more of the following
specified uses unless otherwise provided in this chapter:
   (A)   Any use charged with the principal function of basic research, design
and pilot or experimental product development;
   (B)   Office buildings for any of the following occupations: executive,
administrative, professional, accounting, writing, clerical, stenographic,
drafting and sales;
   (C)   Data processing and computer centers, including service and
maintenance of electronic data processing equipment;
   (D)   Banks, credit unions, savings and loan associations;
   (E)   Hospitals, clinics and medical offices; medical laboratories;
   (F)   Other uses similar to the above uses;
   (G)   Municipal buildings and uses;
   (H)   Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to the above
permitted uses; provided, such buildings and uses are located on the same
zoning lot with a permitted use; and
   (I)   Churches, mosques and synagogues.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 1800) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007; Ord. 1479, passed 9-
23-2019)
§ 190.246 SPECIAL USES.
   The following uses may be permitted by the Planning Commission subject to
the conditions hereinafter imposed in §§
190.305 through
190.307 of this chapter for each use and subject to the review and approval of
a site plan in accord with §
190.377 of this chapter and after a public hearing in accord with §
190.378 of this chapter by the Planning Commission:
   (A)   Light industrial and retail uses; and
   (B)   All principal and special uses permitted in the RU Recreation Unit
District and subject to all regulations and requirements of the RU District,
except as hereinafter modified.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 1801) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 190.247 REQUIRED CONDITIONS.
   The following conditions shall be required in all IRO Districts:
   (A)   All required conditions of the I-1 District shall apply;
   (B)   The outdoor storage of goods or materials is prohibited. The outdoor
loading and unloading of trucks or vehicles at truck bays is allowed for
businesses occupying a site; however, such loading and unloading shall not
allow the outdoor parking of such truck or vehicle for periods of longer than
24 hours and shall not include truck terminals. Outdoor parking of trucks for
longer than 24 hours shall be considered storage;
   (C)   Any use established in the IRO District shall be operated so as to
comply with the performance standards set forth in §
190.326 of this chapter, where applicable;
   (D)   All uses shall receive site plan review and approval by the Planning
Commission prior to the issuance of any building permit;
   (E)   Off-street loading shall be provided in accordance with the following
schedule:
      (1)   For office building of less than 100,000 square feet in gross floor
area, at least one loading space, with a dimension of at least ten by 50 feet,
separate from off-street parking shall be provided in the rear or side yard
only;
      (2)   For office buildings greater than 100,000 square feet in gross
floor area, at least one loading space with a dimension of at least ten by 50
feet with clearance of at least 14 feet in height, in the rear or side yard
only;
      (3)   For special uses, one separate space, in addition to space required
for offices, shall be provided for each serviced entrance to the use in the
rear or side yard only; and
      (4)   All loading and unloading shall be provided off-street in the rear
yard or in interior side yard, and in no instance shall be permitted in a front
yard. All loading and unloading areas shall be screened from public view.
   (F)   All buildings shall be provided with finished materials on all sides
exposed to public view. Pole barn types of structures shall not be permitted;
and
   (G)   See §§
190.324 through
190.329 and
190.377 of this chapter regarding off-street parking requirements, off-street
parking layout, standards, construction and maintenance, signs, landscaping and
site plan review, as related to uses permitted in the district.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 1802) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
P-1 VEHICULAR PARKING DISTRICTS
Editor’s note:
   The P-1 Vehicular Parking Districts are designed to accommodate the off-
street parking of those uses which are not able to provide adequate space
within their own district boundaries.
§ 190.260 PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED.
   Premises in such district shall be used only for an off-street parking area
and shall be developed and maintained subject to such regulations as are
hereinafter provided.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 1900) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 190.261 REQUIRED CONDITIONS.
   The following conditions shall be required in all P-1 Districts:
   (A)   The parking area shall be accessory to, and for use in connection with
one or more businesses, or industrial establishments, located in adjoining
business or industrial districts, or in connection with one or more existing
professional or institutional office buildings or institutions;
   (B)   The parking area shall be used solely for parking of private passenger
vehicles, for periods of less than one day;
   (C)   The storage of merchandise, motor vehicles for sale, trucks or the
repair of vehicles is prohibited in parking areas;
   (D)   No signs of any kind, other than signs designating entrances, exits
and conditions of use, shall be maintained on such parking area;
   (E)   No building other than those for shelter of attendants shall be
erected upon the premises and they shall not exceed 15 feet in height to peak
of the roof;
   (F)   Applications for P-1 District rezoning shall be made by submitting a
scaled and dimensional layout of the proposed parking lot showing the intended
parking plan in accordance with §§
190.324 and
190.325 of this chapter. Approval of the application shall be subject to the
review and approval of a site plan by the Planning Commission in accordance
with §
190.377 of this chapter and after a public hearing in accordance with §
190.378 of this chapter; and
   (G)   P-1 Vehicular Parking Districts shall be developed and maintained in
accordance with the requirements of §
190.324 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 1901) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 190.262 MINIMUM DISTANCES AND SETBACKS.
   (A)   Side and rear yards. Where the P-1 District is contiguous to side or
rear lot lines of premises within a residentially zoned district, a wall or
obscuring fence shall be constructed on said lot lines in accordance with §
190.320 of this chapter.
   (B)   Front yards. Where the P-1 District is contiguous to a residentially
zoned district and has a common frontage on the same block with residential
structures, or wherein no residential structures have been yet erected, or is
across the street from a residential district, there shall be a minimum setback
of 15 feet from the front property line. A required wall or obscuring fence
shall be located on this minimum setback line unless the Planning Commission
finds that no good purpose would be served. The land between said setback and
street right-of-way line shall be kept free from refuse and debris and shall be
planted with shrubs, trees or lawn and shall be maintained in a healthy growing
condition, neat and orderly in appearance. Planting shall be in accordance with
§
190.328 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 1902) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
PD PLANNED DEVELOPMENT
Editor’s note:
   The PD Planned Development District is intended to permit the private or
public development or redevelopment of areas throughout the city which shall be
substantially in accord with the goals and objectives of the city’s Master Plan
in providing for a balanced land use pattern for homes, business, industry,
community facilities and services. Homes shall be single-family or condominium
projects with the obligation of being developed for owner occupants. The land
use patterns of the areas involved shall provide a desirable environment and
shall be harmonious to the general surrounding uses permitting flexibility in
overall development while ensuring adequate safeguards and standards for public
health, safety, convenience and general welfare.
    It is further the intent of this district to provide for development which
will be carried out in such manner as to preserve natural features such as
waterfront areas and their accessibility to the public and to promote energy
efficient development. Such Planned Development District may embrace a mixture
of one or more uses or zoning categories all in accord with the city’s Master
Plan for Future Land Use.
§ 190.275 PROCEDURE FOR APPLICATION.
   (A)   Application shall be made to the City Council under this district.
   (B)   The person applying shall be required to make a submittal of the
following material for review and recommendation by the Planning Commission:
      (1)   A proof of ownership of land where land is being requested for
rezoning;
      (2)   A property area survey of the exact area being requested (scale:
one inch equals 100 feet);
      (3)   A topography map of the entire area at a contour interval showing
one foot changes in elevation. This map shall indicate all natural and human-
made features (scale: one inch equals 100 feet);
      (4)   A preliminary plan of the entire area carried out in such detail as
to show the land use being requested, the business area, industrial buildings
and uses, the housing densities being proposed where applicable, the system of
collector streets and off-street parking system;
      (5)   Building elevation drawing and proposed building materials;
      (6)   A written statement explaining in detail the full intent of the
sponsor indicating the specifics of the development plan as it relates to the
type of dwelling units contemplated and resultant population; the extent of
non-residential development and the resultant traffic generated and parking
demands created; and
      (7)   Supporting documentation such as, but not limited to: market
studies; supporting land use request; and the intended scheduling of
development.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 2000) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 190.276 STAGE I PRELIMINARY SITE PLAN.
   (A)   The preliminary site plan shall be referred to the City Engineer, or
his or her designee, to other city agencies or consultants to the city as may
be deemed necessary to provide guidance to the Planning Commission and the City
Council in their review of the project.
   (B)   In reviewing and approving the preliminary site plan, the following
procedures and conditions shall be followed.
      (1)   The proposed development in a PD District shall be of such area as
to represent a sound carrying out of the master plan of land use, it not being
the intention of this district that an unrelated parcel-by-parcel development
be effectuated.
      (2)   The preliminary site plan shall be reviewed and a report with
recommendation shall be made by the Planning Commission to the City Council
relative to the plans meeting the intent and the requirements of the Master
Plan of Future Land Use and the requirements of this chapter.
      (3)   Recommendation by the Planning Commission shall be given only after
public hearing. Such hearing shall be carried out in accord with requirements
of Public Act 110 of 2006, as amended.
      (4)   Approval of the preliminary plan by the City Council shall not
constitute approval of the final site plan. It shall be deemed as approval of
the land use plan submitted and shall serve as a guide in the preparation of
the final plan.
      (5)   Acceptance of the preliminary site plan by the City Council shall
be effective for a period of two years.
      (6)   In an area zoned PD District, no development shall take place
therein nor use made of any part thereof, except in accordance with the site
plan as originally approved, or in accordance with an approved amendment
thereto.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 2001) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 190.277 STAGE II FINAL SITE PLAN.
   (A)   The final site plan shall be submitted to the City Council and
referred to the City Engineer or his or her designee, and to other city
agencies or consultants to the city as may be deemed necessary to provide
guidance to the Planning Commission and the City Council in their review of the
project.
   (B)   In reviewing the final site plan, the following conditions shall be
followed.
      (1)   A final overall site plan for the entire area being requested under
this PD District shall be submitted. This plan shall be worked out in detail
showing specific uses, building location, off-street parking, street alignment
changes, open spaces and other physical plan details being proposed. Supporting
documentation in the form of building floor plans, building elevation drawings,
type of building material and schedule of construction shall be submitted.
      (2)   The final plan shall reflect and adhere to those use patterns as
approved in the preliminary plan. Standards for building, density, height,
bulk, setbacks from public streets and the riverfront, and off-street parking
shall be equal to at least the minimum standards set forth for like uses in the
schedule of regulations and off-street parking requirements of this chapter;
provided however, the Planning Commission and City Council may modify these
standards where the objectives of the district can be proved to be better
served by such modifications. Density standards for multiple-family dwellings
shall generally follow the requirements of the RM-1 districts for one-, two-
and three-story buildings and the RM-2 District requirements for buildings
above three stories subject to modification where it can be shown that such
modification will provide a more desirable planned development. In no instance
shall buildings be located closer than 100 feet to the waterfront unless good
cause can be shown that buildings located closer than 100 feet will provide
site amenities which will be beneficial to the overall development and to the
city as a whole. In those instances where mixed uses utilize a PD District, the
Planning Commission may vary setback and height requirements to accomplish a
desirable planned development.
      (3)   A presentation of the final site plan shall be made to the City
Council. Prior to action by the City Council, the final site plan shall be
forwarded to the Planning Commission for review and recommendation.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 2002) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 190.278 STAGE III FINAL SITE PLAN APPROVAL.
   In approving the final plan, the following conditions shall be set forth.
   (A)   Approval of the final site plan (Stage II) may be granted by the City
Council after review and recommendation is made by the Planning Commission. A
public hearing shall not be required on the Stage II site plan, however, a
resolution of the City Council is required determining that such Stage II site
plan is in compliance with the planned development representations made at the
time of approval of the Stage I site plan, and also meets the requirements set
forth in §
190.279 of this chapter, which follows. Final approvals may be granted in
stages; provided, such stages are in keeping with previously approved
preliminary site plans.
   (B)   All dedications of public rights-of-way or planned public open spaces
shall be made prior to any construction taking place on the site.
   (C)   Upon issuance of a certificate of site plan approval the site plan,
building elevations and other development proposals including the proposed
uses, shall become an integral part of the PD District and for purposes of
recordation, shall be referred to as “Planned Development No. ________ “, which
number shall be recorded on the appropriate properties of the city zoning map.
All approved plans shall be filed with the City Clerk.
   (D)   Approval of the final site plan shall be effective for a period of
three years; providing that, development is commenced within one year, as
evidenced, at a minimum, by issuance of a building permit. If development is
not commenced within one year or not completed within three years, the Planning
Commission shall review progress to date and make a recommendation to the City
Council as to action relative to permitting continuation under original
approval.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 2003) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 190.279 REQUIRED CONDITIONS.
   The following are the required conditions of the PD District:
   (A)   Provisions satisfactory to the City Council have been made to provide
for the financing of any improvements shown on the plan for open spaces and
common use areas which are to be provided by the applicant, and that
maintenance of such improvements is assured by a means satisfactory to the City
Council. Such assurance may include bonding or other suitable guarantee of
performance;
   (B)   The cost of installing all streets, necessary utilities and site
amenities has been assured by a means satisfactory to the City Council;
   (C)   The final plan of each project area of the approved plan is in
conformity with the overall approved plan. Any changes or amendments requested
shall suspend approval of the overall plan until such changes or amendments
have been reviewed and approved as in the instance of the first submittal, it
being the intent of this section that no other administrative or board of
appeals action shall constitute official approval of such changes or amendments
to the overall plan. Denial by City Council of any requested changes or
amendments shall not void the originally approved plan;
   (D)   A change of occupancy, a change in type of use, or the alteration of a
building or the site in a previously approved PD District shall require the
review of the Building Official. The Building Official may request a review by
the Planning Commission where a question arises relative to whether such change
falls within the intent of the previously approved PD District;
   (E)   Fees for review of plans and for services required to supplement city
staff as may be required to provide background for decisions of the Planning
Commission and the City Council shall be established by resolution of the City
Council; and
   (F)   Design review shall be required for all properties within the Design
Review District in accord with §
190.320 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 2004) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS
§ 190.290 LIMITING HEIGHT, BULK, DENSITY AND AREA BY LAND USE.
          Minimum Size                                              Maximum
          Lot Per       Maximum Height  Minimum Yard Setback (Per   Percent of
          Dwelling      of Structure    Lot in Feet)                Lot
Use                                                                 Coverage
Districts Area                                Sides                 (Area of
          in Sq. Width  In      In Feet Front         Total Rear    all
          Ft.    in Ft. Stories               Least 1 of 2          Structures)
             Minimum Size Maximum                                   Maximum
             Lot Per      Height of     Minimum Yard Setback (Per   Percent of
             Dwelling     Structure     Lot in Feet)                Lot
Use                                                                 Coverage
Districts    Area                              Sides                (Area of
             in    Width  In      In    Front  Least  Total  Rear   all
             Sq.   in Ft. Stories Feet         1      of 2          Structures)
             Ft.
B-1,
Neighborhood —   —    2       30    5(m,w) 5(n)   10(n)  10(o)  —
Business
B-2, General —   —    4       40    5(m,w, 5(n)   10(n)  10     —
Business                                z)
CBD, Central —   —    8(p)    80(p) (v,w)  5(n)   10(n)  10     —
Business                  (ad)    (ad)
I-1,                                    20     5(n,t, 10(n,u 10(o,
Industrial   —   —    8       85    (d,t), x,u)   ,t,x)  u,x)   —
                                        (u,x)
I-2,                                    20     5(n,t, 10(n,t 10(o,
Industrial   —   —    —     —   (d,t,  u,x)   ,u,x)  u,x)   —
                                        u,x,y)
I-3,                                    20     5(n,t, 10(n,t 10(o,
Industrial   —   —    —     —   (d,t,  u,x)   ,u,x)  u,x)   —
                                        u,x,y)
IRO,                                    20
Industrial/  —   —    —     —   (t,d,  5(n,t, 10(n,t 10(o,  —
Researc h/                              u)     u)     ,u)    u)
Office
OS, Office   —   —    2       30    5(m,w) 5(n)   10(n)  10(o)  —
Services
RA, One-                                       4(b,c) 12(b,c
Family       5,000 50     2       30    20(d)  (aa)   )      25     35%
Residential
RM-1A,                                         5
Multiple-    (f,q) (f,q,s 3       35    20(d)  (b,i,r 15(b,i 20(h,i 40%
Family             -1)                         -1)    ,r-1)  )
Residential
RM-1,
Multiple-    (e,f) (e,f)  2       30    20     10(h,i 20(h,i 25(h,i 35%
Family                                  (h,d)  )      )      )
Residential
RM-2,                             35(ab 10
Townhouse    (e,f) (e,f)  3(ab)   )     (d,ac  7(h)   14(h)  20(h)  38%
Residential                             )
RM-3,
Multiple-    (j)   (j)    8(k)    80(k) 20(d)  3(i,b) 10(i,b 20(i,l 40%
Family                                                )      )
Residential
RT, One- and                                   4(b,c) 12(b,c
Two-Family   5,000 35     2       30    20(d)  (aa)   )      25     35%
Residential
RU,
Recreation   1,000 20     —     30(r- —    2(s-2) 4(s-2) 10     —
Unit                              2)
Districts
NOTES TO TABLE:
(a) [Reserved.]
(b) Where a side yard abuts a street, the minimum width of such yard shall be
not less than 5 feet, except in the instance of a multiple dwelling such side
yard shall not be less than 10 feet. A distance of not less than 8 feet shall
be provided between the dwelling and a dwelling on an abutting lot.
(c) Any side yard for a principal use or a special use allowed in this
district, other than 1- and 2-family dwellings, shall not be less than 1/2 the
height of the building at the side yard.
(d) In a block on 1 side of the street, 50% or more occupied, the depth of the
front yard need not be more than the average depth of front yards of existing
buildings and, in no instance, more than 20 feet.
(e) The following minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall be provided:
   (1) Efficiency unit: 1,100 square feet per unit;
   (2) One-bedroom unit: 1,600 square feet per unit;
   (3) Two-bedroom unit: 2,200 square feet per unit;
   (4) Three-bedroom unit: 2,800 square feet per unit; and
   (5) Four-bedroom unit: 3,400 square feet per unit.
(f) A den or extra room shall count the same as a bedroom. Examples of an
“extra room” include, but are not limited to, the following: space in a
basement, attic or other area that is planned or may be finished at a later
date as a loft area, office, library, study, bonus room; an additional family
or living room; or other additional room.
(g) The following minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall be provided:
   (1) Efficiency unit: 600 square feet per unit;
   (2) One-bedroom unit: 900 square feet per unit;
   (3) Two-bedroom unit: 1,200 square feet per unit;
   (4) Three-bedroom unit: 1,500 square feet per unit; and
   (5) Four-bedroom unit: 1,800 square feet per unit.
(h) In all RM-1 and RM-2 Multiple-Residence Districts, the minimum distance
between any 2 buildings, excluding buildings where the side yards of each
building are directly opposite one another, shall be regulated according to the
length and height of such buildings. The formula regulating the required
minimum distance between 2 buildings is as follows:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/84f314df5911a4b8d75bf8da219d5dc254290259/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4210.png]
 
 
S = LA + LB + 2(HA + HB)    
6
   where:
   S = Required minimum horizontal distance between any wall of building A and
any wall of building B or the vertical prolongation of either.
   LA = Total length of building A. The total length of building A is the
length of that portion or portions of a wall or walls of building A from which,
when viewed directly from above, lines drawn perpendicular to building A will
intersect any wall of building B.
   LB = The total length of building B. The total length of building B is the
length of that portion or portions of a wall or walls of building B from which,
when viewed directly from above, lines drawn perpendicular to building B will
intersect any wall of building A.
   HA = Height of building A. The height of building A at any given level is
the height above natural grade level of any portion or portions of a wall or
walls along the length of building A. Natural grade level shall be the mean
level of the ground immediately adjoining the portion or portions of the wall
or walls along the total length of the building.
   HB = Height of building B. The height of building B at any given level is
the height above natural grade level of any portion or portions of a wall or
walls the length of building B. Natural grade level shall be the mean level of
the ground immediately adjoining the portion or portions of the wall or walls
along the total length of the building.
(i) Any side or rear yard for a principal use or a use permissible on special
approval allowed in this district, other than RA, RT and multiple-family
dwellings shall not be less than the height of the structure at the side or
rear lot line.
(j) No principal use shall be built upon a lot having less than 2,000 square
feet for the first 2 families, plus 500 square feet for each additional family.
(k) Buildings or parts of buildings, not exceeding 2% of the lot area may be
erected to a height of 100 feet if the side yard is increased to 1/3 of the
height of such part at the 80-foot level.
(l) For each story in excess of 2, 1 additional foot of rear yard in excess of
the minimum 20 feet shall be provided.
(m) A front yard of 5 feet, however, and a minimum of 10 feet for buildings
adjacent to a street right-of-way.
(n) Side yards may be omitted if walls abutting a side yard are of fire-proof
construction and the building is not adjacent to a street right-of-way.
(o) Floors of buildings used in whole or in part as a dwelling shall provide a
minimum rear yard of 25 feet. Not less than 15 feet of depth of such yard shall
be useable as outdoor yard space for the occupants of such dwelling. If a rear
yard abuts an alley, such yard may be measured from the center of the alley.
(p) Buildings or structures may be constructed to a height not to exceed 150
feet where adequate fire protection of such building or structure is provided
to supplement the protection available from municipal sources in the judgment
of the Fire Chief.
(q) The following minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall be provided:
   (1) Efficiency unit: 900 square feet per unit;
   (2) One-bedroom unit: 1,200 square feet per unit;
   (3) Two-bedroom unit: 1,500 square feet per unit;
   (4) Three-bedroom unit: 1,800 square feet per unit; and
   (5) Four-bedroom unit: 2,100 square feet per unit.
(r-1) Every lot on which a multiple dwelling is erected shall be provided with
a side yard on each side of such lot. Each side yard shall be increased by one-
half-foot for each 10 feet or part thereof by which the length of the multiple
dwelling exceeds 40 feet in overall dimension along the adjoining lot line. In
no instance shall a side yard of less than 10 feet be provided on those sides
which provide front entrances to buildings.
(r-2) Above established grade level as determined by the city.
(s-1) No multiple-family dwelling shall he built on a parcel of less width or
depth than 45 feet.
(s-2) Side yards may be eliminated where fire-proof common walls are provided.
(t) A front and side yard setback of not less than 50 feet shall be provided
for industrial sites on major thoroughfares where the use is warehousing,
wholesale, manufacturing, major vehicle repair, metal plating, storage,
incinerators, smelting, processes utilizing furnaces or other similar uses.
Such yard shall be landscaped with plant materials (trees, shrubs and lawn
area). All outdoor storage areas shall be screened from public streets by means
of walls and/or landscape planting and shall not be visible from public
streets. Buildings fronting on public streets shall be constructed of finished
materials.
(u) A setback of not less than 100 feet shall be provided for all buildings on
those sites abutting the Detroit River.
(v) Buildings in the central business districts shall be setback no further
than 5 feet; provided, when buildings exist abutting both sides of a site that
exceed this setback, an average setback of buildings abutting the site may be
provided. No curb cuts are permitted on a street which is adjacent to a front
yard.
(w) Fencing in any front yard shall be prohibited provided this shall not
preclude provision for pedestrian safety barricades for outdoor cafés.
(x) Building setbacks abutting a residential district shall not be less than 20
feet for a front yard, 5 feet for each side yard and 10 feet for a rear yard;
provided, an additional 1 foot of front yard setback and an additional 2 feet
of side and rear yard setback for each foot of building height over a building
height of 20 feet shall be provided. This provision for added yard requirements
shall not apply to none industrial buildings.
(y) In I-2 and I-3 Industrial Districts not on a major thoroughfare, there
shall be a minimum of 20 feet of front yard setback from the property line,
except where the 1 side of the street is 50% or more developed, the depth of
the front yard need not be more than the average depth of front yards of
existing buildings.
(z) Setbacks for drive-in and drive-through restaurants shall be not less than
20 feet.
(aa) For existing single-family homes in RA and RT Districts, additions to
principal buildings may be equal to the side yard of the existing structure,
but shall not reduce the side yard to less than 3 feet.
(ab) A minimum height of 2 stories is required.
(ac) If the building does not front on a public street (i.e., the building
faces an interior lot line) and no other principal dwelling on the same
property faces the structure, a minimum front yard setback of 25 feet is
required. When 2 or more buildings face one another, either for its entire
length or a portion thereof, the front yard setback shall be in accordance with
the formula provided in division (h) above.
(ad) A minimum height of 2 stories and not less than 30 feet in height is
required for all buildings fronting on Biddle Avenue.
Special Uses — Index of Items CovereSection
Special Uses — Index of Items Covered                      Section
Auto and machinery assembly plants                            
Auto wash                                                     
Automobile service station                                    
Automobile service station with major vehicle repair          
Bed and breakfast dwellings                                   
Beverage container processing                                 
Business services located in O-S districts                    
Child care or day care center                                 
Commercial outdoor recreational space                         
Convalescent homes                                            
Domesticated companion animal lodging facility                
Drive-in or drive-through restaurant                          
Functional equivalent family                                  
Funeral homes                                                 
General hospitals                                             
Home occupations (not specifically permitted)                 
Industrial and retail uses in IRO districts                   
Joint use parking facilities                                  
Junkyards                                                     
Kennel                                                        
Limited dwelling construction in O-S districts                
Marina and boat livery facilities                             
Motels                                                        
Murals                                                        
Outdoor café                                                 
Outdoor sales space for new or used automobiles               
Parks and recreational facilities                             
Pool halls and amusement arcades                              
Private and institutional outdoor recreation areas            
Private clubs and lodge halls                                 
Public art                                                    
Public utility facilities and uses                            
Reasonable accommodation use                                  
Residential boutiques                                         
Residential service facilities in Residential RM-2 districts  
Satellite dish antennas                                       
Second floor dwellings in office/business buildings           
Sewage disposal plants                                        
Stores that sell alcoholic beverages                          
Towers and antennas for wireless communication facilities     
Uses authorized by special license                            
Wind turbines                                                 
 
(Prior Code, App. A, § 2100) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007; Ord. 1364, passed 6-
11-2012; Ord. 1380, passed 1-14-2013; Ord. 1390, passed 11-11-2013; Ord. 1498,
passed 9-28-2020)
SPECIAL LAND USES
§ 190.305 PURPOSE.
   The development and execution of this subchapter is based upon the division
of the city into districts within which the uses of land and buildings and the
bulk and location of buildings and structures in relation to the land are
substantially uniform. It is recognized, however, that there are special uses
which, because of their unique characteristics, cannot be properly classified
in any particular district or districts without consideration, in each case, of
the impact of those uses upon neighboring land. These uses include uses
publicly operated or traditionally affected with a public interest and uses
entirely private in character, but of such an unusual nature that their
operation may give rise to unique problems with respect to their impact upon
neighboring property or public facilities.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 2200) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 190.306 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Initiation of special land use. Any person having a freehold interest
in land, a possessory interest entitled to exclusive possession, or a
contractual interest which may become a freehold interest, and which is
specifically enforceable, may file an application to use the land for one or
more of the special uses provided for in this subchapter in the zoning district
in which the land is located.
   (B)   Application of special land use. An application for special land use
shall be filed with the Engineering Department on a form prescribed by the
Department. The application shall be accompanied by any plans or data
prescribed by the Department and shall include as a minimum the requirements
for site plan review as noted in §
190.377 of this chapter. The application shall also include a statement in
writing by the applicant and adequate evidence showing that the proposed
special land use will conform to the standards set forth in this section. The
application shall also be accompanied with a fee to cover the expense of public
hearing. The fee to be determined by resolution of the City Council shall be
based upon the cost of processing the review.
   (C)   Public hearing. Upon receipt of an application for a special land use,
a public hearing shall be held by the Planning Commission. Once notice that a
request for special land use approval has been received, it shall be published
in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and shall be sent by mail or
personal delivery to the owners of property for which approval is being
considered, to all persons to whom real property is assessed within 300 feet of
the boundary of the property in question, and to the occupants of all
structures within 300 feet. The notice shall be given not less than 15 days
before the application will be considered. If the name of the occupant is not
known, the term “occupant” may be used in making notification. Notification
need not be given to more than one occupant of a structure, except that if a
structure contains more than one dwelling unit or spatial area owned or leased
by different individuals, partnerships, businesses or organizations, one
occupant of each unit or spatial area shall receive notice. In the case of a
single structure containing more than four dwelling units or other distinct
spatial areas owned or leased by different individuals, partnerships,
businesses or organizations, notice may be given to the manager or owner of the
structure who shall be requested to post the notice at the primary entrance to
the structure. The notice shall contain the following information:
      (1)   Description of the nature of the special land use request;
      (2)   A site plan in accord with §
190.377 of this chapter has been submitted;
      (3)   Indication of the property, which is the subject of the special
land use request. The notice shall include a listing of all existing street
addresses within the property. Street addresses do not need to be created and
listed if no such addresses currently exist within the property. If there are
no street addresses, other means of identification may be used;
      (4)   Statement of when and where the special land use hearing will be
considered; and
      (5)   Indication of when and where written comments will be received
concerning the request.
   (D)   Standards. No special land use shall be recommended by the Engineering
Department or approved by the Planning Commission unless it shall find the
following:
      (1)   The establishment, maintenance or operation of the special land use
will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety or general
welfare or the natural environment;
      (2)   The special land use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment
of other property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes already permitted,
nor shall it substantially diminish and impair property values within its
neighborhood;
      (3)   The establishment of the special land use will not impede the
normal and orderly development and improvement of the surrounding property for
uses permitted in the district;
      (4)   Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and necessary facilities
have been or are being provided;
      (5)   Adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress or
egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets;
      (6)   The special land use shall, in all other respects, conform to the
applicable regulations of the district in which it is located and to any
additional conditions or procedures as specified in §§
190.305 through
190.307 of this chapter; and
      (7)   A decision on a special land use shall be incorporated in a
statement of findings and conclusions relative to the special land use which
specifies the basis for the decision and any conditions imposed.
   (E)   Conditions and guarantees. Prior to the granting of any special land
use, the Planning Commission shall stipulate the conditions and restrictions
upon the establishment, location, construction, maintenance and operations of
the special land use as deemed necessary for the protection of the public
interest and to secure compliance with the standards and requirements specified
in this section. In all cases in which special land uses are granted, the
Planning Commission shall require any evidence and guarantees as it may deem
necessary as proof that the conditions stipulated in connection therewith are
being and will be complied with. Any conditions imposed shall remain unchanged,
except upon the mutual consent of the Planning Commission and the land owner.
The Planning Commission shall maintain a record of changes granted in the
conditions.
   (F)   Effect of denial of a special land use. No application for a special
land use which has been denied wholly or in part by the Planning Commission
shall be resubmitted for a period of one year from the date of the order of
denial, except on the grounds of new evidence or proof of change of conditions
found to be valid by the engineering department and the Planning Commission.
   (G)   Revocation. In any case where a special land use has not been
established within one year after the date of granting authorization for the
use, the special land use authorization shall automatically be null and void
without further action by the Planning Commission.
   (H)   Revoke special land use. A special land use may be revoked by the
Planning Commission under the following procedures:
      (1)   Mail notice of the proposed action to revoke the special land use
to the owner/operator of the business and outdoor café at least ten calendar
days prior to the hearing;
      (2)   Provide with the notice the reasons for the proposed action;
      (3)   Provide with the notice the date, time and place of the hearing for
the proposed action;
      (4)   Include in the notice a statement that the owner/operator may
present evidence and testimony and question any witness at the hearing; and
      (5)   At the hearing, the City Engineer’s office or planner will present
to the Planning Commission any witnesses, reports, documents and
recommendations concerning the proposed revocation of the special land use.
   (I)   Criteria for revocation. The Planning Commission may revoke a special
land use upon a determination by the Commission that, based upon a
preponderance of evidence presented at the public hearing, any of the following
exists:
      (1)   Violation of any of the restrictions of the special land use set
forth in the city ordinance or in any conditions set by the city when it
approved the special land use.
      (2)   Maintenance of a nuisance upon the premises, including, but not
limited to, any of the following:
         (a)   Existing violations of building, zoning, health, fire or
regulatory codes;
         (b)   A pattern of patron conduct upon or in the neighborhood of the
licensed establishment including outdoor café which is in violation of the law
or disturbs the peace, order and tranquility of the neighborhood;
         (c)   Failure to maintain the grounds and exterior of the licensed
establishment (including outdoor café), including litter, debris, refuse
blowing or being deposited on adjoining properties;
         (d)   Entertainment without a required permit or entertainment which
disturbs the peace, order and tranquility of the neighborhood;
         (e)   Any advertising, promotion or activity which by its nature
causes, creates or contributes to disorder, disobedience to rules, ordinances
or laws, or contributes to the disruption of normal activity of those in the
neighborhood of the licensed establishment (including outdoor café);
         (f)   Any condition of default in the payment of any tax, fee, charge,
water bill, special assessment or other debt to the city or any unpaid judgment
payable to the city; and
         (g)   Any misrepresentation of any information in any application or
hearing for the grant or renewal of any special land use (including outdoor
café).
(Prior Code, App. A, § 2201) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007; Ord. 1433, passed 10-
10-2016)
§ 190.307 SPECIAL LAND USE DESIGNATED.
   The following are those uses identified as special land uses and the
provisions or conditions that must be met so as to be approved in whole or
conditionally.
   (A)   Home occupations. Home occupations not specifically permitted may be
permitted in all residential districts as a special land use under the
following procedures and conditions and subject further to all conditions
specified in §
190.035 of this chapter.
      (1)   The exterior appearance of the structure shall not be altered or
the occupations within the residence be conducted in a manner which would cause
the premises to differ from its residential character either by the use of
colors, materials, construction, lighting, signs or the emission of sounds,
noises or vibrations.
      (2)   No person other than members of the immediate family occupying the
dwelling shall be employed.
      (3)   The occupations shall occupy no more than 25% of the floor area of
the dwelling or 50% of a detached garage.
      (4)   There shall be no outside storage of any kind related to any home
occupation.
      (5)   The use may not increase vehicular traffic flow and off-street
parking as set forth in the off-street parking regulations in §
190.320 of this chapter shall be provided.
      (6)   Mechanical or electric equipment employed by the home occupations
shall be comparable to the machinery or equipment customarily found in the home
associated with a hobby or avocation.
      (7)   Only one nameplate shall be allowed, in accordance with the sign
regulations at 144 square inches. It may display the name of the home
occupations, for example, John Doe, Realtor, and must be attached to the
principal building.
      (8)   No use shall create noise, dust, vibration, smell, smoke glare,
electrical interference, fire hazard or nuisance to any greater or more
frequent extent than that usually experienced in an average residential
occupancy in the district in question under normal circumstances wherein no
home occupation exists.
      (9)   Use of any vehicle other than a passenger vehicle utilized in
connection with a home occupation shall be parked within a garage.
   (B)   Private outdoor recreation areas and institutional recreation centers.
Private outdoor recreation areas and institutional recreation centers, subject
to the provisions of this chapter, and to the following conditions.
      (1)   Any use requiring a structure shall have such structures so located
on the site as not to be closer than 50 feet from the lot line of any adjacent
residential lot.
      (2)   All ingress and egress from said site shall be directly on to a
major thoroughfare or secondary thoroughfare.
      (3)   The off-street parking and general site layout and its relationship
to all adjacent lot lines shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission, who may
impose any reasonable restrictions or requirements so as to ensure that
contiguous residential areas will be adequately protected.
   (C)   Parks, parkways and recreational facilities. Parks, parkways and
recreational facilities, subject to the following conditions.
      (1)   Any use so established shall be so located and developed so as not
to create a nuisance to abutting property, and so as not to be injurious to the
surrounding neighborhood and not contrary to the spirit and purpose of this
chapter.
      (2)   The development of parks or recreational facilities on waterfront
sites shall be so developed as not to create visual barriers to other
residential property on the waterfront or in any way restrict the use of
residential property on the waterfront.
      (3)   Any use of land created by filling of water areas for parks and/or
recreational use shall only be allowed upon the issuance of a permit by the
City Engineer. Such permit shall be issued only if it can be shown that such
filling of water areas will not in any way obstruct the view or hinder access
to open water, or which could in any way create any hazard to health, or in any
other way diminish the amenity enjoyed by land abutting the waterfront.
   (D)   Functional equivalent family; additional persons. The limit upon the
number of persons who may reside as functional equivalent of the domestic
family may be increased or enlarged upon demonstration by the applicant of all
the following.
      (1)   There are adequate provisions on the subject property for off-
street parking for each adult proposed to reside on the premises, and adequate
storage for each person proposed to reside on premises.
      (2)   The extent of increase or enlargement of the limit upon the number
of persons shall not, when considered cumulatively with existing and reasonably
projected population concentration in the area, place an unreasonable burden
upon public services, facilities and/or schools.
      (3)   There shall be a minimum of 150 square feet of useable floor space
per person on the premises.
      (4)   If the Planning Commission grants an application under this
provision, the determination shall include the specific maximum number of
persons authorized to reside on the property, and minimum parking or storage
requirements to be maintained.
   (E)   Reasonable accommodation use. This section is intended to authorize
the grant of relief from the strict terms of the chapter in order to provide
equal housing opportunities particularly suited to the needs of persons
entitled to reasonable accommodation under law and to encourage innovation in
land use and variety in design and layout. In the event state and federal law
(e.g., the Federal Fair Housing Amendment Act of 1988) requires the city to
make “reasonable accommodation” for a particular proposed uses of property, the
following shall apply.
      (1)   As a condition to approval of a reasonable accommodation use, the
applicant must comply with all the terms of this section, and must demonstrate
all of the following:
         (a)   The ultimate residential uses or users of the property shall be
persons for whom the state or federal law mandates the city shall make
reasonable accommodations in connecting with proposed uses of land;
         (b)   Taking into consideration the needs, facts, and circumstances
which exist throughout the community, and within the population to be served by
the use, including financial and other conditions, making the proposed
reasonable accommodation shall be necessary to afford such persons equal
opportunity to the proposed use and enjoyment within the community;
         (c)   Approval of the proposed housing shall not require or will
likely result in a fundamental alteration in the nature of the land use
district and neighborhood in which the property is situated, considering
cumulative impact of one or more other uses and activities in, or likely to be
in the area, and shall not impose undue financial and administrative burden.
The interests of the community shall be balanced against the need for
accommodation on a case-by-case basis; and
         (d)   No other specific provision exists and is available to provide
the relief sought.
      (2)   The application for a reasonable accommodation use shall include
the following:
         (a)   A plan drawn to scale showing the proposed use and development;
         (b)   A separate document providing a summary of the basis on which
the applicant asserts entitlement to approval of a reasonable accommodation
use, covering each of the requirements of divisions (E)(1)(a) through (E)(1)(d)
above;
         (c)   The information required for site plan review, provided, upon
showing by the applicant that the inclusion of specified information generally
required for site plan review would be irrelevant, the city may waive the
requirement to include such material in the application; and
         (d)   All regulations and standards for buildings, structures and site
improvements within the district in which the property is situated shall apply.
   (F)   Child care or day care center.
      (1)   May be permitted as the principal use of the property or may be
permitted as an accessory use to an approved use, such as a church, school,
office or other place of employment upon review and approval as a special use.
      (2)   A valid registration or license as required by the state shall
continually be on file with the city.
      (3)   The facility shall be bought into compliance with all building
codes.
      (4)   One parking space per care giver and/or employee, plus drop off
space, off the street right-of-way for delivery and pick up of children shall
be provided.
      (5)   The site shall comply with the sign provisions of §
190.329 of this chapter.
      (6)   The building shall have an appearance which is non-intrusive and
consistent in color materials, roof-line and architecture with the district in
which it is located, as determined by the Planning Commission.
      (7)   The lot shall be at least 800 feet from another child care center
or day care center.
   (G)   General hospital.
      (1)   The proposed site shall have at least one property line abutting a
major thoroughfare.
      (2)   The minimum distance of any main or accessory building from lot
lines or streets shall be at least 50 feet for front, rear and side yards for
all two-story structures. For every story above two, the minimum yard distance
shall be increased by at least ten feet. Required front yards shall not be
utilized for parking.
      (3)   Ambulance and delivery areas shall be obscured from all residential
view with an obscuring wall or fence five feet in height. Ingress and egress to
the site shall be directly from a major thoroughfare.
      (4)   All ingress and egress to the off-street parking area, for guests,
employees, staff, as well as any other uses of the facilities, shall be from a
major thoroughfare.
   (H)   Convalescent homes.
      (1)   Buildings shall not exceed a height of two stories.
      (2)   The maximum coverage shall not exceed 50% for all buildings
including principal structures and those incidental to the principal structure.
      (3)   The maximum extent of development shall not exceed 30 patient units
per acre.
   (I)   Funeral homes.
      (1)   Buildings shall not exceed two stories in height.
      (2)   The proposed site shall have at least one property line abutting a
major thoroughfare or secondary thoroughfare.
      (3)   The service entrances to such facility shall be screened from view
of abutting residential properties.
      (4)   All processional vehicles shall not be loaded and unloaded on a
public street.
   (J)   Residential service facilities within buildings located in Residential
RM-2 Districts.
      (1)   Facility may include: barber and beauty shops, drugstores, dry-
cleaning and laundry pick-up stations, grocery shops, limited to a size not to
exceed 2,000 square feet.
      (2)   Facilities shall provide services primarily to residents of the
building or buildings within the RM-2 District.
      (3)   No display or products for sale or signage shall be visible from
the exterior of the building.
   (K)   Business services located in O-S Districts.
      (1)   Businesses shall be clearly necessary as service uses to the office
uses of the district or for the servicing of the workday needs of the personnel
employed in the Office-Service District. These uses may include such businesses
uses as drug stores, pharmacies, restaurant (not including drive-in
restaurants), office supply stores, barber and beauty and other similar types
of retail services.
      (2)   Businesses uses shall meet all requirements for off-street parking
as provided in §
190.216 of this chapter.
      (3)   A site plan shall be submitted in accord with §
190.377 of this chapter for Planning Commission review.
      (4)   A landscape plan shall be submitted in accord with §
190.328 of this chapter for Planning Commission review.
   (L)   Limited dwelling construction in O-S Districts.
      (1)   The provision of the RT District (§§
190.050 through
190.052 of this chapter) shall apply for single- and two-family dwellings.
      (2)   The provisions of the RM-1 District (§§
190.065 through
190.067 of this chapter) shall apply for multiple-family dwellings.
      (3)   Such use shall be suitably located with relation to abutting uses.
      (4)   Adequate site shall be provided for such buildings and proper
screening shall be provided so that adverse effects due to noise, traffic or
parking of adjacent uses will not result.
      (5)   A lot or group of lots to be used for new residential construction
shall have one side of such lot or group of lots abutting a residential street
or shall have one side of such lots abutting an already developing residential
lot or lots, unless an adequate site layout can be arranged which will
adequately protect the residential development from abutting non-residential
uses in the opinion of the Planning Commission.
   (M)   Private clubs and lodge halls.
      (1)   Where such use abuts a side yard of a residence or a residential
district a side yard of 20 feet shall be provided on the side yard abutting the
residence or residential district. Such side yard shall not be utilized for
parking and shall be planted to provide an effective buffer to abutting
residences.
      (2)   All activities shall be conducted within an enclosed building.
   (N)   Automobile service station.
      (1)   The minimum lot area shall be 10,000 square feet, and so arranged
that ample space is available for motor vehicles which are required to wait.
      (2)   The curb cuts for ingress and egress shall not be permitted at such
locations that will tend to create traffic hazards in the streets immediately
adjacent thereto. Entrances shall be no less than 20 feet from a street
intersection or from adjacent residential districts.
      (3)   There shall be provided, on those sides abutting or adjacent to a
residential district or use, a four-foot solid wall such as brick, decorative
block or decorative poured concrete. The height of the fence or wall shall be
measured from the surface of the ground of the abutting residential district or
use.
      (4)   All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential districts.
      (5)   The sale of propane gas is permitted provided all requirements of
the International Fire Code as amended are complied with.
   (O)   Automobile service station with major vehicle repair.
      (1)   The minimum lot area shall be 10,000 square feet, and so arranged
that ample space is available for motor vehicles which are required to wait.
      (2)   The curb cuts for ingress and egress shall not be permitted at such
locations that will tend to create traffic hazards in the streets immediately
adjacent thereto. Entrances shall be no less than 20 feet from a street
intersection or from adjacent residential districts.
      (3)   There shall be provided on those sides abutting or adjacent to a
residential district or use, a six-foot solid wall such as brick, decorative
block or decorative poured concrete. The height of the fence or wall shall be
measured from the surface of the ground of the abutting residential district or
use.
      (4)   All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential districts.
      (5)   Vehicle repair, steam cleaning and undercoating when conducted on
the site shall be within a completely enclosed building. The storage of wrecked
automobiles on the site shall be obscured from public view.
      (6)   No vehicles of any kind shall be stored in the open for a period
exceeding one week.
   (P)   Satellite dish antennas.
      (1)   Satellite dish antennas over 39 inches in diameter in all
residential districts:
         (a)   Roof-mounted antennas shall be located only on the rear one-half
of the roof (that portion of the roof furthest from the street upon which the
residential building abuts) so that it will be screened from the street side;
         (b)   Roof-mounted antennas shall not project upward beyond the height
in feet allowed for the main building within the district in which said
satellite antennas dish is being placed;
         (c)   Ground-mounted antennas shall only be located in the rear yard
and shall not extend into any rear extension of required side yards; and
         (d)   Ground-mounted antennas shall not project upward more than 12
feet.
      (2)   Satellite dish antennas over 39 inches in diameter in all other
districts:
         (a)   No ground-mounted antennas shall be permitted; and
         (b)   Roof-mounted antennas shall not project upward beyond 12 feet
measured from the roof upon which it is mounted. The combined height of the
building and antennas shall not exceed the maximum allowable height for a
building designated for that particular district in which said antenna is to be
mounted.
      (3)   Building permits shall be required before any satellite dish
antennas may be installed and the installation of the antennas shall conform to
all requirements of the Building Code.
   (Q)   Motels.
      (1)   It shall be demonstrated that ingress and egress does not conflict
with adjacent business uses.
      (2)   A four-foot solid wall such as brick, decorative block or
decorative poured concrete must be provided where abutting or adjacent
districts are zoned for residential use. The height of the fence or wall shall
be measured from the surface of the ground of the abutting residential
district.
      (3)   No kitchen or cooking facilities are to be provided within the
dwelling units with the exception of units for the use of the manager or
caretaker.
      (4)   Each unit shall contain not less than 250 square feet of floor
area.
   (R)   Commercial outdoor recreational space.
      (1)   Facilities utilized by children shall be fenced on all sides with a
four-foot wall or fence.
      (2)   Adequate parking shall be provided off the road right-of-way and
shall be fenced with a four-foot wall or obscuring fence where adjacent to the
use area of the facility.
   (S)   Outdoor cafés.
      (1)   (a)   Subject to all of the conditions described herein, an outdoor
café may be set up and used annually from January 1 through December 31. The
permitted hours of operation are:
            1.   Monday 7:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight (17 hours);
            2.   Tuesday 7:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight (17 hours);
            3.   Wednesday 7:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight (17 hours);
            4.   Thursday 7:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight (17 hours);
            5.   Friday 7:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m. Saturday morning (19 hours);
            6.   Saturday 7:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m. Sunday morning (19 hours); and
            7.   Sunday 7:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight (17 hours).
         (b)   In addition to the above:
            1.   Each day of the Wyandotte Street Art Fair 7:00 a.m. to 2:00
a.m. of the following day (19 hours);
            2.   March 17 (St. Patrick’s Day) 7:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m. of the
next day (19 hours);
            3.   New Year’s Eve 7:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m. of the next day (19
hours);
            4.   Wednesday immediately before Thanksgiving Day 7:00 a.m. to 2:
00 a.m. of the next day (19 hours); and
            5.   Thursday immediately before Traditional Easter Sunday 7:00
a.m. to 2:00 a.m. of the next day (19 hours).
         (c)   Noise radiating from an outdoor café, which exceeds 75 DBA
between 7:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight or 65 DBA for all other times shall
constitute prima facie evidence that such noise unreasonably disturbs the
comfort, quiet and repose of persons in the area and is prohibited. The “DBA”
represents the sound pressure level in decibel measured on the “A” scale of a
standard sound level meter. Noise level measurements shall be taken at the
zoning district boundary of any residential zoning district, recreation unit
district and any planned development as may be appropriate. In all other
districts, noise level measurements shall be taken at the property line of an
affected property. No one will be allowed to have possession of food or drink
on the café, except during the permitted hours as set forth in this section.
         (d)   Upon request, the City Council may by resolution, extend the
dates of operations or the hours of operation. A public hearing on said request
shall first be held by the Planning Commission (under the same procedures for
approval of special land use). Upon receipt by the City Council of
recommendation of the Planning Commission the City Council may approve the
request.
         (e)   The criteria for approval will include the impact on adjacent or
nearby residential, religious, educational or commercial properties and review
of previous or current compliance with all city ordinances, state and federal
regulations.
         (f)   Any approval for extension of dates or hours shall be issued on
a calendar year basis and shall expire on December 31 and must be renewed
annually. The City Council may grant a renewal of the extended dates or hours
without the necessity of a public hearing if it determines the applicant is in
compliance with all requirements of all city ordinances and approvals for the
special land use. Any approval for extension of dates or hours is subject to
revocation by the Planning Commission in accordance with §
190.306 of this chapter.
      (2)   A site drawing showing the detailed plan of the outdoor café must
be submitted to and approved by the Planning Commission. The detailed plan is
to include: the design; relevant details and location of all temporary
structures such as awnings, planters, landscaping, railing, tables, chairs and
other equipment, as well as lighting and electrical outlet locations. The
location of entrances and exits shall be shown. For cafés on public property,
the plan shall also show existing sidewalks, buildings, curbs, existing
improvements (i.e., lamp posts, street trees, benches, mailboxes and the like)
and an unobstructed clear area for pedestrian use (a minimum of 60 inches). A
minimum clearance of seven feet shall be maintained between the sidewalk and
bottom edge of table umbrellas or awnings. The layout shall show all seating,
tables and chairs and shall be used to determine maximum occupancy load for the
outdoor café. The occupancy load shall be posted in a conspicuous location.
      (3)   Plans for setting up the outdoor café must be approved by the
Department of Engineering and Building to provide for the free passage of
pedestrians along the sidewalks, by the Police Department to provide for
traffic and pedestrian safety, and by the Fire Department for fire-safety
issues. An outdoor café which is adjacent to residential properties or shares
an alley with residential properties shall be screened with a solid fence a
minimum of six feet high.
      (4)   The outdoor café must be part of a licensed restaurant and meet all
the requirements of the Department of Health and any other local, county or
state requirements, including the city’s ordinance and the state’s Liquor
Control Commission (if applicable).
      (5)   For outdoor cafés on public property, liability insurance, liquor
liability coverage and property damage coverage naming the city as an insured
party, in an amount approved by the City Administrator, must be provided before
an outdoor café may be set up and be maintained for as long as the outdoor café
is in operation.
      (6)   Approval of the City Council is required for the proposed use of
any public area or facility. All provisions of a grant of license must be
complied with at all times. Consideration for approval for use of any public
area shall be limited to public property that is situated within 50 feet of the
extended property boundaries of property owned by the applicant. Any public
outdoor café not within the road right-of-way may also require a written lease
as determined by the City Council.
      (7)   An outdoor café in a B-2 district may provide for only 35% more
seating than is provided inside the restaurant. Additional parking shall be
provided for the square foot area of the outdoor café in accordance with §
190.324 of this chapter.
      (8)   No sign or any other form of advertising is permitted in the dining
area, nor on fences or railings of such area with the exception of an
identification or menu sign. The name of the establishment may appear on the
valance of an umbrella. No display of merchandise for sale shall be allowed.
      (9)   Furnishings of an outdoor café shall consist solely of readily
removable awnings, covers, canopies, railings, tables, chairs, planters
containing plants and accessories. Furnishings may not be attached, even in a
temporary manner, to the sidewalk or other public property; except that,
canopies and railings, shall be secured by means of flush mounted anchors or
other methods approved by the Building Official. No objects which are part of
an outdoor café, except lighting fixtures, railings, awnings or other non-
permanent covers or canopies, may be attached, even in a temporary manner, to
any building, or structure on which the outdoor café abuts. When the associated
establishment and/or the outdoor café on public property are not open for daily
use, all furnishings and fixtures, unless otherwise specifically approved,
shall be removed from the public property or stored in an approved manner which
shall not cause a public nuisance or hazard. The Building Official shall
determine when fences on public property shall be removed. The Building
Official shall determine when a hazardous condition exists in the public right-
of-way and on other public property. Any fence abutting public right-of-way or
in public right-of-way must be of black metal material. Shop drawings plans
shall be provided with each application for fencing and all furniture on any
outdoor café for review by the Planning Commission.
      (10)   Outdoor dining areas must remain clear of litter, food scraps and
soiled dishes at all times. All outdoor cafés shall post the hours of
operations as specified by the City Engineer.
      (11)   Annual inspection of the outdoor café to be conducted by the
Engineering and Building Department for compliance with approved plan. All
outdoor cafés shall apply annually to the Engineering and Building Department
for approval and no person may operate an outdoor café until such annual
approval by city is granted for the given year. A public hearing will be
required for an existing outdoor café only if a written complaint, changes to
outdoor café layout or violations are received by any city department in the
previous year. The Engineering and Building Department will be responsible to
receive written complaints concerning an outdoor café and said complaints shall
be forwarded to the Planning Commission. The City Council will approve an
application checklist which will include yearly fees for application review,
inspections, use of public area and review of insurance. This checklist will be
utilized for inspection by the Engineering and Building Department. The yearly
fee will be established by City Council resolution.
   (T)   Second floor dwellings in office/business buildings.
      (1)   A determination shall be made that such dwellings will be
compatible with other uses on adjacent properties.
      (2)   No dwelling unit shall occupy any portion of the building at ground
level or below ground level.
      (3)   Dwellings shall meet all applicable codes and ordinances of the
city, county and state.
      (4)   Off-street parking is required for all residential dwellings.
   (U)   Pool halls and amusement arcades.
      (1)   Facilities shall be subject to all codes and ordinances governing
such establishments.
      (2)   Locations for any such establishment shall be confined to major
thoroughfares and shall have the entrance to both the business and parking area
for such establishment on the thoroughfare. Access from a side residential
street or alley shall be prohibited.
      (3)   Locations for any such facility shall be no closer than 500 feet to
the property line of any elementary, intermediate or high school.
      (4)   No such business shall be located within 500 feet of the property
line of a similar business.
   (V)   Outdoor sales space for new or used automobiles, recreational
vehicles, mobile homes and boats.
      (1)   All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential districts.
      (2)   Ingress and egress to the outdoor sales area shall be at least 20
feet from the intersection of any two streets.
      (3)   A four-foot wall such as brick, decorative block or decorative
poured concrete shall be provided when abutting or adjacent districts are zoned
or used for residential use. The height of the fence or wall shall be measured
from the surface of the ground of the abutting residential district.
      (4)   No major repair or major refinishing shall be done on the property.
      (5)   A suitable building of at least 150 square feet for said use shall
be located on the site.
      (6)   A minimum lot width of 50 feet fronting on a street and containing
a minimum of at least 5,000 square feet of area shall be provided.
      (7)   The provisions of Public Act 495 of 2004 shall be complied with
including as a minimum 1,300 square feet to accommodate ten vehicles and a
minimum of 650 square feet for customer parking.
      (8)   No used car lot shall be permitted within 750 feet of another used
car lot.
      (9)   Outdoor sales spaced for new or used automobiles, recreational
vehicles, mobile homes and boats shall only be allowed on Fort Street (M-85).
   (W)   Bed and breakfast dwelling.
      (1)   Bed and breakfast dwellings are to be allowed only in areas within
close proximity to the Central Business District and shall be limited to that
area bounded by Eureka Avenue, Fourth Street, Ford Avenue and the Detroit River
(hereinafter referred to as “geographical area”) or may be allowed in
historically designated buildings located within or outside the geographical
area within the city.
      (2)   Such dwellings shall meet all applicable codes and ordinances of
the city, county and state.
      (3)   Floor plans drawn to scale of all floors to be utilized for bed and
breakfast activities shall be submitted to the Planning and Rehabilitation
Commission.
      (4)   Dwellings shall be suitable in character for the use proposed and
shall not be cause for a change in character of the neighborhood.
      (5)   The dwelling shall be the permanent residence of the bed and
breakfast operator.
      (6)   The dwelling shall exhibit historical qualities with not more than
five sleeping rooms available for guests of the bed and breakfast dwelling.
      (7)   The site shall meet the minimum requirement of §§
190.035 through
190.037 of this chapter for RA dwellings.
      (8)   There shall be no separate cooking facilities provided for the bed
and breakfast occupants. Meals, other than those served as a part of the normal
operation of the household, shall be served only to occupants of the bed and
breakfast facility.
      (9)   Occupancy shall be of a transient nature for periods not to exceed
one week in duration in any one month by any transient occupant. A guest
registry indicating name, address, phone number and vehicle license number
shall be kept indicating dates of arrival and departure of guests and shall be
available to the Police Department for inspection upon request.
      (10)   An unlighted sign not to exceed six square feet in area may be
provided. Such sign may be provided as a ground sign or a wall sign.
      (11)   Off-street parking shall be provided based upon one space for each
rental room and one space for the operator of the facility. It is the city’s
intent to not encourage yards to be destroyed, landscaping removed or the
integrity of the neighborhood altered in order to provide parking. In those
instances where parking requirements cannot be met, the applicant may request
special consideration from the Planning Commission. In such a case, the
applicant shall submit an analysis of parking required and parking provided
within a 300-foot radius of the subject parcel. After analyzing this data, the
Planning Commission may lower the number of the required parking spaces based
on the fact the sufficient off-street parking exists in the neighborhood.
      (12)   Such bed and breakfast dwelling shall not be located within 300
feet as measured from the nearest property lines of another such facility.
      (13)   A bed and breakfast dwelling established shall be considered to
have ceased operation when active rental of the facility lapses for six months
or more.
      (14)   A bed and breakfast dwelling located in the geographic area shall
be a single-family dwelling or a historically designated building. A bed and
breakfast dwelling located outside the geographic area shall be a historically
designated building that was not formerly used as a residential building or
dwelling.
   (X)   Drive-in or drive-through restaurant.
      (1)   A setback of at least 20 feet from the right-of-way line of any
existing or proposed street shall be maintained.
      (2)   Access points shall be located at least 60 feet from the
intersection of any two streets.
      (3)   All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential districts.
      (4)   A six-foot-high solid wall such as brick, decorative block or
decorative poured concrete shall be provided when abutting or adjacent
districts are zoned residential. The height of the wall shall be measured from
the surface of the ground of the abutting residential district.
      (5)   Locations for any such establishment shall be confined to major
thoroughfares and shall have the entrance to both the business and parking area
for such establishment on the thoroughfare. Access from a side residential
street or alley shall be prohibited.
   (Y)   Auto wash.
      (1)   All buildings shall have a front yard setback of not less than 50
feet.
      (2)   All washing facilities shall be within a completely enclosed
building, except self-serve facilities.
      (3)   Vacuuming and drying areas may be located outside the building, but
shall not be in the required front yard and shall not be closer than 25 feet to
any residential district.
      (4)   All cars required to wait for access to the facilities shall be
provided space off the street right-of-way and parking shall be provided in
accordance with §§
190.324 and
190.325 of this chapter.
      (5)   Ingress and egress points shall be located at least 60 feet from
the intersection of any two streets.
      (6)   All off-street parking and waiting areas shall be hard surfaced and
dust free.
      (7)   All lighting shall be shielded and directed away from adjacent
residential districts.
      (8)   A six-foot solid wall such as brick, decorative block or decorative
poured concrete shall be provided where abutting to a residential district. The
height of the wall shall be measured from the surface of the ground of the
abutting residential district.
      (9)   Locations for any such establishment shall be confined to major
thoroughfares and shall have the entrance to both the business and parking area
for such establishment on the thoroughfare. Access from a side residential
street or alley shall be prohibited.
   (Z)   Marina and boat livery facilities.
      (1)   Such facilities shall have direct access to the water.
      (2)   Secure mooring shall be provided.
      (3)   Retail stores dealing in boating accessories and supplies may be
provided.
      (4)   Repair of boats may be permitted subject to adequate measures to
control any nuisance factors and subject to all federal, state and city
regulations.
      (5)   A designated area for repairs shall be required.
      (6)   Off-street parking shall be available from May 1 to September 15
and boats shall not be stored on required parking spaces during this time
period.
   (AA)   Uses authorized by special license (adult entertainment facilities).
      (1)   Procedure. It shall be unlawful to establish any use authorized by
special license, expect as hereinafter provided.
         (a)   Application shall be made to the City Council by the owner or
person having interest in the subject property for an annual license to use the
subject property for one or more uses authorized by special license.
Application fee shall be not less than $200. The City Council shall refer the
application to the Planning Commission.
         (b)   Any applicant for a use authorized by special license shall
submit a site plan in accordance with §
190.377 of this chapter.
         (c)   The application shall be reviewed, and a report with
recommendation shall be made, by the Planning Commission to the City Council.
The Planning Commission shall conduct necessary field inspections, surveys and
investigations; and otherwise process said application in order to arrive at a
proper recommendation. The cost incurred by the referenced inspection, surveys
and investigation shall be paid by the applicant.
         (d)   Recommendation by the Planning Commission shall be given only
after a public hearing. Such hearing shall be carried out in accord with the
requirements of Public Act 110 of 2006 as amended.
         (e)   The City Council shall either approve, approve with conditions,
or deny the application in accordance with the standards set forth in this
section.
         (f)   Upon approval or approval with conditions of the application by
the City Council, an annual license shall be authorized for the use authorized
by special license. Said annual license shall be a non-transferable license for
the life of the use, and shall be issued upon payment by the applicant of the
costs incurred in the review process, as referenced in divisions (AA)(1)(a) and
(AA)(1)(c) above, and an annual license fee to be determined by resolution of
the City Council.
      (2)   Approval standards.
         (a)   Uses authorized by special license shall be limited to property
zoned B-2 (General Business District) and further limited as described in this
chapter.
         (b)   No use authorized by special license shall be established within
1,000 feet of a public or private school or place of worship. Measurement shall
be made from the boundary of said school or place of worship on a straight line
to the boundary of the proposed uses authorized by special license.
         (c)   No use authorized by special license shall be established within
1,000 feet of any residentially zoned district. Measurement shall be made from
the boundary of all residentially zoned property on a straight line to the
boundary of the proposed uses authorized by special license.
         (d)   No use authorized by special license shall be established within
1,000 feet of any other use authorized by special license. Measurement shall be
made from front door to front door along the street line.
         (e)   No use authorized by special license shall be approved by the
City Council unless all of the following findings are made:
            1.   The establishment, location, maintenance and operation of the
use authorized by special license will not be detrimental to or endanger the
public health, safety, morals, comfort or general welfare;
            2.   The use authorized by special license will not be injurious to
the use and enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity for the
purpose permitted nor substantially diminish or impair property values within
the neighborhood;
            3.   The establishment of the use authorized by special license
will not impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of
surrounding property and uses permitted within the zoning district;
            4.   The use authorized by special license will not be conducted in
any manner that permits the observation of any material depicting or describing
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, from any public way
or from any other property. This provision shall apply to any display,
decoration, sign, show window or other opening; and
            5.   The use authorized by special license will conform with all
other requirements of the zoning district.
         (f)   Prior to granting any use authorized by special license, the
City Council may impose any additional conditions or limitation upon the
establishment, location, construction, maintenance or operation of the use
authorized by special license as may in its judgment be necessary for the
protection of the public interest and to secure compliance with the standards
as specified above. The City Council may require such evidence and guarantees
as it deems necessary as proof that the conditions stipulated in connection
therewith are being and will be fulfilled.
         (g)   The City Council may waive the location requirement of this
division (AA)(2) if the following findings are made:
            1.   The proposed use will not be contrary to the public interest
or injurious to nearby properties, and that the spirit and intent of this
section will be observed;
            2.   The establishment of an additional regulated use in the area
will not be contrary to any program of neighborhood conservation;
            3.   The proposed use will not enlarge or encourage the development
of a skid row blighting influence for the area; and
            4.   All applicable requirements of this section will be complied
with.
         (h)   In any case where a use authorized by special license has not
been established within six months after the granting of an annual license
therefor, then without further action by the City Council, the annual license
for the use authorized by special license shall be null and void.
      (3)   Re-submittal of application. No application for a use authorized by
special license which has been denied wholly or in part by the City Council
shall be resubmitted for a period of one year from the date of said order or
denial, except on the grounds of new evidence or proof of changed conditions
found to be valid as determined by the City Council.
      (4)   Violations. The failure of a licensee under this section to comply
with the requirements thereof and all other applicable laws and ordinances
shall constitute a violation and shall result in revocation of the license by
the City Council and shall subject licensee, property owner and any other
person violating this section to the fines and penalties set forth in this
chapter.
      (5)   Appeal. An appeal may be taken to the Circuit Court from any
decision of the City Council on an application for the use authorized by
special license or revocation of a license for a use authorized by special
license.
      (6)   Public nuisance per se. Any violation of any provision of this
section is hereby declared to be a public nuisance per se, and may be abated by
order of any court of competent jurisdiction.
      (7)   Amortization of non-conforming adult entertainment facilities. Any
adult entertainment facility lawfully operating on the effective date of this
section that is in violation of the locational or other standards or
requirements of this section shall be deemed a non-conforming use. The non-
conforming use will be permitted to continue for a period not to exceed six
months, unless sooner terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for
a period of 30 days or more; provided, however, said non-conforming use shall
be permitted to continue for an additional six-month period if said adult
entertainment facility applies for said extension to the City Council in the
first six-month period. Such non-conforming uses shall not be increased,
enlarged, extended or altered except that the use may be changed to a
conforming use. If two or more adult entertainment facilities are within 1,000
feet of one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the adult
entertainment facility that was first established and continually operated at a
particular location is the conforming use and the later established business
(es) is non-conforming.
   (BB)   Beverage container processing.
      (1)   All processing shall be conducted within an enclosed building.
      (2)   Outdoor storage of unprocessed or processed containers shall be
allowed only within an area surrounded by a masonry wall on those sides visible
from adjacent properties or visible to the public.
      (3)   Compacting of beverage containers shall be conducted within
buildings.
      (4)   Utilization of metal cleaning material shall be conducted within
buildings and cleaning materials shall be stored within buildings in a safe and
secure manner.
      (5)   Metal cutting by use of torch or other method in which glare or
radioactive materials may be present, shall be conducted inside buildings and
shall be shielded from public view. Fuel tanks shall be stored in such manner
that fire hazards are minimized.
   (CC)   Junkyards.
      (1)   All ordinances of the city as applied to these activities shall be
complied with.
      (2)   The location for such facilities shall be allowed only where
property abuts railroad tracks or yards.
      (3)   No such use shall be allowed within 500 feet of a residential
district.
      (4)   Open burning of materials or the open burning of junk cars shall be
prohibited.
   (DD)   Sewage disposal plants.
      (1)   Appropriate measures to control odor shall be instituted to
minimize effects on residential areas.
      (2)   The perimeters of the area shall be suitably landscaped.
   (EE)   Industrial and retail uses in IRO Districts.
      (1)   Any of the following industrial uses when conducted wholly within a
completely enclosed building:
         (a)   The manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging or treatment
of such products as bakery goods, candy, cosmetics, pharmaceutical, toiletries,
food products, vitamins, hardware and cutlery, tool, die, gauge and machine
shops;
         (b)   The manufacture, compounding, assembly or treatment of articles
of merchandise from the following previously prepared materials: bone; canvas;
cellophane; cloth; cork; feathers; felt; fiber; fur; glass; hair; horn;
leather; paper; plastics; precious or semi-precious metals or stones; sheet
metal (excluding large stamping such as automobile fenders and bodies); shell;
textiles; tobacco; wax; wire; wood (excluding saw and planing mills); and
yarns;
         (c)   The manufacture of pottery and figurines or other similar
ceramic products using only previously pulverized clay, and kilns fired only by
electricity or gas;
         (d)   Manufacture of musical instruments, toys, novelties and metal or
rubber stamps or other small molded rubber products;
         (e)   Manufacture or assembly of electrical appliances, electronic
instruments and devices, radios and phonographs; and
         (f)   Experimental, film or testing laboratories.
      (2)   Retail and service uses shall be permitted in buildings which
exceed one story in height as secondary uses to the principal permitted office
uses:
         (a)   Personal service establishments, such as but not limited to
repair shops (watches, radio, television, shoes and the like), tailor shops,
beauty parlors or barber shops, laundries or dry cleaners, printing or
photographic reproduction, photographic, art or interior decorating studios;
and
         (b)   Restaurants or other places serving food or beverage, but not
including drive-in/fast food, carry out or drive-through restaurants, and
subject further to the following conditions.
            1.   Such uses shall be located within an office structure.
            2.   The location of such uses shall be established at the time of
site plan review and approval for the total development complex.
      (3)   The uses subject to special conditions in IRO Districts shall be
subject to the following conditions:
         (a)   Such uses shall not be permitted in a building separate from a
permitted principal use.
         (b)   The total area devoted to such uses in a building shall not
exceed 25% of the total floor area of the building.
         (c)   All uses shall have customer entrances from the interior of the
principle building in which they are located.
   (FF)   Public utility facilities and uses.
      (1)   Such facilities shall not provide outdoor storage yards.
      (2)   Operating requirements necessitate locating said facilities within
the district in order to serve the immediate vicinity.
      (3)   Adequate screening of facilities shall be provided when such
facilities abut residential property.
   (GG)   Residential boutiques.
      (1)   Residential boutiques are prohibited in all districts, except those
districts located on Oak Street and Eureka Avenue which allow single-family
dwellings.
      (2)   Permits shall be subject to renewal by the Planning Commission.
      (3)   Retail trade activity for goods is permitted.
      (4)   A certificate of occupancy and all other state and city permits and
licenses as may be appropriate shall be required.
      (5)   The building shall be inspected by the Engineering Department to
assure compliance with all city requirements for a business activity in
conformance with applicable city ordinances.
      (6)   The owner of the property requesting a residential boutique shall
provide a site plan prior to the public hearing in accord with the site plan
requirements of §
190.377 of this chapter, with particular emphasis on identifying all on site
and off-site parking locations and hours of availability for any off-site
location. There shall be no parking in required setback areas. The Planning
Commission shall determine the number of vehicles that can be parked at any
time during business hours.
      (7)   No additions to the building on the site are permitted.
      (8)   A residential boutique activity may be carried on by the property
owner and not to exceed two employees.
      (9)   The hours of operation of a residential boutique shall be subject
to determination of the Planning Commission.
      (10)   One unlighted ground sign with a maximum of 12 square feet of sign
area per sign face and located five feet from the property line shall be
permitted.
      (11)   The storage of goods and/or materials outside of a building is
prohibited.
      (12)   No business that includes the storage, repair or sale of firearms
or ammunition shall be permitted.
      (13)   A residential boutique does not include boarding or rooming
houses, bed and breakfast establishments, new and used automobile sales,
services and repair, or similar uses.
   (HH)   Auto and machinery assembly plants.
      (1)   Areas other than employee and visitor parking areas shall be
provided for delivery truck parking.
      (2)   Adequate maneuvering lanes shall be provided abutting the site for
arrival and departure of trucks and vehicles delivering goods or existing with
finished products.
      (3)   Assurance that all requirements for performance within all codes
and ordinances of the city shall be provided prior to issuance of an occupancy
permit.
   (II)   Towers and antennas for wireless communication facilities.
      (1)   Towers and antennas for wireless communication facilities shall be
permitted in I-1, I-2 and I-3 Districts and on municipally owned or controlled
property subject to the following.
         (a)   The height of the tower and antennas shall not exceed 200 feet,
measured from the grade at the base of the tower to the top of the highest
antennas.
         (b)   The base of the tower shall be located centrally on a continuous
parcel so that there shall be a distance of not less than one and one-half the
height of the tower to all points on each property line.
         (c)   If located on the same zoning lot with another permitted use,
such tower and any other accessory structures shall not be located in a front
yard or side yard.
         (d)   A tower shall not be located within one mile of another
freestanding tower. Towers shall be designed and constructed to accommodate
multiple antennas on the same tower. Certified plans shall indicate the
location of future antennas. Owner of towers shall not unreasonably deny other
companies to locate antennas on the owners tower.
         (e)   The site of the tower shall be properly fenced or secured to
prevent access to the tower by unauthorized persons.
         (f)   A certified, sealed statement by a licensed engineer or
architect verifying that the tower, antennas or pole including all attachments
will withstand wind speeds of up to 100 mph with no ice and 74 mph with up to
one-half-inch of radial ice shall be furnished with the application.
         (g)   A licensed engineer shall certify that the wireless
communication systems signal(s) will not interfere with the ability of
surrounding uses to receive signals from different radio, television, telephone
or other electronic equipment. Compliance with Federal Aviation Agency and
Federal Communications Commissions standards shall be required.
         (h)   Towers shall be of a color which blends into the surrounding
area. Advertising or signage shall not be permitted on any tower, antennas or
related structures.
         (i)   Antennas and supporting structures shall be permitted to be
placed on the roofs of buildings subject to the following conditions.
            1.   The principal use and any building or structure located on the
property shall conform to all existing ordinance requirements.
            2.   Existing structures 75 feet or greater in height above ground
may be used to support antennas not exceeding 35 feet above the structure.
            3.   Existing structures less than 75 feet in height above ground
may be used to support antennas provided the antenna is not higher than the
structure and the antenna(s) are screened from view by materials which will
maintain the normal appearance of the structure.
         (j)   If the use of any tower and antennas is discontinued for a
period of 12 consecutive months the use shall be considered abandoned, and the
owner of such tower shall remove same within 90 days from receipt of notice
from the city. The city may remove the tower or antennas at the owner’s
expense. If there are two or more users of a single tower, then these
provisions shall not become effective until all users cease using the tower.
   (JJ)   Wind energy systems.
      (1)   Height and type.
         (a)   Only monopole construction shall be permitted.
         (b)   The total height of a wind energy system tower, including
maximum extension of the top of the blade, shall not exceed the maximum height
for structures permitted in the zoning district.
      (2)   Setback. A wind energy systems tower shall be set back a distance
equal to one and one-half times its total height from:
         (a)   Any public road right-of-way, unless written permission is
granted by the governmental entity having jurisdiction over the road.
         (b)   Any overhead utility lines, unless written permission is granted
by the affected utility.
         (c)   All property lines, unless written permission is granted from
the affected landowner or neighbor.
         (d)   Support cables, if provided, shall be anchored to the ground no
closer than ten feet to any property line.
         (e)   In instances where such wind energy system is located abutting
the Detroit River a setback of 100 feet shall be required.
      (3)   Access.
         (a)   All ground-mounted electrical and control equipment shall be
labeled and secured to prevent unauthorized access.
         (b)   The tower shall be designed and installed so as not to provide
step bolts or a ladder readily accessible to the public for a minimum height of
eight feet above the ground.
      (4)   Speed controls. Each wind turbine system shall be equipped with
both manual and automatic controls to limit the rotational speed of the blade
below the design limits of the rotor. The application shall include a statement
by a registered professional engineer certifying that the rotor and over speed
controls have been designed and fabricated for the proposed use in accordance
with good engineering practices. The engineer shall certify the structural
compatibility of towers with rotors and equipment.
      (5)   Sound pressure level. Wind energy systems shall not exceed 55 dB(A)
at the property line closest to the wind energy systems. This sound pressure
level may be exceeded during short-term events such as utility outages and/or
severe wind storms. If the ambient sound pressure level exceeds 55 dB(A), the
standard shall be ambient dB(A), plus five dB(A).
      (6)   Electrical wires. All electrical wires associated with a wind
energy system, other than those necessary to connect the wind generator to the
tower wiring, the tower wiring to the disconnect junction box, and the
grounding wires, shall be located underground.
      (7)   Code compliance. Wind energy systems including towers shall comply
with all of the applicable construction codes, electrical codes and the
National Electric Code.
      (8)   Discontinued use. Any wind energy system that is discontinued for a
period of 12 consecutive months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of
such tower shall remove same within 90 days from receipt of notice from the
city. The city may remove the tower at the owner’s expense.
   (KK)   Joint use parking facilities.
      (1)   Parking shall meet or exceed the standards of §
190.324 of this chapter.
      (2)   Joint use of parking facilities may only be allowed subject to
assurance that all of the parking facilities to be utilized jointly will not in
any way overlap in times of utilization.
      (3)   Assurance should be had that the joint use parking facility will
not negatively impact abutting properties and the neighborhood due to overflow
parking, traffic or hours of operation.
   (LL)   Stores that sell alcoholic beverages.
      (1)   A masonry wall not less than five feet high or a densely planted
evergreen plating not less than five feet high shall be provided abutting any
residential district and conform to §
190.326(K) and (O) of this chapter.
      (2)   All outdoor lighting shall be screened from nearby residential
areas.
      (3)   No drive through service areas should be provided.
      (4)   Outdoor storage of any nature is prohibited.
      (5)   On street truck loading and unloading is prohibited.
      (6)   Signage shall be limited to that provided for in §
190.329 of this chapter. No signs advertising products and prices of any nature
shall be permitted on the outside walls, windows, doors or the roof of the
building.
      (7)   A certificate of occupancy and all other state and city permits and
licenses as may be appropriate shall be required.
   (MM)   Murals.
      (1)   Design review by the Design Review Committee (§
190.320 of this chapter) may be requested by the Planning Commission when a
proposed mural is within the design review district.
      (2)   A mural on private property will be reviewed and approved or denied
by the Planning Commission.
      (3)   A mural on public property will be reviewed by the Planning
Commission and a recommendation made to the City Council for approval or
denial.
      (4)   A dimensioned sketch plan in color on a dimensioned wall elevation
shall be provided for review.
      (5)   Murals shall only be permitted on the side or rear walls of
buildings. Permission of a building owner in writing shall be obtained before a
mural may be applied.
      (6)   A mural shall not serve as an advertising device for any product or
business.
      (7)   Murals shall be allowed only on building walls that do not contain
signs on the same wall as occupants of the building.
      (8)   Murals depicting partially nude or seminude persons shall be
prohibited.
      (9)   Materials utilized in painting a mural shall have proven durability
and shall be maintained or removed if not maintained.
      (10)   The city may require a bond for assurance that such mural is
maintained or removed.
      (11)   Lighting of a mural may be permitted, provided it is not of an
intermittent or flashing type.
      (12)   Graffiti shall not be considered as a mural and shall not be
permitted.
   (NN)   Public art.
      (1)   Review of public art by the Design Review Committee may be
requested by the Planning Commission when proposed public art is to be placed
within the design review district.
      (2)   Public art on private property will be approved or denied by the
Planning Commission.
      (3)   Public art on public property will be reviewed and a recommendation
made to the City Council for approval or denial.
      (4)   Public art shall not constitute a hazard to the public.
      (5)   Public art shall be located so as not to hinder access on public
streets or rights-of-way.
      (6)   Public art shall not serve as an advertising device for any product
or business.
      (7)   Public art shall be of durable construction and shall be maintained
or removed if not maintained.
      (8)   Lighting of public art may be permitted, provided it is not of an
intermittent or flashing type.
      (9)   The city may require a bond for assurance that such public art is
maintained or removed.
   (OO)   Domesticated companion animal lodging facility.
      (1)   An establishment where domesticated companion animals are kept or
confined for the purpose of providing training, boarding, sale or day care or
extended sheltering, and includes kennels.
      (2)   A domesticated companion animal lodging facility which includes a
dog kennel, shall obtain a kennel license in accordance with the “Dog Law of
1919” as amended, or as may be amended, as currently set forth in M.C.L.A. §§
287.270 et seq.
      (3)   The facility shall be brought into compliance with all city codes
and ordinances.
      (4)   Animal care and maintenance shall comply with §§
90.055 through
90.062 and
90.999 of this code of ordinances.   
      (5)   The required outdoor area for dog run shall be at least 120 square
feet per dog able to be housed at the facility, or individual pens for each dog
shall be a minimum three feet wide, ten feet long and six feet in height. Dog
runs and pens shall include areas shaded from the sun. Dog runs and pens shall
be allowed in rear yards only with an obscuring fence or wall on all sides, and
shall not encroach into any required side or rear yard setback.
      (6)   The domesticated companion animal facility shall comply with §
90.040 of this code of ordinances.
      (7)   A six-foot solid wall such as brick, decorative block, or
decorative poured concrete must be provided where abutting or adjacent
districts are zoned or used as residential. The height of the wall will be
measured from the surface of the ground at the rear yard line of the premise.
      (8)   Off-street parking shall be provided at one parking space for each
employee in the largest working shift and one additional parking space for each
four animals able to be housed.    
      (9)   All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential districts.
   (PP)   Kennel.
      (1)   An establishment where three or more dogs are kept or confined for
sale, boarding, breeding or training purposes. A kennel established as an
accessory use by a licensed veterinarian or technician specializing and trained
in the medical treatment or medical observation of dogs shall be allowed in the
zoning district in which the primary use is allowed for short-term recovery and
observation only, and shall not include outdoor dog runs or pens.    
      (2)   A dog kennel shall obtain a kennel license in accordance with the
“Dog Law of 1919” as amended, or as may be amended, as currently set forth in
M.C.L.A. §§ 287.270 et seq.
      (3)   The facility shall be brought into compliance with all city codes
and ordinances.    
      (4)   The kennel shall comply with §
90.040 of this code of ordinance.
      (5)   The kennel shall comply with §§
90.055 through
90.062 and
90.999 of this code of ordinances.
      (6)   Outdoor area for dog run shall be at least 120 square feet per dog
able to be housed at the facility, or individual pens for each dog shall be a
minimum three feet wide, ten feet long and six feet in height. Dog runs and
pens shall include areas shaded from the sun. Dog runs and pens shall be
allowed in rear yards only with an obscuring fence or wall on all sides, and
shall not encroach into any required side or rear yard setback.
      (7)   A six-foot solid wall such as brick, decorative block, or
decorative poured concrete must be provided where abutting or adjacent
districts are zoned or used as residential. The height of the wall will be
measured from the surface of the ground at the rear yard line of the premise.
   
      (8)   Off-street parking shall be provided at one parking space for each
employee for the largest working shift and one additional parking space for
each four animals able to be housed.    
      (9)   All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential districts.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 2202) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007; Ord. 1320, passed 1-
25-2010; Ord. 1342, passed 3-14-2011; Ord. 1373, passed 10-8-2012; Ord. 1411,
passed 7-13-2015; Ord. 1424, passed 3-14-2016; Ord. 1434, passed 10-10-2016;
Ord. 1463, passed 4-30-2018; Ord. 1498, passed 9-28-2020)
SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
§ 190.320 DESIGN REVIEW.
   Design review is required in order to: provide for the orderly development
and redevelopment in the Design Review District, the boundaries of which are
defined on the Design Review District map (located at the end of this section);
maintain and enhance property values; promote the health, safety and welfare of
the community by facilitating development where the physical, visual and
spatial characteristics are established and reinforced through appropriate
design in harmony with the historic character of the area; provide for a Design
Review Committee of the Planning Commission to act in the application of this
provision; encourage creativity in the development and redevelopment of
property in the Design Review District; and to ensure the standards and
guidelines established by the ordinance are administered so as to encourage the
disposition of development proposals without undue delay or cost to property
owners in the district.
   (A)   Definitions. Because many of the words or terms used in design review
are not in common usage, or they could be misconstrued as to meaning, the
following definitions are to be used in the context of the use of this section.
Terms not herein defined shall have the meaning customarily assigned to them,
unless otherwise defined in this chapter.
      APPEARANCE. The outward aspect of a building structure or site visible to
the public.
      APPROPRIATE. Sympathetic, or fitting, to the context of the site and the
whole community.
      APPURTENANCES. The visible, functional objects accessory to and part of
buildings.
      ARCHITECTURAL CONCEPT. The basic aesthetic idea of a building, or group
of buildings or structures, including the site and landscape development, which
produces the architectural character.
      ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE. A prominent or significant part or element of a
building, structure or site.
      ARCHITECTURAL STYLE. The characteristic form and detail, as of buildings
of a particular historic period.
      DESIGN REVIEW DISTRICT. The area designated on the Design Review District
map of this chapter.
      CHARACTER. The combination of traits which, when considered together,
distinguish specified land and/or development from other specified land and/or
development. In assessing CHARACTER, the following may be considered, along
with any other expressly identified factors:
         (a)   Percentage of a lot(s) covered by structures and other
impervious improvements;
         (b)   Type or style of structure(s);
         (c)   Traffic flow and pattern, and the relationship of traffic to
pedestrian and vehicular thoroughfares;
         (d)   Density of land uses; and
         (e)   Intensity of uses.
      EXTERIOR DESIGN FEATURE. The general arrangement of any portion of a
building, sign, landscaping or structure and including the kind, color and
texture of the materials of such portion and the types of roof, windows, doors,
lights, attached or ground signs or other fixtures appurtenant to such
portions, as will be open to public view from any street, place or way.
      GRAPHIC ELEMENT. A letter, illustration, symbol, figure, insignia or
other device employed to express and illustrate a message or part thereof.
      HARDSCAPE. Any exterior paving such as driveways, sidewalks, patios and
terraces which are constructed of a brick-paver, stone, compacted gravel,
concrete or bituminous concrete surface.
      LANDSCAPING. Any modification or embellishment of the plant cover or
hardscape of a property.
      MAJOR ARCHITECTURAL CHANGE. The following: change in roof pitch,
structural additions or removals, covering or replacement of facade materials,
decorative trim, and/or exterior trim which is not similar in texture,
dimension or proportion to the original, and changes to door and window opening
or style.
      ORDINARY MAINTENANCE. Keeping a building, structure or other exterior
architectural features unimpaired, and in good condition through ongoing minor
intervention, undertaken from time to time, in its exterior condition. ORDINARY
MAINTENANCE does not change the exterior architectural appearance, except
through the elimination of the usual expected effects of time and weathering.
ORDINARY MAINTENANCE, such as repainting, repairs to broken windows, and
caulking does not constitute work as herein defined. ORDINARY MAINTENANCE does
not include replacement of existing signage, repainting of signage or
repainting of a building to a different color than the current building color.
      PAINTING. Applying a different color of paint or stain over what is
currently visible on the exterior. Existing brick building that have not been
previously painted shall not be painted without approval of the Design Review
Committee.
      REPAINTING. Applying the same color of paint or stain as currently exists
on the exterior as a part of ordinary maintenance. REPAINTING does not
constitute work for the purpose of this chapter.
      REPAIR. To restore a decayed or damaged building or architectural feature
to a good or sound condition by any process. REPAIRS which do not change the
exterior architectural appearance, except through the elimination of the usual
and expected effects of time and weathering do not constitute work.
      SHINGLING. Replacing an existing roofing material with a new material.
New materials should convey the same visual appearance as the existing
materials or the documented, historic, roofing materials.
      SIGNIFICANT. Important to the overall character of a building and
essential to the preservation of the architectural style of the Design Review
District, such as changes in exterior design features as defined herein and
including alteration or enlargement of signage, and changes in architectural
trim features. All changes shall however, comply with the design guidelines and
design review ordinance to the extent possible.
      WORK. Any activity which changes the exterior architectural appearance of
a building.
   (B)   Design Review Committee.
      (1)   Creation. A Design Review Committee shall be appointed by the City
Council for the purpose of assisting the City Council to: preserve, protect and
enhance the aesthetic appeal of the Design Review District; protect property
values through the application of good design principles; and promote the
general health, safety and welfare of the Design Review District and the
community.
      (2)   Membership.
         (a)   The Design Review Committee shall consist of not less than five
members all of whom shall be residents of the city. The Committee shall consist
of one member from each of the following commissions or departments:
            1.   Planning Commission: a PC member as appointed by the Chair and
approved by the PC;
            2.   Cultural and Historical Commission: the President of the
Commission or her or his designee;
            3.   Downtown Development Authority: a DDA member as appointed by
the Chair and approved by the DDA;
            4.   Engineering and Building Department: the City Engineer or his
or her designee;
            5.   Resident at large appointed by Mayor and approved by City
Council.
         (b)   Appointments shall be for a period of three years and
appointment may be extended by reappointments. The Review Committee, as it
determines necessary or appropriate, shall utilize the assistance of planning,
architectural and other consultants. The Review Committee shall seek the
assistance of relevant experts in an effort to achieve accord in those
instances in which the applicant objects to the decision of the Review
Committee.
      (3)   Requirement for approved design; nature of review. In the Design
Review District, no permit required under the ordinances of the city for a sign
or for the erection, construction, alteration or repair of any building or
structure which involves a major architectural change or a significant change
to an exterior design feature shall be issued by the city unless and until the
Design Review Committee has reviewed and approved such activity. The Building
Official may determine that no major architectural change or significant
exterior design feature is involved in the work for which the approval is
sought, in which case, no review by the Design Review Committee shall be
required. The Building Official may request a review by the Design Review
Committee where a question arises relative to whether proposed exterior changes
fall within the intent of the design review ordinance and guidelines. Design
review shall not apply to repair, ordinary maintenance as defined herein, or
landscape activities. The Building Official may, however, impose requirements
stated in the design guidelines when issuing permits for work that is otherwise
exempt from a formal design review process.
      (4)   Review meeting attendance and appeals. The property, business owner
or a representative must be present for the Design Review Committee meeting at
which the applicant’s request is being reviewed. A quorum of the Design Review
Committee (at least three members) must be present for the review and action on
an application. Should an application be denied, an appeal may be made to the
City Council.
      (5)   Design guidelines. The design guidelines (available in the
engineering and building department) established by the Planning Commission for
the Design Review District shall serve as a guide to the Design Review
Committee in the review of plans.
   (C)   Administration.
      (1)   As a separate and distinct part of site plan review, drawings and
plans shall be submitted to the city at a scale in sufficient detail to
illustrate clearly the design for which approval is sought.
      (2)   Such plans shall show the following:
         (a)   Existing conditions (both public and private) and natural
features, all structures and uses, improvements, public streets rights-of-way,
sidewalks, public and private easements and restrictions for the subject site
and immediately abutting property;
         (b)   Site plans showing buildings in plan view and showing site
features as they relate to property lines and to abutting properties and
buildings;
         (c)   Architectural drawings of all exterior building elevations,
colors of exterior walls, trims and roofs, lighting materials, ornamental,
pictorial or decorative material to be used in or about the exterior of the
structure. Samples of building materials and colors may be required to be
submitted; and
         (d)   Such other information as may be required by the Design Review
Committee to permit reasonable consideration of the application.
   (D)   Design Review Committee action. The Design Review Committee may
approve, conditionally approve or disapprove signs on behalf of the city.
Actions of the Design Review Committee on signs shall be appealable to the City
Council.
      (1)   Upon the granting of an approved design or amendment thereto, the
exterior drawings, sketches, landscape and site plans, renderings and materials
upon which an approved design or amendment was granted shall be turned over to
the Building Official, whose responsibility it shall be to determine, from
time-to-time as the project is in progress and finally upon its completion,
that there have been no deviations therefrom.
      (2)   It shall be the duty of the person, firm or corporation to whom an
approved design has been granted to comply therewith, and to obtain such
inspections as may be necessary in order to assure compliance. The Building
Official may notify such persons of any deficiencies found to exist. Failure to
comply with an approved design will constitute a violation of this chapter.
Before any use may be made of improvements constructed under these provisions
of design review, a final inspection of these premises must be obtained from
the Building Official.
   (E)   Design criteria.
      (1)   Criteria.
         (a)   The purpose of these criteria is to establish a checklist of
those items that affect the physical aspect of the Design Review District
environment. Pertinent to appearance is the design of the site, building and
structures, planting, signs, street hardware and miscellaneous other objects
which are observed by the public. The design guidelines established by the
Planning Commission shall serve as the guidelines for review by the Design
Review Committee.
         (b)   These criteria are not intended to restrict imagination,
innovation or variety, but rather to provide a guide for decision-making and
assist in focusing on design principles, which can result in creative solutions
that will continue to develop and enhance a satisfactory visual appearance
within the Design Review District.
      (2)   Relationship of building site.
         (a)   Parking areas where provided shall be treated with decorative
elements, building wall extensions, plantings, berms or other innovative means
so as to largely screen parking areas from view from public ways.
         (b)   To the extent reasonably feasible, the height and scale of each
building shall be compatible with its site and adjoining buildings. A building
may exceed the height of adjoining buildings up to the maximum height permitted
by ordinance, but said building shall be compatible with adjoining buildings in
regards to architectural style and exterior design features to the extent
reasonably feasible.
      (3)   Relationship of building and site to adjoining area.
         (a)   Adjacent buildings of different architectural styles that are in
harmony with the overall design guidelines shall be respected in the design or
alterations of a building site.
         (b)   To the extent reasonably feasible, harmony in texture, lines and
masses are required.
         (c)   To the extent reasonably feasible, the building and site shall
not be inconsistent with the character (as defined in this chapter) of the
area.
      (4)   Building design.
         (a)   Architectural style is not restricted. Evaluation of appearance
of a project shall be based on quality of its design and relationship to
surroundings.
         (b)   To the extent reasonably feasible, buildings shall have good
scale and be in harmonious conformance with permanent neighboring development.
         (c)   Materials shall have good architectural character and shall be
selected for harmony of the building with adjoining buildings.
         (d)   Materials shall be selected for suitability to the type of
buildings and the design in which they are used. Buildings shall have the same
materials, or those that are architecturally harmonious, used for all building
walls and other exterior building components wholly or partly visible from
public ways.
         (e)   Inappropriate materials and methods, and those which will
produce inconsistency with the structure of those building, shall be avoided.
         (f)   Materials shall be of durable quality.
         (g)   Building components, such as windows, doors, eaves and parapets,
shall have good proportions and relationship to one another.
         (h)   Colors shall be harmonious, and not used to draw attention
(e.g., serving as a sign).
         (i)   Mechanical equipment or other utility hardware on roof, ground
or buildings shall be screened from public view with materials harmonious with
the building, or they shall be located so as not to be visible from any public
ways.
         (j)   Exterior lighting shall be part of the architectural concept.
Fixtures, standards and all exposed accessories shall be harmonious with
building design.
         (k)   Refuse and waste removal areas, service yards, storage yards’
and exterior work areas shall be screened from view from public ways, using
materials as stated in criteria for equipment screening.
         (l)   Inappropriate, incompatible, bizarre and exotic designs shall be
avoided.
         (m)   To the extent reasonably feasible, the building design shall not
be inconsistent with the character (as defined in this chapter) of the area.
   (F)   Signs. The provisions of this chapter in regard to signs shall be part
of the criteria of this division (F). In addition to zoning ordinance
standards, the design guidelines (available in the Engineering and Building
Department) established by the Planning Commission shall serve as a guide for
sign design.
      (1)   Wall signs shall be part of the architectural concept. Size, color,
lettering, location, and arrangement shall be harmonious with the building
design, and shall be compatible with signs in conformance with zoning standards
on adjoining buildings. Signs shall have good proportions.
      (2)   Identification signs of a prototype design shall conform to the
criteria for signs.
      (3)   Materials used in signs shall have good architectural character and
be harmonious with building design and surrounding landscape.
      (4)   Every sign shall have good scale in its design and in its visual
relationship to buildings and surroundings.
      (5)   Colors shall be used harmoniously. Brilliant colors shall be
avoided. Lighting shall be harmonious with the design. If external spot or
ground lighting is used, it shall be arranged so that the light source is
shielded from view.
   (G)   Miscellaneous structures and street hardware.
      (1)   Miscellaneous structures include any structures, other than
buildings, visible to view from any public way or ways. Street hardware
includes all objects not commonly referred to as structures and located in
streets and public ways and outside of buildings.
      (2)   Miscellaneous structures and street furniture located on private
property shall be designed to be part of the architectural concept of design
and landscape. Materials shall be compatible with buildings, scale shall be
good, colors shall be in a harmony with buildings and surroundings, and
proportions shall be attractive.
      (3)   Miscellaneous structures and street hardware located in public ways
and other public property shall be harmonious with design of adjacent buildings
and other structures and landscape.
      (4)   Lighting in connection with miscellaneous structures and street
hardware shall meet the criteria applicable to site, landscape, buildings and
signs.
      (5)   The provisions of this chapter in regard to area and bulk
regulations and standards, and of those portions of the Building Code which
directly affect appearance, shall be part of the criteria of this division (G).
   (H)   Maintenance; planning and design factors.
      (1)   Continued good appearance depends upon the extent and quality of
maintenance. The choice of materials and their use, together with the types of
finishes and other protective measures, must be conducive to easy maintenance
and upkeep.
      (2)   Materials and finishes shall be selected for their durability and
wear as well as for their beauty. Proper measures and devices shall be
incorporated for protection against the elements, neglects, damage and abuse.
      (3)   Provision for washing and cleaning of buildings and structures, and
control of dirt and refuse, shall be included in the design. Such
configurations that tend to catch and accumulate debris, leaves, trash, dirt
and rubbish shall be avoided.
   (I)   Exceptions. Existing single-family, two-family and multiple-family
dwellings shall be exempt from design review.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/84f314df5911a4b8d75bf8da219d5dc254290259/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4212.png]
 
(Prior Code, App. A, § 2300) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007; Ord. 1386, passed 8-
12-2013)
§ 190.321 CONFLICTING REGULATIONS.
   Wherever any provision of this chapter imposes more stringent requirements ,
regulations, restrictions or limitations than are imposed or required by the
provisions of any other law or ordinance, then the provisions of this chapter
shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other law or ordinance impose more
stringent requirements than are imposed or required by this chapter, then the
provisions of such law or ordinance shall govern.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 2400) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 190.322 NON-CONFORMITIES.
   No building or structure, or part thereof, shall hereafter be erected,
constructed or altered and maintained, and no new use or change shall be made
or maintained of any building, structure or land, or part thereof, except in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
   (A)   Intent.
      (1)   It is recognized that there exists within the districts established
by this chapter or amendments that may later be adopted, lots, structures and
uses of land and structures which were lawful before this chapter was passed or
amended, but which would be prohibited, regulated or restricted under the terms
of this chapter.
      (2)   It is the intent of this chapter to permit these non-conformities
to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival. Such
uses are declared by this chapter to be incompatible with permitted uses in the
districts involved. It is further the intent of this chapter that non-
conformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as
grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same
district.
      (3)   A non-conforming use of a structure, a non-conforming use of land,
or a non- conforming use of a structure and land shall not be extended or
enlarged after passage of this chapter by attachment on a building or premises
of additional signs intended to be seen from off the premises, or by the
addition of other uses of a nature which would be prohibited generally in the
district involved.
      (4)   To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to
require a change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building
on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of
adoption or amendment of this chapter and upon which actual building
construction has been diligently carried on. Actual construction is hereby
defined to include the placing of construction materials in permanent position
and fastened in a permanent manner; except that where demolition or removal of
an existing building has been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding,
such demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided
that work shall be diligently carried on until completion of the building
involved.
   (B)   Non-conforming lots. In any district in which single-family dwellings
are permitted, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this
chapter, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be
erected on any single lot of record or parcel with a minimum of 40 feet in
width, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter. This
provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for
area that are generally applicable in the district; provided that, yard
dimensions and other requirements not involving the area of the lot shall
conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located.
   (C)   Non-conforming uses of land. Where, at the effective date of adoption
or amendment of this chapter, lawful use of land exists that is made no longer
permissible under the terms of this chapter as enacted or amended, such use may
be continued, so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following
provisions.
      (1)   No such non-conforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor
extended, to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective
date of adoption or amendment of this chapter.
      (2)   No such non-conforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to
any other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective
date of adoption or amendment of this chapter.
      (3)   If such non-conforming use of land ceases for any reason for a
period of more than 30 days, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to
the regulations specified by this chapter for the district in which such land
is located.
   (D)   Non-conforming structures. Where a lawful structure exists at the
effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter by reason of
restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards or other characteristics of
the structure or its location on the lot, such structure may be continued so
long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions.
      (1)   No such structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which
increases its non- conformity.
      (2)   Should such structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of
more than 50% of its replacement cost at the time of destruction, it shall not
be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
      (3)   Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance
whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in
which it is located after it is moved.
   (E)   Non-conforming uses of structures and land. If a lawful use of a
structure, or of structure and land in combination, exists at the effective
date of adoption or amendment of this chapter, that would not be allowed in the
district under the terms of this chapter, the lawful use may be continued so
long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions.
      (1)   No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this
chapter in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended,
constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered, except in changing
the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is
located.
      (2)   Any non-conforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a
building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use, and which
existed at the time of adoption or amendment of this chapter, but no such use
shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building.
      (3)   If no structural alterations are made, any non-conforming use of a
structure, or structure and premises, may be changed to another non-conforming
use; provided that, the Board of Appeals, either by general rule or by making
findings in the specific case, shall find that the proposed use is equally
appropriate or more appropriate to the district than the existing non-
conforming use. In permitting such change, the Board of Appeals may require
appropriate conditions and safeguards in accord with the purpose and intent of
this chapter.
      (4)   Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which
a non- conforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter
conform to the regulations for the district in which such structure is located,
and the non-conforming use may not thereafter be resumed.
      (5)   When a non-conforming use of a structure, or structure and premises
in combination, is discontinued or ceases to exist for six consecutive months,
the structure, or structure and premises in combination, shall not thereafter
be used, except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it
is located. Structures occupied by seasonal uses shall be excepted from this
provision.
      (6)   Where non-conforming use status applies to a structure and premises
in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the
non-conforming status of the land.
   (F)   Repairs and maintenance.
      (1)   On any building devoted in whole or in part to any non-conforming
use, work may be done in any period of 12 consecutive months on ordinary
repairs, or on repair or replacement of non- bearing walls, fixtures, wiring or
plumbing to an extent not exceeding 50% of the true cash value of the building,
provided that the cubic content of the building as it existed at the time of
passage or amendment of this chapter shall not be increased. The repair and
maintenance or remodeling of buildings located in O-S, B-1, CBD or B-
2 Districts for uses allowed in such districts shall not be prohibited due to
inadequate off-street parking as required in §
190.324 of this chapter.
      (2)   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the
strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof
declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public
safety, upon order of such official.
   (G)   Uses under special use provisions not conforming uses. Any existing
use for which a general exception or special approval is permitted as provided
in this chapter shall not be deemed a non- conforming use, but shall without
further action be deemed a conforming use in such district.
   (H)   Change of tenancy or ownership. There may be a change of tenancy,
ownership or management of any existing non-conforming uses of land, structures
and premises; provided, there is no change in the nature or character of such
non-conforming uses.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 2401) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 190.323 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND USES.
   Accessory buildings, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter, shall be
subject to the following regulations.
   (A)   Where the accessory building is structurally attached to a main
building, it shall be subject to all regulations applicable to main buildings.
   (B)   To construct or replace an accessory building with a floor area of 200
square feet or less, a site plan shall be submitted, approved and a zoning
permit issued by the engineering and building department to the homeowner or
contractor to ensure proper placement as regulated by this chapter. The
accessory building must have a four-inch wide by 24-inch deep rat wall or a
four-inch concrete floor slab.
   (C)   Accessory residential buildings shall not be erected in any required
yard, except a rear yard.
   (D)   An accessory building shall not exceed 40% of the total rear yard in a
residential district; provided that, in no instance shall the accessory
building exceed the ground floor area of the main building.
   (E)   No detached accessory building shall be located closer than ten feet
to any main building. In those instances where the rear lot line is coterminous
with an alley right-of-way, the accessory building shall be no closer than one
foot to such rear lot line. In no instance shall an accessory building be
located within a dedicated easement right-of-way.
   (F)   For detached accessory structures, an exterior wall shall not be
located less than three feet from interior lot lines, except accessory
structures less than 200 square feet in area may be built on interior lot lines
with no part thereof protruding over said lot line. There shall be no opening
in any wall which is located less than three feet from an interior lot line.
   (G)   No detached accessory building in an RA, RU, RT, RM-1, RM-1A, RM-2,
RM-3, O-S or B-1 District shall exceed 15 feet in height to the ridgeline, with
an exception that no accessory building may exceed 15 feet in height; provided,
the slope of the roof has a pitch of 4:12 or greater to a maximum height of 17
feet to the ridgeline. Accessory buildings in all other districts may be
constructed to 20 feet in height to the ridgeline.
   (H)   When an accessory building is located on a corner lot, the side lot
line of which is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the lot
to its rear, said accessory building shall not be located closer to the street
side lot line than the existing front yard setback of the lot to the rear;
provided, in those instances where lots are 40 feet or less in width, the
setback need not exceed 15 feet. Where lots are 35 feet or less, the setback
need not exceed ten feet. When an accessory building is located on a corner
lot, the side line of which is substantially a continuation of the side lot
line of the lot to its rear, said accessory buildings shall not be closer than
the required street side yard setback of the lot to its rear.
   (I)   A garage attached by a breezeway that has enclosed walls and is
habitable and heated may be constructed to a height to the peak not to exceed
the height of the peak of the existing dwelling. Attached garages shall not
exceed the ground floor area of the dwelling.
   (J)   An attached garage shall not project more than six feet forward of the
dwelling portion of the home and shall not occupy more than 60% of the front
building facade.
   (K)   Private swimming pools shall not encroach on any front yard or
required side yard. A wall of a swimming pool shall not be located less than
four feet from any rear or side property line or five feet from any street
property line, or ten feet from any transmission line. When a swimming pool is
located on a corner lot, the side lot line of which is substantially a
continuation of the front lot line of the lot to its rear, said swimming pool
shall not be located closer to the street side lot line than the existing front
yard setback of the lot to the rear; provided, the setback need not exceed ten
feet.
   (L)   Mechanical equipment installed outside of one- or two-family dwellings
and their attached structures shall not be installed in any front and/or
minimum required side yard and shall be located behind the dwelling and not
closer than five feet from the property line. Exception: where a side yard
abuts a street or an alley, the Building Official may approve a side yard
location on the street or alley side, if the locations is established prior to
installation.
   (M)   An accessory building or use shall not include a wood burning device
to supplement home heating.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 2402) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 190.324 PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   There shall be provided in all districts at the time of erection or
enlargement of any main building or structure, automobile off-street parking
with adequate access to all spaces. The number of off-street parking spaces and
improvements shall be in accordance with this section, in conjunction with all
land or building uses prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, a
certificate of compliance, certificate of approval or certificate of conformity
as hereinafter prescribed. Refer to §
72.003 of this code of ordinances for regulations for parking on city streets
and in residential areas.
   (A)   Except as specifically permitted in the P-1 Vehicular Parking
District, off-street parking or off-street parking areas shall not be permitted
as the sole or principal permitted use in any zoning district.
   (B)   Off-street parking for other than residential uses shall be either on
the same lot or within a reasonable distance of the building it is intended to
serve as determined by the Planning Commission. Ownership or control shall be
shown of all lots or parcels intended for use as parking by the applicant.
   (C)   Off-street parking spaces may be located within a side or rear yard.
Off-street parking shall not be permitted within a required front yard unless
otherwise provided for in this chapter.
   (D)   In all districts, parking abutting a street shall be set back from the
property line not less than five feet and such setback shall not be paved.
   (E)   Parking in industrially zoned districts shall be allowed in a required
front yard.
   (F)   Off-street parking spaces for one- and two-family dwellings shall be
designated on a parking ribbon, on a driveway, or in a garage, or combination
thereof. To construct or replace a driveway for said dwellings, a site plan
shall be submitted, approved and a zoning permit issued by the Engineering and
Building Department to the homeowner or a contractor, to ensure proper
placement as regulated by this chapter. Said spaces shall be provided with
asphalt or concrete surfaces and shall be located on the premises they are
intended to serve. Garages/accessory structures shall be subject to the
provisions of §
190.323 of this chapter.
   (G)   Any area once designated as required off-street parking shall not be
changed to any other use unless and until equal parking spaces are provided
elsewhere.
   (H)   Two or more buildings or uses may collectively provide the required
off-street parking in which case the required number of parking spaces shall
not be less than the sum of the requirements for the several individual uses
computed separately.
   (I)   In the instance where the same off-street parking spaces are to be
utilized by two or more businesses or other uses, providing the operating hours
of the businesses do not overlap, the Planning Commission may, after a public
hearing, grant a special land use for the joint use of the same parking
facilities in accordance with §§
190.305 through
190.307 of this chapter.
   (J)   The storage of merchandise, motor vehicles for sale, trucks or the
repair of vehicles is prohibited in parking areas.
   (K)   For those uses not specifically mentioned, the requirements for off-
street parking facilities shall be in accordance with a use which is similar in
type.
   (L)   For the purpose of computing the number parking spaces required, the
definition of floor area usable, in §
190.004 of this chapter shall govern unless specifically mentioned otherwise
herein.
   (M)   Whenever off-street parking requirements shall be determined on a
square footage of usable floor area basis, the usable floor area for planned
commercial centers and freestanding retail commercial uses, other than grocery
stores and restaurants, shall be 75% of the gross floor area.
   (N)   When units or measurements determining the number of required parking
spaces result in the requirement of a fractional space, a full space shall be
provided.
   (O)   Whenever the City Council shall establish off-street parking spaces by
means of special assessments, the required number of spaces may be reduced by
that number of spaces which can be prorated to the use which was specially
assessed.
   (P)   CBD parking.
      (1)   Within the Central Business District (CBD) Zoning District, as
shown on the city’s zoning map, all uses, except for those listed below, are
exempt from the off-street parking requirements contained in division (R)
below:
         (a)   Residential uses;
         (b)   Funeral homes/mortuary establishments;
         (c)   Hotels and motels with 34 or more rooms;
         (d)   Hospitals;
         (e)   Clinic; and
         (f)   Private clubs.
      (2)   For properties within the “developed business area”, but not zoned
CBD, Central Business, Zoning District, the provisions of division (R) below
shall be reduced by one-half the minimum required spaces for all uses, except
residential. The “developed business area” for purposes of this division (P) is
that area illustrated on the map.
   (Q)   Required parking spaces shall be provided free of charge to parking
lot users.
   (R)   (1)   The minimum number of off-street parking spaces by type of use
shall be determined in accordance with the following schedule:
Use Minimum Number of Parking Spaces Per Unit of Measure
Use                                                  Minimum Number of Parking Spaces Per Unit of Measure
BUSINESS AND COMMERCIAL USES
Auto wash (automatic)                                1 for each 1 employee, plus a minimum of 15 spaces for cars waiting to be
                                                     washed for each conveyor system or line
Auto wash (coin-operated or self-service)            3 waiting spaces for each washing stall in addition to the stall itself
Beauty parlor, barber shop, tattoo parlor, salon or  1-1/2 spaces for beauty, barber chair or station, plus 1 space for each
similar use                                          employee
Boat launching ramp                                  25 spaces for each 12 feet of launching ramp width. Each parking space is to
                                                     measure 10 feet by 40 feet
Bowling alleys                                       4 for each bowling lane plus parking for accessory uses
                                                     1 for each 75 square feet of usable floor area. In those instances where
Dance halls, roller rinks, exhibition halls and      patrons are served without seating, 1 space for each 20 square feet of
assembly halls without fixed seats                   standing room floor area in addition to the above requirements shall be
                                                     provided
Drive-in restaurants (food served in car)            1 for each 30 square feet of usable floor area, plus 1 for each 2 seats in an
                                                     established seating area
Drive-through restaurants                            5 waiting spaces for each serving window; plus 1 for each 2 seats in an
                                                     established seating area, plus 1 for each employee
Driving range                                        1 for each tee
Establishments for sale and consumption on the       1 for each 75 square feet of usable floor area, plus 1 for each employee. In
premises of beverages, food or refreshments,         those instances where patrons are served without seating, 1 space for each 20
including outdoor cafés                             square feet of standing room floor area in addition to the above requirements
                                                     shall be provided
Furniture and appliance, hardware, laundries/dry
cleaning, household equipment, repair shops,         1 for each 600 square feet of usable floor area, plus 1 for each 2 employees
showroom of a plumber, decorator, electrician or
other similar uses
                                                     1 for each gasoline pump, plus 1 for each employee, plus not less than 2 for
                                                     each service bay. In those instances where convenience store merchandise is
Gasoline service station with major auto repair      provided additional parking of not less than the requirement for a retail use,
                                                     but not less than 2 spaces separate from pump spaces shall be provided. On-
                                                     street parking of service vehicles or vehicles awaiting services shall be
                                                     prohibited
                                                     1 for each gasoline pump, plus 1 for each service vehicle, plus 1 for each
                                                     employee, plus 1 for each service bay in addition to the service bay. In those
Gasoline service stations with minor auto repair     instances where convenience store merchandise is provided additional parking
                                                     of not less than the requirement for a retail use, but not less than 2 spaces
                                                     separate from pump spaces shall be provided
                                                     1 space for each gasoline pump, plus 1 space for each employee. In those
Gasoline service stations (self-serve)               instances where convenience store merchandise is provided additional parking
                                                     of not less than the requirement for a retail use, but not less than 2 spaces
                                                     separate from pump spaces shall be provided
Health club                                          1 for every 2 lockers or 1 for each 100 square feet of usable floor area,
                                                     whichever is greater
Laundromats and coin-operated dry cleaners           1 for each 2 washing machines or dry cleaning machines
                                                     1-1/2 spaces per boat mooring slip, plus 1 additional space for every 4 boat
                                                     racks or storage spaces either inside or outside of a boat storage building
Marina and boat livery facilities                    where the business provides an in-out boat launching service. Required parking
                                                     spaces may be utilized for winter boat storage from September 15 to May 1,
                                                     plus additional spaces as required for accessory uses
                                                     Boat liveries shall provide 1 space for each 2 boats available for rent
Miniature or “par-3” golf courses                3 spaces per hole, plus 1 for each employee
Mortuary establishments                              1 for each 50 square feet of usable area of assembly room and parlors
Motel/hotel                                          1 for each occupancy unit, plus 1 for each employee, plus spaces as required
                                                     for accessory uses
Motor vehicle sales establishments, boat showrooms   1 for each 200 square feet of usable floor area of sales room, plus 1 for each
                                                     service stall in service areas
Open air business establishments, except as listed   1 for each 500 square feet of lot area for retail sales and retail uses
in “motor vehicle sales establishments...” above
Outdoor special assembly area                        1 space per each 10 square feet of assembly area in addition to requirements
                                                     for additional accessory uses on site, plus 1 space for each employee
Pool hall and/or arcade                              2 for each game table and 1 for each amusement device, or 1 for each 100
                                                     square feet of usable floor area in the game room, whichever is greater
Retail stores, except as otherwise specified herein  1 for each 150 square feet of usable floor area, plus 3 waiting spaces for
                                                     each drive-through window
Studios: dance; music and; other similar places of   1 for each 150 square feet of usable floor area
instruction
Supermarket (self service food stores)               1 for each 150 square feet of usable floor area
Tanning salon                                        1 space for each 3 tanning booths
INDUSTRIAL USES
Industrial establishments including manufacturing,
research and testing laboratories or similar uses    5, plus 1 for each employee in the largest working shift
and related accessory offices
Major automotive repair                              1 for each 400 square feet of usable floor area, plus 1 for each employee.
                                                     (Does not include storage of wrecked or repaired vehicles)
Truck sales and services                             1 for each 200 square feet of usable floor area of sales room, plus 1 for each
                                                     service stall in the service area
Warehouse and wholesale establishments and related   3, plus 1 for each 1 employee in the largest working shift, or 5 plus 1 for
accessory offices                                    every 1,700 sq. ft. of usable floor area, whichever is greater
INSTITUTIONAL USES
Elementary or junior high schools                    1 for each teacher, employee or administrator or the requirements of the
                                                     auditorium, whichever is greater
Homes for the aged and convalescent homes            1 for each 4 beds, plus 1 for each 2 employees in the largest working shift
Hospitals                                            1 for each 1 bed, plus 1 for each 2 employees in the largest shift, plus
                                                     spaces as required for related uses
Library, museum and post office                      1 for each 150 square feet of usable floor area
Nursery schools, day care centers or child care      1 for each 350 square feet of usable floor area, plus 1 for each employee
centers
                                                     1 for each 4 seats or 8 feet of pew in the main unit of worship. In places of
Places of worship                                    worship where seating is not provided such as mosques, 1 space for each 30
                                                     square feet of worship room
Post office                                          1 for each employee in the largest shift, plus 1 for each 150 square feet of
                                                     lobby area
                                                     Whichever of the following requires the greatest amount of parking:
                                                     1 space per club member and 1 space per guest
Private clubs or lodge halls                         1 space per occupancy permitted as determined by the state’s Building Code
                                                     based on plans submitted by the applicant
                                                     1 space for each 100 square feet of usable floor space
Senior high schools                                  1 for each teacher, employee or administrator, and 1 for each 10 students, or
                                                     the requirements for an auditorium, whichever is greater
Stadium or sports arenas or similar outdoor place of 1 for each 4 seats or 8 feet of benches
assembly
Swimming pool clubs or similar uses                  1 for each 3 member families or individuals, plus spaces as required for
                                                     accessory uses
Tennis clubs or similar uses                         3 for each court, plus spaces as required for accessory uses
Theaters and auditoriums                             1 for each 4 seats, or 1 for each 60 square feet of floor area in the assembly
                                                     room without fixed seats, plus 1 for every 2 employees
OFFICE USES
Business offices or professional offices, except as  1 for each 300 sq. ft. of usable floor area
indicated in “professional offices...” below
Financial institutions (banks, savings and loan      1 for each 200 sq. ft. of usable floor space, plus 4 waiting spaces for each
offices, credit unions)                              drive-through window
Professional offices of doctors, dentists,           1 for each 50 sq. ft. of usable floor area in waiting rooms and 1 for each
veterinarians or similar professions; outpatient     examining room, dentist chair or similar use area and 1 space for each 2
clinic                                               employees
RESIDENTIAL USES
Bed and breakfast or rooming houses                  1 for the owner or resident manager and 1 for each guest room
                                                     1 for each 3 dwelling units and 1 for each employee in the largest working
Housing for the elderly                              shift. Should units revert to general occupancy, the standards of “multiple-
                                                     family” below shall apply
Mid-rise, high-rise condominiums or apartments in    1 parking space for each dwelling unit of 1 bedroom, 1-1/4 parking spaces for
CBD                                                  each dwelling unit of 2 or more bedrooms, plus 1 additional parking space for
                                                     every 8 dwelling units for guest parking
Mid-rise, high-rise condominiums or apartments not   1-1/4 parking space for each dwelling unit of 1 bedroom, 2 parking spaces for
in CBD                                               each dwelling unit of 2 or more bedrooms, plus 1 additional parking space for
                                                     every 8 dwelling units for guest parking
                                                     1-1/2 parking spaces for each dwelling unit of 1 bedroom; 2 parking spaces for
Multiple-family                                      each dwelling unit of 2 bedrooms; 2-1/2 parking spaces for each dwelling unit
                                                     of 3 or more bedrooms; plus 1 additional parking space for every 8 units for
                                                     guest parking
One- and two-family                                  1 for each dwelling unit
 
      (2)   Barrier free design: Off-street parking areas shall conform with
all applicable requirements of the state’s Department of Labor Construction
Code Commission in accordance with §
72.003 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 2403) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007; Ord. 1374, passed 11-
12-2012; Ord. 1392, passed 2-10-2014; Ord. 1467, passed 11-12-2018)
§ 190.325 OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE LAYOUT, STANDARDS, CONSTRUCTION AND
MAINTENANCE.
   Wherever the off-street parking requirements in §
190.324 of this chapter require the building of an off-street parking facility
which consists of three or more parking spaces, or where P-1 Vehicular Parking
Districts are provided, such off-street parking areas shall be laid out,
constructed and maintained in accordance with the following standards and
regulations.
   (A)   No parking area or off-street parking facility shall be constructed or
reconstructed unless and until a permit therefor is issued by the City
Engineer. Applications for a permit shall be submitted to the City Engineer for
approval. The application shall be submitted with two sets of site plans for
the development and construction of the parking area or off-street parking
facility showing the provisions of this section will be fully complied with.
The dumpster and transformer, if required, shall be shown on submitted plan.
Landscape plans shall be submitted as required in §
190.328 of this chapter.
   (B)   Adequate ingress and egress to the parking area or parking facility by
means of clearly defined drives shall be provided for all vehicles. Such
necessary directional signs and controls as are required shall be established
and maintained by the owner or lessee. All spaces shall be provided adequate
access by means of maneuvering lanes. Backing directly onto a street shall be
prohibited.
   (C)   In an industrially zoned area, the requirements of division (B) above
may be modified with the approval of the City Engineer and the Police
Department.
   (D)   (1)   Plans for the layout of off-street parking facilities shall be
in accord with the following minimum requirements.
 
Parking Pattern      Maneuvering Lane Parking Space Width Parking Space Width
(degrees)            Width
0 (parallel parking) 12 ft.           8 ft.               23 ft.
30 to 53             12 ft.           8 ft. 6 in.         20 ft.
54 to 74             15 ft.           8 ft. 6 in.         20 ft.
75 to 90             22 ft.           8 ft. 6 in.         19 ft.
Small car design (90 21 ft.           8 ft.               15 ft.
degrees only)
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/84f314df5911a4b8d75bf8da219d5dc254290259/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4214.png]
 
 
      (2)   Only parking lots with double loaded aisles may incorpor ate small
car design standards into their parking layout. A maximu m of 20% of the
parking spaces may utilize the small car design standard. Such spaces shall be
clearly marked for small car usage.
   ( E)   All maneuvering lane widths shall require one-way traffic moveme nt,
with the exception of the 90- degree pattern where two-way movement may be
permitted.
   ( F)   Each entrance to and exit from any off-street parking lot or parking
facility shall be at least 20 feet in distance from adjacent property which is
zoned residential.
   ( G)   The entire parking area, including parking spaces and maneuve rings
lanes, required under this section shall be provided with asphaltic or concrete
surfacing in accordance with specificat ions approved by the City Engineer .
   (H)   Off-street parking areas or parking facilities shall be constructed or
reconstructed as specified in this section and require a permit from the
Department of Engineering and Building before work begins. Two sets of plans
must be submitted showing, but not limited to, the following information:
Location, dimensions and elevations with respect to lot lines and existing
building, location and elevations of paved streets or alleys and existing
drainage structures, type of surface construction, proposed drainage pattern,
proposed drainage structures and landscaping.
   (I)   Off-street parking areas shall be drained so as to dispose of all
surface water accumulated in the parking area in such a way as to prevent
drainage of water onto adjacent property or toward buildings. Surface water on
all paved areas shall be collected at intervals as required so that it will not
obstruct the flow of vehicles or pedestrian traffic and will not create
nuisance ponding in paved areas.
      (1)   Surface run-off is acceptable for small parking lots if the
engineer determines that a nuisance to pedestrian or vehicular traffic is not
created.
      (2)   When catch basins are utilized, plans must be submitted for the
permit. Plans must include a maximum six-inch diameter storm sewer where
connecting to the public sewer, details of the catch basin (must have a two-
foot sump), sewer main connection, grades indicating surface flow of the
parking lot, and a restrictive catch basin grate. Hydraulic information may be
required by the City Engineer showing the impact on the public sewer and
verifying that the proposed additional flow will not adversely affect the
public sewer main capacity.
   (J)   In all cases where such parking facilities abut public or private
sidewalks, a curb at least six inches in height or bumper guards shall be
placed thereon so that a motor vehicle cannot be driven or parked extending
over a public or private sidewalk or within five feet of a front of a building.
A sidewalk not less than five feet in width shall be provided wherever parking
abuts a wall of the main entrance to a building.
   (K)   A six-inch high curb or bumper guards shall be provided to prevent
motor vehicles from striking any structure, wall or fence.
   (L)   (1)   Off-street parking areas shall be provided with a continuous and
completely obscuring wall or fence not less than five feet, but not more than
six feet in height measured from the surface of the parking area.
      (2)   This wall or fence shall be provided on all sides where the
abutting or adjacent property is used or designated as residential and shall be
of solid type material such as brick, block or poured concrete or other
approved material as determined by the Zoning Board of Appeals upon appeal and
shall meet the requirements of the P-1 District, §
190.262 of this chapter, minimum distances and setbacks.
      (3)   The obscuring wall or fence shall be properly maintained.
      (4)   The side lot line required wall shall end a minimum distance of ten
feet from the front line.
   (M)   Dumpster areas shall be screened to obscure the dumpster from any
public street or residential area. Screening materials shall be masonry or
other durable material. Transformers shall be screened with landscaping.
   (N)   (1)   All lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking area
shall be so installed as to be confined within and directed onto the parking
area only. When a parking lot abuts a major thoroughfare lighting fixtures
shall be provided in the private greenbelt adjacent to the street.
      (2)   This lighting will be required to be the following:
Manufacture Holophane Unique Solutions
            515 McKinley Avenue, Newark, OH 43055
Post        Burlington Series, Black Cast Aluminum 11” Sq. Base 4” dia. Fluted
            Shaft
Light       GranVille Series Luminaire, Leaf Style Housing
Arm mount   Philadelphia Series, Black Cast Aluminum 36” -2 Arm 180 deg.
Height      12 feet except on Eureka, Biddle and Fort Streets where the height
            shall be 14 feet
Spacing     Lights shall be spaced not more than 50 feet apart
Fixture     2 head fixtures are required on Eureka, Biddle and Fort Streets; all
heads       other streets require single head fixtures; 2 headed fixtures shall be
            located perpendicular to the street
 
OR
 
Manufacture   Cooper Lighting
              1121 Highway 74, South Peach Tree City, GA 30269
Post          Grand, Black Cast Aluminum, 11.5”, 1 Piece Structural
              Catalog #CLB050LEDU33x32 BK
Height        12 feet, except on Eureka, Biddle and Fort Streets where the
              height shall be 14 feet
Spacing       Lights shall be spaced not more than 50 feet apart
              2 headed fixtures are required on Eureka, Biddle and Fort Street
              which will require the use of Holophane Unique Solutions approved
Fixture heads light. All other streets require single headed fixtures which
              allow the approved light from Cooper Lighting; 2 headed fixtures
              shall be located perpendicular to the street
 
   (O)   In all cases where a wall extends to an alley which is a means of
ingress and egress to a parking area, it shall be permissible to end the wall
not more than ten feet from such alley line in order to permit a wider means of
access to the parking area.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/84f314df5911a4b8d75bf8da219d5dc254290259/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4216.png]
 
   (P)     The Planning Commissi on, where it has site plan review, upon
application by the property owner of the off-street parking area, may modify
the yard or wall requireme nts where no good purpose would be served by the
complianc e with the requireme nts of this section.
   (Q)    For all new parking areas and used car lots of six or more spaces,
and all existing parking areas and used car lots to be reconstruc ted
consisting of 20 or more spaces, the following requireme nts shall apply. These
requirements shall also apply to existing parking lots that are reconfigured or
add additional parking spaces. If the existing parking lot consists of 20 or
more spaces, these requirements shall apply when 50% of the parking lot area is
reconstructed. The off-street parking area shall have a planting area of at
least five feet in width along any abutting dedicated street right-of-way.
Additional planting areas shall be required equaling at least ten square feet
in area for each parking space. Parking and used car lots of 20 or more parking
spaces shall provide 15 square feet of landscaping for each parking space.
Planting areas shall be so located as to divide and break-up the expanse of
paving. Landscape planting areas shall be subject to the requirement of §
190.328 of this chapter.
   (R)   All parking lot landscaped areas shall be provided with underground
irrigation.
   (S)   Bars and restaurants shall not have parking access from an alley which
abuts residential properties.
   (T)   A survey by a registered land surveyor may be required by the City
Engineer.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 2404) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007; Ord. 1298, passed 9-
15-2008; Ord. 1335, passed 10-11-2010)
§ 190.326 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   Uses permitted within any district shall conform to the following standards
of use, occupancy and operation.
   (A)   Smoke, dust, dirt and fly ash. It shall be unlawful for any person,
firm or corporation to permit the emission or discharge of any smoke, dust,
dirt or fly ash in quantities greater than prescribed in the codes and
ordinances of the city.
   (B)   Open storage. The open storage of any equipment, vehicles and all
materials, including wastes, shall be screened from public view, from a public
street and from adjoining properties by an enclosure consisting of a wall or an
obscuring fence not less than eight feet in height, except as otherwise
provided herein. Scrap, junk cars and other junk materials shall not be piled
or stacked as open storage to a height in excess of 25 feet. Sand, gravel,
aggregate, slag or other materials of this nature, piled or stored outside
buildings shall not exceed the height of 40 feet.
   (C)   Glare and radioactive materials. Glare from any process which emits
harmful rays shall be completely shielded from public view. Radioactive
materials and wastes, and including electromagnetic radiation such as X-ray
machine operation, shall not emit radiation at levels which exceed quantities
established as safe by the U.S. Bureau of Standards, when measured at the
property line.
   (D)   Fire and explosive hazards.
      (1)   The storage, utilization or manufacture of materials, goods or
products ranging from incombustible to moderate burning, as determined by the
Fire Chief, is permitted, subject to compliance with all other performance
standards above-mentioned.
      (2)   The storage, utilization or manufacture of materials, goods or
products ranging from free or active burning to intense burning, as determined
by the Fire Chief, is permitted subject to compliance with all other yard
requirements and performance standards previously mentioned, and providing that
the following conditions are met.
         (a)   Said materials or products shall be stored, utilized or produced
within completely enclosed buildings or structures having incombustible
exterior walls, which meet the requirements of the Building Code of the city.
         (b)   All such buildings or structures shall be set back at least 40
feet from lot lines and all such buildings or structures shall be protected
throughout by an automatic sprinkler system complying with installation
standards prescribed by the National Fire Association.
         (c)   The storage and handling of flammable liquids, liquefied
petroleum, gases and explosives shall comply with the state rules and
regulations as established by Public Act 110 of 2006, as amended.
   (E)   Noise.
      (1)   Levels of noise shall be controlled in accord with Title XIII of
this code of ordinances.
      (2)   Noise from any use of property shall not exceed 55 DBA as measured
at the property line of the use emitting such noise. Exceeding this level shall
constitute prima facie evidence that such noise unreasonably disturbs the
comfort, quiet and repose of persons in the area. The “DBA” represents the
sound pressure level in decibels measured on the “A” scale of a standard level
meter. Temporary uses such as lawn mowers, snow blowers and portable generators
are excepted provided such uses does not exceed one hour per 24 hours. Portable
generators may be utilized for the entire period of a power outage.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 2405) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 190.327 FENCES.
   (A)   (1)   Fences, not exceeding five feet in height may occupy a side
yard, however, fences six feet in height may be permitted; provided, a side
yard width of not less than four feet on both sides of the fence is provided
and a front yard of not less than 20 feet is provided.
      (2)   Fences not exceeding six feet in height may occupy a rear yard.
      (3)   Except for the following: wherein the adjacent lot is developed and
the side yard fence is adjacent to the rear yard of the developed lot or
wherein the lot is adjacent to an alley or a street, then said side yard fence
may be six feet in height.
   (B)   No residential or non-residential fence or wall shall be erected in a
required front yard; except that, on lots with a side lot line adjacent to an
alley or a street, a decorative or ornamental fence shall be allowed, such as,
but not limited to, a split-rail or a two-rail fence; but not to include chain
link or fences of solid type construction and not exceeding four feet in
height, may be constructed along the alley, street line or extension of the
side yard to the front of said lot.
   (C)   Decorative or ornamental fences constructed under this section shall
not be intended to enclose or be capable of enclosing animals or human beings.
   (D)   Prior to construction of any decorative or ornamental fence allowed by
this chapter, a site plan showing the location and type of fence to be
constructed shall be submitted to the Department of Engineering and Building
for approval.
   (E)   No decorative or ornamental fence shall be constructed without first
obtaining the approval set forth herein.
   (F)   Fences on non-residential properties are not permitted in a front yard
or side yard when the fence is within 20 feet of the front property line or in
front of the building.
   (G)   Where a rear or side yard of “non-residential property” abuts a
residentially zoned area, then any fence shall be of solid type material such
as brick, decorative block or decorative poured concrete or other approved
material as determined by the Zoning Board of Appeals upon appeal.
   (H)   It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of land in the city to
build or maintain any fence constructed wholly or in part of barbed wire, razor
wire or other similar security wires or materials which could easily cause
injury to persons, or any fence, guard wall or other protection upon which
there shall be fixed, attached or placed in any manner any spike, nail or
pointed instrument of any kind or description or any fence electrically
charged; provided, however, barbed wire may be used along the top of such
fences surrounding industrial zoned parcels of property, if such barbed wire is
fastened to a portion of the fence extending at an angle over the property
enclosed and not over other private property and not projecting on the opposite
side or the side adjacent to a sidewalk or public way.
   (I)   (1)   When a fence is located on a corner lot, the side lot line of
which is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the lot to its
rear, said fence shall not be located closer to the street side lot line than
the existing front yard setback of the lot to the rear; provided, in those
instances where lots are 40 or less in width, the setback need not exceed 15
feet. Where lots are 35 feet or less, the setback need not exceed ten feet.
      (2)   When a fence is located on a corner lot, the side line of which is
substantially a continuation of the side lot line of which is substantially a
continuation of the side lot line of the lot to its rear, said fence shall not
be closer than the required street side yard setback of the lot to its rear.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/84f314df5911a4b8d75bf8da219d5dc254290259/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4218.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/84f314df5911a4b8d75bf8da219d5dc254290259/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4220.png]
 
(Prior Code, App. A, § 2406) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 190.328 LANDSCAPE PLANTING.
   (A)    Wherever in this chapter a landscape planting screen or landscape
plantings are required the developer shall provide a surety bond or escrow
money acceptable to the City Engineer in an amount sufficient to ensure
completion in accordance with the approved planting plan prior to the issuance
of any building permits. Such landscape plantings shall be planted in
accordance with an approved planting plan, planted to completion and approved
by the City Engineer prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy,
certificate of compliance, certificate of approval or certificate of conformity
unless the structure or required paving construction is completed in an off
planting season, in which case temporary certificates will be issued; however,
all required plantings shall be placed to completion within 60 days of the next
planting season. Failure to place the required plantings within 60 days of the
next planting season shall be grounds for termination or revocation of a
temporary certificate and subject the property owner to the fines and penalties
of §
190.999 of this chapter. No additional certificate, either temporary or final
will be issued until all required plantings are placed to completion.
   (B)   All plantings shall consist of permanent, living plant materials and
shall be so planted as to be in a healthy growing condition. Planting materials
shall be maintained in a healthy growing condition which shall include
watering, cultivation and weed control and further maintained in a neat and
orderly appearance free of refuse and debris. All unhealthy and dead plant
materials shall be replaced within three months or during the next appropriate
planting season.
   (C)   Whenever a landscape planting screen or landscape plantings are
required under the provisions of this chapter, a site plan together with a
detailed planting plan of said screen or plantings, shall be submitted to and
be approved by the Planning Commission prior to issuance of a building permit.
Estimated costs shall also be submitted with the detailed planting plans.
Detailed plans shall be submitted in accordance with the following:
      (1)   A minimum scale of one inch equals 40 feet;
      (2)   Plans shall indicate, to scale, the location, spacing, starting
size and description for each unit of plant material proposed for use within
the required screening or planting area, together with the finished grade
elevations therein;
      (3)   Plans shall indicate the proposed location and height of all
structures, proposed location of off-street parking areas, points of ingress
and egress to the site, location of walks and roadways, location of proposed
outside storage, dumpster areas, loading or service areas and transformers; and
      (4)   Plans shall indicate existing plant or tree cover including types
of trees and tree height.
   (D)   The planting plan shall be reviewed relative to the following:
      (1)   The proper spacing, height, placement, location and type of plant
materials:
         (a)   To ensure landscape screens are the length and width so the
required horizontal and vertical obscuring effect of proposed land uses will be
achieved; and
         (b)   To ensure landscape planting areas are planted within the
minimum requirements as set forth in this chapter.
      (2)   The choice and selection of plant materials so as to ensure that
root systems will not interfere with public utilities and that fruit and other
debris (excluding leaves) will not constitute a nuisance within public rights-
of-way or to abutting property owners;
      (3)   The choice and selection of plant materials are of types that will
survive and thrive in the area which they are to be located. It is suggested
that a mixture of plant materials (evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs) be
provided in all landscape plans as a protective measure against disease and
insect infestation. Where landscape screens are required, a proper relationship
exists between deciduous and evergreen plant materials to assure that the
desired obscuring effect will be maintained throughout the various seasonal
periods; and
      (4)   The size of plant materials (both starting and ultimate):
         (a)   Where landscape screens are required to ensure adequate maturity
and optimum screening effect; and
         (b)   Where landscape planting areas are required, such areas are to
be safely located from any building, point of ingress or egress and not create
a traffic hazard.
   (E)   Landscape planting screens and landscape planting areas shall consist
of suitable plant materials laid out in conformance with the following:
landscape planting screen.
      (1)   Plant materials (except creeping vine type) shall not be located
within two feet of a property line.
      (2)   Where plant materials are planted in two or more rows, planting
shall be staggered in rows.
      (3)   Evergreen trees shall be a minimum of six feet in height. When
planted in informal groupings, they shall be spaced not less than ten feet on
centers. If placed further apart, additional screen plantings shall be used to
achieve the desired obscuring effect. When planted in rows, they shall be
spaced not more than eight feet on centers.
      (4)   Narrow evergreen trees shall be a minimum of five feet in height.
When planted in informal groupings, they shall be spaced not more than ten feet
on centers. When planted in rows, they shall be spaced not more than five feet
on centers.
      (5)   Tree-like shrubs shall be a minimum of six feet in height and
spaced not more than ten feet on centers.
      (6)   Large deciduous shrubs shall be a minimum of four feet in height
and spaced not more than six feet on centers.
      (7)   Deciduous trees shall be a minimum of eight feet in height with a
minimum caliper of two and one-half inches, they shall be spaced not more than
30 feet on centers.
   (F)   In addition to parking lot landscape requirements as specified herein,
street tree shade trees shall be provided between the curb and sidewalk or if
space is not adequate between the curb and sidewalk, trees shall be located on
private property spaced 35 feet on centers along all street frontages. On
streets under the jurisdiction of the county or the state, plans for street
trees shall be subject to the requirements of such agency.
   (G)   (1)   Yard planting exposed to public view shall be required in all
multiple-family, office service, neighborhood business, general business and
all industrial districts. Plantings shall consist of shrubs, trees, flowers and
lawns as may be appropriate.
      (2)   The pavements surface in any residential yard shall not exceed 50%
for a required front yard.
   (H)   (1)   Spacing between and minimum size of plant materials (in feet)
shall be as follows:
 
Plant Material Narrow                    Tree-Like Large Deciduous
Types          Evergreen Evergreen Trees Shrubs    Trees           Large Shrubs
               Trees
Evergreen      Min. 12’Min. 10’      Min. 12’Min. 20’      Min. 6’
trees                    Max. 20’
Large          Min. 15’Min. 20’      Min. 15’Min. 20’      Min. 6’
deciduous                                          Max. 30’
Large shrubs   Min. 5’ Min. 6’       Min. 6’ Min. 6’       Min. 4’
                                                                   Max. 6’
Narrow         Min. 5’ Min. 12’      Min. 10’Min. 15’      Min. 5’
evergreen      Max. 10’
Tree like      Min. 10’Min. 12’      Min. 8’ Min. 15’      Min. 6’
shrubs                                   Max. 15’
NOTES TO TABLE:
Narrow evergreen trees: 5 feet in height
Evergreen trees: 6 feet in height
Tree-like shrubs: 6 feet in height
Large deciduous trees: 2-1/2-inch caliper
Large deciduous shrubs: 4 feet in height
 
      (2)   Trees not permitted (all locations):
         (a)   Box elder;
         (b)   Soft maples;
         (c)   Elms;
         (d)   Horse chestnut (nut-bearing);
         (e)   Tree of Heaven;
         (f)   Catalpa; and
         (g)   Ash.
      (3)   Trees not permitted within street right-of-way:
         (a)   Basswood;
         (b)   Cottonwood; and
         (c)   Willow.
      (4)   On the following table is a list of suggested plant materials.
Size, special characteristics and tolerances are given to aid in determining
what plant materials are right for an individual situation. This list is not
intended to be a comprehensive list of plant materials, especially in the area
of deciduous shrubs.
   T - Tolerant
   I - Intolerant
   S - Slow
   M - Moderate
   F - Fast
   V - Varies
 Deicing                                                            Light   Dense   Ped     Attractive Attractive Good  Winter   Growth
 Salt    Heat Drought Shade Course Medium Fine Oval Round Pyramidal Foliage Foliage Level   Flowers    Fruit      Fall  Interest Rate
                                                                                    Massing                       Color
   T - Tolerant
   I - Intolerant
   S - Slow
   M - Moderate
   F - Fast
   V - Varies
                           Deicing                                                            Light   Dense   Ped     Attractive Attractive Good  Winter   Growth
                           Salt    Heat Drought Shade Course Medium Fine Oval Round Pyramidal Foliage Foliage Level   Flowers    Fruit      Fall  Interest Rate
                                                                                                              Massing                       Color
Shade (Canopy) trees 50’—60’
   Hackberry            T       T    T       T            X           X                                                                                 F
   Honeylocust, ThornlesT       T    T                           X         X               X               X                                            F
   Linden, American     I                    T     X                  X                            X       X       X                                    M
   Maple, Norway        T            I             X                       X                       X       X                                            M
   Maple, Red           I                    T            X           X                                            X                     X              F
   Maple, Sugar         I       I            T            X           X                            X                                     X              S
   Oak, Pin             I            I       T            X                      X                         X                             X     X        M
Intermediate Trees 30’—40’
   Birch, River                              T                   X    X                    X               X                             X     X        F
   Linden, Greenspire                        T            X                      X                 X       X       X                                    F
   Linden, Littleleaf                I       T            X           X                    X       X       X                                            M
   Linden, Redmond                           T     X                             X                 X       X       X                                    M
Low trees 15’—25’
   Beech, Blue                               T                   X         X                               X                             X              S
   Crabapple            I                    I            X           X    X                               X       X          X                X        F
   Dogwood, Pagoda                           T            X           X                                    X       X                     X              M
   Hawthorn, Thornless  I                                 X                X                               X       X          X                         F
   Maple, Amur          T                    T            X                X                               X                             X              F
   Mountain Ash, EuropeaI            T       I                   X    X    X                               X                                            M
   Olive, Russian       T       T    T                           X         X                               X                                            F
   Shadblow Serviceberry                     T            X           X                    X               X                                            F
Evergreen trees 50’—60’
   Pine, Austrian       T                    T            X                      X                         X                                   X        F
   Pine, Scotch         T                                 X                      X                         X                                   X        F
   Spruce, Black Hills  T       T    T                    X                      X                         X                                   X        M
   Spruce, Colorado     T                                 X                      X                         X                                   X        S
Deciduous Shrubs 4½’ and taller
   Buckthorn, Columnar  T       T            T            X           X                                    X                  X                         F
   Chokeberry, Black                         T            X                X                               X       X          X          X              S
   Dogwood, Redtwig     I                                 X                X                               X       X                           X        F
   Euonymous, Winged    I                          X                  X                    X               X                             X     X        S
   Lilac, French                             T            X                X                               X       X                                    M
   Ninebark, Golden                          T            X                X                               X                                            F
Deciduous shrubs under 4½’
   Currant, Alpine      T       T                                X         X                       X       X                                            M
   Barberry, Japanese   I            T       T     X                       X                               X                  X          X     X        M
   Cranberry Bush, CompaIt                                X                X                               X
   Honeysuckle, Emerald                      T            X                X                               X       X          X                         M
Mound
   Potentilla           T       T    T             X                       X                               X       X                                    M
   Spiraea, Anthony                          T            X                X                               X       X                                    M
Waterer
Evergreen shrubs (height varies)
   Arborvitae           Varies                            X           Varies                               X                                   X        S
   Juniper              Varies                            X           Varies                               X                                   X        S
   Pine, Mugho          Varies                            X           Varies                               X                                   X        S
   Yews                 Varies                            X           Varies                               X                                   X        S
Groundcovers 1’—2’
   Cinquefoil Wineleaf               T                           X                                         X                             X              F
   Crownvetch                        T       T                   X                                         X       X                                    S
   Creeper, Virginia    T            T       T     X                                                       X                             X              F
   Fleeceflower                 T    T                    X                                                X       X          X                X        F
 
      (5)   All parking lot landscaped areas shall be provided with underground
irrigation.
      (6)   Except as otherwise allowed or specified in this chapter, all land
in all use districts located between abutting public right-of-way, railroad
right-of-way or waterway shall be landscaped and well maintained in grass,
ground cover, shrubs or trees.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 2407) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 190.329 SIGNS.
   Any public displayed sign, symbol or notice on a premise to advertise the
business or activity there transacted, or name of person or firm conducting
said business or activity on premises, or directing to some other locale, shall
be regulated as follows.
   (A)   All plans for the erection of signs shall be submitted to the city’s
Engineering and Building Department for review and approval and shall be
further subject to all codes and ordinances of the city.
   (B)   Prior to the erection of a sign in a public right-of-way or
overhanging a public right-of-way, the sponsor of such sign shall receive the
approval of the proper governmental agency (city, county or state) having
jurisdiction over such right-of-way. The city may require a bond to be provided
for any sign in or overhanging a public right-of-way.
   (C)   After the effective date of this chapter, all new signs within the
city shall conform to the city’s Building Code and this chapter.
   (D)   Existing signs in need of repair may be repaired provided the cost of
repairs does not exceed 50% of the replacement cost for the entire sign (in the
judgment of the Building Official). If it does, then the sign must be replaced
and must conform to code.
   (E)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      “A” FRAME TEMPORARY SIGN. A sign other than a ground sign or portable
sign which is not attached to a building and is capable of being moved on the
same zoning lot and is only allowed to be displayed during hours of operation
and is capable of being moved by one person. (
Fig. 2)
      AWNING SIGN. A sign on or attached to a temporary retractable shelter
that is supported entirely on the exterior wall of a building. (
Fig. 17.)
      BENCH SIGN. A sign painted, placed or attached to a bench. (
Fig. 18.)
      CANOPY SIGN. A sign on or attached to a permanent overhanging shelter
that projects from the face of the building and is supported only partially by
the building. (
Fig. 19.)
      CHANGEABLE MESSAGE SIGN. A sign or portion thereof with characters,
letters, or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged without altering
the face or surface of the sign. When any particular type of sign is also an
electronic message sign, the requirements and restrictions for electronic
message signs take precedence. In addition, the size of the electronic sign
shall be based upon the type of sign being utilized (example: wall, ground and
pole).
      CONSTRUCTION SIGNS. A sign which is not of a permanent nature and is
utilized during the construction of a new building or major remodeling.
      DECORATIVE DISPLAY. A decorative, temporary display designed for the
aesthetics or cultural enrichment of the public and having no direct or
indirect sales or advertising content. (
Fig. 1.)
      GROUND SIGN. A permanent display sign mounted directly and permanently in
and upon the ground surface and having a height not in excess of six feet. (
Fig. 16)
      MARQUEE SIGN. A sign on or attached to a permanent overhanging shelter
that projects from the face of the building and is supported entirely by the
building. (
Fig. 5)
      OFF-PREMISES SIGN. A sign that advertises activities, goods, products and
the like that are available elsewhere than within the building or on the lot
where the sign is located. (A billboard, for example
Fig. 11.)
      POLE OR PYLON SIGN. A display sign supported by one or more columns,
uprights or braces set a minimum 42 inches below ground surface and having a
height in excess of eight feet. (
Fig. 3.)
      PORTABLE SIGN.
         (a)   A sign and sign structure which is designed to facilitate the
movement of the sign from one zoning lot to another.
         (b)   The sign may or may not have wheels, changeable lettering and/or
hitches for towing. (
Fig. 4.)
      PROJECTING SIGN. Projecting sign means a sign which is affixed to any
building or structure, other than a marquee, and any part of which extends
beyond the building wall or structure more than 15 inches. (
Fig. 8.)
      ROOF SIGN. A display sign which is erected, constructed and maintained on
or above the roof of the building and supported on the building roof. (
Fig. 6.)
      SIGN.
         (a)   Any device (including, but not limited to, letters, words,
numerals, figures, emblems, pictures or any part of combination) used for
visual communication to attract the attention of the public and visible from
the public right-of-way or other properties.
         (b)   The term SIGN shall not include any flag, badge or insignia of
any governmental unit, nor shall include any item of merchandise normally
displayed within a window of a business.
      SIGN AREA MEASUREMENTS.
         (a)   The total sign area shall be the area within a single,
continuous perimeter of the sign surface composed of any rectilinear line or
geometric figure which encloses the extreme limits of the sign.
         (b)   If the sign is composed of individual letters or symbols using
the wall, awning or mansard roof as the background, the total sign area shall
be calculated by measuring the area within the perimeter of each symbol or
letter and the combined area of the individual figures shall be considered the
total sign area. (See Fig. 20 “Common Geometric Shapes and Formulas to
Determine Sign Area”.)
         (c)   Buildings with more than one occupant may prorate the sign area
for the total building to each building occupant, but not to exceed the total
allowable sign area for the building.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/84f314df5911a4b8d75bf8da219d5dc254290259/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4222.png]
 
      SIGN FRONTAGE. The length in feet of the ground floor level of a building
front or side facing a street that is occupied by a business or businesses.
      TEMPORARY SIGN. A display sign, banner or other advertising device
constructed of paper, cloth, canvas, fabric, plastic or other light temporary
material, inflated devices with or without a structural frame. (
Fig. 10.)
      TRANSITORY SIGN. A sign which is not of a permanent nature and exists for
a short time. (
Fig. 7.)
      VEHICLE SIGN. A sign attached to a vehicle or placed within or upon such
vehicle. (
Fig. 15.)
      WALL SIGN. A display sign which is painted on or attached directly to the
building wall. (
Fig. 9.)
      WINDOW SIGN. A sign on the inside of the glass of a window. (
Fig. 14.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/84f314df5911a4b8d75bf8da219d5dc254290259/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4224.png]
 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/84f314df5911a4b8d75bf8da219d5dc254290259/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4226.png]
 
   (F)   (1)   CBD Central Business Districts sign types allowed and standards:
         (a)   Wall signs. Wall signs which project no more than 15 inches from
the building face, nor extend higher than whichever of the following is lowest:
            1.   Twenty-five feet above grade;
            2.   The sills of windows located above the first story; or
            3.   The lowest point of a gable, hip or shed roof.
         (b)   Projecting signs.
            1.   Projecting signs must project at right angles to the building,
shall have no more than two faces and project no more than five feet from the
face of the building. Only one projecting sign will be allowed at each entrance
to a business establishment and that business must occupy a minimum of 18 feet
of frontage.
            2.   The bottom of the sign must be at least ten feet above ground
level and its top may not extend higher than whichever of the following is
lowest:
               a.   Twenty-five feet above grade;
               b.   The sills of the first level of windows above first story;
and
               c.   The lowest part of the roof.
            3.   No projecting signs shall be attached to roofs, chimneys,
smokestacks, elevator towers, penthouses and the like.
            4.   The area of each sign may not exceed 24 square feet for each
sign face.
            5.   No exposed guy wires or turnbuckles are allowed on a
projecting sign.
         (c)   Window signs. A permanent sign on the inside of the glass of a
window shall not exceed 30% of the window area on the section of the building
front occupied by the business the sign advertises. Any permanent sign in
ground floor windows must be included in calculating the total area of signage
for that building.
         (d)   Painted-on signs. Painted on signs shall not be allowed on the
sides of buildings. Painted on signs must be applied to the front of the
buildings and will be included in the total area of signage for that building.
Sides of buildings abutting streets or parking lots shall be treated the same
as building fronts.
         (e)   Awning, canopy and marquee. Letters may be painted or otherwise
affixed to any permissible awning, canopy or marquee subject to the following
regulations.
            1.   Lettering or letters shall not project above, below or beyond
the vertical drip of the awning or canopy.
            2.   Lettering on a marquee shall not extend beyond the geometric
figure which encloses the sign message.
            3.   No awning, canopy or marquee sign shall extend below a minimum
height of seven feet six inches.
            4.   The area of such sign shall be limited as part of the total
sign area for all signs permitted.
            5.   Backlighting of an awning or marquee shall be prohibited.
         (f)   Temporary signs. Temporary window signs are allowed only on the
inside of the window for no more than 15 days. They shall occupy no more than
30% of the area of the window in which they appear.
         (g)   “A” frame temporary signs. “A” frame temporary sign provided
they do not exceed six square feet of sign area per sign face and shall be
located so as to not obstruct pedestrian traffic. One sign shall be allowed per
business. A hold harmless agreement must be obtained through the Engineering
and Building Department by the property owner, tenant and any occupant. Such
sign shall be securely anchored to prevent movement by wind forces.
         (h)   Attention-getting devices. Attention getting devices including
searchlights, balloons, banners (provided payment of the required fee for the
banner is made, and the banner may not be placed on outdoor café enclosures)and
similar devices or ornamentation designed for purposes of attracting attention,
promotions or advertising, are allowable. A banner or multiple banners, shall
be allowed on each street, parking lot or alley side of the building, and shall
not exceed 24 square feet in area per banner or 24 square feet total for all
banners on each side of building, except only one banner shall be allowed on
the front of the building and shall not exceed 24 square feet in area. All
banners and signs cannot exceed 10% of the wall area. A maximum two banners on
any wall, except the front wall, and no more than five banners shall be allowed
at one time. Attention-getting devices, except banners as described above,
shall be allowed for up to three separate 30-day periods in a calendar year.
Feather banners are not permitted.
         (i)   Changeable message signs.
            1.   Changeable message signs are permitted on buildings that are
located on the following streets:
               a.   East side of First Street between Elm Street and alley
north of Oak Street;
               b.   East side of Second Street between Sycamore Street and
alley north of Oak Street; and
               c.   Third Street between Eureka Avenue and alley north of Elm
Street.
            2.   Changeable message signs shall only be permitted as a wall
sign that is facing First Street, Second Street or Third Street in the
locations set forth above.
            3.   An electronic changeable message sign shall be limited to the
electronic display of a non-flashing or non-moving message that shall remain
unchanged for at least five continuous seconds before it is replaced by another
message. Electronic changeable messages shall be part of the total square
footage of display area permitted for the sign even if the message is contained
in a separate cabinet, except the face of the message shall not consume more
than 60% of the total permitted display area of the sign.
         (j)   Standards for all CBD signs.
            1.   For all new construction or remodeling of buildings, the name
of the owner and date of construction or the historic name and date of
construction shall be indicated on the building above the highest building
window or on the cornerstone of the building.
            2.   Lighting: signs shall be lighted only with a continuous light.
Flashing lights are prohibited.
            3.   Motion: all signs must be stationary.
            4.   Supports: no supports for a sign may extend above the cornice
line of the building to which it is attached.
            5.   Maximum allowable sign area square footage:
 
Multiply Building Frontage By  Centerline of Street
Building frontage          x 2 0—99 feet
Building frontage          x 4 100—399 feet
Building frontage          x 5 400 or more feet
NOTES TO TABLE:
If a use has less than 25 feet of building frontage and the building front is
99 feet or less from the centerline of the street it faces, it is allowed a
maximum of 50 square feet of permanent sign area. The distance of a sign on
or under a canopy, marquee or awning from the centerline of the abutting
street should be computed as if the sign were on the building face to which
the canopy is attached.
 
            6.   Abandoned sign: sign support structures abandoned and no
longer supporting a sign shall be removed by the building owner within 30 days
after receiving notice to do so from the city. Should the owner fail to comply,
the city shall proceed with §
190.999 of this chapter.
            7.   Sign abatement: notwithstanding other provisions of this
chapter, the city shall require the abatement of the following signs or sign
devices within five days from the date of notification: temporary, transitory
and portable signs.
      (2)   O-S, B-1, B-2 Districts sign types allowed: wall, awning, canopy,
freestanding, ground, marquee, projecting, pole, window, vehicle and temporary
(except on outdoor café enclosures) as defined in this chapter and subject to
the following conditions.
         (a)   Ground sign.
            1.   One ground sign shall be permitted having a sign area of not
more than 40 square feet for each sign face. On corner lots, two such signs are
permissible where business fronts both streets. Such sign shall not exceed six
feet in height.
            2.   Not more than one ground sign may be erected accessory to any
one development regardless of the number of buildings, separate parties,
tenants or uses contained therein. On corner lots, two such signs are
permissible where business fronts both streets.
            3.   No ground sign shall be located nearer than five feet to any
existing or proposed right-of-way line.
            4.   Ground signs may be illuminated with a continuous light only.
         (b)   Pole.
            1.   To be allowed only when a ground sign cannot be erected due to
building location or other site constraints and upon approval of the Planning
Commission.
            2.   One pole sign may be erected accessory to any one development
regardless of the number of buildings, separate parties, tenants or uses
contained therein.
            3.   It shall be unlawful to erect any pole sign to a height
greater than 30 feet above the level of the street upon which the sign faces.
The distance from the ground to the bottom shall be not less than eight feet
and shall be so erected as to not obstruct traffic vision. The area of such
sign shall not exceed 120 square feet for each sign face.
            4.   Signs may be illuminated with a continuous light only.
            5.   All letters, figures, characters, items or representations in
cutout or irregular form, maintained in conjunction with, attached to or
superimposed upon any sign shall be safely and securely built or attached to
the sign structure.
            6.   Loose or missing letters, figures, characters or items shall
constitute a maintenance violation.
            7.   All pole signs shall be securely built, constructed and
erected upon posts and standards at least 42 inches below the material surface
of the ground and shall be embedded in concrete. Wood or wood products shall be
of wolmanized or equal treatment.
         (c)   Projecting.
            1.   One projecting sign may be erected at each entrance to a
business or office establishment.
            2.   Projecting signs must project at right angles to the building
and have no more than two faces, and project no more than five feet from the
face of the building.
            3.   The bottom of the sign projecting must be at least ten feet
above ground level and its top may not extend higher than whichever of the
following is lowest:
               a.   Twenty-five feet above grade;
               b.   The sills of the first level of windows above first story;
and
               c.   The lowest part of the roof.
            4.   No projecting signs shall be attached to roofs, chimneys,
smokestacks, elevator towers, penthouses and the like.
            5.   The area of each projecting sign may not exceed 24 square feet
for each sign face.
            6.   No exposed guy wires or turnbuckles are allowed on a
projecting sign.
         (d)   Wall.
            1.   Wall signs may be provided on all street sides, parking lots
sides or alley sides of a building. The total sign area of wall signs on any
one wall shall not exceed 10% of the wall surface of such wall. Where a single
principal building is devoted to two or more business, offices or commercial
uses, the operator of each such use may install a front wall sign. The maximum
area of each such sign shall be determined by determining the proportionate
share of the allowed signage for the principal building occupied by each such
use and applying such proportion of the total sign area permitted for each
tenant or the per cent agreed to by the occupants, the total not to exceed the
above area limitations for the district in which such building is located. It
is the applicant’s responsibility to provide the required information when
applying for a sign permit. In those instances where a change of tenancy occurs
which presents a hardship in providing signage based on this requirement, the
Zoning Board of Appeals may vary these provisions.
            2.   Signs may be illuminated with a continuous light only.
Illuminated signs shall not be permitted on the alley side of a building.
            3.   Materials required: all wall signs of a greater area than 50
square feet shall have a surface or facing of non-combustible material.
            4.   Limitation on placement: no wall sign shall cover wholly or
partially any wall opening, nor project beyond the ends or top of the wall to
which it is attached.
            5.   Projection and height: no wall sign shall have a greater
thickness than 12 inches measured from the wall to which it is attached to the
outermost surface. Wall signs may project over the public right-of-way not to
exceed 12 inches; provided, a clearance of not less than seven feet six inches
is maintained below such sign if such sign projects more than four inches. Such
sign shall not project above the roofline.
            6.   Supports and attachments: all wall signs shall be safely and
securely attached to structural members of the building by means of metal
anchors, bolts or expansion screws. In no case shall any wall sign be secured
with wire, strips of wood or nails. The method of attachment shall be stated on
the permit application.
         (e)   Awning, canopy and marquee. Letters may be painted or otherwise
affixed to any permissible awning, canopy or marquee subject to the following
regulations.
            1.   Lettering or letters shall not project above, below or beyond
the physical dimensions of the awning or canopy.
            2.   Lettering on a marquee shall not extend beyond the geometric
figure which encloses the sign message.
            3.   No awning, canopy or marquee sign shall extend below a minimum
height of seven feet six inches.
            4.   The area of such sign shall be limited as part of the total
sign area for all signs as provided in division (F)(2)(d)1. above.
         (f)   Window. Window signs shall not exceed 30% of the glass area of
the window area on the section of building front occupied by the business at
that location.
         (g)   Temporary, transitory or construction signs.
            1.   There shall be no more than one such sign; except that, on a
corner lot, two signs with one facing each street, shall be permitted. No such
sign shall exceed six square feet in area for each sign face of such sign. All
such signs shall be removed upon occupancy.
            2.   Construction signs for buildings under construction may be
erected for the period of construction and shall not exceed a face area of 64
square feet for each sign face of such sign. Such signs shall be erected on the
building or lot where such construction is being carried on.
            3.   Temporary window signs are allowed only on the inside of the
window lasting no more than 15 days. They shall occupy no more than 30% of the
area of the window in which they appear.
            4.   No temporary sign shall be strung on a building exterior or on
a sign structure or across any public right-of-way, nor shall any temporary
sign project beyond the property line, except as authorized by the City
Council.
            5.   Temporary signs found by the Building Official to be in torn
or damaged condition must be removed by the owner within three days after
receipt of notice to do so from the Building Official. Temporary signs found to
be unsafe shall be removed immediately upon receipt of notice by the city.
            6.   “A” frame temporary signs; provided, they do not exceed six
square feet of sign area per sign face and shall be located so as to not
obstruct pedestrian traffic. One sign shall be allowed per business. A hold
harmless agreement must be obtained through the Engineering Department by the
property owner and operator of the business being advertised. Such sign shall
be securely anchored to prevent movement by wind forces.
         (h)   Billboards. Billboards not exceeding 200 square feet per sign
face are permitted only in B-2 Districts on Fort Street and shall be located no
nearer than 3,000 feet between such billboards with a maximum height of 30
feet. Billboards shall not be animated and lighting shall be continuous.
         (i)   Attention-getting devices.
            1.   Attention getting devices including searchlights, balloons,
banners (provided payment of the required fee for the banner is made, and the
banner may not be placed on outdoor café enclosures) and similar devices or
ornamentation designed for purposes of attracting attention, promotions or
advertising, are allowable. A banner or multiple banners, shall be allowed on
each street, parking lot or alley side of the building, and shall not exceed 24
square feet in area per banner or 24 square feet total for all banners on each
side of building, except only one banner shall be allowed on the front of the
building and shall not exceed 24 square feet in area. All banners and signs
cannot exceed 10% of the wall area. A maximum two banners on any wall, except
the front wall, and no more than five banners shall be allowed at one time.
Attention-getting devices, except banners as described above, shall be allowed
for up to three separate 30-day periods in a calendar year.
            2.   Feather banners are not permitted.
         (j)   Changeable message signs.
            1.   Changeable message signs shall only be permitted as ground,
wall or pole signs.
            2.   An electronic changeable message sign shall be limited to the
electronic display of a non-flashing or non-moving message that shall remain
unchanged for at least five continuous seconds before it is replaced by another
message. Electronic changeable messages shall be part of the total square
footage of display area permitted for the sign even if the message is contained
in a separate cabinet, except the face of the message shall not consume more
than 60% of the total permitted display area of the sign.
         (3)   PD District sign types allowed: sign types and uses allowed for
the uses designated for the area as portrayed in the master plan for future
land use shall be allowed provided the Planning Commission may make a
determination as to sign size and type most suitable to the promotion of the
objectives of the PD District. Signs located in the Design Review District (§
190.320 of this chapter) shall require design review.
      (4)   I-l, I-2, I-3, IRO Districts sign type allowed: all sign types
allowed and as controlled for O-S, B-I and B-2 Districts.
      (5)   P-1 Parking Districts sign types allowed: pole and wall signs are
permitted in parking districts subject to the following conditions:
         (a)   One entrance and one exit sign for each access way to the
parking lot shall be allowed and one conditions of use sign for each parking
lot shall be allowed;
         (b)   Signs shall not exceed nine square feet in area for each sign
face of such sign, nor an overall height above ground of nine feet; and
         (c)   Signs as required by the Building Code.
      (6)   RA-RU-RT Districts sign types allowed: wall, transitory, temporary
and construction signs, as defined in this chapter; provided, such signs shall
not be illuminated unless otherwise provided for in this chapter and subject to
the following conditions by sign type:
         (a)   Wall signs. Dwelling nameplate: for each dwelling unit, one
nameplate not exceeding one square foot in area; and
         (b)   Temporary signs or transitory signs.
            1.   Not exceeding ten square feet in area for each sign face of
such sign. Signs shall not be placed on public property between the sidewalk
and street curb.
            2.   Construction signs. For building or remodeling of non-
residential buildings, such as, but not limited to, churches and schools, not
more than one sign shall be allowed not to exceed 32 square feet in total
surface area for each sign face of such sign and shall be located on the
premises being utilized for such construction. For residential buildings, not
more than one sign shall be permitted not exceeding ten square feet per sign
face. Such sign shall be removed within 15 days of completion of the project.
      (7)   RM-1, RM-1A, RM-2, RM-3 Districts sign types allowed: wall, real
estate, ground and temporary signs as defined in this chapter and subject to
the following conditions by sign type and subject to design review when located
in the Design Review District: (See §
190.320 of this chapter.)
         (a)   Wall sign. Dwelling nameplate. For each dwelling unit, one
nameplate not exceeding one square foot;
         (b)   Temporary sign or transitory sign.
            1.   One sign not exceeding ten square feet in area for each sign
face of such sign. Signs shall not be placed on public property between the
sidewalk and street curb; and
            2.   Signs for new developments. It shall be permissible to erect
one sign not to exceed a total surface area of 32 square feet for each sign
face of such sign.
         (c)   Ground signs. Multiple-family residential units. Any person
owning or operating any multiple-family residential dwelling, with six or more
units may erect one sign, such sign not to exceed 32 square feet for each sign
face of such sign and not to exceed an overall height of six feet above the
ground level and may be lighted during the hours of darkness.
         (d)   Temporary signs.
   `         1.   Banners and pennants. Banners and pennants may be allowed for
periods not to exceed 30 days and must be securely fastened and any torn or
damaged units must be repaired or removed.
            2.   Construction signs. For building or remodeling of residential
and non-residential buildings, such as, but not limited to, churches and
schools, not more than one sign shall be allowed not to exceed 32 square feet
in total surface area for each sign face of such sign and shall be located on
the premises being utilized for such construction. For residential buildings,
not more than one sign shall be permitted not exceeding ten square feet per
sign face. Such sign shall be removed within 15 days of completion of the
project.
      (8)   Permitted signs accessory to churches, schools, non-profit
institutions or historical markers on buildings in the CBD sign type allowed
(all districts): churches, colleges, schools, buildings housing governmental
functions and utilities of the city, county or state or any subdivision or
historical markers on buildings in CBD thereof, are permitted to erect a sign.
Such signs, when of a permanent nature, shall meet all the requirements of this
chapter and other ordinances of the city, except as provided hereafter and may
include ground, portable, transitory and temporary signs as defined in this
chapter and subject to the following conditions.
         (a)   Wall signs. Wall signs may be provided on all street sides,
parking lot sides or alley sides of a building. The total sign area of wall
signs on any one wall shall not exceed 5% of the wall surface of such wall.
         (b)   Ground signs.
            1.   There shall be no more than one sign.
            2.   Such signs shall be set back from the lot line at least one-
third of the distance from the lot line to the nearest building, but need not
be set back more than ten feet from the property line.
            3.   No sign shall exceed 30 square feet in area, for each sign
face of such sign, unless the sign is located more than 50 feet behind the
property line, then said sign may be increased by five additional square feet
for each additional ten feet of setback, but in no event shall such sign exceed
50 square feet in area for each sign face of such sign.
            4.   Illumination of signs shall be permitted.
            5.   An electronic changeable message sign shall be limited to the
electronic display of a non-flashing or non-moving message that shall remain
unchanged for at least five continuous seconds before it is replaced by another
message. Electronic changeable messages shall be part of the total square
footage of display area permitted for the sign even if the message is contained
in a separate cabinet, except the face of the message shall not consume more
than 60% of the total permitted display area of the sign.
         (c)   Portable signs.
            1.   There shall be no more than one portable sign not exceeding 32
square feet in area for each sign face of such sign. Such portable sign shall
be permitted as a temporary sign for periods not to exceed seven days in a 30-
consecutive-day-period on any one zoning lot and not to exceed 28 days in any
one year. In no instance shall such sign obstruct parking spaces or automobile
or pedestrian travel lanes or occupy a parking space unless sufficient
additional parking space is available on the site.
            2.   Connections to an energy source for lighting shall be in
accord with all codes of the city and shall not be exposed in any way that may
constitute a safety hazard to the public.
         (d)   Temporary sign or transitory sign. One sign not exceeding ten
square feet in area for each sign face of such sign. Signs shall not be placed
on public property between the sidewalk and street curb.
   (G)   The following signs are prohibited within the city:
      (1)   No sign or banner shall be placed upon or across any public right-
of-way, except by permission of the City Council;
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to display upon any sign or
other advertising structure any obscene, indecent or immoral matter;
      (3)   Signs which incorporate in any manner flashing lights;
      (4)   String lights used in connection with business premises for
commercial purposes, other than seasonal decorations;
      (5)   Any sign unlawfully installed erected or maintained;
      (6)   Signs on trees or utility poles, whether public or private;
      (7)   Signs on benches (Fig. 18); and
      (8)   Roof top signs.
   (H)   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, repair, paint, alter or
relocate any sign within the city, as defined in this chapter, without first
obtaining a permit from the city’s Building Department with the exception of
the following.
      (1)   Signs for which a permit is not required.
         (a)   Wall signs not exceeding four square feet in area;
         (b)   Bulletin boards when the same are located on the premises of
said institutions; provided, however, if said signs are electrically
illuminated, an electrical permit must be obtained;
         (c)   Traffic or other municipal signs, legal notices, danger and such
temporary emergency signs as may be approved by the city;
         (d)   Temporary signs and transitory signs ten square feet or less;
         (e)   Flags of recognized federal, state, county or city governments;
         (f)   Temporary window signs;
         (g)   Signs of civic and non-profit organization displayed for not
more than 90 days within any 12-month period and not to exceed 32 square feet
per sign face;
         (h)   Emblems, badges and insignias;
         (i)   Holiday decorations not exceeding 32 square feet;
         (j)   Non-illuminated signs pertaining to the construction or repair
of buildings or property on which they are located. Such signs shall be removed
upon the issuance of a certificate of occupancy; and
         (k)   Off premise directional signs. Such signs shall be confined to
one signpost per corner and shall not exceed a sign area of four square feet
per sign face.
      (2)   Application for sign permit. Applications for permits shall be made
upon forms provided by the Building Department and shall contain or have
attached thereto the following information:
         (a)   Name, address and telephone number of the applicant;
         (b)   Location of building, structure or lot to which or upon which
the sign or other advertising structure is to be attached or erected;
         (c)   Position and location of the sign or other advertising structure
in relation to nearby buildings or structures;
         (d)   Two blueprints or drawings of the plans and specifications and
methods of construction and attachment to the building or in the ground;
         (e)   Name of person, firm, corporation or association erecting
structure;
         (f)   Written consent of the owner where the sign is to be erected on
vacant land;
         (g)   In all cases where wiring is to be used in connection with the
sign an electrical permit shall be obtained in compliance with the city’s
Electrical Code. The Electrical Inspector shall approve and affix his or her
signature to said permit if it is deemed necessary by the Electrical Inspector;
and
         (h)   Such other information as the city shall require showing full
compliance with this and all other ordinances of the city.
      (3)   Sign permit fee. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or
alter any sign, except those signs specifically exempted herein, unless a
permit shall first have been obtained from the Building Department for such
erection or alteration, and a permit fee paid to the city according to the
schedule as may be established from time to time by resolution of the City
Council.
      (4)   Sign permit revocable at any time. All rights and privileges
accrued under the provisions of this chapter or any amendment thereto are mere
licenses and may be voided upon the violation of any of the conditions
contained herein. If the work authorized under a sign or electrical permit has
not been completed within six months after date of issuance, said permit shall
become null and void and a new permit shall be necessary to continue the
project. Partially completed signs, if abandoned, shall be removed immediately
by the erector upon notice from the city.
   (I)   All existing signs that do not conform to the provisions of this
chapter shall be permitted to continue as non-conforming signs until such time
as they are removed or until there is a change in occupancy, at which time they
shall conform to the provisions of this chapter. The provision of this division
(I) shall not apply to maintenance and repainting.
   (J)   This chapter shall be enforced by the Building Official or an employee
designated by the City Council.
   (K)   (1)   Maintenance. All signs for which a permit is required, together
with all their supports, braces, guys and anchors, shall be maintained in good
working order, and when not galvanized or constructed of approved corrosion-
resistant, non-combustible materials, shall be painted when necessary to
prevent corrosion. The exteriors of all signs, supporting members, painted
surfaces, advertising materials and lettering shall be kept painted and in good
repair, so as to present a neat and orderly appearance. All bulbs or component
parts of the sign, including the electrical switches, boxes and wiring used in
the illumination of the sign must be well maintained.
      (2)   Housekeeping. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the owner
or lessee of every sign to maintain the immediate premises occupied by the sign
in a clean, sanitary and healthful condition.
   (L)   (1)   Signs shall be subject to inspections and when the condition of
the sign is questionable, the owner or occupant shall obtain a professional
engineer’s report, certifying the sign condition. Failure to submit the report
and make any specified correction will result in an order for the sign to be
removed.
      (2)   Sign support structures abandoned and no longer supporting a sign
shall be removed by the building owner within 30 days after receiving notice to
do so from the city. Should the owner fail to comply, the city, at the owner’s
expense, may order the work done on the owner’s behalf and the cost will be
assessed against the property.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 2408) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007; Ord. 1343, passed 3-
14-2011; Ord. 1351, passed 8-8-2011; Ord. 1365, passed 7-23-2012; Ord. 1373,
passed 10-8-2012; Ord. 1391, passed 2-10-2014; Ord. 1398, passed 5-12-2014;
Ord. 1409A, passed 3-16-2015; Ord. 1440, passed 12-5-2016)
§ 190.330 NEWSRACKS/DROP-BOXES.
   No person shall place or maintain on any public right-of-way in the city,
any newsrack or drop-boxes that do not comply with the following.
   (A)   No newsracks or drop-boxes shall exceed 61 inches in height, 30 inches
in width or 21 inches in thickness.
   (B)   No newsracks shall be used for advertising signs or publicity purposes
other than that dealing with the display, sale or purchase of the newspaper or
news periodical sold therein.
   (C)   No drop-boxes shall be used for advertising signs or publicity
purposes other than that dealing with the deposit of envelopes or packages
therein.
   (D)   Each newsrack shall be equipped with a coin-return mechanism to permit
a person using the machine to secure an immediate refund in the event he or she
is unable to receive the publication for which he or she has paid. The coin-
return mechanism shall be maintained in good working order.
   (E)   Each newsrack shall have affixed to it, in a readily visible place, so
as to be seen by anyone using the newsrack, a notice setting forth the name and
address of the distributor and the telephone number of a working telephone
service to call to report a malfunction or to secure a refund in the event of a
malfunction of the coin-return mechanism or to give the notices provided for in
this section.
   (F)   Every newsrack or dropbox shall be maintained in a neat and clean
condition and in good repair at all times. Specifically, but without limiting
the generality of the foregoing, each newsrack or drop-box shall be serviced
and maintained so that:
      (1)   It is reasonably free of dirt and grease;
      (2)   It is reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling and cracked paint
in the visible areas thereof;
      (3)   It is reasonably free of rust and corrosion in the visible
unpainted metal areas thereon;
      (4)   The clear plastic or glass parts thereof, if any, through which the
publications therein are viewed are unbroken and reasonably fee of cracks,
dents, blemishes and discolorations;
      (5)   The paper or cardboard parts or inserts thereof are reasonably free
of tears, peeling or fading;
      (6)   Newsracks or drop-boxes shall not be placed in the right-of-way
next to a building or property without the permission of the property owner;
      (7)   No newsracks nor drop-boxes shall be placed or maintained which
project onto, into or over any part of the roadway of any public street or
which rests, wholly or in part upon, along or over any portion of the roadway
of any public street;
      (8)   No newsracks or drop-boxes shall be permitted to rest upon, in or
over any public sidewalk, when such installation, use or maintenance endangers
the safety of persons or property which such site or location is used for
public utility purposes, governmental use or when such newsracks or drop-boxes
unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrian or vehicular
traffic including any legally parked or stopped vehicle, the ingress or egress
from any residence or place of business, or the use of poles, posts, traffic
signs or signals, hydrants, mailboxes or other objects permitted at or near
such location;
      (9)   No newsracks shall be chained, bolted or otherwise attached to any
fixture located on the public right-of-way, except to other newsracks;
      (10)   No drop-boxes shall be chained, bolted or otherwise attached to
any fixture located on the public right-of-way, except to another drop-box;
      (11)   Newsracks may be placed next to each other; provided that, no
group of newsracks shall extend for a distance of more than eight feet along a
curb;
      (12)   Drop-boxes may be placed next to each other; provided that, no
group of drop-boxes shall extend for a distance of more than eight feet along a
curb;
      (13)   No newsracks or drop-boxes shall be placed, installed, used or
maintained:
         (a)   Within three feet of any marked crosswalk;
         (b)   Within 12 feet of the curb return of any unmarked crosswalk;
         (c)   Within five feet of any fire hydrant or other emergency
facility;
         (d)   Within five feet of any driveway;
         (e)   At any location whereby the clear space for the passageway of
pedestrians is reduced to less than five feet;
         (f)   Within three feet of or on any public area improved with lawn,
flowers, shrubs or trees or other landscaping; and
         (g)   Within two and one-half feet from the back of street curbs.
      (14)   No newsracks shall be placed, installed, used or maintained within
300 feet of any other newsrack. No drop-boxes shall be placed, installed, used
or maintained within 300 feet of any other drop-box;
      (15)   In the event a newsrack remains empty for a period of 30
continuous days, the same shall be deemed abandoned, and may be removed
immediately and processed as unclaimed property; and
      (16)   Placement of newsracks and drop boxes in a public right-of-way
shall require a zoning permit and hold harmless agreement issued by the
Building and Engineering Department.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 2409) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 190.331 LOT AND PARCEL SPLITS.
   In no instance shall a certificate of occupancy be approved for a lot or
parcel split without the approval of the city. The sale or transfer of
ownership of a portion of such a lot or parcel or the detachment of a portion
of such lot or parcel to an abutting parcel, which causes the remaining parcel
to be less than the requirements of §
190.290 of this chapter, shall not be allowed. The following procedure shall be
followed in the undertaking of any lot or parcel split and any transfer of one
part of a lot or parcel to an abutting lot or parcel.
   (A)   Submissions. The developer or petitioner shall submit to the City
Engineer:
      (1)   One copy of an application for review of the proposed lot or parcel
split; and
      (2)   One copy of a sketch drawn to scale of the proposed lot or parcel
split indicating the following data:
         (a)   Name and address of the owner, subdivider or petitioner;
         (b)   Date, north arrow and scale, written and graphic;
         (c)   Boundary lines of the lot or parcel to be split;
         (d)   Street names, rights-of-way and roadway widths of all existing
and proposed streets within and adjacent to the proposed lot or parcel split;
         (e)   All existing structures and other physical features which would
influence the layout and design of the lot or parcel split; and
         (f)   Location, width and purpose of easements.
   (B)   Application review.
      (1)   Should the City Engineer find that the proposed lot or parcel split
will not impair or does not create or increase the non-conforming condition or
create a lot or parcel which cannot be used under the terms of the zoning
ordinance, such lot or parcel split shall be approved.
      (2)   All lots or parcels resulting from a lot or parcel split shall be
suitable for development as zoned.
      (3)   Should the City Engineer find that the proposed lot or parcel split
will create or increase the non-conforming condition of a lot or parcel which
cannot be used under the terms of the zoning ordinance, such lot or parcel
split shall be disapproved. If the application is denied, the applicant may
appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 2410) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 190.332 AREA, HEIGHT AND USE EXCEPTIONS.
   The regulations in this chapter shall be subject to the following
interpretations and exceptions.
   (A)   Essential services. Essential services shall be permitted as
authorized and regulated by law and other ordinances of the city; it being the
intention hereof to exempt such essential services from the application of this
chapter.
   (B)   Voting place. The provisions of this chapter shall not be so construed
as to interfere with the temporary use of any property as a voting place in
connection with a municipal or other public election.
   (C)   Height limit. The height limitations of this chapter shall not apply
to chimneys, church spires, flag poles or public monuments.
   (D)   Lots adjoining alleys. In calculating the area of a lot that adjoins a
vacated alley or lane, for the purpose of applying lot area requirements of
this chapter, one-half the width of such alley abutting the lot shall be
considered as part of such lot so long as the alley is part of the same
subdivision as the lot.
   (E)   Multiple-dwelling side yard. For the purpose of side yard regulations,
a two-family, a terrace, a row house or a multiple dwelling shall be considered
as one building occupying one lot.
   (F)   Projections into required open spaces.
      (1)   Outside stairways, fire escapes, vestibules, balconies, decks and
similar projections from a wall of a building and detached decks extending more
than two feet above the established grade shall not extend into any required
yard. A landing required for exit from a building of a maximum area of ten
square feet is allowed.
      (2)   Fences, walls, chimneys, bay windows or other obstructions more
than four feet above the established grade required for the proper maintenance
of the land, may occupy parts of the side yard but may not extend more than 16
inches.
      (3)   (a)   Accessory buildings not over 17 feet in height to the ridge
line may occupy part of the rear yard, but not a side yard.
         (b)   Such occupancy shall not exceed 40% of the total rear yard in a
residential district.
         (c)   Accessory buildings attached to a principal building shall be
treated as a principal building.
         (d)   In a business district or industrial district, accessory
buildings, if not used for dwelling purposes, may occupy only the lot coverage
area allowed for the principal building.
      (4)   Unenclosed vehicle storage or loading space may occupy parts of a
side or rear yard and the area thus used shall not be computed in the total
percentage of lot coverage as long as it remains unenclosed.
      (5)   Structures four feet in height or less shall not be considered in
computing maximum per cent of lot coverage in residential districts.
      (6)   An unenclosed terrace porch may project six feet into a required
front yard and may include a fixed canopy or awning, but this shall not be
interpreted to include enclosed sides. An existing porch within a required
front yard or required side yard may be replaced, but may not be extended any
closer to the front or side property line. To construct or replace a deck or
porch with an area enclosed below the floor level with an access door for
storage, a four-inch wide by 24-inch deep ratwall or a four-inch concrete floor
slab is required.
      (7)   (a)   No more than two of the following type vehicles may be parked
and/or stored in permitted areas on residential lots:
            1.   Recreational type vehicles including travel trailers;
            2.   Non-recreational type vehicles including travel trailers;
            3.   Motor homes (but not converted buses);
            4.   Boats with trailers; and
            5.   Snowmobiles with trailers.
         (b)   Such parking and storage of said vehicles is allowed only in a
rear yard. The rear yard shall be as defined in this chapter and is an open
space extending the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum
horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the nearest line of the main
building. Any vehicle under this section may only be parked or stored on a hard
surface (such as concrete, blacktop or other comparable surfaces, but not
gravel). Any other vehicle not described above must be housed in a garage when
not in use.
      (8)   (a)   Private swimming pools shall not encroach on any front yard
or required side yard.
         (b)   A wall of a swimming pool shall not be located less than four
feet from any rear or side property line or five feet from any street property
line, or ten feet from any transmission line.
         (c)   When a swimming pool is located on a corner lot, the side lot
line of which is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the lot
to its rear, said swimming pool shall not be located closer to the street side
lot line than the existing front yard setback of the lot to the rear; provided,
the setback need not exceed ten feet.
      (9)   Mechanical equipment installed outside of one- or two-family
dwellings and their attached structures shall not be installed in any front
and/or side yard and shall be installed behind the structure and a minimum of
five feet from the property line.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 2500) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007; Ord. 1422, passed 3-
14-2016)
CONDITIONAL REZONING
Editor’s note:
   It is recognized that there are certain instances where it would be in the
best interests of the city, as well as advantageous to property owners seeking
a change in zoning boundaries, if certain conditions could be proposed by
property owners as part of a request for rezoning. It is the intent of this
subchapter to provide a process consistent with the provisions of § 405, State
Zoning Enabling Act 110 of 2006 (M.C.L.A. § 125.3405) by which an owner seeking
a rezoning may voluntarily propose conditions regarding the use and/or
development of land as part of the rezoning request.
§ 190.345 APPLICATION AND OFFER OF CONDITIONS.
   (A)   An owner of land may voluntarily offer in writing conditions relating
to the use and/or development of land for which a rezoning is requested. This
offer may be made either at the time the application for rezoning is filed, or
may be made at a later time during the rezoning process.
   (B)   The required application and process for considering a rezoning
request with conditions shall be the same as that for considering rezoning
requests made without any offer of conditions, except as modified by the
requirements of this section.
   (C)   The owner’s offer of conditions may not purport to authorize uses or
developments not permitted in the requested new zoning district.
   (D)   The owner’s offer of conditions shall bear a reasonable and rational
relationship to the property for which rezoning is requested.
   (E)   Any use of development proposed as part of an offer of conditions that
would require a special land use permit under the terms of the ordinance may
only be commenced if a special land use permit for such use or development is
ultimately granted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (F)   Any use or development proposed as part of an offer of conditions that
require variance under the terms of this chapter may only be commenced if a
variance for such use or development is ultimately granted by the Zoning Board
of Appeals in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (G)   Any use or development proposed as part of an offer of conditions that
would require site plan approval under the terms of this chapter may only be
commenced if site plan approval for such use or development is ultimately
granted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (H)   The offer of conditions may be amended during the process of rezoning
consideration; provided that, any amended or additional conditions are entered
voluntarily by the owner. An owner may withdraw all or part of its offer of
conditions any time prior to final rezoning action provided that, if such
withdrawal occurs subsequent to the Planning Commission’s public hearing on the
original rezoning request, then the rezoning application shall be referred to
the Planning Commission for a new public hearing on the original rezoning
request, then the rezoning application shall be referred to the Planning
Commission for a new public hearing with appropriate notice and a new
recommendation.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 2800A) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007; Ord. 1320, passed 1-
25-2010)
§ 190.346 PLANNING COMMISSION REVIEW.
   The Planning Commission, after public hearing and consideration of the
factors for rezoning, recommends approval, approval with recommended changes or
denial of the rezoning; provided, however, that, any recommended changes to the
offer of conditions are acceptable to and thereafter offered by the owner.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 2800A1) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007; Ord. 1320, passed
1-25-2010)
§ 190.347 CITY COUNCIL REVIEW.
   After receipt of the Planning Commission’s recommendations, the City Council
shall deliberate upon the requested rezoning and may approve or deny the
conditional rezoning request. The City Council’s deliberations shall include,
but not be limited to, a consideration of the factors for rezoning of this
chapter. Should the City Council consider amendments to the proposed
conditional rezoning advisable and if such contemplated amendments to the offer
of conditions are acceptable to and thereafter offered by the owner, then the
City Council shall, in accordance with § 405 of the state’s Zoning Enabling Act
(M.C.L.A. § 125.3405), refer such amendments to the Planning Commission for a
report thereon within a time specified by the City Council and proceed
thereafter in accordance with said statute to deny or approve the conditional
rezoning with or without amendments.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 2800A2) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007; Ord. 1320, passed
1-25-2010)
§ 190.348 APPROVAL.
   (A)   If the City Council finds the rezoning request and offer of conditions
acceptable, the offered conditions shall be incorporated into a formal written
statement of conditions acceptable to the owner and conforming in form to the
provisions of this section. The statement of conditions shall be incorporated
by attachment or otherwise as an inseparable part of the ordinance adopted by
the City Council to accomplish the requested zoning.
   (B)   The statement of conditions shall:
      (1)   Be in a form recordable with the Register of Deeds of the county
or, in the alternative, be accompanied by a recordable affidavit or memorandum
prepared and signed by the owner giving notice of the statement of conditions
in a manner acceptable to the City Council;
      (2)   Contain a legal description of the land to which it pertains;
      (3)   Contain a statement acknowledging that the statement of conditions
runs with the land and is binding upon successor owners of the land;
      (4)   Incorporate by attachment or reference any diagram, plans or other
documents submitted or approved by the owner that are necessary to illustrate
the implementation of the statement of conditions. If any such documents are
incorporated by reference, the reference shall specify where the documents may
be examined;
      (5)   Contain a statement acknowledging that the statement of conditions
or an affidavit or memorandum giving notice thereof may be recorded by the city
with the Register of Deeds of the county; and
      (6)   Contain the notarized signatures of all of the owners of the
subject land preceded by a statement attesting to the fact that they
voluntarily offer and consent to the provisions contained within the statement
of conditions.
   (C)   Upon rezoning taking effect, the zoning map shall be amended to
reflect the new zoning classification along with a designation that the land
was rezoned with a statement of conditions. The City Clerk shall maintain a
listing of all lands rezoned with a statement of conditions.
   (D)   The approved statement of conditions or an affidavit or memorandum
giving notice thereof shall be filed by the city with the Register of Deeds of
the county. The City Council shall have authority to waive this requirement if
it determines that, given the nature of the conditions and/or the time frame
within which the conditions are to be satisfied, the recording of such a
document would be of no material benefit to the city or to any subsequent owner
of the land.
   (E)   Upon the rezoning taking effect, the use of the land so rezoned shall
conform thereafter to all the requirements regulating use and development
within the new zoning district as modified by any more restrictive provisions
contained in the statement of conditions.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 2800A3) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007; Ord. 1320, passed
1-25-2010)
§ 190.349 COMPLIANCE WITH CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Any person who establishes a development or commences a use upon land
that has been rezoned with conditions shall continuously operate and maintain
the development or use is in compliance with all of the conditions set for in
the statement of conditions. Any failure to comply with a condition contained
within the statement of conditions shall constitute a violation of this chapter
and be punishable accordingly. Additionally, any such violation shall be deemed
a nuisance per se and subject to judicial abatement as provided by law.
   (B)   No permit or approval shall be granted under this chapter for any uses
or development that is contrary to an applicable statement of conditions.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 2800A4) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007; Ord. 1320, passed
1-25-2010)
§ 190.350 TIME PERIOD FOR ESTABLISHING DEVELOPMENT OR USE.
   (A)   Unless another time period is specified in the ordinance rezoning the
subject land, the approved development and/or use of the land pursuant to
building and other required permits must be commenced upon the land within 18
months after the rezoning took effect and thereafter proceed diligently to
completion.
   (B)   This time limitation may upon written request be extended by the City
Council if:
      (1)   It is demonstrated to the City Council’s reasonable satisfaction
that there is a strong likelihood that the development and/or use will commence
within the period of extension and proceed diligently thereafter to completion;
and
      (2)   The City Council finds that there has not been a change in
circumstances that would render the current zoning with statement of conditions
incompatible with other zones and uses in the surrounding area or otherwise
inconsistent with sound zoning policy.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 2800A5) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007; Ord. 1320, passed
1-25-2010)
§ 190.351 REVERSION OF ZONING.
   If approved development and/or use of the rezoned land do not occur within
the time frame specified under §
190.350 of this chapter, then the land shall revert to its former zoning
classification as set forth in the state’s Zoning Enabling Act (M.C.L.A. §
125.3405). The reversion process shall be initiated by the City Council
requesting that the Planning Commission proceed with consideration of rezoning
of the land to its former zoning classification. The procedure for considering
and making this reversionary rezoning shall thereafter be the same as applies
to all other rezoning requests.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 2800A6) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007; Ord. 1320, passed
1-25-2010)
§ 190.352 SUBSEQUENT REZONING OF LAND.
   When land that is rezoned with a statement of conditions is thereafter
rezoned to a different zoning classification or to the same zoning
classification, but with a different or no statement of conditions, whether as
a result of a reversion of zoning pursuant to §
190.351 of this chapter or otherwise, the statement of conditions imposed under
the former zoning classification shall cease to be in effect. Upon the owner’s
written request, the City Clerk shall record with the Register of Deeds of the
county that the statement of conditions is no longer in effect.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 2800A7) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007; Ord. 1320, passed
1-25-2010)
§ 190.353 AMENDMENT OF CONDITIONS.
   During the time period for commencement of an approved development or use
specified pursuant to §
190.350 of this chapter, or during any extension thereof granted by the City
Council, the city shall not add to or alter the conditions in the statement of
conditions.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 2800A8) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007; Ord. 1320, passed
1-25-2010)
§ 190.354 CITY RIGHT TO REZONE.
   Nothing in the statement of conditions nor in the provisions of this section
shall be deemed to prohibit the city from rezoning all or any portion of land
that is subject to a statement of conditions to another zoning classification.
Any rezoning shall be conducted in compliance with this chapter and the state’s
Zoning Enabling Act (M.C.L.A. § 125.3405).
(Prior Code, App. A, § 2800A9) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007; Ord. 1320, passed
1-25-2010)
§ 190.355 FAILURE TO OFFER CONDITIONS.
   The city shall not require an owner to offer conditions as a requirement for
rezoning. The lack of an offer of conditions shall not affect the owner’s
rights under this chapter.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 2800A10) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007; Ord. 1320, passed
1-25-2010)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 190.370 ADMINISTRATING OFFICER.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be administered by the Building
Official. He or she shall make general rules and prescribe the use of such
forms and methods consistent with the intent of this chapter as may facilitate
the work.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 2600) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 190.371 RECORDS.
   A record of each certificate of occupancy issued or applied for and each
application for a zoning and building permit issued or applied for shall be
kept on record and such record shall be available for inspection in accord with
the Freedom of Information Act.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 2601) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 190.372 BUILDING PERMIT.
   No building permit shall be issued for the erection of or alteration to any
structure or part thereof which is not in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 2602) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 190.373 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   No structure shall be occupied nor land used until a certificate of
occupancy has been issued for such occupancy or use, which occupancy or use
shall be in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. No structure or use
shall be changed until a certificate has been issued for the changed structure
or use.
   (B)   The cost for processing a certificate of occupancy application shall
be a fee established by the City Council.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 2603) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 190.374 EXISTING USES.
   A certificate of occupancy shall be issued for structure and uses existing
at the time of adoption of this chapter or within one year thereafter when
requested.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 2604) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 190.375 TEMPORARY CERTIFICATES.
   Temporary certificates of occupancy shall be issued, upon deposit of an
escrow as determined by the Building Official, for a portion of a structure in
the process of construction; provided that, such temporary certificates shall
not be effective for a period of more than six months, nor for more than one
month after completion of the structure unless additional time is authorized by
the Building Official due to weather conditions.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 2605) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 190.376 APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATES.
   Application for certificates shall be made to the Building Official in
writing upon forms furnished by him or her at the time of application for a
building permit. All applications shall be accompanied by a plan of the
location and size of the structure thereon proposed with other information
which may be necessary to show conformance with this chapter. Should the
Building Official find the application in accordance with this chapter, he or
she shall endorse the same on the plan. If, however, he or she shall find that
it is not in accordance with the ordinance, he or she shall state in writing
wherein it does not comply, within seven days after receipt of the application.
Certificates of occupancy shall be issued if after inspection, upon completion
of the structure or use, it is found to conform to the application and this
chapter.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 2606) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 190.377 SITE PLAN REVIEW.
   (A)   A site plan shall be submitted for Planning Commission review and
approval for all new construction where parking for six or more parking spaces
is required, not including the remodeling of existing structures, in areas
zoned RM, O-S, B-1, CBD, B-2, I-1, I-2, I-3 and IRO Districts.
   (B)   A site plan shall be submitted for approval for any use or development
for which the submission of a site plan is required by any provision of this
chapter.
   (C)   (1)   Every site plan submitted shall be in accord with the
requirements of this chapter. No site plan shall be approved until same has
been reviewed by the Building Official and Planning Commission where
applicable, for compliance with the requirements for site plan review as
follows.
      (2)   The following information shall be included:
         (a)   A scale of not less than one inch equals 50 feet if the subject
property is less than three acres and one inch equals 100 feet if three acres
or more;
         (b)   Date, north arrow and scale;
         (c)   The dimensions of all lot and property lines, showing the
relationship of the subject property to abutting properties;
         (d)   The location of all existing and proposed structures and site
improvements on the subject property and all existing structures and
improvements within 100 feet of the subject property;
         (e)   Typical floor plans and building elevation drawings including
type of materials and building colors;
         (f)   Plans for landscape planting with materials identified with
proposed sizes;
         (g)   The location of all existing and proposed drives and parking
areas;
         (h)   The location and right-of-way widths of all abutting streets and
alleys;
         (i)   The names and addresses of the architect, planner, designer,
engineer or person responsible for the preparation of the site plan;
         (j)   Such other information as may be required by the city to assist
in the consideration of the proposed development; and
         (k)   Air conditioners, transformers and other exterior appurtenances
shall be screened with landscaping or a decorative obscuring fence.
   (D)   In the process of reviewing the site plan, the following, in addition
to other requirements of this chapter, shall be considered:
      (1)   The location and design of driveways providing vehicular ingress to
and egress from the site, in relation to streets giving access to the site and
in relation to pedestrian traffic;
      (2)   The traffic circulation features within the site, and the location
of automobile parking areas; and may make such requirements with respect to any
matters as will assure: safety and convenience of both vehicular and pedestrian
traffic both within the site and in relation to access streets;
      (3)   Satisfactory and harmonious relationships between the proposed
development and use of the site and the existing and prospective development
and use of contiguous land and surrounding area; and
      (4)   The Planning Commission may further require landscaping, fences,
walls and other improvements in pursuance of these objectives and same shall be
provided and continually maintained as a condition of the establishment of any
use to which they are appurtenant.
   (E)   Plans shall be submitted two weeks prior to the scheduled Planning
Commission meeting.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 2607) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 190.378 PUBLIC HEARINGS.
   Whenever any section on this chapter refers to this section, notice of a
public hearing shall be given in accordance with Public Act 110 of 2006, as
amended.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 2608) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
BOARD OF APPEALS
§ 190.390 ESTABLISHMENT OF BOARD.
   (A)   There is hereby established a Zoning Board of Appeals consisting of
nine members appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the City
Council. One member of the Board of Appeals shall be a member of the Planning
Commission. The members of the Board now serving shall serve the terms for
which they were appointed and confirmed. Subsequent terms of all members shall
be for a period of three years. Members shall be citizens of the United States,
and residents and freeholders in the city. Their compensation, if any, shall be
established by the City Council.
   (B)   The City Council may also appoint not more than two alternate members
for the same term as regular members of the Board of Appeals. The alternate
members may be called on a rotating basis to sit as regular members of the
Board of Appeals in the absence of a regular member. An alternate member may
also be called to serve in the place of a regular member for the purpose of
reaching a decision on a case in which the regular member has abstained for
reasons of conflict of interest. The alternate member having been appointed
shall serve on the case until a final decision had been made. The alternate
member shall have the same voting rights as a regular member of the Board of
Appeals.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 2700) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 190.391 OFFICERS.
   The officers shall consist of a Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson elected by
the Board, and a Secretary. The terms of the Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson
shall be for terms of one year, the term of the Secretary, who may be other
than a voting member of the Board, for such term as serves the pleasure of the
Board. He or she shall keep a record of all appeals brought before the Board
and appropriately record actions taken.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 2701) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 190.392 RULES AND PROCEDURE.
   (A)   The Board shall adopt general rules and regulations governing its
procedure and shall make rules for the filing of appeals and other matters
requiring its attention which shall not cause unreasonable delays in the
transaction of its business. Hearings shall be held on all appeals. The Board
shall cause to be given notice to all owners of property as required by Public
Act 110 of 2006, as amended.
   (B)   Appeals shall be decided by the Board within 30 days after conclusion
of hearings thereon.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 2702) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 190.393 APPEALS, HOW TAKEN.
   Appeals shall be taken within such time as shall be prescribed by the Board
by general rule, by the appellant paying to the city an appeal fee as may be
established by the City Council and filing an application in writing with the
Zoning Board of Appeals and with the official from whom an appeal is taken who
shall forthwith transmit to the Board all papers constituting the record upon
which the appeal is taken. An appeal stays all the proceedings in furtherance
of the action appealed from unless the official from whom the appeal was taken
certifies to the Board, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with
him or her, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in
his or her opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property, in which case
proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may
be granted by the Board, Circuit Court or other court of jurisdiction or notice
on application to the official from whom the appeal was taken and on due cause
shown.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 2703) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 190.394 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not have the power to alter or
change the zoning district classification of any property, nor to make any
change in the terms of this chapter, but does have power to act on those
matters where this chapter provides for an administrative review,
interpretation and to authorize a variance as defined in this section and laws
of the state.
   (B)   Said powers include:
      (1)   Administrative review. To hear and decide appeals where it is
alleged by the appellant that there is an error in any order, requirement,
permit, decision or refusal made by the Building Official or any other
administrative official in carrying out or enforcing any provisions of this
chapter; and
      (2)   Exceptions and special approvals. To hear and decide in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter, requests, for interpretations of the
zoning text and zoning map, and for decisions on special approval situations on
which this chapter specifically authorities the Board to pass. Any exception or
special approval permit shall be subject to such conditions as the Board may
require to preserve and promote the character of the zone district in question
and otherwise promote the purpose of this chapter.
   (C)   Variance: to authorize the following upon an appeal:
      (1)   A non-use variance from the strict applications of the provisions
of this chapter where by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, shape
or area of a specific piece of property at the time of enactment of this
chapter or by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or other
extraordinary or exceptional conditions of such property, the strict
application of the regulations enacted would result in peculiar or exceptional
practical difficulties in the use of the property in question upon the owner of
such property; provided, such relief may be granted without substantial
detriment to the public good and without substantially impairing the intent and
purpose of this chapter. In granting a variance, the Board may attach thereto
such conditions regarding the location, character and other features of the
proposed use as it may deem reasonable in furtherance of the purpose of this
chapter. A non-use variance shall require a majority vote of the membership of
the Board to reverse a determination of an administrative official. The
applicant must show practical difficulty by demonstrating that:
         (a)   Strict compliance with area, setbacks, frontage, height, bulk or
density would unreasonably prevent the owner from using the property for a
permitted purpose, or would render conformity unnecessarily burdensome;
         (b)   A variance would do substantial justice to the applicant as well
as to other property owners in the district, or whether a lesser relaxation
would give substantial relief and be more consistent with justice to others;
         (c)   The plight of the owner is due to unique circumstances of the
property; and
         (d)   The problem is not self-created.
      (2)   A use variance for a use not permitted in the zoning district in
which the property is located subject to the following procedure.
         (a)   Procedure. A request for rezoning of the property in question
shall be made in accord with zoning ordinance amendment procedure before a
request for a use variance is made.
         (b)   Information required. In addition to the information required
for other variance requests, an application for a use variance under this
section shall include a plan drawn to scale detailing the specific use and
improvements proposed by the applicant, and a summary of the facts which must
support all of the following conclusions to demonstrate the showing of
unnecessary hardship:
            1.   Applicant’s property cannot be used for the purposes permitted
in the zoning districts;
            2.   Applicant’s plight is due to unique circumstances peculiar to
his or her property and not to general neighborhood conditions;
            3.   Applicant’s suggested use would not alter the essential
character of the area;
            4.   Applicant’s problem has not been self-created; and
            5.   Unavailability of administrative relief which may afford
reasonable use of applicant’s property.
         (c)   Pre-hearing conference. Prior to the scheduling of a hearing,
the applicant shall contact the Building Official for the purpose of scheduling
a pre-hearing conference between the applicant, the city’s Building Official
and the City Attorney and others as may be deemed appropriate by the city. The
purpose of the pre-hearing conference shall be to:
            1.   Review the procedure for the hearing and identify all persons
who will testify (directly or through affidavit) and the evidence to be offered
on behalf of the applicant;
            2.   Attempt to secure a statement of agreed-upon facts to be used
to narrow the matters of dispute and shorten the hearing;
            3.   Explore a means of providing relief by way of non-use variance
from the Zoning Board of Appeals, or other relief which may require action by
persons or bodies other than the Zoning Board of Appeals which will afford an
adequate remedy for the applicant; and
            4.   The pre-hearing conference shall be scheduled and conducted on
an expeditious basis so as to avoid unreasonable delay to the applicant.
Sufficient time shall be taken, however, to achieve the purposes of the pre-
hearing conference stated above.
         (d)   Use variance decision by the Board of Appeals.
            1.   A use variance shall require a two-thirds vote of the
membership of the Board to reverse a determination of an administrative
official.
            2.   The Zoning Board of Appeals may deem it appropriate in any
given case to provide an opportunity for anyone presenting testimony or
evidence to submit proposed findings of fact and conclusions.
            3.   At the conclusion of the hearing, the Zoning Board of Appeals
may make its decision at that meeting, or it may adjourn the hearing to a new
date for the purpose of reviewing the testimony and evidence, and reviewing
proposed findings and conclusions submitted by hearing participants, in
preparation for making its decision.
            4.   If the Zoning Board of Appeals determines to grant variance
relief, it shall be the minimum relief required to allow reasonable use of the
property, while maintaining the essential character of the area. Such relief
may be in the form of one or more non-use variances and/or in the form of a use
variance. The motion may include conditions that are authorized by law.
            5.   If the Zoning Board of Appeals adopts a motion to grant
variance relief, such motion may be made as a tentative grant of relief subject
to review by the Planning Commission or other person or official with
expertise, with a view of obtaining recommendations on any conditions that may
be relevant and authorized by law, and for the further purpose of ensuring that
the grant of relief would not violate applicable law. If such a tentative grant
of relief is approved, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall request the completion
of all reviews by other commissions or persons by a specific date.
   (D)   Permit the modification of automobile parking space requirements
where, in the particular instance, such modification will not be inconsistent
with the purpose and intent of such requirements, or where the provision of the
required amount of parking spaces would create undue hardship or practical
difficulty in existing business areas, in the opinion of the Board.
   (E)   The Board may issue temporary building or use permits during periods
of construction.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 2704) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 190.395 STANDARDS.
   (A)   Each case before the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be considered as an
individual case and shall conform to the detailed application of the following
standards in a manner appropriate to the particular circumstances of such case.
All uses as listed in any district requiring board approval for a permit shall
be of such location, size and character that, in general, it will be in harmony
with the appropriate and orderly development of the district in which it is
situated and will not be detrimental to the orderly development of adjacent
districts and to adjacent uses.
   (B)   The Board shall give consideration to the following:
      (1)   The location and size of the use;
      (2)   The nature and intensity of the operations involved in or conducted
in connection with it;
      (3)   Its size, layout and its relation to pedestrian and vehicular
traffic to and from the use;
      (4)   The assembly of persons in connection with it will not be hazardous
to the neighborhood or be incongruous therewith or conflict with normal traffic
of the neighborhood;
      (5)   Taking into account among other things, convenient routes of
pedestrian traffic, particularly of children;
      (6)   Vehicular turning movements in relation to routes of traffic flow,
relation to street intersections, site distance and the general character and
intensity of development of the neighborhood;
      (7)   The location and height of buildings, the location, nature and
height of walls, fences and the nature and extent of landscaping of the site
shall be such that the use will not hinder or discourage the appropriate
development and use of adjacent land and buildings or impair the value thereof;
      (8)   The nature of filling or excavation which may be necessary to
utilize the site, shall be such that the use will not hinder or discourage the
appropriate development and use of adjacent land and buildings or impair the
value thereof, and such filling or excavation shall not be injurious to the
surrounding neighborhood and not contrary to the spirit and purpose of this
chapter;
      (9)   The nature, location, size and site layout of the uses shall be
such that it will be a harmonious part of the district in which it is situated
taking into account, among other things, prevailing shopping habits,
convenience of access by prospective patrons and the physical and economic
relationship of one type of use to another;
      (10)   The location, size, intensity and site layout of the use shall be
such that its operations will not be objectionable to nearby dwellings, by
reason of noise, fumes or flash of lights to a greater degree than is normal
with respect to the proximity of commercial to residential uses, nor interfere
with an adequate supply of light and air, nor increase the danger of fire or
otherwise endanger the public safety; and
      (11)   Where a variance is granted, the requirements of the Building Code
shall be met.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 2705) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 190.396 MISCELLANEOUS.
   (A)   No order of the Zoning Board of Appeals permitting the erection or
alteration of buildings shall be valid for a period longer than one year,
unless a building permit for such erection or alteration is obtained within
such period and such erection or alteration is commenced and proceeds to
completion in accordance with the terms of such permit. No order of the Zoning
Board of Appeals permitting a use of a building or premises shall be valid for
a period longer than one year unless such use is established within such
period; provided, however, that, the use of such permit is dependent upon the
erection or alteration of a building, such order shall continue in full force
and effect if a building permit for such use, erection or alteration is
obtained within such period and such erections or alterations are commenced and
proceed to completion in accordance with the terms of such permit.
   (B)   An appeal once denied shall not again be presented for appeal for 12
months unless condition for such appeal has substantially changed.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 2706) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 190.397 CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS.
   The City Council may from time to time, on recommendation from the Planning
Commission, or on its own motion, or on petition, amend supplement, modify or
change this chapter in accordance with the authority of Public Act 110 of 2006,
as amended. Upon presentation to the City Council of a petition for amendment
of said ordinance by an owner of real estate to be affected, such petition
shall be accompanied by a fee. The amount of such fee shall be set by
resolution of the City Council and shall be used to defray the expense of
publishing the required notices and the expense of said Planning Commission.
(Prior Code, App. A, Art. XXVIII) (Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
§ 190.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Violations.
      (1)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction, and shall
be fined not less than $100, nor more than $500, for such finding of
responsibility. Any person who is responsible for any municipal civil
infraction shall be required to pay a fee of $15 in addition to any other civil
fine and court cost imposed.
      (2)   Each act of violation and every day upon which any such violation
shall occur shall constitute a separate offense.
      (3)   A second offense or subsequent violation of the same provision
within this chapter may be issued as a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not
exceeding $500 and/or imprisonment not exceeding 93 days; provided, the
authorized city official issues an appearance ticket and marks it as a
misdemeanor. The authorized city official may issue subsequent violations as
municipal civil infractions.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 3200)
   (B)   Public nuisance. Any building or structure which is erected, altered
or converted, or any use of premises or land which is begun or changed
subsequent to the time of passage of this chapter and in violation of any of
the provisions thereof is hereby declared to be a public nuisance per se.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 3201)
   (C)   Fines, imprisonment and the like. The owner of any building, structure
or premises or parts thereof, where any condition in violation of this chapter
shall exist or shall be created, and any person who has assisted knowingly in
the commission of such violation shall each be guilty of a separate offense
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be liable to the fines and imprisonment
herein provided.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 3202)
   (D)   Each day a separate offense. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed upon each day during or when a violation occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 3203)
   (E)   Rights and remedies are cumulative. The right and remedies provided
herein are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies provided by law.
(Prior Code, App. A, § 3204)
(Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-2007)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
[Reserved]
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Michigan Compiled Laws Annotated
References to Prior Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO MICHIGAN COMPILED LAWS ANNOTATED
M.C.L.A. Section Code Section
M.C.L.A. Section                 Code Section
5.3354                           Charter §
                                 101.3
5.3367                           Charter §
                                 101.16
                                 31.023,
                                 31.025,
15.231 et seq.                   31.027,
                                 177.043,
                                 177.045
15.231 to 15.246                 115.004,
                                 115.016
                                 31.024,
15.261 et seq.                   177.043,
                                 177.045
15.261 to 15.275                 177.021
15.268(a)                        177.021
16.107                           71.001
16.109                           71.001
16.253                           71.001
24.201 et seq.                   74.011
24.201 to 24.315                 70.007
24.201 to 24.328                 95.187
24.286                           95.214
24.402                           170.003
28.451 et seq.                   Ch. 93,
                                 93.001
28.601 et seq.                   33.001
28.602                           95.185
29.1 et seq.                     Ch. 91
38.502                           Charter §
                                 101.1
38.503                           Charter §
                                 101.2
38.504                           Charter §
                                 101.3
38.505                           Charter §
                                 101.4
38.506                           Charter §
                                 101.5
38.507                           Charter §
                                 101.6
38.508                           Charter §
                                 101.7
38.509                           Charter §
                                 101.8
38.510                           Charter §
                                 101.9
38.511                           Charter §
                                 101.10
38.512                           Charter §
                                 101.11
38.513                           Charter §
                                 101.12
38.514                           Charter §
                                 101.13A
38.514                           Charter §
                                 101.13
38.515                           Charter §
                                 101.14
38.516                           Charter §
                                 101.15
38.517                           Charter §
                                 101.16
38.1101 et seq.                  32.009
46.51 et seq.                    Charter §
                                 85
117.1 et seq.                    Charter
                                 Charter §
117.3(a)                         40, Charter §
                                 43, Charter §
                                 65
117.3(b)                         Charter §
                                 20
117.3(c)                         Charter §
                                 13
                                 Charter §
117.3(d)                         44,
                                 Charter Ch. V, Charter §
                                 131
117.3(e)                         Charter §
                                 12
117.3(g)                         Charter §
                                 181
117.3(h)                         Charter §
                                 182
                                 Charter §
117.3(i)                         192, Charter §
                                 195, Charter §
                                 202
                                 Charter §
                                 147,
                                 10.001,
                                 170.021 -
117.3(k)                         170.023,
                                 170.036,
                                 170.051,
                                 170.082,
                                 172.052
117.3(l)                         Charter §
                                 69
                                 Charter §
117.3(m)                         52, Charter §
                                 71
117.4(a)(2)                      Charter §
                                 238
117.4(f)                         Charter §
                                 188
117.4a                           Charter Ch. XIV, Subd. 2
117.4a(l)                        Charter Ch. XV, Charter §
                                 237
117.4b                           Charter Ch. XIV, Subd. 2
                                 Charter §
117.4c                           86, Charter §
                                 212
117.4d                           Charter Ch. XIV, Subd. 2
                                 Charter §
117.4f                           86, Charter §
                                 212
                                 Charter §
117.4i(6)                        38,
                                 Charter Ch. XI
117.4i(7)                        Charter Ch. VII
117.4i(8)                        Charter §
                                 269-A
117.4i(10)                       Charter §
                                 156
                                 Charter §
                                 30, Charter §
117.5                            185,
                                 Charter Ch. XIV, Subd. 2,
                                 Charter Ch. XV
117.5(d)                         Charter §
                                 135
117.5(i)                         Charter §
                                 179
117.5(o)                         Charter §
                                 184
                                 Charter §
117.5b                           147, Charter §
                                 148
                                 Charter §
                                 20, Charter §
117.32                           40, Charter §
                                 44, Charter §
                                  63, Charter §
                                 132
123.1191 et seq.                 113.005
125.31 through 125.45            190.001
125.71 et seq.                   178.018
125.1352                         72.027,
                                 72.029
                                 177.022,
125.1501 to 125.1531             177.045,
                                 177.046
                                 170.021 -
125.1508b(6)                     170.023,
                                 170.036,
                                 170.051
125.1651 through 125.1680        177.022,
                                 177.027
125.1662                         177.022
125.1663                         177.022
125.1664                         177.022
125.1666                         177.022
125.1669 et seq.                 177.024
125.3101 et seq.                 190.001
                                 190.332,
125.3405                         190.347,
                                 190.351,
                                 190.354
125.3801 et seq.                 177.001
125.3811                         177.001
125.3815                         177.002
125.3817                         177.003
125.3821                         177.003
141.20                           Charter §
                                 239
                                 Charter §
168.1 et seq.                    13, Charter §
                                 34
                                 Charter §§
168.322                          16 -
                                 19
168.327                          Charter §
                                 140
168.492                          Charter §
                                 14
168.493a                         Charter §
                                 15
168.531 et seq.                  Charter §
                                 16
168.544a                         Charter §
                                 18
168.551                          Charter §
                                 22
168.581 et seq.                  Charter §
                                 25
168.631 et seq.                  Charter §
                                 30
                                 Charter §
                                 14, Charter §§
                                 16 -
168.642                          20, Charter §
                                 22, Charter §§
                                 24 -
                                 27
168.644b et seq.                 Charter §
                                 16
168.644e et seq.                 Charter §
                                 28
                                 Charter §
168.644f                         17, Charter §
                                 18
168.648 et seq.                  Charter §
                                 32
168.654 et seq.                  Charter §
                                 13
168.672 et seq.                  Charter §
                                 35
                                 Charter §
168.706                          20, Charter §
                                 21, Charter §
                                 29
168.720 et seq.                  Charter §
                                 33
168.841 et seq.                  Charter §
                                 27
168.851                          Charter §
                                 26
168.851 et seq.                  Charter §
                                 37
168.861                          Charter §
                                 26
168.951 et seq.                  Charter §
                                 38
169.201 through 169.282          31.025
207.1001 et seq.                 74.010
211.1 et seq.                    Charter §
                                 181
211.1 through 211.157            11.008
211.1 to 211.157                 170.065
211.60                           11.008
213.321 to 213.332               177.025
247.241                          175.006,
                                 175.007
247.651 et seq.                  115.012
247.651 to 247.674               74.014
252.201 et seq.                  131.001
                                 70.025,
257.1 through 257.923            71.999,
                                 95.002,
                                 95.213
257.1d                           93.008
257.8b                           93.008
257.319                          150.999
257.322                          95.214
257.606(a)8                      Ch. 73
257.624a                         150.007,
                                 150.008
257.624b                         150.007
257.625                          150.007
257.625(1) or (2)                150.999
257.625(1), (3), (4), (5) or (6) 150.999
257.625(1), (3) or (6)           150.999
257.625a(6)                      150.007
257.625b                         150.999
257.675(5)                       72.026
257.684                          74.014
257.688                          74.014
257.697                          74.014
257.698                          74.014
257.710d                         70.010
257.803d                         72.026
257.907(3)                       74.021
257.951                          71.001
280.1 et seq.                    176.003
281.1001 through 281.1199        95.002
286.371 et seq.                  116.056
287.261 through 287.290          90.018
287.270 et seq.                  190.307
287.279(a)                       90.016
287.289b                         90.015,
                                 90.016
287.308                          90.078
287.321 through 287.323          90.078
289.1101 et seq.                 Ch. 116
289.1107(t)                      116.071
289.4101                         116.040
290.601 et seq.                  Ch. 100,
                                 100.002
290.617 et seq.                  100.001
324.35105(1)(a)                  175.006
324.44501                        95.071,
                                 95.185
324.44522                        95.185
324.80101 et seq.                95.002,
                                 150.013
                                 95.185,
324.80101 to 324.80199           95.188,
                                 95.198
324.80110 to 324.80113           150.013
324.80122                        95.002
324.80124                        95.015
324.80140                        95.185
324.80141                        95.072
324.80164                        95.188,
                                 95.193
324.80166                        95.002
324.80176                        150.007
324.80208                        95.188
324.80211                        95.185
324.80301 et seq.                95.017
324.81134                        150.007
324.82127                        150.007
                                 176.002,
                                 176.003,
                                 176.006,
                                 176.008,
324.9101 et seq.                 176.011,
                                 176.012,
                                 176.025,
                                 176.030,
                                 176.999
324.9115                         176.032
324.9115a                        176.032
330.1100a                        150.999
333.6230                         150.999
333.7101 et seq.                 155.001
333.7104                         95.002,
                                 151.008
333.13801 through 333.13831      133.013
333.20106                        150.007
333.20904                        150.007
333.27101 et seq.                118.003
339.2501 to 339.2515             170.065
380.1 to 380.1852                150.024
399.201 et seq.                  177.045
400.271 et seq.                  111.040
418.101 et seq.                  33.018,
                                 33.038
427.1 et seq.                    Ch. 181
436.1101 et seq.                 117.010
436.1105(3)                      151.008
436.1501 et seq.                 150.008
436.1701                         150.007
436.1701(1)(a)                   150.007
436.1703                         150.007
436.1707                         150.007
436.1801(2)                      150.007
436.1909                         150.007
                                 131.027,
445.401 et seq.                  131.029,
                                 131.041,
                                 131.043
445.404(2)                       131.039
445.421 et seq.                  131.035
                                 131.026,
446.201 et seq.                  131.027,
                                 131.032,
                                 131.041
446.203(a)(i)                    131.025
446.205                          131.039
480.11 et seq.                   74.006
480.11 to 480.21                 74.014
484.2102                         115.003
484.2251                         115.004
484.3101 et seq.                 115.001,
                                 115.003
484.3103                         115.003
484.3103(3)                      115.006
484.3104(2)                      115.015
484.3105(1)                      115.004
484.3105(3)                      115.004
484.3105(4)                      115.004
484.3106(1)                      115.004,
                                 115.005
484.3106(2)                      115.004,
                                 115.005
484.3106(5)                      115.004
484.3106(6)                      115.005
484.3106(7)                      115.007
484.3106(8)                      115.007
                                 115.009,
484.3108                         115.010,
                                 115.011
484.3110(4)                      115.012
484.3110(5)                      115.013
484.3113(1)                      115.010
484.3113(4)                      115.010
484.3113(5)                      115.011
484.3113(6)                      115.014
484.3115                         115.005
484.3115(2)                      115.017
484.3115(3)                      115.005
484.3115(4)                      115.005
484.3115(5)                      115.008
500.3101 through 500.3179        71.006
559.101                          190.004
560.190                          175.008
600.101 et seq.                  11.001,
                                 176.999
600.2913                         151.008
600.4001 et seq.                 11.006
600.6001 et seq.                 11.006
600.8302                         11.006
600.8396                         11.001
600.8701 et seq.                 11.004
600.8705                         11.003
600.8707(6)                      11.001
                                 Charter §
                                 20, Charter §
                                 40, Charter §
                                 44, Charter §
600.9921                         63, Charter §
                                 132, Charter §
                                 133, Charter §
                                 151, Charter §
                                 155
600.9921 et seq.                 Charter Ch. VIII
712A.1 et seq.                   151.006
712A.1 through 712A.31           95.002
712A.2                           151.006
712A.18m                         150.999
722.1 to 722.6                   150.007,
                                 150.999
722.751 et seq.                  150.009
750.81 et seq.                   151.001
750.131 et seq.                  152.011
750.145                          151.006
750.165                          151.005
                                 150.005,
                                 150.015,
                                 151.003,
750.167                          151.005,
                                 153.001,
                                 153.008 -
                                 153.010
750.167a                         150.007
750.169                          153.007
                                 150.015,
750.170                          153.006,
                                 153.008
750.217a et seq.                 152.005
750.224                          154.003
750.237                          150.007
750.245 et seq.                  150.017
750.301 et seq.                  150.002
750.356                          152.001
750.377a                         152.006
750.380                          152.007
750.381                          152.008
750.382                          152.009
750.383                          152.010
750.493d                         150.004
750.520b to 750.520g             150.007
750.540e                         151.004
750.552 et seq.                  152.012,
                                 152.013
752.361 to 752.374               113.005
752.525                          153.007
760.1 through 776.21             95.999
760.1 to 776.21                  150.999
764.9c                           11.004
769.1j                           150.999
771.3                            150.999,
                                 156.001
771.4                            156.003
801.257                          156.003
                                 
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code Section 2021 Code Section
Prior Code Section  2021 Code Section
1-2                 10.002
1-6                 10.999
1-10                10.012
2-1                 31.001
2-2                 31.002
2-3                 31.003
2-21                30.001
2-22                30.001
2-41                34.001
2-42                34.002
2-43                34.003
2-44                34.004
2-45                34.005
2-62                30.002
2-63                30.002
2-64                30.002
2-65                30.002
2-87                30.003
2-88                30.003
2-89                30.003
2-90                30.003
2-112               30.004
2-113               30.004
2-114               30.004
2-115               30.004
2-116               30.004
2-117               30.004
2-118               30.004
2-119               30.004
2-120               30.004
2-142               30.005
2-143               30.005
2-144               30.005
2-145               30.005
2-146               30.005
2-147               30.005
2-148               30.005
2-149               30.005
2-175               30.006
2-176               30.006
2-188               30.006
2-189               30.006
2-190               30.006
2-191               30.006
2-201               32.001
2-201.1             32.002
2-202               32.003
2-203               32.004
2-204               32.005
2-205               32.006
2-206               32.007
2-206.1             32.008
2-207               32.009
2-208               32.010
2-209               32.011
2-209.1             32.012
2-210               32.013
2-211               32.014
2-211.1             32.015
2-212               32.016
2-213               32.016
2-214               32.016
2-215               32.016
2-216               32.016
2-217               32.016
2-218               32.016
2-219               32.016
2-220               32.016
2-221               32.016
2-222               32.017
2-223               32.018
2-224               32.019
2-225               32.019
2-226               32.019
2-226.1             32.019
2-227               32.020
2-228               32.021
2-229               32.022
2-230               32.023
2-230.1             32.023
2-231               32.024
2-232               32.025
2-233               32.026
2-234               32.026
2-235               32.026
2-236               32.026
2-237               32.026
2-238               32.026
2-238.1             32.027
2-239               32.028
2-240               32.029
2-241               32.030
2-242               32.031
2-243               32.032
2-244               32.033
2-245               32.034
2-246               32.035
2-247               32.036
2-253               32.050
2-254               32.051
2-255               32.052
2-256               32.053
2-257               32.054
2-258               32.055
2-259               32.056
2-260               32.057
2-261               32.058
2-262               32.059
2-300               31.015
2-301               31.016
2-302               31.017
2-303               31.018
2-304               31.019
2-305               31.020
2-306               31.021
2-307               31.022
2-308               31.023
2-309               31.024
2-310               31.025
2-311               31.026,
                    31.999
2-312               31.027,
                    31.999
2-313               31.028
2.1-1               99.001
2.1-2               99.002
2.1-3               99.003
2.1-4               99.004
2.1-5               99.005
2.1-6               99.006
2.1-7               99.999
4-1                 90.001
4-2                 90.002
4-3                 90.003
4-4                 90.015 -
                    90.020
4-5                 90.004,
                    90.999
                    90.055 -
4-6                 90.062,
                    90.999
4-7                 90.075 -
                    90.080
4-8                 90.999
4-15                90.035
4-16                90.036
4-17                90.037
4-18                90.037,
                    90.999
4-19                90.037
4-20                90.037
4-21                90.037
4-22                90.038
4-23                90.039
4-24                90.040
4-25                90.999
4-79                131.027
5-1                 110.001
5-2                 110.002
5-3                 110.003
5-4                 110.004
5-5                 110.005
5-6                 110.006
5-7                 110.007
5-8                 110.008
5-9                 110.020
5-10                110.021
5-26                110.035
5-27                110.036
5-28                110.037
5-30                110.038
5-31                110.039
5-46                110.040
6-1                 73.001
6-2                 73.002
6-3                 73.003
6-4                 73.004
6-26                73.005
6-27                73.005
6-28                73.005
6-29                73.005
6-30                73.005
6-31                73.005
6-32                73.005
6-40                73.020
6-41                73.021
6-42                73.022
6-43                73.023
6-44                73.024,
                    73.999
6-45                73.025
6-46                73.026
6-47                73.027
6-48                73.999
7-1                 170.001
7-2                 170.002
7-3                 170.003
7-51                170.065
7-61                170.095
7-62                170.096
7-63                170.096
7-64                170.097
7-65                170.098
7-66                170.999
7-74                170.110
7-75                170.111
7-76                170.112
7-77                170.112
7-78                170.113
7-79                170.114
7-80                170.115
7-81                170.116
7-82                170.117
7-83                170.999
8.1-1               53.001
8.1-2               53.002
8.1-3               53.003
8.1-4               53.004
8.1-5               53.005
8.1-6               53.006
8.1-7               53.007
8.1-8               53.008
8.1-9               53.009,
                    53.999
8.2-1               113.001
8.2-2               113.002
8.2-3               113.003
8.2-4               113.004
8.2-5               113.005
8.2-6               113.006
8.2-7               113.007
8.2-8               113.008
8.2-9               113.009
8.2-10              113.010
9-1                 50.001
9-2                 50.002
9-3                 50.003
9-4                 50.004
9-5                 50.005
9-6                 50.006
9-7                 50.999
9-8                 50.999
9-26                172.070
9-27                172.071
9-28                172.072
9-29                172.073
9-30                172.074
9-31                172.075
9-32                172.076
9-33                172.077
9-34                172.078
9-35                172.079
9-36                172.080
9-37                172.081
9-56                172.095
9-57                172.096
9-58                172.096
9-59                172.097
9-60                172.098
9-61                172.099
9-62                172.100
9-63                172.101
9-64                172.101
9-65                172.102
9-66                172.103
9-67                172.104
9-68                172.105
9-69                172.106
9-70                172.106
9-71                172.106
9-72                172.107
9-73                172.108
9-74                172.109
9-75                172.110
9-76                172.111
9-91                172.125
9-92                172.126
9-93                172.127
9-93.1              172.128
9-94                172.129
9-95                172.130
9-131               172.001
9-132               172.002
9-133               172.003
9-134               172.004
9-135               172.005
9-136               172.006
9-137               172.007
9-151               172.020
9-152               172.021
9-153               172.022
9-155               172.023
9-156               172.024
9-171               172.035
9-172               172.036
9-200               50.020
9-201               50.021
9-202               50.022
9-203               50.023
9-204               50.024
9-205               50.025
9.1-1               180.001
9.1-2               180.002
9.1-3               180.003
9.1-4               180.004
9.1-5               180.005
9.1-6               180.006
9.1-7               180.007
9.1-8               180.999
9.1-9               180.008,
                    180.999
9.1-20              180.020
9.1-21              180.021
9.1-22              180.021
9.1-23              180.022
9.1-24              180.023
9.1-25              180.024
9.1-26              180.025
9.1-27              180.026
9.1-28              180.027
9.1-29              180.028
9.1-30              180.028
9.1-31              180.029
9.1-40              180.040
9.1-41              180.041
9.1-42              180.042
10-1                170.004
10-2                170.004
11-1                91.015
11-2                91.016
11-3                91.017
11-4                91.018
11-5                91.019
11-6                91.020
11-7                91.021
11-8                91.022
11-9                91.023
11-10               91.023,
                    91.999
11-26               91.001
11-27               91.002
11-51               93.001
11-52               93.002,
                    93.999
11-53               93.003
11-54               93.004
11-55               93.005
11-56               93.006
11-57               93.007
11-58               93.008
11-59               93.009
11-60               93.009
11-61               93.010
11-62               93.011
11-63               93.012
11-64               93.999
11-65               92.001
11-66               92.002
11-67               92.003
12-16               116.001
12-17               116.002
12-18               116.003
12-19               116.004
12-20               116.005
12-21               116.006
12-50               116.020
12-51               116.021
12-52               116.022
12-53               116.023
12-54               116.024
12-55               116.025
12-56               116.026
12-63               116.040
12-83               116.041
12-84               116.042
12-85               116.043
12-86               116.044
12-87               116.045
12-88               116.046
12-89               116.047
12-90               116.048
12-91               116.049
12-92               116.050
12-93               116.051
12-94               116.052
12-95               116.053
12-96               116.054
12-97               116.055
12-98               116.056
12-99               116.057
12-100              116.058
13-1                110.055
13-2                110.056
13-3                110.057
13-4                110.058
13-5                110.059
13-26               110.060
13-27               110.060
13-28               110.060
13-29               110.060
14-1                51.001
14-2                51.002
14-3                51.002
14-4                51.002
14-5                51.002
14-6                51.002
14-7                51.003
14-8                51.003
14-8.1              51.003
14-9                51.004
14-10               51.005
14-11               51.006
14-12               51.007
14-13               51.008
14-14               51.009
14-15               51.010
14-16               51.011
14-17               51.999
14-31               94.035
14-32               94.036
14-33               94.037
14-34               94.039
14-35               94.040
14-36               94.041
14-37               94.999
15-1                114.001
15-2                114.002
15-3                114.003
16-1                176.001
16-2                176.002
16-3                176.003
16-4                176.004
16-5                176.005
16-6                176.006
16-7                176.007
16-8                176.008
16-9                176.009
16-10               176.010
16-11               176.011
16-12               176.012
16-13               176.999
16-14               176.012
16-31               176.025
16-32               176.026
16-33               176.027
16-34               176.028
16-35               176.029
16-36               176.030
16-37               176.031
16-38               176.032
17-1                112.001
17-2                112.002
17-3                112.003
17-4                112.004
17-5                112.005
19-1                171.001
19-2                171.002
19-3                171.003
19-5                171.004,
                    171.999
19-21               171.015
19-22               171.015
19-23               171.016
19-24               171.017
19-25               171.018
19-34               173.045
19-46               171.030
19-47               171.031
19-48               171.032
19-49               171.033
19-50               171.034
19-51               171.035
19-52               171.036
19-53               171.037
19-54               171.038
19-55               171.039
19-56               171.040
19-57               171.041
19-61               171.055
19-62               171.056
19-63               171.057
19-64               171.058
19-65               171.059
19-76               171.070
19-77               171.071
19-86               171.085
19-87               171.086
19-88               171.087
19-101              171.100
19-102              171.101
19-103              171.102
19-116              171.115
19-117              171.116
19-118              171.117
19-119              171.118
19-131              171.130
19-132              171.131
19-133              171.132
19-134              171.133
19-146              171.145
19-147              171.146,
                    171.999
19-148              171.147
19-149              171.148
19-150              171.149
19-151              171.150
19-152              171.151
19-153              171.152
19-165              171.165
19-166              171.166
19-167              171.167
19-168              171.168
19-169              171.169
19-170              171.170
19-182              171.185
19-183              171.186
19-184              171.187
19-185              171.188
19-186              171.189
19-187              171.190
19-188              171.191
19-189              171.192
19-190              171.193
19-191              171.194
19-203              171.205
19-204              171.206
19-205              171.207
19-217              171.220
19-218              171.221
19-230              171.235
19-231              171.236
19-232              171.237
19-244              171.250
19-245              171.251
19-257              171.265
19-258              171.266
19-259              171.267
19-260              171.268
19-261              171.269
19-273              171.280
19-274              171.281
19-275              171.282
19-287              171.295
19-288              171.296
19-289              171.297
19-290              171.298
19-291              171.299
19-292              171.300
19-304              173.001
19-305              173.002
19-306              173.003
19-307              173.004
19-319              173.015
19-320              173.016
19-321              173.017
19-322              173.018
19-323              173.019
19-324              173.020
19-325              173.021
19-326              173.022
19-327              173.023
19-328              173.024
19-329              173.025
19-330              173.026
19-331              173.027
19-332              173.028
19-333              173.029
19-334              173.030
19-347              173.046
19-348              173.047
19-349              173.048
19-350              173.049
19-351              173.050
19-352              173.051
19-353              173.052
19-354              173.053
19-355              173.054
19-356              173.055
19-357              173.056
19-358              173.057
19-359              173.058
19-360              173.059
19-361              173.060
19-362              173.061
19-363              173.062
19-364              173.063
19-365              173.064
19-366              173.065
21-276              117.001
21-277              117.002
21-278              117.003
21-279              117.004
21-280              117.005
21-281              117.006
21-282              117.007
21-283              117.008
21-284              117.009
21-285              117.010
21-286              117.011
21-287              117.012
21-288              117.013
21-289              117.014
21-290              117.015
21-291              117.016,
                    117.999
21.1-1              118.001
21.1-2              118.002
21.1-3              118.003
21.1-4              118.999
21.5-1              95.001
21.5-11             95.002
21.5-12             95.002
21.5-13             95.002
21.5-14             95.002
21.5-21             95.015
21.5-22             95.016
21.5-22             95.150
21.5-23             95.017,
                    95.999
21.5-24             95.018
21.5-25             95.019
21.5-26             95.020
21.5-27             95.193
21.5-41             95.035
21.5-42             95.036
21.5-43             95.037
21.5-44             95.038
21.5-45             95.039
21.5-46             95.040
21.5-47             95.041
21.5-61             95.055
21.5-62             95.055
21.5-63             95.055
21.5-64             95.055
21.5-65             95.056
21.5-66             95.057
21.5-81             95.070
21.5-82             95.071,
                    95.999
21.5-83             95.072
21.5-84             95.073
21.5-85             95.073
21.5-86             95.074,
                    95.999
21.5-87             95.075,
                    95.999
21.5-88             95.076
21.5-89             95.077
21.5-90             95.078
21.5-91             95.079,
                    95.999
21.5-92             95.079
21.5-93             95.080
21.5-94             95.081
21.5-95             95.082
21.5-96             95.083,
                    95.999
21.5-97             95.084
21.5-98             95.085,
                    95.999
21.5-99             95.999
21.5-100            95.086
21.5-121            95.210
21.5-122            95.999
21.5-123            95.999
21.5-124            95.211
21.5-125            95.212
21.5-126            95.213
21.5-127            95.214
21.5-128            95.214
21.5-129            95.214
21.5-130            95.214
21.5-131            95.214
21.5-132            95.214
21.5-133            95.214
21.5-134            95.214
21.5-135            95.214
21.5-136            95.215
21.5-137            95.216
21.5-138            95.217
21.5-139            95.218
21.5-140            95.219
21.5-141            95.220
21.5-161            95.100
21.5-162            95.101
21.5-163            95.101
21.5-164            95.101
21.5-165            95.102
21.5-166            95.103
21.5-167            95.103
21.5-168            95.104
21.5-181            95.115
21.5-182            95.116
21.5-183            95.117
21.5-184            95.118
21.5-185            95.119
21.5-186            95.120
21.5-187            95.121
21.5-188            95.122
21.5-201            95.135
21.5-202            95.136
21.5-203            95.137
21.5-204            95.138
21.5-222            95.151
21.5-223            95.152
21.5-224            95.153
21.5-241            95.165
21.5-242            95.166
21.5-243            95.167
21.5-244            95.168
21.5-245            95.169
21.5-246            95.170
21.5-261            95.185
21.5-262            95.186
21.5-263            95.187
21.5-264            95.188
21.5-265            95.188,
                    95.999
21.5-266            95.189
21.5-267            95.190
21.5-268            95.191
21.5-269            95.192
21.5-271            95.194
21.5-272            95.195,
                    95.999
21.5-273            95.196,
                    95.999
21.5-274            95.999
21.5-275            95.197
21.5-276            95.198
21.5-277            95.999
22.1-1              74.001
22.1-10             74.002
22.1-11             74.002
22.1-12             74.002
22.1-13             74.002
22.1-14             74.002
22.1-15             74.999
22.1-20             74.003
22.1-21             74.004
22.1-22             74.005
22.1-23             74.006
22.1-24             74.007
22.1-25             74.008
22.1-26             74.009
22.1-30             74.010
22.1-31             74.010
22.1-32             74.010
22.1-33             74.999
22.1-40             74.011
22.1-41             74.011
22.1-42             74.999
22.1-43             74.011
22.1-44             74.011
22.1-45             74.011
22.1-46             74.999
22.1-50             74.012,
                    74.999
22.1-51             74.013,
                    74.999
22.1-52             74.014,
                    74.999
22.1-53             74.015,
                    74.999
22.1-54             74.016,
                    74.999
22.1-55             74.017,
                    74.999
22.1-56             74.018,
                    74.999
22.1-57             74.019,
                    74.999
22.1-58             74.020,
                    74.999
22.1-59             74.021
22.1-60             74.022,
                    74.999
22.1-61             74.023,
                    74.999
22.1-62             74.024
22.1-63             74.025
22.1-71             74.999
23.5-1              11.001
23.5-2              11.002
23.5-3              11.003
23.5-4              11.003
23.5-5              11.004
23.5-6              11.005
23.5-7              11.006
23.5-8              11.007
23.5-9              11.008
24-1                94.001
24-2                94.002
24-3                94.003
24-4                94.004
24-5                94.004
24-6                94.004
24-7                94.005
24-8                94.006
24-9                94.007,
                    94.999
24-36               94.020
24-37               94.021
24-38               94.999
25-1                150.001
25-2                150.002
25-3                150.003
25-4                150.004
25-5                150.005,
                    150.999
25-6                150.006
25-6.1              150.007
25-7                150.007,
                    150.999
25-7.1              150.007
25-7.2              150.007
25-7.3              150.007,
                    150.999
25-8                150.008
25-9                150.008
25-9.1              150.008
25-10               150.009,
                    150.999
25-10.1             150.010,
                    150.999
25-10.2             150.010,
                    150.999
25-10.3             150.011,
                    150.999
25-10.4             150.012,
                    150.999
25-11               150.013
25-11.1             150.014
25-12               150.015
25-13               150.016
25-14               150.017
25-15               150.018
25-16               150.019
25-17               150.020,
                    150.999
25-18               150.021
25-19               150.022,
                    150.999
25-20               150.023,
                    150.999
25-21               150.024
25-21.1             150.024,
                    150.999
25-22               150.024,
                    150.999
25-23               150.024
25-24               150.025,
                    150.999
25-31               151.001
25-32               151.002
25-33               151.003
25-34               151.004
25-35               151.005
25-36               151.006
25-37               151.007
25-38               151.008,
                    151.999
25-51               152.001,
                    152.999
25-51.1             152.002,
                    152.999
25-51.2             152.003,
                    152.999
25-51.3             152.004,
                    152.999
25-52               152.005
25-53               152.006,
                    152.999
25-54               152.007,
                    152.999
25-55               152.008
25-56               152.009,
                    152.999
25-57               152.010
25-58               152.011
25-59               152.012
25-60               152.012
25-60.1             152.012,
                    152.999
25-61               152.013
25-61.1             152.014,
                    152.999
25-62               152.015,
                    152.999
25-63               152.016,
                    152.999
25-76               153.001
25-76.1             153.002,
                    153.999
25-76.2             153.003
25-76.3             153.004,
                    153.999
25-76.4             153.005,
                    153.999
25-77               153.006
25-78               153.007
25-79               153.008
25-80               153.009
25-81               153.010
25-82               153.011
25-83               153.012
25-84               153.013,
                    153.999
25-85               153.014
25-96               154.001
25-96.1             154.002
25-97               154.003
25-98               154.003
25-116              153.025
25-117              153.026
25-118              153.027
25-119              153.028
25-136              155.001
25-137              155.002,
                    155.999
25-139              155.003
25-140              155.004
25-141              155.005
25-156              155.020
25-157              155.021
25-158              155.022
25-159              155.023
25-160              155.024
25-161              155.025
25-162              155.026
25-165              154.015,
                    154.999
25-166              154.016,
                    154.999
25-167              154.017,
                    154.999
25-181              96.001
25-182              96.002
25-183              96.003
25-184              96.999
25-201              156.001
25-202              156.002
25-203              156.003
25-204              156.004
25-205              156.005
25-206              156.006
25-207              156.007
25-208              156.008
25-209              156.009
25-220              156.020
25-221              156.021
25-222              156.022
25-236              152.030
25-237              152.031
25-238              152.032
25-239              152.999
25-240              152.045
25-241              152.046
25-242              152.047
25-243              152.999
26-1                97.001
26-2                97.002
26-3                97.003
26-4                97.004
26-5                97.005,
                    97.999
26-6                97.006
26-7                97.007,
                    97.999
26-8                97.008
26-9                97.009
27-16               111.001
27-17               111.002
27-18               111.003
27-19               111.004
27-20               111.005
27-32               111.006
27-33               111.006
27-34               111.006
27-35               111.006
27-47               111.020
27-48               111.021
27-49               111.022
27-50               111.023
27-51               111.024
27-63               111.025
27-64               111.025
27-65               111.025
27-66               111.025
27-67               111.025
27-68               111.025
27-69               111.025
27-70               111.025
27-71               111.025
27-83               111.040
27-84               111.041
27-85               111.042
27-97               111.043
27-98               111.043
27-99               111.043
27-100              111.043
27-101              111.043
27-102              111.043
28-16               177.001
28-17               177.002
28-18               177.003
28-19               177.004
28-20               177.005
28-31               177.020
28-32               177.021
28-33               177.022
28-34               177.023
28-34.1             177.024
28-35               177.025
28-36               177.026
28-37               177.027
28-38               177.028
28-39               177.029
28-61               177.040
28-62               177.041
28-63               177.042
28-64               177.043
28-65               177.044
28-66               177.045
28-67               177.045
28-68               177.045
28-69               177.045
28-70               177.045
28-71               177.045
28-72               177.046
28-73               177.047
28-74               177.048
28-75               177.049
28-76               177.050
28-77               177.051
28-78               177.052
28-79               177.053
28-80               177.999
28-81               177.054
28-82               177.055
28-83               177.056
29-31               170.005
29-41               170.130
29-42               170.131
29-43               170.132
29-44               170.133
29-45               170.134
29-46               170.135
29-47               170.136
29-48               170.133
30-1                33.001
30-18               33.015
30-19               33.016
30-20               33.017
30-21               33.018
30-22               33.019
30-23               33.020
30-24               33.021
30-25               33.022
30-41               33.035
30-42               33.036
30-43               33.037
30-44               33.038
30-45               33.039
30-46               33.040
30.1-21             94.055
30.1-22             94.056
30.1-23             94.057
30.1-24             94.058
30.1-25             94.059
30.1-26             94.060
30.1-27             94.061
30.1-28             94.061
30.1-29             94.062
30.1-30             94.063
30.1-31             94.064
30.1-32             94.064
30.1-33             94.061
30.1-34             94.999
31.1-1              181.001,
                    181.005
31.1-2              181.002
31.1-3              181.003
31.1-4              181.004
31.1-5              181.006
31.1-6              181.007
31.1-11             181.020
31.1-12             181.021
31.1-13             181.022
31.1-14             181.023
31.1-20             181.999
31.1-21             181.999
32-1                174.001
32-2                174.002
32-3                174.003
32-4                174.004
32-5                174.005
32-6                174.006
32-7                174.007
32-8                174.008
32-9                174.009
32-10               174.010
32-11               174.011
32-12               174.012
32-13               174.013
32-14               174.014
32-15               174.015
32-32               174.030
32-33               174.031
32-34               174.032
32-35               174.033
32-52               174.045
32-53               174.046
32-54               174.047
32-55               174.048
33-16               179.001
33-17               179.002
33-18               179.003
33-19               179.004
33-20               179.005
33-21               179.006
33-22               179.007
33-23               179.008
33-24               179.009
33-25               179.010
33-26               179.011
33-27               179.012
33-28               179.013
33-29               179.014
33-30               179.015
33-31               179.016
33-32               179.017
33-33               179.018
33-34               179.019
34.5-1              115.001
34.5-2              115.002
34.5-3              115.003
34.5-4              115.004
34.5-5              115.005
34.5-6              115.006
34.5-7              115.007
34.5-8              115.008
34.5-9              115.009
34.5-10             115.010
34.5-11             115.011
34.5-12             115.012
34.5-13             115.013
34.5-14             115.014
34.5-15             115.015
34.5-16             115.016
34.5-17             115.017
34.5-19             115.018
34.5-20             115.999
35-1                70.001
35-2                70.002
35-3                70.003
35-4                70.004
35-5                70.005
35-6                70.006
35-7                70.007,
                    70.999
35-8                70.008
35-9                70.009,
                    70.999
35-10               70.010,
                    70.999
35-23               71.001
35-24               71.002
35-25               71.003
35-26               71.004
35-27               71.999
35-28               71.005
35-29               71.006
35-44               72.001
35-45               72.002
35-46               72.003,
                    72.999
35-47               72.004
35-48               72.005
35-49               72.006
35-50               72.007
35-51               72.008
35-52               72.009,
                    72.999
35-53               72.010
35-54               72.011
35-55               72.012,
                    72.999
35-61               72.025
35-62               72.026
35-63               72.027
35-64               72.028
35-65               72.029
35-66               72.030
35-67               72.999
35-73               72.045
35-74               72.046
35-75               72.047
35-76               72.048
35-77               72.049
35-81               70.040
35-82               70.041
35-83               70.042
35-84               70.043
35-85               70.044
35-86               70.045
35-87               70.046
35-88               70.047
35-89               70.999
35-116              70.025
35-117              70.026
35-118              70.027
35-119              70.028
35-120              70.029
35-121              70.999
36-1                175.001
36-2                175.002
36-3                175.003
36-4                175.004
36-5                175.005
36-6                175.006
36-7                175.007
36-8                175.008
36-9                175.009
36-10               175.010
36-11               175.011
36-12               175.012,
                    175.999
36.1-1              98.001
36.1-2              98.002 -
                    98.004
36.1-3              98.999
37-1                178.001
37-2                178.002
37-3                178.003
37-4                178.004
37-21               178.015
37-22               178.016
37-23               178.017
37-24               178.018
38.1-1              52.001
38.1-2              52.001
38.1-16             52.015
38.1-17             52.016
38.1-18             52.017
39-1                100.001
39-2                100.002
39-3                100.003
39-4                100.004
39-5                100.005
40-1                130.001
40-2                130.002
40-3                130.003
40-4                130.004
40-5                130.005
40-6                130.006
40-7                130.007
40-8                130.008
40-9                130.009
40-10               130.010
40-11               130.011
40-12               130.012
40-13               130.013
40-14               130.014
40-15               130.015
40-16               130.045
40-17               130.030
40-18               130.031
40-19               130.032
40-20               130.033
40-21               130.034
40-22               130.035
40-23               130.036
40-24               130.037
40-25               130.038
40-26               130.039
40-27               130.040
40-28               130.041
40-29               130.042
40-30               130.043
40-31               130.044
40-32               130.045
40-34               132.001
40-35               132.002
40-36               132.003
40-37               132.004
40-38               132.005
40-39               132.006
40-40               132.007
40-41               132.008
40-42               132.009
40-43               132.010
40-44               132.011
40-45               132.012
40-46               132.013
40-47               132.014
40-48               132.015
40-49               132.016
40-50               132.017
40-51               132.018
40-52               132.019
40-53               132.020
40-54               132.021
40-55               132.022
40-56               132.023
40-57               132.024
40-58               132.025
40-59               132.040
40-60               132.041
40-61               132.042
40-62               132.043
40-63               132.044
40-64               132.045
40-65               131.001
40-66               131.002
40-67               131.003
40-68               131.004
40-69               131.005
40-70               131.006
40-71               131.007
40-72               131.008
40-73               131.009
40-74               131.010
40-75               131.011
40-76               131.025
40-77               131.026
40-78               131.027
40-80               131.029
40-81               131.030
40-82               131.031
40-83               131.032
40-84               131.033
40-85               131.034
40-86               131.035
40-87               131.036
40-88               131.037
40-89               131.038
40-90               131.039
40-91               131.040
40-92               131.041
40-93               131.042
40-94               131.043
40-95               133.001
40-96               133.002
40-97               133.003
40-98               133.004
40-99               133.005
40-100              133.006
40-101              133.007
40-102              133.008
40-103              133.009
40-104              133.010
40-105              133.011
40-106              133.012
40-107              133.013
40-108              133.014
40-109              133.015
40-110              133.999
40-111              132.060
40-112              132.061
40-113              132.062
40-114              132.063
40-115              132.064
40-116              132.065
40-117              132.066
40-118              132.067
40-119              132.068
40-120              132.069
40-121              132.070
40-122              132.071
40-123              132.072
40-124              132.073
40-125              132.074
40-126              132.075
40-127              132.076
40-128              132.077
40-129              132.078
40-130              132.079
40-131              132.080
40-132              132.081
40-133              132.999
40-134              132.082
40-135              134.001
40-136              134.002
40-137              134.003
40-138              134.004
40-139              134.005
40-140              134.006
40-141              134.007
40-142              134.008
40-143              134.009
40-144              134.010
App. A, § 100      190.001
App. A, § 101      190.002
App. A, § 102      190.003
App. A, § 200      190.004
App. A, § 201      190.004
App. A, § 300      190.020
App. A, § 301      190.021
App. A, § 302      190.022
App. A, § 303      190.023
App. A, § 400      190.035
App. A, § 401      190.036
App. A, § 402      190.037
App. A, § 500      190.050
App. A, § 501      190.051
App. A, § 502      190.052
App. A, § 600      190.065
App. A, § 601      190.066
App. A, § 602      190.067
App. A, § 700      190.080
App. A, § 701      190.081
App. A, § 702      190.082
App. A, § 800      190.095
App. A, § 801      190.096
App. A, § 802      190.097
App. A, § 900      190.110
App. A, § 901      190.111
App. A, § 902      190.112
App. A, § 1000     190.125
App. A, § 1001     190.126
App. A, § 1002     190.127
App. A, § 1100     190.140
App. A, § 1101     190.141
App. A, § 1102     190.142
App. A, § 1200     190.155
App. A, § 1201     190.156
App. A, § 1202     190.157
App. A, § 1300     190.170
App. A, § 1301     190.171
App. A, § 1302     190.172
App. A, § 1400     190.185
App. A, § 1401     190.186
App. A, § 1402     190.187
App. A, § 1500     190.200
App. A, § 1501     190.201
App. A, § 1502     190.202
App. A, § 1600     190.215
App. A, § 1601     190.216
App. A, § 1602     190.217
App. A, § 1700     190.230
App. A, § 1701     190.231
App. A, § 1702     190.232
App. A, § 1800     190.245
App. A, § 1801     190.246
App. A, § 1802     190.247
App. A, § 1900     190.260
App. A, § 1901     190.261
App. A, § 1902     190.262
App. A, § 2000     190.275
App. A, § 2001     190.276
App. A, § 2002     190.277
App. A, § 2003     190.278
App. A, § 2004     190.279
App. A, § 2100     190.290
App. A, § 2200     190.305
App. A, § 2201     190.306
App. A, § 2202     190.307
App. A, § 2300     190.320
App. A, § 2400     190.321
App. A, § 2401     190.322
App. A, § 2402     190.323
App. A, § 2403     190.324
App. A, § 2404     190.325
App. A, § 2405     190.326
App. A, § 2406     190.327
App. A, § 2407     190.328
App. A, § 2408     190.329
App. A, § 2409     190.330
App. A, § 2410     190.331
App. A, § 2500     190.332
App. A, § 2600     190.370
App. A, § 2601     190.371
App. A, § 2602     190.372
App. A, § 2603     190.373
App. A, § 2604     190.374
App. A, § 2605     190.375
App. A, § 2606     190.376
App. A, § 2607     190.377
App. A, § 2608     190.378
App. A, § 2700     190.390
App. A, § 2701     190.391
App. A, § 2702     190.392
App. A, § 2703     190.393
App. A, § 2704     190.394
App. A, § 2705     190.395
App. A, § 2706     190.396
App. A, Art. XXVIII 190.397
App. A, § 2800A    190.345
App. A, § 2800A1   190.346
App. A, § 2800A2   190.347
App. A, § 2800A3   190.348
App. A, § 2800A4   190.349
App. A, § 2800A5   190.350
App. A, § 2800A6   190.351
App. A, § 2800A7   190.352
App. A, § 2800A8   190.353
App. A, § 2800A9   190.354
App. A, § 2800A10  190.355
App. A, Art. XXX    190.005
App. A, Art. XXXI   190.006
App. A, § 3200     190.999
App. A, § 3201     190.999
App. A, § 3202     190.999
App. A, § 3203     190.999
App. A, § 3204     190.999
                    
 
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     171.001 -
                     171.004,
                     171.015 -
                     171.018,
                     171.030 -
                     171.041,
                     171.055 -
                     171.059,
                     171.070,
                     171.071,
                     171.085 -
                     171.087,
                     171.100 -
                     171.102,
                     171.115 -
                     171.118,
                     171.130 -
                     171.133,
                     171.145 -
                     171.152,
                     171.165 -
                     171.170,
312      3-25-1963   171.185 -
                     171.194,
                     171.205 -
                     171.207,
                     171.220,
                     171.221,
                     171.235 -
                     171.237,
                     171.250,
                     171.251,
                     171.265 -
                     171.269,
                     171.280 -
                     171.282,
                     171.295 -
                     171.300,
                     171.999,
                     173.001 -
                     173.004,
                     173.015 -
                     173.030,
                     173.045 -
                     173.065
                     32.001,
                     32.003 -
                     32.011,
                     32.013,
                     32.014,
                     32.016,
368      9-25-1967   32.018 -
                     32.026,
                     32.028 -
                     32.031,
                     32.035,
                     32.036,
                     32.050 -
                     32.058
375      1-8-1968    32.016,
                     32.026
415      2-9-1970    32.016,
                     32.021
456      1-24-1972   32.016,
                     32.026
586      5-9-1972    32.021
                     32.007,
                     32.016,
490-A    12-4-1972   32.019,
                     32.021,
                     32.026
506      8-3-1973    32.026
514      1-28-1974   32.021
525      6-24-1974   32.051
                     32.007,
541      12-9-1974   32.016,
                     32.019,
                     32.026
                     131.001 -
610      3-27-1975   131.009,
                     131.011
553      7-28-1975   32.054
557      10-6-1975   150.008
561      2-23-1976   150.013
567      6-14-1976   32.009
569      8-2-1976    97.001
570      8-9-1976    97.002
571      8-23-1976   32.032
572      9-13-1976   97.003
573      10-18-1976  153.025 -
                     153.028
                     32.007,
586      5-9-1977    32.016,
                     32.017,
                     32.026
593      10-3-1977   32.026
                     50.001 -
                     50.006,
                     50.999,
                     172.001 -
                     172.007,
                     172.020 -
                     172.024,
                     172.035,
597      11-7-1977   172.036,
                     172.070 -
                     172.081,
                     172.095 -
                     172.111,
                     172.125 -
                     172.127,
                     172.129,
                     172.130
604      2-6-1978    111.025
609      3-27-1978   116.001 -
                     116.006
                     111.001 -
                     111.006,
610      3-27-1978   116.020 -
                     116.026,
                     134.001 -
                     134.010
611      3-27-1978   116.040 -
                     116.058
625      11-27-1978  32.016
624      12-4-1978   32.007
630      3-12-1979   32.033
632      4-16-1979   150.007,
                     150.999
633      4-16-1979   150.007,
                     150.999
634      5-7-1979    32.030
637      7-3-1979    32.007
                     71.001 -
647      1-14-1980   71.004,
                     71.999
648      1-14-1980   150.007,
                     150.999
653      7-21-1980   52.016
654      7-21-1980   71.006
655      7-21-1980   150.008
656      7-21-1980   155.004
660B     8-11-1980   52.015
661      8-18-1980   32.054
662      8-18-1980   32.055
663      8-18-1980   32.053
664      8-18-1980   32.051
666      9-15-1980   32.055
669      10-20-1980  71.002
670      11-17-1980  32.026
672      12-8-1980   72.008
673      12-15-1980  52.017
674      12-15-1980  150.009,
                     150.999
675      12-15-1980  97.002
676      12-15-1980  71.002
677      1-12-1981   71.002
678      1-19-1981   153.002,
                     153.999
679      1-19-1981   153.003
681      2-2-1981    70.007
682      2-23-1981   72.007
683      3-2-1981    32.026
684      3-2-1981    32.017
685      3-2-1981    71.006
686      3-2-1981    32.021
687      3-9-1981    71.002
689      3-30-1981   152.013
696      5-11-1981   32.026
697      6-8-1981    32.034
702      7-6-1981    32.007
703      7-6-1981    32.026
705      7-27-1981   53.001 -
                     53.009
706      8-3-1981    32.026
707      8-3-1981    32.007
                     72.025 -
708      8-3-1981    72.030,
                     72.999
709      9-14-1981   32.007
710      9-21-1981   97.005,
                     97.999
711      9-21-1981   71.999
716      10-5-1981   71.001 -
                     71.004
717      11-2-1981   97.006
723      2-22-1982   132.002 -
                     132.025
724      3-1-1982    132.018,
                     132.025
                     32.010,
725      4-5-1982    32.016,
                     32.023,
                     32.026
729      4-26-1982   70.007,
                     71.006
                     94.035 -
                     94.037,
730      5-10-1982   94.039 -
                     94.041,
                     94.999
731      5-24-1982   132.018
734      6-14-1982   30.004
736      7-26-1982   71.002
738      9-20-1982   72.045 -
                     72.048
740      1-10-1983   150.008
744      3-14-1983   71.002
746      3-28-1983   30.004
747      4-19-1983   71.002
750      8-29-1983   97.007,
                     97.999
751      8-29-1983   71.002
755      10-10-1983  110.055 -
                     110.060
759      3-5-1984    152.002,
                     152.999
760      3-19-1984   154.002
766      5-14-1984   97.001
768      6-11-1984   72.009,
                     72.999
769      6-25-1984   53.999
                     50.001 -
                     50.006,
                     50.999,
                     172.001 -
                     172.007,
                     172.020 -
                     172.021,
770      8-27-1984   172.024,
                     172.035,
                     172.036,
                     172.070 -
                     172.081,
                     172.095 -
                     172.111,
                     172.125 -
                     172.130
                     32.007,
771      9-24-1984   32.016,
                     32.017,
                     32.026
773      11-19-1984  70.008
                     94.055 -
775      12-3-1984   94.064,
                     94.999
780      5-6-1985    150.021
781      5-13-1985   97.008
782      5-20-1985   132.040 -
                     132.045
                     70.040 -
783      6-3-1985    70.047,
                     70.999
784      6-3-1985    32.016,
                     32.017
785      9-16-1985   150.021,
                     150.999
786      9-23-1985   32.026
                     110.001 -
                     110.008,
788      10-28-1985  110.021,
                     110.035 -
                     110.039
                     151.007,
790      11-25-1985  151.008,
                     151.999
791      12-2-1985   32.051 -
                     32.055
793      4-4-1986    97.001
798      6-2-1986    150.005,
                     150.999
801      7-28-1986   97.009
804      11-17-1986  32.026
805      11-17-1986  112.003
809      3-23-1987   174.010,
                     174.013
811      3-23-1987   170.004
815      3-30-1987   155.002,
                     155.999
                     181.001 -
                     181.005,
820      7-6-1987    181.007,
                     181.020 -
                     181.022,
                     181.999
821      7-6-1987    31.003
823      8-17-1987   97.005,
                     97.999
829      10-12-1987  174.011
                     32.007,
830      10-19-1987  32.011,
                     32.016
                     181.002 -
832      1-18-1988   181.005,
                     181.020,
                     181.021
835      3-21-1988   32.051
835      3-21-1988   32.052
835      3-21-1988   32.053
835      3-21-1988   32.054
840      3-21-1988   171.004,
                     171.999
845      5-23-1988   32.051 -
                     32.054
854      10-17-1988  152.003,
                     152.999
856      11-7-1988   150.009,
                     150.999
857      11-21-1988  150.009,
                     150.999
858      12-5-1988   32.007,
                     32.016
860      3-27-1989   174.010
861      4-17-1989   152.015,
                     152.999
862      5-1-1989    170.130 -
                     170.136
863      5-15-1989   150.014
864      6-5-1989    70.009,
                     70.999
866      6-19-1989   111.006
867      8-28-1989   111.025
872      10-30-1989  70.008
                     32.002,
                     32.016,
874      1-15-1990   32.027,
                     32.051 -
                     32.055
879      3-5-1990    150.010,
                     150.999
883      4-3-1990    150.009,
                     150.999
                     74.001 -
885      7-16-1990   74.025,
                     74.999
                     172.001,
892      7-20-1990   172.002,
                     172.006
889      7-23-1990   170.065
                     50.002 -
                     50.006,
                     50.999,
                     172.007,
                     172.021,
                     172.022,
                     172.035,
                     172.036,
                     172.070 -
892      7-23-1990   172.081,
                     172.095,
                     172.096,
                     172.098,
                     172.099,
                     172.102,
                     172.104,
                     172.106 -
                     172.111,
                     172.125 -
                     172.130
                     170.095 -
893      7-30-1990   170.098,
                     170.999
900      1-7-1991    30.006
902      1-28-1991   153.012
904      3-18-1991   111.006
910      7-22-1991   152.014,
                     152.999
911      7-22-1991   74.011,
                     74.999
                     32.007,
                     32.008,
917      8-19-1991   32.012,
                     32.016,
                     32.019,
                     32.059
921      10-21-1991  171.004,
                     171.999
922      10-21-1991  181.021
923      10-28-1991  70.010,
                     70.999
934      3-2-1992    72.002
937      4-13-1992   32.051
943      6-22-1992   175.012,
                     175.999
944      7-20-1992   171.004,
                     171.999
                     181.001,
945      7-20-1992   181.007,
                     181.020
941      7-22-1992   153.013,
                     153.999
947      7-27-1992   150.007,
                     150.999
948      7-27-1992   150.008
949      7-27-1992   150.008
950      7-27-1992   150.007,
                     150.999
951      7-27-1992   97.002
802      8-4-1992    52.001
955      9-21-1992   94.001,
                     94.002
956      9-21-1992   150.023,
                     150.999
                     32.007,
958      10-5-1992   32.009,
                     32.011
960      12-7-1992   51.002,
                     51.003
961      2-1-1993    51.009
962      3-8-1993    32.027
989      3-20-1993   72.003,
                     72.999
964      4-19-1993   51.002,
                     51.003
465      5-10-1993   51.007,
                     51.010
                     51.001 -
965      5-10-1993   51.009,
                     51.011,
                     51.999
                     96.001 -
966      5-24-1993   96.003,
                     96.999
973      11-15-1993  52.001
                     51.002,
977      3-21-1994   51.003,
                     51.006,
                     51.009
981      9-12-1994   150.013
985      10-24-1994  150.024
987      11-14-1994  72.003,
                     72.999
                     133.001 -
                     133.008,
993      6-5-1995    133.010 -
                     133.015,
                     133.999
995      6-5-1995    150.007,
                     150.999
                     150.010,
997      7-17-1995   150.011,
                     150.999
1000     9-11-1995   52.001
1007     2-12-1996   92.001,
                     92.002
1014     4-8-1996    170.065
                     170.098,
                     171.004,
1025     9-23-1996   171.999,
                     181.003,
                     181.004,
                     181.021
1028     1-6-1997    32.016
1029     1-6-1997    32.027
1030     3-24-1997   152.016,
                     152.999
1031     3-24-1997   170.096
1032     3-24-1997   72.008
1033     3-24-1997   171.004,
                     171.999
1034     3-24-1997   181.001,
                     181.003
1040     8-18-1997   52.001
1044     12-15-1997  51.003
1046     1-26-1998   32.019
                     95.001,
                     95.002,
                     95.015 -
                     95.020,
                     95.035 -
                     95.041,
                     95.055 -
                     95.057,
                     95.070 -
                     95.086,
                     95.100 -
1048     5-18-1998   95.104,
                     95.115 -
                     95.122,
                     95.135 -
                     95.138,
                     95.150 -
                     95.153,
                     95.165 -
                     95.170,
                     95.210 -
                     95.220,
                     95.999
                     71.999,
                     72.003,
1049     6-15-1998   72.010,
                     72.011,
                     72.049,
                     72.999
1050     8-17-1998   11.001 -
                     11.008
1053     10-19-1998  72.002
1055     11-9-1998   52.001
                     110.040,
                     110.060,
                     111.006,
1057     12-21-1998  111.025,
                     131.009,
                     132.016,
                     134.005
1058     2-1-1999    110.059
                     32.007,
1060     3-1-1999    32.009,
                     32.016,
                     32.026
                     154.015 -
1061     3-1-1999    154.017,
                     154.999
1065     5-3-1999    152.009,
                     152.999
1066     5-3-1999    152.007,
                     152.999
1067     5-3-1999    152.006,
                     152.999
1068     5-3-1999    152.004,
                     152.999
1069     5-3-1999    152.003,
                     152.999
1071     5-3-1999    152.001,
                     152.999
                     95.185 -
1072     5-3-1999    95.198,
                     95.999
1070     5-7-1999    152.002
1070     5-7-1999    152.999
                     32.007,
1077     9-13-1999   32.016,
                     32.017,
                     32.026
1078     9-20-1999   153.014
1080     9-27-1999   71.002
1082     11-1-1999   32.007,
                     32.009
1089     5-8-2000    150.025,
                     150.999
                     32.007,
1091     6-5-2000    32.009,
                     32.016
1093     6-28-2000   52.017
1094     9-11-2000   170.065
1095     9-18-2000   170.096
1097     9-25-2000   72.003,
                     72.999
1100     11-13-2000  150.007,
                     150.999
1101     11-13-2000  151.008,
                     151.999
1115     6-4-2001    52.017
1116     6-11-2001   52.001
                     11.005,
                     95.017,
1118     6-11-2001   95.079,
                     95.083,
                     95.193,
                     95.999
1125     7-16-2001   91.001,
                     91.002
1134     10-22-2001  170.096
1135     12-10-2001  150.010,
                     150.999
1138     3-11-2002   150.024,
                     150.999
1139     3-11-2002   94.007,
                     94.999
1151     6-10-2002   116.040
1152     6-17-2002   52.017
                     32.007,
1159     11-18-2002  32.009,
                     32.016
1162     1-6-2003    171.004,
                     171.999
1137     2-4-2003    170.004
                     99.001 -
1164     3-3-2003    99.006,
                     99.999
                     11.005,
1169     4-14-2003   115.001 -
                     115.018,
                     115.999
1173     6-16-2003   52.017
                     70.025,
1176     9-15-2003   70.026,
                     70.999
1178     10-6-2003   117.001 -
                     117.014
1182     10-20-2003  50.002
1185     10-20-2003  174.010
1486     11-3-2003   94.007,
                     94.999
1191     5-24-2004   171.004,
                     171.999
1192     5-24-2004   181.021
1257     5-24-2004   171.004,
                     171.999
                     94.020,
1193     6-14-2004   94.021,
                     94.999
1194     6-21-2004   177.022
1195     6-28-2004   52.017
1203     9-13-2004   52.001
1204     9-13-2004   32.016
1205     9-20-2004   153.004,
                     153.999
1206     9-20-2004   150.011,
                     150.999
1211     12-20-2004  51.002,
                     51.009
1215     1-10-2005   181.023
1216     1-24-2005   150.007,
                     150.999
1218     2-7-2005    10.999
1219     2-7-2005    72.012,
                     72.999
1223-B   4-4-2005    177.020 -
                     177.029
1227     6-20-2005   52.017
1230     7-11-2005   50.002
                     31.015 -
1235     7-18-2005   31.028,
                     31.999
1238     8-29-2005   50.002
1243     9-26-2005   92.003
1245     10-17-2005  171.146,
                     171.999
1246     10-24-2005  51.999,
                     94.999
1247     10-24-2005  32.016
                     70.025 -
1248     10-24-2005  70.029,
                     70.999
1249     10-24-2005  72.003,
                     72.999
1250     12-5-2005   72.003,
                     72.999
1255     12-12-2005  170.098
1256     12-12-2005  50.002
1257     12-12-2005  171.004,
                     171.999
1259     12-12-2005  181.021
1260     12-12-2005  174.010
1261     12-19-2005  153.002,
                     153.999
1262     12-19-2005  32.015
                     51.001 -
1263     3-6-2006    51.003,
                     51.009
1266     5-15-2006   156.001 -
                     156.009
1273     10-9-2006   181.001,
                     181.020
1274     10-9-2006   171.004,
                     171.999
1275     10-23-2006  94.002,
                     94.005
                     190.001 -
                     190.006,
                     190.020 -
                     190.022,
                     190.035 -
                     190.037,
                     190.050 -
                     190.052,
                     190.065 -
                     190.067,
                     190.080 -
                     190.082,
                     190.095 -
                     190.097,
                     190.110 -
                     190.112,
                     190.125 -
                     190.127,
                     190.140,
                     190.142,
                     190.155 -
                     190.157,
                     190.170 -
                     190.172,
1277     4-2-2007    190.185 -
                     190.187,
                     190.200 -
                     190.202,
                     190.215 -
                     190.217,
                     190.230 -
                     190.232,
                     190.245 -
                     190.247,
                     190.260 -
                     190.262,
                     190.275 -
                     190.279,
                     190.290,
                     190.305 -
                     190.307,
                     190.320 -
                     190.332,
                     190.345 -
                     190.355,
                     190.370 -
                     190.378,
                     190.390 -
                     190.397,
                     190.999
1278     4-16-2007   170.003
1285     8-13-2007   72.002
1286     9-10-2007   153.005,
                     153.999
1290     10-22-2007  150.007,
                     150.999
                     132.060 -
1294     4-21-2008   132.082,
                     132.999
1295     5-19-2008   177.001 -
                     177.005
1297     8-11-2008   152.012,
                     152.999
1298     9-15-2008   190.325
1307     1-26-2009   50.020 -
                     50.025
                     117.015,
1309     2-2-2009    117.016,
                     117.999
                     176.001 -
                     176.012,
1311     3-16-2009   176.025 -
                     176.032,
                     176.999
1315     7-27-2009   117.012
1317     11-9-2009   181.020
1318     11-9-2009   171.004,
                     171.999
                     190.004,
1320     1-25-2010   190.307,
                     190.345 -
                     190.355
1321     2-8-2010    113.001 -
                     113.010
1323     3-29-2010   70.009,
                     70.999
1324     4-12-2010   190.023
1329     6-28-2010   52.017
1330     7-19-2010   150.007,
                     150.999
                     177.040 -
1332     9-13-2010   177.056,
                     177.999
1335     10-11-2010  190.325
                     180.001 -
                     180.008,
                     180.020 -
1337     11-22-2010  180.029,
                     180.040 -
                     180.042,
                     180.999
1339     1-31-2011   156.020 -
                     156.022
1341     3-14-2011   190.156
1342     3-14-2011   190.307
1343     3-14-2011   190.329
                     170.110 -
1344     4-4-2011    170.117,
                     170.999
1349     6-27-2011   52.017
1351     8-8-2011    190.329
                     152.030 -
1352     8-8-2011    152.032,
                     152.999
1353     9-19-2011   110.060
1355     9-19-2011   181.003,
                     181.004
1358     12-12-2011  150.007,
                     150.999
1359     3-12-2012   132.071
1360     3-12-2012   52.001
1364     6-11-2012   190.290
1365     7-23-2012   190.329
                     93.001 -
1366     7-23-2012   93.011,
                     93.999
1367     7-23-2012   152.016,
                     152.999
                     90.001 -
                     90.004,
                     90.015 -
                     90.020,
                     90.035 -
1370     9-17-2012   90.040,
                     90.055 -
                     90.062,
                     90.075 -
                     90.080,
                     90.999
1371     9-17-2012   32.009,
                     32.016
                     190.004,
1373     10-8-2012   190.171,
                     190.307,
                     190.329
1374     11-12-2012  190.324
1378     12-10-2012  91.001,
                     91.002
1379     12-17-2012  91.023,
                     91.999
1380     1-14-2013   190.290
1381     3-11-2013   190.004
1384     6-24-2013   93.002
1385     6-24-2013   52.017
1386     8-12-2013   190.320
1388     10-14-2013  32.007,
                     32.009
1389     10-28-2013  51.002,
                     51.003
1390     11-11-2013  190.290
1391     2-10-2014   190.329
1392     2-10-2014   190.324
1393     2-10-2014   190.171
1394     2-10-2014   131.025 -
                     131.043
1398     5-12-2014   190.329
1400     6-23-2014   52.017
1401     7-21-2014   51.002
1402     9-15-2014   97.005,
                     97.999
1405     11-10-2014  91.001,
                     91.002
1409A    3-16-2015   190.329
1410     5-11-2015   155.001
1411     7-13-2015   190.307
1414     8-10-2015   190.096,
                     190.097
1415     8-10-2015   190.155
1421     12-21-2015  52.017
1422     3-14-2016   190.332
1423     3-14-2016   190.186
1424     3-14-2016   190.307
1425     3-14-2016   51.009
1427     6-27-2016   52.017
1432     10-3-2016   131.031
1433     10-10-2016  190.306
1434     10-10-2016  190.307
1437     12-5-2016   153.004
1437     12-5-2016   153.999
1438     12-5-2016   150.010,
                     150.999
1439     12-5-2016   150.012,
                     150.999
1440     12-5-2016   190.329
1443     12-19-2016  171.004
1443     12-19-2016  171.999
1444     12-19-2016  181.021
                     132.005,
1446     4-3-2017    132.011,
                     132.024
1447     4-10-2017   91.001,
                     91.002
1450     6-19-2017   52.017
                     98.001 -
1455     11-20-2017  98.004,
                     98.999
1456     11-20-2017  154.004
1458     12-18-2017  150.007,
                     150.999
                     73.020 -
1459     1-22-2018   73.027,
                     73.999
1463     4-30-2018   190.307
1464     6-25-2018   52.017
                     152.045 -
1465     8-27-2018   152.047,
                     152.999
1467     11-12-2018  190.004,
                     190.324
                     118.001 -
1468     1-14-2019   118.003,
                     118.999
1469     2-25-2019   150.010,
                     150.999
1470     2-25-2019   150.010,
                     150.999
1471     2-25-2019   153.004,
                     153.999
1472     2-25-2019   150.024,
                     150.999
                     181.001,
1473     3-25-2019   181.006,
                     181.020,
                     181.021
                     93.001 -
1475     4-29-2019   93.012,
                     93.999
1476     6-17-2019   52.017
                     130.001 -
                     130.007,
                     130.009 -
                     130.015,
                     130.030 -
                     130.045,
                     131.001 -
                     131.010,
                     131.025 -
                     131.043,
1477     6-17-2019   132.001 -
                     132.025,
                     132.040 -
                     132.044,
                     132.060 -
                     132.082,
                     132.999,
                     133.001 -
                     133.015,
                     133.999,
                     134.001 -
                     134.010
                     190.096,
1479     9-23-2019   190.170,
                     190.186,
                     190.245
1482     10-21-2019  52.015
985      10-24-2019  150.999
1483     11-18-2019  190.110
                     32.007,
1485     4-20-2020   32.009,
                     32.016,
                     32.034
1486     5-4-2020    51.002,
                     51.003
1488     6-29-2020   52.017
                     52.030 -
1490     6-29-2020   52.043,
                     52.999
1492     8-31-2020   90.002,
                     90.035
1495     9-14-2020   90.037,
                     90.999
                     90.002,
1497     9-28-2020   90.039,
                     90.040,
                     90.041
                     190.004,
1498     9-28-2020   190.201,
                     190.290,
                     190.307
1499     10-26-2020  90.002,
                     90.035
1505     3-22-2021   31.004
                     170.006,
                     170.020 -
                     170.023,
1506     4-26-2021   170.035,
                     170.036,
                     170.050,
                     170.051
1507     4-26-2021   172.050 -
                     172.052
1508     4-26-2021   170.080 -
                     170.082
                     170.024,
1509     4-26-2021   170.025,
                     170.037,
                     170.052
1510     4-26-2021   170.083
1511     6-21-2021   153.004,
                     153.999
1512     6-21-2021   150.999
1513     6-21-2021   150.010,
                     150.999
1514     6-21-2021   150.010,
                     150.999
1515     6-21-2021   52.017
1518     10-18-2021  Adopting Ordinance
1519     10-18-2021  170.026
                     70.025 -
1520     12-20-2021  70.028,
                     70.999
                     52.055 -
1521     2-7-2022    52.068,
                     52.999
1522     2-28-2022   177.024
1523     3-14-2022   181.999
1525     6-27-2022   155.001
1526     6-27-2022   52.017
1528     9-26-2022   72.013
1529     10-11-2022  153.015
1531     12-19-2022  90.003
1533     5-22-2023   174.010,
                     174.012
1534     6-5-2023    175.003 -
                     175.006
1535     6-5-2023    71.006,
                     71.999
1536     7-10-2023   52.017
1538     11-3-2023   30.003
1539     11-6-2023   175.005
1541     4-22-2024   172.052
1543     6-17-2024   52.017
1544     9-16-2024   116.070 -
                     116.081
1546     10-14-2024  181.030 -
                     181.033
1552     3-24-2025   94.035 -
                     94.041
                    
 
