TOWN OF COWLEY, WYOMING
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-2 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through 335, passed 3-11-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
(800) 445-5588
www.amlegal.com
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE TOWN OF COWLEY, WYOMING,
REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN EXISTING GENERAL
ORDINANCES OF THE TOWN OF COWLEY, WYOMING DEALING WITH SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN
SUCH CODE OF ORDINANCES, AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.
WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of the Town of Cowley,
Wyoming are inadequately arranged and classified and are insufficient in form
and substance for the complete preservation of the public peace, health,
safety, and general welfare of the municipality and for the proper conduct of
its affairs; and
WHEREAS, the Acts of the Legislature of the State of Wyoming empower and
authorize the Town of Cowley to revise, amend, restate, codify, and compile any
existing ordinances and all new ordinances not heretofore adopted or published
and to incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance in book form; and
WHEREAS, the Legislative Authority of the Town of Cowley has authorized a
general compilation, revision, and codification of the ordinances of the Town
of Cowley of a general and permanent nature and publication of such ordinance
in book form; and
WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety, and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take effect
at an early date.
NOW THEREFORE BE IT ORDAINED BY THE LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY OF THE POLITICAL
SUBDIVISION OF THE TOWN OF COWLEY
Section 1.   The general ordinances of the Town of Cowley as revised, amended,
restated, codified, and compiled in book form are hereby adopted as and shall
constitute the “Code of Ordinances of the Town of Cowley, Wyoming.”
Section 2.   Such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall consist of
the following titles:
   TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
                           10.   General Code Construction
                           11.   Town Standards
   TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
                           30.   Governing Body
                           31.   Officials and Employees
                           32.   Boards and Organizations
                           33.   General Administrative Policies
                           34.   Taxation
                           35.   Municipal Court
   TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
                           50.   General Provisions
                           51.   Water
                           52.   Sewers
                           53.   Garbage
   TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
                           70.   General Provisions
   TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
                           90.   Animals
                           91.   Nuisances
   TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
                           110.   Business Licensing
                           111.   Peddlers, Itinerant Merchants, and Solicitors
                           
   TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
                           130.   General Offenses
                           131.   Weapons
                           132.   Offenses Involving Minors
   TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
                           150.   General Provisions
                           151.   Building Codes
                           152.   Development Code
                           153.   Unsafe Buildings
                           154.   Mobile Homes
                           155.   Trees and Plants
                           156.   Streets and Sidewalks
   TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
                           I.   Franchises
                           II.   Contracts and Agreements
                           III.   Grant Applications
                           IV.   Vacating of Streets and Alleys
                           V.   Transfer of Property
                           VI.   Annexations and Deannexations
                           VII.   Districts
                           VIII.   Bonds
                           IX.   Appropriations
   PARALLEL REFERENCES
                           References of Wyoming Statutes
                           References of Resolutions
                           References of Ordinances
   INDEX
Section 3.   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in such
Code of Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date
of this ordinance except as they are included and reordained in whole or in
part in such Code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense committed
or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of
this ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provision of ordinances
levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory,
establishing franchises, or granting special rights to certain person,
authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing
of money, authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property,
granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to public use,
vacating or settling the boundaries of streets or other ordinance of a
temporary or special nature or pertaining to subjects not contained on or
covered by the Code.
Section 4.   Such Code shall be deemed published as of the day of its adoption
and approval by the Legislative Authority and the Clerk of The Town of Cowley
is hereby authorized and ordered to file a copy or such Code or Ordinances in
the Office of the Clerk.
Section 5.   Such Code shall be in full force and effect as provided in Section
6, and such Code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and places of the
ordinance and all provisions, sections, penalties and regulations therein
contained and of the date of passage, and that the same is properly signed,
attested, recorded, and approved and that any public hearing and notices
thereof as required by law have been given.
Section 6.   This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary
for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety, and general
welfare of the people of this municipality and shall take effect at the
earliest date provided by law.
PASSED AND ADOPTED by the Legislative Authority of the Town or Cowley on this
8th day of August 2023.
   Joel Peterson /s/
   Mayor Peterson
ATTEST:
Lisa Woodis /s/
Clerk/Treasurer Lisa Woodis
 
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL CODE CONSTRUCTION
      
11.   TOWN STANDARDS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL CODE CONSTRUCTION
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Construction of code
   
10.05   Rules of interpretation; definitions
   
10.06   Severability
   
10.07   Reference to other sections
   
10.08   Reference to offices; name designations
   
10.09   Errors and omissions
   
10.10   Reasonable time
   
10.11   Repeal or modification of code section
   
10.12   Limitation periods
   
10.13   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.14   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.15   Section histories; statutory references
   
10.16   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the town, as revised,
codified, rearranged, renumbered and consolidated into component codes, titles,
chapters and sections, shall be known and designated as the “Town of Cowley
Code,” for which designation “code of ordinances,” “codified ordinances” or
“code” may be substituted. Code title, chapter and section headings do not
constitute any part of the law as contained in the code.
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of this chapter compatible with future legislation shall
apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code,
unless otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CONSTRUCTION OF CODE.
   (A)   This code is a codification of previously existing laws, amendments
thereto and newly enacted laws. Any previously existing law or amendment
thereto reenacted by this code shall continue in operation and effect, as if it
had not been repealed by this code. All rules and regulations adopted under
laws reenacted in this code shall remain in full force and effect unless
repealed or amended subsequent to the enactment of this code.
   (B)   Any appropriation repealed and reenacted by this code is continued
only for the period designated in the original enactment of that appropriation.
   (C)   The numerical order and position of sections in this code does not
resolve a conflict between two or more sections.
   (D)   Any irreconcilable conflict between sections shall be resolved by
reference to the dates that the sections were originally enacted. The section
most recently enacted supersedes any conflicting section or subsection.
   (E)   All references within a section of this code to any section of
previously existing laws refer to the numbers in the original enactment.
   (F)   (1)   The numerical designations and descriptive headings assigned to
the various titles, chapters, subchapters or sections of this code, as
originally enacted or as added by amendment, are not law, and may be altered by
the compilers of this or any subsequent codification, in any official
publication, to more clearly indicate its content. These descriptive headings
are for organizational purposes only and do not affect the meaning, application
or construction of the law they precede.
      (2)   Each note following a section of this code is for reference
purposes only and is not a part of the section.
   (G)   All references to any section of this code refer to all subsequent
amendments to that section, unless otherwise provided.
§ 10.05 RULES OF INTERPRETATION; DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Rules of interpretation. This code shall be construed by the following
rules unless the construction is plainly repugnant to the legislative intent or
context of the provision.
      (1)   Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, ordinary and usual
sense. Technical words and phrases having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in
law shall be understood according to their technical import.
      (2)   Words imputing joint authority to three or more persons shall be
construed as imputing authority to a majority of the persons, unless otherwise
declared in the section giving the authority.
      (3)   Where a section requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent
or deputy may perform in addition to the principal, the performance of the act
by an authorized deputy or agent is valid.
      (4)   Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the
feminine and neuter genders; words in the singular shall include the plural,
and words in the plural shall include the singular; the use of a verb in the
present tense shall include the future, if applicable.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code of ordinances, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CLERK/TREASURER. The Town Clerk/Treasurer of the Town of Cowley, Wyoming.
      COUNCIL. The Town Council of Cowley, Wyoming.
      COUNTY. Big Horn County, Wyoming.
      HIGHWAY. Includes bridges, roads and streets, unless otherwise expressly
provided.
      MONTH. One calendar month.
      PERSON. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee, receiver and bodies politic. Whenever used in
any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as
applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members
thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
      PRECEDING and FOLLOWING. When referring to sections or divisions in this
code, refer to the sections or divisions next following or next preceding that
in which the words occur, unless some other section is designated.
      STATE. The State of Wyoming.
      TOWN. The Town of Cowley, Wyoming.
      WRITTEN and IN WRITING. Include printing, lithographing or other modes of
representing words and letters. Where the written signature of a person is
required, the terms mean the proper handwriting of the person, or the person’s
mark.
      YEAR. One calendar year, unless otherwise expressly provided.
§ 10.06 SEVERABILITY.
   (A)   If any section of this code now enacted or subsequently amended or its
application to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the invalidity does
not affect other sections that can be given effect without the invalid section
or application.
   (B)   Except in the case of a section or amendment to this code containing a
nonseverability provision, each division or part of every section is severable.
If any portion or application of a section is held invalid, the invalidity does
not affect the remainder of the section unless:
      (1)   The remainder is so essentially and inseparably connected with and
so dependent upon the invalid provision or application that it cannot be
presumed that the remainder would have been enacted without the invalid
provision or application; or
      (2)   The remainder is incomplete and incapable of being executed in
accordance with the legislative intent without the invalid provision or
application.
   (C)   This section applies to every section of this code regardless of
whether a section was enacted before or after the passage of this code.
   (D)   The repeal of a section or amendment stating that the provisions of a
chapter, subchapter or section are severable as provided in division (B) above
does not affect the operation of division (B) with respect to that chapter,
subchapter or section.
§ 10.07 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, the
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed
or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OFFICES; NAME DESIGNATIONS.
   (A)   Reference to offices. Reference to a public office or officer shall be
deemed to apply to any office, officer or employee of this municipality
exercising the powers, duties or functions contemplated in the provision,
irrespective of any transfer of functions or change in the official title of
the functionary.
   (B)   Name designations. Whenever any ordinance or resolution of the Council
refers to any board, bureau, commission, division, department, officer, agency,
authority or instrumentality of any government, and that name designation is
incorrectly stated; on the effective date of that ordinance or following the
effective date, the rights, powers, duties or liabilities placed with that
entity are or were transferred to a different entity; then the named board,
bureau, commission, department, division, officer, agency, authority or
instrumentality, whether correctly named in the ordinance at its effective date
or not, means that correctly named entity, or the entity to which the duties,
liabilities, powers and rights were transferred.
§ 10.09 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the word or
words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
the error.
§ 10.10 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME OR
NOTICE shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
is a Saturday, Sunday or a state holiday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.11 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF CODE SECTION.
   When a section of this code is repealed which repealed a former section or
law adopted prior to the enactment of this code, the former section or law is
not revived unless it so expressly provides. The repeal of any section shall
not extinguish or release any penalty, forfeiture or liability incurred under
the section, unless the repealing section so expressly provides. The section
shall be treated as still remaining in force for the purposes of sustaining any
proper action or prosecution for the enforcement of the penalty, forfeiture or
liability.
§ 10.12 LIMITATION PERIODS.
   The running of any period of limitations or any requirement of notice
contained in any law, whether applicable to civil causes or proceedings, or to
the prosecution of offenses, or for the recovery of penalties and forfeitures,
contained in a law repealed and reenacted by this code, shall not be affected
by the repeal and reenactment; but all suits, proceedings and prosecutions for
causes arising or acts committed prior to the effective date of this code may
be commenced and prosecuted with the same effect as if this code had not been
enacted.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In addition to an indication
thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or title
shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.15 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and amending ordinances, if any, are listed
following the text of the code section. Example:
      (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960; Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-
1-1980; Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.
Example:
      (Wyo. Stat. § 12-2-201)
      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory reference”
following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer
to that statute for further information. Example:
      § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
         This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
      Statutory reference:
         Inspection of public records, see Wyo. Stat. § 12-2-201
§ 10.16 PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.
   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date of
this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those laws.
This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued, penalties incurred
or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code. The liabilities,
proceedings and rights are continued; punishments, penalties or forfeitures
shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had not been enacted. In
particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize highway rights-of-way;
contracts entered into or franchises granted; the acceptance, establishment or
vacation of any highway; and the election of corporate officers shall remain
valid in all respects, as if this code had not been enacted.
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   No person, firm, partnership, corporation or business, hereinafter
referred to as “person,” shall violate any of the provisions of the ordinances
of the town. Any person who is convicted of violating any of the provisions of
the ordinances of the town shall be punished by a fine of not more than $750,
to which may be added costs of $10.
   (B)   Each person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every
day during any portion of which any violation of any provisions of the
ordinances of the town is committed, contracted, permitted or omitted by any
such person, and he or she shall be punished accordingly.
   (C)   The imposition of any fine shall not bar institution of the
appropriate legal action of proceedings by the town to restrain, correct or
abate the violations through injunctions, mandamus or otherwise, nor shall the
institution of such legal actions or proceedings be deemed to bar the
imposition of such fine. The town shall be entitled to recover reasonable
attorney’s fees and costs in any proceedings authorized in this code and as
authorized by law.
(Ord. 250, passed 1-2-1998)
CHAPTER 11: TOWN STANDARDS
Section
   
11.01   Seal
§ 11.01 SEAL.
   The following is hereby adopted as the official seal for said town:
   (A)   In the center shall be the word “seal;”
   (B)   Around the inside shall be the words “Incorporated 1907;” and
   (C)   Around the outside shall be the words “Town of Cowley, Wyo.”
(Ord. 1, passed 1-16-1908)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   GOVERNING BODY
      
31.   OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
      
32.   BOARDS AND ORGANIZATIONS
      
33.   GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE POLICIES
      
34.   TAXATION
      
35.   MUNICIPAL COURT
CHAPTER 30: GOVERNING BODY
Section
General Provisions
   
30.01   Compensation
Meetings of Town Council; Passage of Ordinances
   
30.15   Majority required
   
30.16   Regular meetings
   
30.17   Special meetings
   
30.18   Mayor to preside
   
30.19   Reading of ordinances
   
30.20   Publication
   
30.21   Effective dates
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 30.01 COMPENSATION.
   (A)   Any ordinance that established compensation for members of the Town
Council is hereby repealed as of this date.
   (B)   The Town Councilmembers shall receive compensation as follows: the
Mayor of the Council shall receive an amount as shall be set from time to time
for his or her service and the four members of the Town Council shall receive
an amount as shall be set from time to time for their service.
   (C)   Town Councilmembers shall be compensated for non-local travel on town-
related business according to established town policy applicable to town
employees.
(Ord. 254, passed 9-10-1998)
MEETINGS OF TOWN COUNCIL; PASSAGE OF ORDINANCES
§ 30.15 MAJORITY REQUIRED.
   The Town Council shall consist of the Mayor and Councilmembers, and a
majority thereof shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, but
no business shall be transacted unless concurred in by a majority of all the
members of the Council.
(Ord. 3, passed 1-14-1908)
§ 30.16 REGULAR MEETINGS.
   The regular meeting of the Town Council shall be held on the second Tuesday
in each month at 7:00 p.m. at the Town Hall; provided that all meetings may be
adjourned from time to time, and by such adjournment may be held at any other
convenient time and place within the corporate limits of the town.
(Ord. 13, passed 2-4-1909)
§ 30.17 SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   Special meetings may be held at any time when called by the Mayor, or by two
or more Councilmembers. Notice of such meeting shall be given in the official
paper when practicable; otherwise, all members of the Council shall be notified
if within the town limits by the Marshal, who shall serve either written or
verbal notice on such member who shall not have joined in the call for such
meeting. Should any member of the Council be absent from the town, such notice
shall be left at his or her residence or his or her usual place of business.
(Ord. 3, passed 1-14-1908)
§ 30.18 MAYOR TO PRESIDE.
   At all meetings of the Council, the Mayor shall preside if present, but, in
his or her absence, the Council shall choose, from among its number, a
president pro tem, who shall for the time have the same authority as the Mayor.
(Ord. 3, passed 1-14-1908)
§ 30.19 READING OF ORDINANCES.
   Every ordinance shall be publicly read on three different days. Public
reading may be by title only. At least ten days shall elapse between the
introduction and final passage of every ordinance. For an emergency ordinance,
the requirements of this section may be suspended by the affirmative vote of
three-fourths of the qualified members of the governing body. No franchise may
be granted by emergency ordinance. Each member of the Council shall vote
thereon, unless excused. If a majority of the Council shall vote in favor of
passage of the ordinance, it shall be declared passed.
(Ord. 3, passed 1-14-1908; Ord. 284, passed 11-8-2011)
§ 30.20 PUBLICATION.
   All ordinances shall be published once in the official newspaper and shall
be recorded by the Town Clerk/Treasurer in a book provided for that purpose,
called “Ordinance Book, Town of Cowley,” and the same shall be properly and
conveniently indexed.
(Ord. 3, passed 1-14-1908)
§ 30.21 EFFECTIVE DATES.
   (A)   Unless a later date is specifically named therein, all ordinances
shall take effect and be in force from and after their passage and publication
as provided for in §
30.20.
   (B)   Due proof of publication shall be made by affidavit by the editor or
manager of the paper publishing such ordinance, together with a printed copy of
the ordinance, attached to the affidavit, to be filed in the office of the Town
Clerk/Treasurer, who shall note thereon the day and hour of the filing,
verified by his or her official signature.
   (C)   In case of an emergency, the same shall be so declared.
   (D)   All ordinances shall be numbered consecutively, beginning with the
number current at the passage of this subchapter.
(Ord. 3, passed 1-14-1908)
CHAPTER 31: OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
Section
Retirement System
   
31.01   Adoption of the state’s Retirement System Deferred Compensation Plan
for the benefit of employees of the town
   
31.02   Contributions
   
31.03   Implemented Internal Revenue Code; employee contributions
   
31.04   Payment into the retirement system
   
31.05   Option to receive contributed amounts
   
31.06   Town to pay employee contributions
   
31.07   Amount of contributions
   
31.08   Treatment of employee contributions
Removing Employees
   
31.20   Treatment before removal
   
31.21   Treatment during removal
Taking Office
   
31.35   Oath of office
   
31.36   Bonds
   
31.37   Delivery of bonds
RETIREMENT SYSTEM
§ 31.01 ADOPTION OF THE STATE RETIREMENT SYSTEM DEFERRED COMPENSATION PLAN FOR
THE BENEFIT OF EMPLOYEES OF THE TOWN.
   (A)   The political subdivision adopts the state’s Retirement System
Deferred Compensation Plan (“plan”), effective September 1, 2012.
   (B)   The participation of the political subdivision’s employees in the
state plan shall be governed by the plan document, a copy of which is attached
to the resolution codified herein; the services agreement(s); and any and all
rules and regulations promulgated by the State Retirement System Board.
   (C)   The political subdivision agrees to be bound by and honor the
decisions and action taken by the State Retirement System Board, the Plan
Administrator, in connection with plan management and administration,
including, but not limited to, amending or terminating the plan, selecting
investment options and service providers and approving unforeseeable emergency
requests.
   (D)   The political subdivision agrees that no employee shall be allowed to
contribute more than the maximum annual contribution into the plan. If
political subdivision offers one or more other 457 plans, the political
subdivision shall coordinate the maximum annual contribution among all of the
plans and agrees that any excess deferrals resulting from participation in
multiple plans shall be attributable to and distributed from one of the other
457 plans, not the State Retirement System 457 Plan.
   (E)   It is recommended that the political subdivision facilitate
educational programs developed for use with the plan at least once a year, and,
to the extent possible, allow employees to attend during work hours.
   (F)   The Town Clerk/Treasurer is hereby authorized to provide all relevant
information to State Retirement System 457 Plan Administrator as requested.
(Res. passed 8-14-2012)
§ 31.02 CONTRIBUTIONS.
   The town is to pick up employee contributions to the State Retirement
System, pursuant to Wyo. Stat. § 9-3-412 and with the meaning of I.R.C. § 414
(h)(2), being 26 U.S.C. § 414(h)(2), as follows.
   (A)   The town specifies that contributions, although designated as employee
contributions, are being paid by the town in lieu of contributions by the
employee.
   (B)   The employee is not given the option of choosing to receive the
contributed amounts directly instead of having them paid by the town to the
pension plan.
(Res. 2008-7, passed 12-18-2008)
§ 31.03 IMPLEMENTED INTERNAL REVENUE CODE; EMPLOYEE CONTRIBUTIONS.
   The town/law will implement the provisions of I.R.C. § 414(h)(2), being 26
U.S.C. § 414(h)(2), by making employee contributions pursuant to Wyo. Stat. §
9-3-412(b) on behalf of its employees who are members of the State Retirement
System. EMPLOYEE CONTRIBUTIONS shall mean those contributions to the State
Retirement System which are deducted from the salary of employees and are
credited to individual employees’ accounts.
(Res. 2009-5, passed 12-8-2009)
§ 31.04 PAYMENT INTO THE RETIREMENT SYSTEM.
   The contributions made by the town/law to the State Retirement System,
although designated as employee contributions, are being paid to the State
Retirement System by the town/law in lieu of contributions by the employees who
are members of the State Retirement System.
(Res. 2009-5, passed 12-8-2009)
§ 31.05 OPTION TO RECEIVE CONTRIBUTED AMOUNTS.
   Employees shall not have the option of choosing to receive the contributed
amounts directly instead of having them paid by the town/law to the State
Retirement System.
(Res. 2009-5, passed 12-8-2009)
§ 31.06 TOWN TO PAY EMPLOYEE CONTRIBUTIONS.
   The town/law shall pay to the State Retirement System the contributions
designated as employee contributions from the same source of funds as used in
paying salary.
(Res. 2009-5, passed 12-8-2009)
§ 31.07 AMOUNT OF CONTRIBUTIONS.
   The amount of the contributions designated as employee contributions and
picked up by the town/law to the State Retirement System on behalf of an
employee shall be the entire contribution required of the employee by the State
Retirement Act, being Wyo. Stat §§ 9-3-401 et seq.
(Res. 2009-5, passed 12-8-2009)
§ 31.08 TREATMENT OF EMPLOYEE CONTRIBUTIONS.
   The contributions designated as employee contributions made by the town/law
to the State Retirement System shall be treated for all purposes, other than
taxation, in the same way that member contributions are treated by the State
Retirement System.
(Res. 2009-5, passed 12-8-2009)
REMOVING EMPLOYEES
§ 31.20 TREATMENT BEFORE REMOVAL.
   Except as otherwise provided, town employees, except the Town Clerk/
Treasurer, Chief of Police, Town Marshal, Attorney, Municipal Judge and
department heads appointed by the Mayor, shall be afforded the following
treatment before being removed from employment for incompetency, neglect of
duty or otherwise for cause.
   (A)   The charges supporting removal shall be specified by the Mayor in a
written notice which, together with a copy of this subchapter, shall be
delivered personally or be mailed to the employee at his or her last known
address.
   (B)   Within five days of the date the aforementioned notice is sent or
delivered, the employee may demand a hearing upon the charges by delivering a
written demand to the Town Clerk/Treasurer at the Town Hall.
   (C)   In the event of a demand for a hearing, as provided, a hearing shall
be scheduled by the Mayor, or his or her representative, with not less than
five days’ notice to the employee. The notice shall be in writing and shall
include the date, time and place of the hearing, and shall state that the
purpose of the hearing is to determine whether there are reasonable grounds to
believe that the charges against the employee are true and support the
dismissal action.
   (D)   If the Mayor, or his or her representative, determines from the
hearing that there are reasonable grounds to believe that the charges against
the employee are true, then and in that event the employee may be removed from
employment; however, if it is determined from the hearing that there are no
reasonable grounds to believe that the charges against the employee are true,
then the employee shall not be removed from employment.
(Ord. 228, passed 11-13-1990)
§ 31.21 TREATMENT DURING REMOVAL.
   Except as otherwise provided, town employees, except the Town Clerk/
Treasurer, Chief of Police, Town Marshal, Attorney, Municipal Judge and
department heads appointed by the Mayor, shall be afforded the following
treatment when removed from employment for incompetency, neglect of duty or
otherwise for cause: the charges supporting removal shall be specified by the
Mayor in a written notice which, together with a copy of this subchapter, shall
be delivered personally or be mailed to the employee at his or her last known
address within three working days of removal.
(Ord. 228, passed 11-13-1990)
TAKING OFFICE
§ 31.35 OATH OF OFFICE.
   Upon assuming the duties of their respective offices, the Mayor and
Councilmembers shall take the oath of office prescribed by law.
(Ord. 6, passed 1-20-1908)
§ 31.36 BONDS.
   The Town Clerk/Treasurer and ex-officio assessor shall give a bond in the
sum of $500, the Town Marshal shall give a bond of $500 and the Town Clerk/
Treasurer and ex-officio collector of taxes shall give a bond in the sum of
$1,000.
(Ord. 6, passed 1-20-1908)
§ 31.37 DELIVERY OF BONDS.
   Said bonds shall be given to the town with sufficient sureties conditioned
for the faithful performance of the duties of their respective offices and
shall be approved by the Town Council and filed with the Town Clerk/Treasurer.
(Ord. 6, passed 1-20-1908)
CHAPTER 32: BOARDS AND ORGANIZATIONS
Section
Sage Creek Heritage Preservation Society
   
32.01   Statement of purpose
   
32.02   Definitions
   
32.03   Historic Preservation Commission
   
32.04   Duties and powers of Sage Creek Heritage Preservation Society
   
32.05   Inventory of significant cultural resources
   
32.06   Designation of local cultural resources
   
32.07   Participation on the National Register process
Emergency Management Department
   
32.20   Purpose
   
32.21   Creation
   
32.22   Declaration of emergency
   
32.23   Emergency operations plan and mutual aid agreements
   
32.24   Duty
   
32.25   Authority regarding response to emergency or disaster
   
32.26   Emergency operations centers
   
32.27   Location of emergency operations centers
   
32.28   Succession of authority
   
32.29   Coordinator
   
32.30   Designated persons
   
32.31   Emergency or Disaster Operations Fund
   
32.32   Coordinator – powers and duties
   
32.33   Necessity
SAGE CREEK HERITAGE PRESERVATION SOCIETY
§ 32.01 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   (A)   The ordinance incorporated herein this subchapter may be called “The
Sage Creek Historic Preservation Ordinance.”
   (B)   (1)   The state and the town have a wealth of cultural resources that
represent the many aesthetic and practical triumphs of the past. The Town
Council recognizes the historic value of these resources and specifically
recognizes those parochial representatives of our heritage. The town has “name
carvings” nearby, traced to Bridger Trail activity. The town has several public
buildings as well as private homes that, in some cases, represent distinctly
unique, L.D.S. pioneer design features. In view of the destruction of many
invaluable historic and archeological sites in recent years, without adequate
and thoughtful consideration to the possible preservation and use of these
properties, we, the citizens of the town, declare this policy: It is in the
best interests of this community and state to promote, expand and preserve
those relics of historical significance and do everything within our power to
preserve, restore, document and promote our heritage.
      (2)   The purpose of this subchapter is to:
         (a)   Effect and accomplish the protection, enhancement and
perpetuation of such improvements and of districts which represent or reflect
elements of the town’s cultural, social, economic, political, engineering and
architectural history;
         (b)   Safeguard the town’s historic, archaeological and cultural
heritage, as embodied and reflected in such historical structures, sites and
districts;
         (c)   Stabilize and improve property values;
         (d)   Foster civic pride in the beauty and noble accomplishments of
the past;
         (e)   Protect and enhance the town’s attractions to residents,
tourists and visitors, and serve as a support and stimulus to business and
industry to strengthen the economy of the town; and
         (f)   Promote the use of historic structures, sites and districts for
the education, pleasure and welfare of the people of the town.
   (C)   The town enacts this subchapter as stated above to help preserve the
state’s heritage. The town also endorses the State Certified Local Government
program and agrees to participate in this historic preservation program. The
town has the ability to participate in the CLG Program by provisions specified
in Wyo. Stat. § 16-1-101.
(Ord. passed 8-8-1991)
§ 32.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   LOCAL GOVERNMENT. A city, town, county or any other political subdivision
within the state.
   NATIONAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC PLACES. The federal government’s official list
of properties judged to be worthy of preservation. The National Register
program in the state is administered by the SHPO.
   SAGE CREEK HERITAGE PRESERVATION SOCIETY. The Historic Preservation
Commission established by the town’s government body.
   SCHPS. Sage Creek Heritage Preservation Society.
   STATE HISTORIC PRESERVATION OFFICER or SHPO. The individual appointed by the
Governor to administer the state’s historic preservation program.
(Ord. passed 8-8-1991)
§ 32.03 HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION.
   (A)   This subchapter hereby authorizes the creation of a historic
preservation commission known as the Sage Creek Heritage Preservation Society.
   (B)   The Mayor shall appoint board members to the SCHPS; each appointment
will be subject to approval by the Town Council. The Mayor shall attempt to
draw upon a wide range of backgrounds and interests to represent the town’s
diverse heritage.
   (C)   The SCHPS shall consist of five members.
   (D)   Members of the SCHPS shall serve without compensation, but may be
reimbursed for expenses necessarily incurred in the performance of their
duties.
   (E)   At least two members of the SCHPS must reside within the boundaries of
the local jurisdiction.
   (F)   All SCHPS members must have a demonstrated interest, knowledge or
experience in the fields related to historic preservation as described below.
   (G)   (1)   To the extent that such professionals are available in the
community, at least two members of the SCHPS shall be professionals in fields
related to historic preservation (e.g., history, architectural history,
archeology, historical architecture, planning or other related disciplines such
as: American civilization, cultural geography or cultural anthropology).
      (2)   If historic preservation professionals do not reside within the
county, expertise may be obtained from other state communities. Information on
the credentials of the SCHPS members must be kept on file and available for
public inspection.
   (H)   When an appropriate discipline is not represented among the SCHPS
members, the SCHPS shall be required to seek the appropriate expertise when
considering National Register nominations or other actions that will impact
properties which are normally evaluated by a professional in such disciplines.
   (I)   Minutes or records of the proceedings of the SCHPS shall be
transmitted to the town as well as to members of the SCHPS. The SCHPS shall
monitor and report to the SHPO any activity affecting significant property
within its jurisdiction.
   (J)   An annual report of the activities of the SCHPS shall be submitted to
the town and the SHPO. Such reports shall include, but are not limited to,
items such as: the number and type of cases reviewed, review decisions,
proposed nominations, updated resumes of SCHPS members, appointments to the
SCHPS, meeting attendance records, progress reports on survey activities and
National Register nominations reviewed.
   (K)   SCHPS meetings must be held at least twice a year.
   (L)   The appointing authority shall act within 90 days to fill a vacancy.
   (M)   Each SCHPS member is required to attend at least one informational or
educational meeting per year, as sponsored by the SHPO, that pertains to the
work and functions of the SCHPS or to Historic Preservation Commissions.
   (N)   The SCHPS, in addition to the appropriations made by the town, shall
have the right to receive, hold and spend funds which it may legally receive
from any and every source both in and out of the state for the purpose of
carrying out the provisions of this subchapter.
   (O)   The SCHPS shall adopt rules of procedure for the conduct of its
business in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter. Such rules of
procedures shall be filed with the town. Terms of the SCHPS members and the
election of officers shall be discussed within the SCHPS’s rules of procedure.
(Ord. passed 8-8-1991)
§ 32.04 DUTIES AND POWERS OF SAGE CREEK HERITAGE PRESERVATION SOCIETY.
   The Sage Creek Preservation SCHPS shall have powers to:
   (A)   Conduct cultural resource surveys of structures and areas for the
purpose of determining those of architectural, historical, cultural and/or
archaeological significance; to maintain and revise detailed listings of
significant structures and districts;
   (B)   (1)   Propose to the Town Council criteria of the evaluation and
designation of districts, buildings, structures, sites or objects located
within the town’s jurisdiction. The criteria should be compatible with the
Department of Interior’s criteria for evaluation of potential entries to the
National Register of Historic Places as listed in division (B)(2) below.
      (2)   The quality of significance in American history, architecture,
archaeology and culture is present in districts, sites, buildings, structures
and objects that possess integrity of location, design, setting, materials,
workpersonship, feeling and association, and:
         (a)   That are associated with events that have made a significant
contribution to the broad patterns of our history;
         (b)   That are associated with the lives of persons significant in our
past;
         (c)   That embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period or
method of construction, or that represent the work of a master, or that possess
high artistic values, or that represent a significant and distinguishable
entity whose components may lack individual distinction; or
         (d)   That have yielded, or may be likely to yield, information
important in prehistory or history.
   (C)   Designate districts, sites, buildings, structures and objects which
meet the criteria because they are significant in American history,
architecture, archaeology and culture. This recognition of local districts,
sites, buildings, structures and objects shall be entitled locally as specified
in §
32.06(A). Ultimately, designations by the Sage Creek Heritage Preservation
Society shall be submitted to the Town Council for ratification;
   (D)   Act as advisors on historic preservation issues to appropriate local
government agencies and the town;
   (E)   Act as advisors to residents and property holders on matters of
historic preservation;
   (F)   Promote historic preservation awareness through a wide range of
activities such as walking tours, educational seminars and published materials;
   (G)   Retain assistance of staff members or consultants to carry out the
duties as listed above; and
   (H)   Request and receive any appropriate information, cooperation
assistance or studies from any government departments, boards, agencies or
commissions.
(Ord. passed 8-8-1991)
§ 32.05 INVENTORY OF SIGNIFICANT CULTURAL RESOURCES.
   (A)   As stated in §
32.04(A), the Sage Creek Historic Preservation Society (“SCHPS”), with
assistance from local officials and the SHPO, shall conduct a cultural resource
survey of neighborhoods, commercial and rural areas for the purpose of
evaluating each area’s potential for local designation. The inventory shall
serve as the database for preservation decisions and possibly a guide for
planning and zoning decisions.
   (B)   The local inventory shall:
      (1)   Be accessible to the public unless access to archaeological or
historic information must be restricted for protective purposes;
      (2)   Be updated periodically to reflect new information;
      (3)   Incorporate information about buildings, sites, structures,
districts or objects enrolled in or eligible for listing in the National
Register of Historic Places; and
      (4)   Be supplied to the SHPO through the use of duplicates for use in
SHPO inventory files.
   (C)   Current historic preservation methodology as established by the
Department of the Interior and the SHPO shall serve as a guideline for the
cultural resource survey.
   (D)   Cultural resource consultants may be retained to perform the survey
duties of the SCHPS.
(Ord. passed 8-8-1991)
§ 32.06 DESIGNATION OF LOCAL CULTURAL RESOURCES.
   (A)   Based upon the results of the cultural resource inventory, the SCHPS
shall complete a list of districts, buildings, structures, sites or objects
that meet the criteria for eligibility, as specified in §
32.04(B), the Department of the Interior’s criteria for the National Register
of Historic Places. The SCHPS shall establish an official list of locally
significant cultural resources and give this list an appropriate title of “Sage
Creek Heritage Preservation Society’s List of Locally Recognized Historic
Sites.”
   (B)   The SCHPS shall submit the proposed designation of local sites to the
Town Council for ratification.
   (C)   The designation shall contain specific boundaries for proposed
designations.
   (D)   A landowner, or other interested parties, may submit a recommendation
to the SCHPS for consideration of local listing. The SCHPS must duly process
this petition.
   (E)   Notice of a proposed designation shall be sent by certified mail to
the owner of property proposed for designation, describing the property
proposed and announcing a public hearing by the SCHPS to consider said
designation.
   (F)   All property owners shall be notified of public hearing as in division
(E) above. The local government shall advertise the meeting once in each daily
local newspaper at least 15 days prior to the SCHPS meeting.
   (G)   At the public meeting:
      (1)   The SCHPS may present testimony or documentary evidence of its own
to establish a record regarding the historical and architectural, cultural or
archaeological importance of the proposed designation;
      (2)   The SCHPS shall afford to the owner of said property reasonable
opportunity to present testimony or documentary evidence regarding the
importance of the proposed designation;
      (3)   The owner of the property proposed for designation shall be
afforded the right to representation by counsel and reasonable opportunity to
cross-examine witnesses presented by the SCHPS;
      (4)   Any interested party may present testimony or documentary evidence
regarding the proposed designation at public hearing; and
      (5)   The SCHPS must submit its decision to the Town Council within 30
days of the public hearing, and the Town Council must act on the resolution for
approval within 60 days of the public hearing.
   (H)   Owners must be notified of the designation decision within 14 days of
the SCHPS meeting. The State Historic Preservation office, and other agencies
as appropriate, shall be notified of designation by the SCHPS. Within 30 days
of the date on which the Town Council ratifies designation of any site,
building structure, district or object as worthy of preservation, the SCHPS
shall cause to be filed with the appropriate legal entity a certificate of
notification that such property is designated, and said certificate of
notification shall be maintained on the public records until such time as the
designation may be withdrawn by the SCHPS.
   (I)   The SCHPS may rescind the designation of a site, building, structure,
district or object if, due to professional error, the property was incorrectly
designated. The SCHPS shall follow the public notification procedures as
specified above to rescind a local designation.
(Ord. passed 8-8-1991)
§ 32.07 PARTICIPATION ON THE NATIONAL REGISTER PROCESS.
   The SCHPS shall review each pending National Register nomination that lies
within the boundaries of its specified jurisdiction. The SCHPS will comply with
§ 4 of the “Rules and Regulations Pertaining to the Certification of Local
Governments,” being Section 4 of W.C.W.R. 085-0010-1, as written by the SHPO
and officially approved by the Department of the Interior.
(Ord. passed 8-8-1991)
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT DEPARTMENT
§ 32.20 PURPOSE.
   (A)   Pursuant to Wyo. Stat. § 19-13-108, this subchapter provides for the
establishment of an Emergency Management Department and its governing Council
to:
      (1)   Eliminate hazards that constitute a significant threat to public
safety or to reduce the effects of unavoidable hazards through a program of
hazard mitigation;
      (2)   Prepare and exercise operations plans for the preservation of life,
protection of property and restoration of the economy in the event of an
emergency;
      (3)   Effect coordination among other public departments, industry and
citizens with emergency responsibilities;
      (4)   Act as specified by the applicable plan during emergencies declared
by the Emergency Management Council or by any participating municipal
government;
      (5)   Provide for a Coordinator and the enrollment of assistants, and to
define their powers and duties;
      (6)   Make the necessary rules and orders to accomplish emergency
preparedness, response and recovery within each participating jurisdiction; and
      (7)   Authorize acceptance of services, equipment and funds and the like
from the United States government, the state and other public or private
sources.
   (B)   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT means the planning for and the execution of all
emergency functions for the prevention of, response to and recovery from
disaster events, which include, but are not limited to, public disorder,
sabotage, flood, fire, earthquake, blizzard, tornado and any other natural,
human-caused or nuclear emergencies.
(Res. passed 4-15-1988)
§ 32.21 CREATION.
   (A)   There is hereby created the County Emergency Management Department,
which shall be governed by an Emergency Management Council consisting of:
County Commissioners; Councilmembers and/or chief executive of each signator-
incorporated community; County Sheriff; and other persons as designated from
time to time by the Emergency Management Council.
   (B)   The Chairperson of the County Commissioners shall be Chairperson of
the Emergency Management Council. The Vice Chairperson shall be elected from
among its members.
(Res. passed 4-15-1988)
§ 32.22 DECLARATION OF EMERGENCY.
   The primary responsibility for initiating action at the time of an emergency
or disaster rests with the elected government of the county or incorporated
community involved. A declaration of an emergency or disaster, and subsequent
assistance requests on behalf of the county or any of its incorporated
communities, will be honored only when the declaration is made by the chief
elected official or the Emergency Management Council.
(Res. passed 4-15-1988)
§ 32.23 EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLAN AND MUTUAL AID AGREEMENTS.
   The Emergency Management Council is empowered to prepare, review and
recommend to the county and community governing bodies a local emergency
operations plan and mutual aid agreements.
(Res. passed 4-15-1988)
§ 32.24 DUTY.
   It shall be the duty of the Emergency Management Council to promulgate such
rules and regulations as may be necessary for the efficient management and
operation of the Emergency Management Department, including the adoption of
applicable regulations of the State Coordinator issued under authority of Wyo.
Stat. § 19-13-105.
(Res. passed 4-15-1988)
§ 32.25 AUTHORITY REGARDING RESPONSE TO EMERGENCY OR DISASTER.
   The Emergency Management Council may make, amend and rescind all rules and
orders as may be necessary to respond to or recover from any declared emergency
or disaster.
(Res. passed 4-15-1988)
§ 32.26 EMERGENCY OPERATIONS CENTERS.
   The Emergency Management Department shall provide emergency operations
centers with essential communications and emergency equipment as directed by
the Emergency Management Council.
(Res. passed 4-15-1988)
§ 32.27 LOCATION OF EMERGENCY OPERATIONS CENTERS.
   (A)   The principal County Emergency Operations Center shall be located at
420 1/2 West C. Basin, Wyoming. The Emergency Operations Center for the town
shall be located at the Cowley Log Gym Community Center at 55 and First Street
South.
   (B)   Emergency or disaster situations may also require the establishment of
field operations centers at or near the affected locations.
(Res. passed 4-15-1988)
§ 32.28 SUCCESSION OF AUTHORITY.
   The succession of authority within the County Emergency Management Council
will be as depicted in the existing Local Emergency Operations Plan (Direction
and Control).
(Res. passed 4-15-1988)
§ 32.29 COORDINATOR.
   The Emergency Management Council shall recommend to the Governor of the
state a person to serve as Coordinator for the Council, who shall serve at the
pleasure of the Council and the Governor.
(Res. passed 4-15-1988)
§ 32.30 DESIGNATED PERSONS.
   The Emergency Management Council shall, with the consent of the Governor,
designate a person or persons to receive equipment, funds, services and the
like offered by the federal or state governments or by other donors.
(Res. passed 4-15-1988)
§ 32.31 EMERGENCY OR DISASTER OPERATIONS FUND.
   The Emergency Management Council shall establish an Emergency or Disaster
Operations Fund for its participating jurisdictions or a method of payment for
expenses incurred as a result of emergency operations and disaster relief.
(Res. passed 4-15-1988)
§ 32.32 COORDINATOR – POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Coordinator is hereby empowered and directed:
   (A)   To identify and analyze the effects of hazards that threaten the
participating jurisdictions;
   (B)   To prepare an Emergency Operations Plan for the county and to assist
in the preparation of additional emergency operations plans for the
incorporated communities within the county where appropriate;
   (C)   To coordinate the emergency readiness responsibilities and functions
of local governments, industry and citizens within the county;
   (D)   To expend funds for emergency operations and disaster relief not to
exceed $500 without further authorization from the Emergency Management
Council;
   (E)   To establish a program to prevent and reduce the potential effects of
disasters;
   (F)   To assist in establishing mutual aid or cooperative assistance
agreements among the local governments, industry and volunteer agencies within
the county; and
   (G)   To execute the directives and policies established by the County
Emergency Management Council.
(Res. passed 4-15-1988)
§ 32.33 NECESSITY.
   This subchapter is hereby declared to be a measure necessary to provide
coordination with federal and state emergency management agencies and for the
immediate preservation of the public peace, health and safety; it shall take
effect upon being passed by the Board of County Commissioners, and for each
participating incorporated community upon the adoption by its governing council
and signature by its Mayor.
(Res. passed 4-15-1988)
CHAPTER 33: GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE POLICIES
Section
   
33.01   Adoption of Region Six Hazard Mitigation Plan
   
33.02   Pre-Disaster Mitigation Plan
   
33.03   Adoption of Town Master Plan
§ 33.01 ADOPTION OF REGION SIX HAZARD MITIGATION PLAN.
   The town adopts the Region Six Hazard Mitigation Plan.
(Res. 2017-2, passed 1-10-2017)
§ 33.02 PRE-DISASTER MITIGATION PLAN.
   The County Pre-Disaster Mitigation Plan is approved and adopted by the Mayor
and Town Council, this November 9, 2010.
(Res. 2010-3, passed 11-9-2010)
§ 33.03 ADOPTION OF TOWN MASTER PLAN.
   The Town Planning Commission does hereby adopt the Town Master Plan and
certifies it to the Town Council.
(Res. passed 8-23-2007)
CHAPTER 34: TAXATION
Section
   
34.01   Excise tax
   
34.02   Sales tax not included
§ 34.01 EXCISE TAX.
   An excise tax of 1% upon the retail sales of tangible personal property and
services, as defined by Wyo. Stat. § 39-15-202 et seq., within the town is
continued; provided the County Clerk shall certify to the County Treasurer that
a sufficient number of ordinances have been adopted and the resolution approved
by the county to continue this tax within 90 days of the election to determine
the continuation.
(Ord. 252, passed 6-11-1998)
§ 34.02 SALES TAX NOT INCLUDED.
   The amount subject to the excise tax on retail sales shall not include the
amount of any sales tax imposed by the state.
(Ord. 252, passed 6-11-1998)
CHAPTER 35: MUNICIPAL COURT
Section
   
35.01   Procedure in Municipal Courts
   
35.02   Bond
   
35.03   Costs in trials
   
35.04   Actions for violating ordinances
   
35.05   Complaint upon oath
   
35.06   Rendition of judgment
§ 35.01 PROCEDURE IN MUNICIPAL COURTS.
   The procedure in Municipal Courts in said town, except as hereinafter
provided, shall, as nearly as possible, conform to that provided by the general
laws of the state in courts of the Justice of Peace.
(Ord. 4, passed 1-14-1908)
§ 35.02 BOND.
   The Police Justice in and for said town, except as hereinafter provided,
shall give a bond of $200 to said town, conditioned on the faithful performance
of the duties of his or her office.
(Ord. 4, passed 1-14-1908)
§ 35.03 COSTS IN TRIALS.
   The cost in all trials before the Municipal Courts shall be the same as
those provided by law for similar services, in the courts of the Justice of
Peace; provided, however, that there shall be assessed as part of the costs in
each case the sum of $5, to be paid to the Town Attorney for prosecuting the
case.
(Ord. 4, passed 1-14-1908)
§ 35.04 ACTIONS FOR VIOLATING ORDINANCES.
   Actions for violating ordinances may be commenced by filing with the Police
Justice a statement or complaint, stating the nature of the offense and signed
by the Town Attorney, Town Marshal or any responsible citizen of the town.
(Ord. 4, passed 1-14-1908)
§ 35.05 COMPLAINT UPON OATH.
   In case complaint upon oath shall be made, as hereinafter provided, the
Police Justice shall issue a warrant for the arrest of the person or persons
against whom such complaint is made.
(Ord. 4, passed 1-14-1908)
§ 35.06 RENDITION OF JUDGMENT.
   Upon the rendition of judgment against any defendant for the violation of
any ordinance of the town, the Police Justice shall take an order, and enter
the same upon his or her docket, that if the defendant shall neglect or refuse
to satisfy such judgment and costs, he or she shall be confined in the Town
Jail or other safe place provided for that purpose one day for each $1 of such
judgment and costs, and execution shall proceed immediately upon the rendition
of judgment; every person so committed shall be employed at hard labor on the
streets or other public improvements of the town, under the direction of the
Marshal, until such fine and costs are fully paid and allowed, at the rate of
$1 per day, each day to consist of eight hours of faithful work.
(Ord. 4, passed 1-14-1908)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
51.   WATER
      
52.   SEWERS
      
53.   GARBAGE
CHAPTER 50: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
50.01   FTC Identity Theft Red Flag Rule for utilities
   
50.02   Billing for all services provided by the town
   
50.03   Application of payments
   
50.04   Termination of services
§ 50.01 FTC IDENTITY THEFT RED FLAG RULE FOR UTILITIES.
   The Utilities Department will assess its existing identity theft risk for
new and existing accounts and use the risk assessment to select measures (red
flags) that may be used to detect attempts to establish fraudulent accounts or
manipulate existing accounts through adoption of an identity theft program.
(Res. 2008-6, passed 11-11-2008)
§ 50.02 BILLING FOR ALL SERVICES PROVIDED BY THE TOWN.
   All services provided by the town, pursuant to statute, ordinance or
otherwise, requiring payment to the town for such services, and including, but
not limited to, utility services, garbage collection, construction or
demolition services for enforcement of building codes, abatement of nuisances,
removal of weeds and any other services, may be billed by the town to the owner
of property receiving such services in a single unified billing statement
detailing all charges due and payable from such person.
(Ord. 238, passed 6-11-1992)
§ 50.03 APPLICATION OF PAYMENTS.
   All payments received by the town from a property owner for services shall
be applied first to late charges assessed against such property owner; then to
costs of collection of any amounts due and payable from the property owner to
the town; then to arrearage due from the property owner to the town; then to
current charges as may be directed by said property owner.
(Ord. 238, passed 6-11-1992)
§ 50.04 TERMINATION OF SERVICES.
   (A)   It is the policy of the town to discontinue utility service to
customers by reason of nonpayment of bills only after notice and a meaningful
opportunity to be heard on disputed bills. The town’s form for application for
utility service and all bills shall contain, in addition to the title, address,
room number and telephone number of the official in charge of billing, clearly
visible and easily readable provisions to the effect that:
      (1)   All bills are due and payable on or before the date set forth on
the bill;
      (2)   If any bill is not paid by or before that date, a second bill will
be mailed containing a cutoff notice that if the bill is not paid within ten
days of the mailing of the second bill, service will be discontinued for
nonpayment; and
      (3)   Any customer disputing the correctness of his or her bill shall
have a right to a hearing at which time he or she may be represented in person
and by counsel or any other person of his or her choosing and may present,
orally or in writing, his or her complaint and contentions to the town official
in charge of utility billing. This official shall be authorized to order that
the customer’s service not be discontinued and shall have the authority to make
a final determination of the customer’s complaint.
   (B)   Requests for delays or waiver of payment will not be entertained; only
questions of proper and correct billing will be considered. In the absence of
payment of the bill rendered or resort to the hearing procedure provided
herein, service will be discontinued at the time specified, but in no event
until the charges have been due and unpaid for at least 30 days.
   (C)   When it becomes necessary for the town to discontinue utility service
to a customer for nonpayment of bills, service will be reinstated only after
all bills for service then due have been paid, along with a turn-on charge in
the sum of $50.
CHAPTER 51: WATER
Section
Water Rates
   
51.01   Hookup fee
   
51.02   Fees to be paid before work
   
51.03   Excavations
   
51.04   Deposit
   
51.05   Access to any premises for maintaining system
   
51.06   Entering on easements
   
51.07   Entrance with proper credentials
   
51.08   Water rates
   
51.09   Utility bills
   
51.10   Provisions of reasonable rates to all persons; non-discrimination
 
   
51.99   Penalty
WATER RATES
§ 51.01 HOOKUP FEE.
   (A)   Any person, firm, association or corporation desiring to hook onto the
town water system shall pay a hookup fee which shall be established annually
upon the adoption of the town’s budget.
   (B)   The initial hookup fee shall be as follows:
 
Water tap, in town (standard 3/4-inch)          $1,250
Water tap (larger than 3/4-inch/2-inch maximum) $1,250 plus additional charges
Water tap, out of town                          $2,500 plus materials
 
(Ord. 278, passed 7-29-2010) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.02 FEES TO BE PAID BEFORE WORK.
   All fees required under this subchapter shall be paid before any work is
commenced to provide water service to any property.
(Ord. 278, passed 7-29-2010) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.03 EXCAVATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, other than an authorized agent of the
town, to excavate or dig in any street, alley or highway in the town. The user
shall be responsible for the water line from the meter to the point of use. The
town excavates on the town’s property and the owner excavates on the owner’s
property. Any leak occurring within ten feet of the meter pit on the owner’s
side will be repaired by the town and the cost paid by the user.
(Ord. 278, passed 7-29-2010) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.04 DEPOSIT.
   All renting customers requesting water service from the town shall pay a
deposit of $150 to the Town Treasurer before service will be provided. If the
customer requesting water service is a business that historically uses a large
amount of water, the deposit shall be equal to three months’ billing depending
on garbage size.
(Ord. 278, passed 7-29-2010) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.05 ACCESS TO ANY PREMISES FOR MAINTAINING SYSTEM.
   All town employees or agents, in the discharge of their duties, shall have
access to any premises in, to or on which any water service is connected, at
all reasonable hours, for the purpose of maintaining the water line, installing
equipment, turning on water, turning off water or for any other purpose that
may be deemed necessary for the preservation and efficiency of the water
system, or the protection of the revenue of the town derived from such system.
(Ord. 278, passed 7-29-2010) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.06 ENTERING ON EASEMENTS.
   Any authorized employees or agents of the town shall be permitted to enter
all private properties through which the town holds a duly negotiated easement
for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the water facilities lying
within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement
shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement
pertaining to the private property involved.
(Ord. 278, passed 7-29-2010) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.07 ENTRANCE WITH PROPER CREDENTIALS.
   Any authorized employees or agents of the town bearing proper credentials
and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes
of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing pertinent to
discharge to the community system in accordance with the provisions of this
subchapter.
(Ord. 278, passed 7-29-2010) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.08 WATER RATES.
   (A)   Water rates shall hereafter be established on an annual basis upon the
adoption of the annual budget.
   (B)   The water rates shall be as follows:
Bulk water                                                 $0.25 per 50 gallons
Customer deposit                                           Equal to 3 months’
                                                           billing
Emergency infrastructure maintenance fee                   $10
In town                                                    $21 for first 10,000
                                                           gallons
Metered water over base                                    $0.75 per 1,000
                                                           gallons
Out of town                                                $30.50 for first
                                                           10,000 gallons
Out of town water maintenance fee                          $17.50
Required special testing – federal, state, local and the To be billed to
like                                                       customer
                                                           $1,250 plus
Water tap, in town                                         materials and
                                                           expenses
                                                           $2,500 plus
Water tap, out of town                                     materials and
                                                           expenses
 
(Ord. 278, passed 7-29-2010; Ord. 288, passed 9-11-2012; Ord. 289, passed 4-9-
2013; Ord. 293, passed 11-12-2013; Ord. 305, passed 6-13-2016; Ord. 322, 2021,
passed 12-14-2021; Ord. 324, 2021, passed 12-14-2021) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.09 UTILITY BILLS.
   All utility bills are due by the tenth of each month, and any bill remaining
unpaid for 30 days shall result in termination of service. Any damage incurred
by the user as a result of termination of service is the sole responsibility of
the user. No service shall be restored until the user has paid a $50 reconnect
fee, the past due balance and the customer deposit fee.
(Ord. 278, passed 7-29-2010) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.10 PROVISIONS OF REASONABLE RATES TO ALL PERSONS; NON-DISCRIMINATION.
   The governing body agrees that the town will make the services of said
system available within its capacity to all persons in the town’s service area
without discrimination as to race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age,
marital status or physical or mental handicap (if such persons possess the
capacity to enter into legal contract for services) at reasonable charges,
including assessments, taxes or fees, in accordance with a schedule of such
charges, whether for one or more classes of service, as may be modified from
time to time by the town. The initial rate schedule must be approved by the
Farmers Home Administration since it is providing some of the funding for said
water system. Thereafter, the town may make such modifications to the rate
system as long as the rate schedule remains reasonable and non- discriminatory.
(Res. 1981-A, passed 6-9-1981)
§ 51.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person found guilty of violating or failing to comply with any of
the provisions of §§
51.01 through
51.09 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $750 for each such offense, to which
may be added costs of $10, as described in §
10.99. Each day any violation or non-compliance of §§
51.01 through
51.09 continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 148, passed 3-21-1951; Ord. 250, passed 1-2-1998; Ord. 278, passed 7-29-
2010)
CHAPTER 52: SEWERS
Section
Sewage System
   
52.01   Necessity of sewage system
   
52.02   Private waste disposal systems prohibited
   
52.03   Connection to town system required; discontinuance of water service
upon failure to connect
   
52.04   Connection
   
52.05   Abandonment of private waste disposal systems
   
52.06   Sewer mains and lines
   
52.07   Fee, notification and inspection before connection
   
52.08   Tap or connection fees
   
52.09   Sewer service charges
   
52.10   Interceptors required
   
52.11   Right to inspect
   
52.12   Failure to pay
   
52.13   Limit of sewer service
   
52.14   Sizing and construction methods of adding new sewer taps, and replacing
old or damaged existing sewer taps, to the town municipal sewer system
   
52.15   Easements for main sewer inspection
   
52.16   Right of entry for inspection
   
52.17   Diagrams
 
   
52.99   Penalty
SEWAGE SYSTEM
§ 52.01 NECESSITY OF SEWAGE SYSTEM.
   It is hereby determined that in order to protect the health of the
inhabitants of and near the town, and to comply with the laws of the state, and
the requirements of the public health of the town, and to prevent the pollution
of public waters, it is necessary to build, repair, enlarge and improve the
sewage system in the town.
(Ord. 279, passed 8-10-2010)
§ 52.02 PRIVATE WASTE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful and it is hereby declared to be a nuisance and
detrimental to the public health, sanitation, safety, morals and the general
welfare of the town for any person to use and maintain within the town any
outside water closet, privy vault or cesspool, or any other private waste
disposal system except for portable toilets furnished to workers on
construction sites or approved by the town for temporary use.
(Ord. 279, passed 8-10-2010) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.03 CONNECTION TO TOWN SYSTEM REQUIRED; DISCONTINUANCE OF WATER SERVICE
UPON FAILURE TO CONNECT.
   (A)   Owners of improved property within the town shall, at their expense,
install suitable toilet facilities therein in the event such house, building or
property has no such facilities, and to connect such facilities directly with
the sewage system in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter within
30 days after the date of official notice by the town to do so.
   (B)   In the event any owner of improved property fails or refuses to make
such connections upon being requested to do so by the town officials, the town,
at its election, may discontinue the furnishing of such property with water.
(Ord. 279, passed 8-10-2010) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.04 CONNECTION.
    All developments generating sewage effluent shall connect to the town
sewage system except those in the areas designated for individual septic
systems per §
152.080(D).
(Ord. 279, passed 8-10-2010) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.05 ABANDONMENT OF PRIVATE WASTE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS.
   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a
private sewage disposal system, as provided in §
52.03, a direct connection shall be made to the outfall or collection lines of
the sewage system of the town in compliance with this subchapter, and any
septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be
abandoned and filled with suitable material.
(Ord. 279, passed 8-10-2010) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.06 SEWER MAINS AND LINES.
   Sewer line from sewer main to the residence is the responsibility of the
property owner. The town excavates on town property and the owner on owner’s
property. It is the town’s responsibility for sewer mains; a main is a line
consisting of more than one tap. It is the property owner’s responsibility to
pay for sewer taps. A tap is a service line to an individual user.
(Ord. 279, passed 8-10-2010) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.07 FEE, NOTIFICATION AND INSPECTION BEFORE CONNECTION.
   (A)   No unauthorized person shall make any connections with or opening
into, use, alter or disturb the sewage system or appurtenances thereof of the
town without first paying the Town Clerk/Treasurer the amount levied as the
connection or attachment change.
   (B)   Upon payment of said attachment or connection charge, the Town Clerk/
Treasurer will issue a receipt for that amount to the applicant. The applicant
shall thereafter notify the town agent when the applicant’s sewer is ready for
inspection and connection to the sewage system of the town.
   (C)   The connection shall be made under the supervision of the Town
Inspector and Waste Water Operator.
(Ord. 279, passed 8-10-2010) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.08 TAP OR CONNECTION FEES.
   The fees for tapping and connection to the town sewer mains or laterals
shall be established on an annual basis upon the adoption of the annual budget.
The fees shall be as set by the Town Council at budget meetings for both
tapping and connection to town sewer mains and laterals.
(Ord. 279, passed 8-10-2010) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.09 SEWER SERVICE CHARGES.
   There shall be a sewer service charge payable on or before the tenth day of
each month following connection and thereafter for the use of said facility,
which shall be established on an annual basis upon the adoption of the annual
budget. The initial rate schedule shall be as follows:
 
Sewer
Sewer commercial rates $64.80 - more than two restrooms, commercial use, car
                       wash, laundromat, school or motel
Sewer commercial rates $17.70 - standard up to two restrooms
Sewer residential rate $15.36 - single dwelling
Sewer tap              $1,250 plus materials and expenses
 
(Ord. 279, passed 8-10-2010; Ord. 304, passed 6-13-2016; Ord. 325, passed 5-10-
2022) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.10 INTERCEPTORS REQUIRED.
   (A)   The owners or operators of restaurants, cold storage plants, cafes,
eating houses, garages, car washes and gasoline filling stations shall provide
for grease, oil and sand traps or interceptors for the proper handling of
liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any flammable wastes,
sand, earth and other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall
not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units used exclusively
for that purpose. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by
the Town Inspector and Waste Water Operator, made to conform to standards
hereinafter set out and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible
for cleaning and inspection.
   (B)   Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious
materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature.
They shall be of substantial construction, watertight and equipped with easily
removable covers.
   (C)   All grease, oil and sand traps or interceptors shall be maintained by
the owner, at his or her expense, in continuously efficient operation at all
times.
(Ord. 279, passed 8-10-2010) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.11 RIGHT TO INSPECT.
   The Town Inspector, and other duly authorized employees of the town bearing
proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter on all
properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling
and testing, in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 279, passed 8-10-2010) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.12 FAILURE TO PAY.
   The connection or attachment and sewer service charge shall be charged
against the owner, lessee or occupant of the premises, and against any or all
of them, and if any service charge so established is not paid within 30 days
after the same is due, the amount thereof, together with a penalty of 10% per
month and a reasonable attorney’s fee, may be recovered in a civil action by
the town; or, in the alternative, the Town Council, in its discretion and as a
supplementary remedy, may enforce collection of said sewer charge by shutting
off the water to said premises, and keep the same shut off until all of said
delinquent sewer charges and penalty have been paid.
(Ord. 279, passed 8-10-2010) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.13 LIMIT OF SEWER SERVICE.
   No sewer service shall be extended beyond the town boundaries and no
property lying outside the town boundaries shall be served by the town sewage
system.
(Ord. 279, passed 8-10-2010) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.14 SIZING AND CONSTRUCTION METHODS OF ADDING NEW SEWER TAPS, AND REPLACING
OLD OR DAMAGED EXISTING SEWER TAPS, TO THE TOWN MUNICIPAL SEWER SYSTEM.
   (A)   (1)   No sewerage outfall from a residence or small business shall be
larger than four inches except by approval of the town agent and Town Council.
      (2)   All attachments (taps) shall be by approved saddles and cut so as
to eliminate damage to the existing sewer mains. Whenever possible, a grade
fall of one-fourth inch per foot shall be maintained.
      (3)   In no case shall a grade fall of less than one-eighth inch per foot
be allowed in any portion of the outfall. Any sewer taps that are installed
allowing less than one-eighth inch shall not be approved unless a properly
approved and inspected sewerage lift pump is installed which will provide the
necessary and desirable one-fourth inch per foot gradient. Maintenance of said
lift pump will be the responsibility of the property owner and in no case will
be assumed by the town.
   (B)   All piping will be schedule “40” “BE” P.V.C. or SDR 35 sewer pipe and
installed per the “typical” drawing attached and incorporated in §
52.17 (sanitary sewer service line - sewer tap plan drawing - 04-28-97).
(Ord. 279, passed 8-10-2010) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.15 EASEMENTS FOR MAIN SEWER INSPECTION.
   (A)   Duly authorized employees or agents of the town shall be permitted to
enter all private properties through which the town holds a duly negotiated
easement for the purpose of, but not limited to, inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the waste water
facilities lying within said easement.
   (B)   All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement shall be done
in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to
the private property involved.
(Ord. 279, passed 8-10-2010) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.16 RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR INSPECTION.
   Duly authorized employees or agents of the town bearing proper credentials
and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes
of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing pertinent to
discharge to the community system in accordance with the provisions of this
subchapter.
(Ord. 279, passed 8-10-2010) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.17 DIAGRAMS.
   (A)   Sewer tap plan.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fb208a0a8c638e923b35d86bc83324741aaade44/
IMAGES/0-0-0-836.png]
 
   (B)   Town zoning map.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fb208a0a8c638e923b35d86bc83324741aaade44/
IMAGES/0-0-0-838.png]
 
(Ord. 279, passed 8-10-2010 )
§ 52.99 PENALTY.
   (A)    Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person violating any provision of §§
52.01 through
52.17, upon conviction, shall be fined an amount not exceeding $750 for each
violation, to which may be added costs of $10, as described in §
10.99. Each day any violation or non-compliance of §§
52.01 through
52.17 continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 250, passed 1-2-1998; Ord. 279, passed 8-10-2010)
CHAPTER 53: GARBAGE
Section
   
53.01   Garbage pickup charges
   
53.02   Receptacles required
   
53.03   Failure to pay garbage pickup charge
   
53.04   Burning of garbage
 
   
53.99   Penalty
§ 53.01 GARBAGE PICKUP CHARGES.
   (A)   The monthly charge for garbage pickup shall be established on an
annual basis during the adoption of the annual budget.
   (B)   The garbage rates for fiscal year 2023-2024 are established as
follows:
 
1 1/2-yard (dumpster) bi-weekly        $36
1 1/2-yard (dumpster) weekly           $72
3-yard commercial weekly               $140
1 1/2-yard (dumpster) shared bi-weekly $21.50
Roll-out cart bi-weekly                $21.50
 
(Ord. 268, passed 6-13-2006; Ord. 280, passed 7-29-2010; Ord. 286, passed 6-12-
2012; Ord. 292, passed 6-11-2013; Ord. 319, passed 7-14-2020; Ord. 328, passed
4-11-2023) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.02 RECEPTACLES REQUIRED.
   All garbage shall be placed in the receptacles furnished for that purpose.
(Ord. 268, passed 6-13-2006) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.03 FAILURE TO PAY GARBAGE PICKUP CHARGE.
   All garbage bills are due by the tenth of each month, and any bill remaining
unpaid for 30 days shall result in termination of services, including water and
sewer. No service shall be restored until the user has paid a $50 reconnect
fee, the past due balance and the customer deposit fee.
(Ord. 268, passed 6-13-2006; Ord. 280, passed 7-29-2010; Ord. 286, passed 6-12-
2012; Ord. 292, passed 6-11-2013; Ord. 319, passed 7-14-2020; Ord. 328, passed
4-11-2023)
§ 53.04 BURNING OF GARBAGE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to burn, or cause to be burned, any
garbage, waste, packing material, trash, discarded boxes or other materials
outside of an incinerator within the town limits without having first obtained
written permission from the Fire Chief. The Fire Chief shall grant permission
if, in his or her opinion, the burning of the above-described materials can be
accomplished without danger to adjoining property or undue contamination to the
air in the vicinity. The town shall not be held to assume any liability by
reason of having granted permission to burn any of the materials mentioned
herein if such burning should cause damage to other persons’ property. The
permission granted shall be valid for only 48 hours from the time of issuance.
(Ord. 182, passed 11-14-1972) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of §
53.04 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be fined not more than $750 plus costs of $10, as described in §
10.99.
(Ord. 182, passed 11-14-1972; Ord. 250, passed 1-2-1998)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
70.01   Adoption of Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways
Licensing Regulations
   
70.15   Unlicensed motor vehicles and trailers
   
70.16   Failure to maintain liability coverage
   
70.17   Driving while license cancelled, suspended or revoked
Driving Regulations
   
70.30   Unlawful operation
 
   
70.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.01 ADOPTION OF UNIFORM ACT REGULATING TRAFFIC ON HIGHWAYS.
   (A)   Adoption.
      (1)   Pursuant to Wyo. Stat. § 15-1-119, 1977 republished edition, as
amended; §§ 31-5-101 through and including 31-5-1214 of the statutes; and all
amendments thereto up through 1997, being the Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on
Highways, except such sections of the Act as are specifically deleted therefrom
by division (B) below, are adopted by reference and incorporated as a part of
this section as if fully set forth herein. One copy of such provisions shall be
kept in the office of the Town Clerk/Treasurer for examination and inspection.
      (2)   Wyo. Stat. §§ 31-4-503, 31-5-1303 and 31-7-134 are adopted by
reference and incorporated as a part of this section as if freely set forth
herein.
      (3)   Wyo. Stat. § 31-4-101(a)(i), “Vehicle registration and license
plate required;” Wyo. Stat. § 31-7-116, “Carrying and displaying driver’s
license;” and Wyo. Stat. § 31-7-117, “Restricted driver’s license; for persons
between the ages of 14 and 16 years of age,” are adopted by reference and
incorporated as a part of this section as if freely set forth herein.
   (B)   Deletions. The following sections of the Uniform Act Regulating
Traffic on Highways, found within Wyo. Stat. §§ 31-5-101 through and including
31-5-1214, as amended, are specifically deleted and excepted therefrom before
adoption by the Town Council, as provided in division (A) above:
      (1)   Wyo. Stat. § 31-5-212;
      (2)   Wyo. Stat. § 31-5-213;
      (3)   Wyo. Stat. § 31-5-227;
      (4)   Wyo. Stat. § 31-5-233;
      (5)   Wyo. Stat. § 31-5-302;
      (6)   Wyo. Stat. § 31-5-306;
      (7)   Wyo. Stat. § 31-5-501;
      (8)   Wyo. Stat. § 31-5-502;
      (9)   Wyo. Stat. § 31-5-959;
      (10)   Wyo. Stat. §§ 31-5-1110 through 31-5-1112; and
      (11)   Wyo. Stat. § 31-5-1201.
(Ord. 249, passed 1-2-1998; Ord. 249, passed 2-12-2002; Ord. 260, passed 1-14-
2003) Penalty, see §
70.99
LICENSING REGULATIONS
§ 70.15 UNLICENSED MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAILERS.
   No person may store, keep or park any motor vehicle or trailer which is not
currently licensed or does not have a properly displayed current license on any
street, highway or public right-of-way located in the town.
(Ord. 306, 2016, passed 7-12-2016) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.16 FAILURE TO MAINTAIN LIABILITY COVERAGE.
   No owner of a motor vehicle required to be registered shall operate or
permit the operation of his or her motor vehicle without having in full force
and effect a motor vehicle liability policy in the amounts provided by Wyo.
Stat. § 31-9-405(b) or a bond in amounts provided by Wyo. Stat. § 31-9-102(a)
(xi).
(Ord. 249, passed 3-10-2009) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.17 DRIVING WHILE LICENSE CANCELLED, SUSPENDED OR REVOKED.
   No person shall drive a motor vehicle on any public highway in this state at
a time when his or her driver’s license from this or any other jurisdiction or
non-resident operating privileges are cancelled, suspended or revoked under
this Act or any other law.
(Ord. 249, passed 3-10-2009) Penalty, see §
70.99
DRIVING REGULATIONS
§ 70.30 UNLAWFUL OPERATION.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any motor vehicle to allow the same to
be operated in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 92, passed 12-11-1950) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Any person or persons, firm or corporation who is responsible
for the failure to comply with the provisions of §
70.01 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, will be
fined not more than $750 for each violation, together with costs.
      (2)   The Municipal Judge shall establish and adopt a bond schedule for
all misdemeanor offenses where a bond may be forfeited in lieu of appearance.
   (C)   Any person who violates any provisions of §
70.15 shall be subject to a penalty of up to $750 per day. Each day in which
the violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
   (D)   Violation of §
70.16 is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than $250 nor more than
$750.
   (E)   A person convicted of violating §
70.17 is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $750.
   (F)   (1)    Any person or persons violating §
70.30, upon conviction, shall be fined in any sum not to exceed $750 and costs
or 25 days in jail, or both. Such fine and imprisonment is at the discretion of
the court.
      (2)   Failure to attend after being served with the summons in any way
shall be punished independently of any other violation of §
70.30, and shall be fined in any sum not exceeding $750 or imprisoned in the
Town Jail for 25 days or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. 92, passed 12-11-1950; Ord. 250, passed 1-2-1998; Ord. 249, passed 3-10-
2009; Ord. 306, 2016, passed 7-12-2016)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   NUISANCES
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
Dogs
   
90.01   Purpose
   
90.02   Definitions
   
90.03   Running at large prohibited
   
90.04   Keeping dog constituting nuisance prohibited
   
90.05   Keeping dog constituting a vicious dog prohibited
   
90.06   Notification to owner of dog constituting a nuisance
   
90.07   Impounding of dogs running at large
   
90.08   Ascertaining ownership
   
90.09   Claiming impounded dogs
   
90.10   Enforcement of this subchapter and entry upon private premises
   
90.11   Unlawful to deprive of collar or kill any dog
   
90.12   License required
   
90.13   Payment of fees and issuance of license
   
90.14   Display of tag
   
90.15   Disease control
   
90.16   Authorization to issue citations
Livestock
   
90.30   Definitions
   
90.31   Permit required for keeping livestock
   
90.32   Minimum lot size
   
90.33   Cleanliness of premises
   
90.34   Livestock noise
   
90.35   Suitable fencing
   
90.36   Permit procedures
   
90.37   Enforcement
   
90.38   Notification of animal constituting a nuisance
   
90.39   Permit revocation or cancellation
   
90.40   Violations
   
90.41   Livestock permit
   
90.42   Animal cruelty; unlawful acts designated
 
   
90.99   Penalty
DOGS
§ 90.01 PURPOSE.
   The ordinance codified herein this subchapter is enacted for the purpose of
regulating dogs within the town.
(Ord. 320, 2020, passed 8-11-2020)
§ 90.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER. A person employed by the town for the purpose of
policing or enforcing this subchapter in the town.
   AT LARGE. Any dog off the premises of its owner and not under restraint by a
person physically able to control it.
   KENNEL. Any facility maintained upon any premises for the purpose of keeping
and caring for four or more dogs.
   NUISANCE. Any dog which trespasses upon public or private property; is “at
large;” damages, soils, defiles or defecates on private or public property
other than of its owner or keeper; causes garbage which has been placed in a
garbage container to be strewn or deposited on private or public property;
habitually, constantly or frequently disturbs the sleep, rest, tranquility or
peace of any neighborhood or person by barking or howling; chases pedestrians,
bicyclists or motor vehicles; attacks other domestic animals; any dog in heat
which is not confined on owner or keeper’s premises; any dog which creates
offensive odors disturbing to any neighborhood or person.
   OWNER OR KEEPER. Any person, or group of persons, association of persons or
corporation who shall own, keep for another or harbor any dog or permit the
same to habitually remain on or about such OWNER’S premises.
   RESTRAINT. A dog within the property limits of its owner or keeper or under
actual physical control of the owner or keeper, or when in the immediate
company of the owner or keeper and is obedient to that person’s command.
   VICIOUS ANIMAL. Any dog which has attacked, menaced or bitten any person
without reasonable provocation, or any dog which has behaved in such a manner
that the owner knows or should reasonably know that the dog is possessed or has
a tendency to attack, menace or bite persons without reasonable provocation, or
bred to attack.
(Ord. 320, 2020, passed 8-11-2020)
§ 90.03 RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any owner or keeper of any dog to allow a dog to
run at large within the town limits.
(Ord. 320, 2020, passed 8-11-2020) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.04 KEEPING DOG CONSTITUTING NUISANCE PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful to own or keep any dog which is a nuisance within the
town limits.
(Ord. 320, 2020, passed 8-11-2020) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.05 KEEPING DOG CONSTITUTING A VICIOUS DOG PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful to own or keep any animal which is a vicious dog within
the town limits of the town.
(Ord. 320, 2020, passed 8-11-2020) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.06 NOTIFICATION TO OWNER OF DOG CONSTITUTING A NUISANCE.
   Before any prosecution is brought for a violation of §
90.04, it shall be necessary for the complaining party or dog control officer
of the town to notify the owner or keeper of the dog that the dog is creating a
nuisance and, unless the nuisance is abated withing seven days after receipt of
notice, a complaint may be filed. Notification, if by the complaining party,
shall be by certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall be deemed
completed upon deposit of notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid and
properly addressed. If notice is by an animal control officer, it shall be
complete upon personal notification by the officer. Any officer who shall give
notice of a nuisance pursuant to this subchapter shall keep a record of the
date, time and place notification was given to the owner or keeper.
(Ord. 320, 2020, passed 8-11-2020)
§ 90.07 IMPOUNDING OF DOGS RUNNING AT LARGE.
   Animal control officers of the town shall have authority to impound dogs
found running at large, either licensed or not licensed, and may do so without
making or requiring a complaint and shall, after complying with §
90.08, place or dispose of the dog in accordance with the provisions of this
subchapter.
(Ord. 320, 2020, passed 8-11-2020)
§ 90.08 ASCERTAINING OWNERSHIP.
   (A)   In the event a dog is impounded pursuant to this subchapter, the town,
by and through its animal control officers and other personnel, shall make
reasonable efforts to ascertain the ownership of the dog impounded.
   (B)   The owner or keeper, if known, shall be notified by phone, by mailing
a written notice to the last known address of the owner or keeper or notified
in person that the dog has been impounded.
   (C)   Any dog not claimed within three days after notice is provided to the
owner or keeper, or within two days after posting a description of the dog in
the town post office and in the town mercantile when the owner or keeper is
unknown, may be put to death by the animal control officer or other authorized
personnel employed by the town.
(Ord. 320, 2020, passed 8-11-2020)
§ 90.09 CLAIMING IMPOUNDED DOGS.
   (A)   The owner or keeper of an impounded dog may reclaim the animal
provided the owner or keeper of the dog shall have paid the required license
fee and complied with all other ordinances relating to vaccination and
licensing.
   (B)   Any person reclaiming a dog shall pay to the town all costs and
charges incurred by the town, including, but not limited to, all costs of food,
shelter and veterinary care.
(Ord. 320, 2020, passed 8-11-2020)
§ 90.10 ENFORCEMENT OF THIS SUBCHAPTER AND ENTRY UPON PRIVATE PREMISES.
   In the enforcement of any provision of this subchapter, any dog control
officer, or other personnel authorized by the town to enforce this subchapter,
is/are authorized to enter the premises of any person and take possession of
licensed or unlicensed dogs when in pursuit of such dog at the time when such
dog goes upon private property.
(Ord. 320, 2020, passed 8-11-2020)
§ 90.11 UNLAWFUL TO DEPRIVE OF COLLAR OR KILL ANY DOG.
   It shall be unlawful for any person other than the owner or keeper of a dog
or animal control officer to deprive any dog of its collar, license or tag or
to purposely kill, or cause to be killed, any dog without the consent of the
owner or keeper.
(Ord. 320, 2020, passed 8-11-2020) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.12 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   All dogs kept, harbored or maintained in the town shall be licensed and
registered if over three months of age. Dog licenses shall be issued after
payment of all license fees, which are set at $5 for each dog that is spayed or
neutered and $10 for each dog that is not spayed or neutered. Application shall
be made to the town for a license and shall include the name and address of the
applicant. Any dwelling unit or other property maintaining four or more dogs is
considered a kennel and shall pay an annual license fee of $75 per year. The
provisions of this section shall not be deemed to apply to dogs whose owners
are non- residents, temporarily within the town, nor to dogs brought into town
for the purpose of participating in any dog show, nor to “seeing eye” dogs
properly trained to assist blind persons when such dogs are actually being used
by the blind persons. The town, its agents and employees shall not issue a
license until and unless the owner of the dog shall exhibit and produce a
certificate from a duly licensed and practicing veterinarian certifying that
the dog has been vaccinated against rabies for the licensing period.
(Ord. 320, 2020, passed 8-11-2020) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.13 PAYMENT OF FEES AND ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   Upon payment of the license fee, the owner of the dog shall receive from the
town a license certificate and a metallic tag for each dog licensed. The
license tag shall be stamped thereon the year for which it was issued and the
number corresponding to the necessary certificate. All licenses shall expire at
midnight on December 31 of each and every year, and the owners of the dogs
shall procure a new license each and every year between January 1 and the last
day of February of the year following the date of expiration of the license.
Dog tags shall not be transferrable from one dog to another and no refunds
shall be made on any dog license fee because of the death of the dog or because
the owner or keeper of the dog shall have moved from the corporate limits of
the town.
(Ord. 320, 2020, passed 8-11-2020) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.14 DISPLAY OF TAG.
   Every owner or keeper of a dog shall attach the tag issued by the town to
the collar or harness of the licensed dog and the collar or harness shall be
worn by the dog at all times.
(Ord. 320, 2020, passed 8-11-2020) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.15 DISEASE CONTROL.
   (A)   Any person owning or keeping a dog over the age of three months shall
have such a dog vaccinated against rabies and other disease by a licensed
veterinarian.
   (B)   (1)   Any person who has been bitten by any dog or the parent or
guardian of such person shall promptly report the incident to the town, which
in turn immediately shall notify the dog control officer or other authorized
personnel to investigate the incident. The owner or keeper, upon demand made by
the control officer or other authorized personnel, shall forthwith surrender
the dog which has bitten the person, or which is suspected as having been
exposed to rabies or other disease, for quarantine under the supervision of and
on the secure premises of a licensed veterinarian or at facilities contracted
by the town for keeping of such dogs and at the expense of the owner of the
dog.
      (2)   Failure to surrender upon demand shall be unlawful and punishable
according to the penalty provision of this chapter.
   (C)   Upon payment of all expenses for supervised quarantine, and upon being
judged free of disease by a licensed veterinarian, the dog may be reclaimed by
the owner or keeper.
   (D)   If the owner or keeper of a dog is unknown and said dog shall have
been impounded by employees or agents of the town, the town shall bear all
expenses of a supervised quarantine. In the event the owner or keeper of a dog
previously thought to be unknown claims the dog quarantined, the owner or
keeper shall be responsible for all costs and expenses.
   (E)   When a dog under quarantine has been diagnosed by a licensed
veterinarian as being diseased, the owner or keeper of the diseased dog shall
take every reasonable precaution to prevent the spread of the disease. In no
event shall a dog which has been diagnosed and determined to be diseased be
released from quarantine until such time as a licensed veterinarian indicates
that the dog is free of all disease.
(Ord. 320, 2020, passed 8-11-2020) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.16 AUTHORIZATION TO ISSUE CITATIONS.
   Dog control officers of the town and other authorized personnel are
authorized to issue citations to the owners or keepers of any dog found to be
in violation of this subchapter, in lieu of impoundment. If the owner is not
identifiable or locatable, the dog may be impounded.
(Ord. 320, 2020, passed 8-11-2020)
LIVESTOCK
§ 90.30 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL. A single cow, sheep, pig, horse, pony, mule, goat, any number of
fowl or any single hybrid thereof.
   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER. A person employed by the town for the purpose of
policing or enforcing this subchapter in the town.
   LIVESTOCK. Any cattle, sheep, swine, horses, ponies, mules, llamas, goats or
any hybrids thereof.
(Ord. 285, passed 4-10-2012; Ord. 315, passed 8-14-2016)
§ 90.31 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR KEEPING LIVESTOCK.
   (A)   Keeping, maintaining, harboring or boarding of livestock within the
limits of the town for more than seven days shall require an annual permit from
the town.
   (B)   All permits shall be subject to revocation and cancellation as
provided under §
90.39.
   (C)   No permit shall be issued for chickens or other avian livestock
without proof from the applicant of adequate shelter (i.e., coop or henhouse)
for the livestock. Failure to maintain adequate housing for avian livestock
shall be grounds for revocation of the permit under §
90.39. Roosters are not permitted in the town.
(Ord. 285, passed 4-10-2012; Ord. 334, 2024, passed 10-8-2024) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.32 MINIMUM LOT SIZE.
   Issuance of any livestock-keeping permit shall be subject to the following
conditions and subject to regularly accepted space requirements for the type of
animal being permitted:
   (A)   Keeping of animals requires a minimum lot size of 7,000 square feet;
   (B)   Regularly accepted space guidelines are as follows:
      (1)   Poultry/fowl: Four square feet of space per bird; all birds must be
confined to owner's property. Roosters and swine are not allowed within town
limits;
      (2)   Goats, llamas, sheep: Fifty square feet per animal;
      (3)   Horses: Four hundred square feet per horse; and
      (4)   Cattle require 150 square feet of space per animal.
   (C)   Permits may be denied for a lack of adequate space for additional
livestock.
   (D)   Livestock/animal/fowl pens must be bordered in closer proximity to
owner’s residence than adjacent residences on all sides.
(Ord. 285, passed 4-10-2012; Ord. 332, 2023, passed 12-13-2023) Penalty, see §
 
90.99
§ 90.33 CLEANLINESS OF PREMISES.
   The holder of a permit issued pursuant to this subchapter must at all times
keep any building, yard, shed, stable, corral or enclosure wherein any animals
are kept in a clean and sanitary condition and may not permit any manure or
other filth or debris to accumulate therein.
(Ord. 285, passed 4-10-2012) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.34 LIVESTOCK NOISE.
   The holder of a permit issued pursuant to this subchapter must not allow
livestock to make loud or incessant noise which may be annoying or
discomforting to neighbors in close proximity.
(Ord. 285, passed 4-10-2012) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.35 SUITABLE FENCING.
   The holder of a permit issued pursuant to this subchapter must not allow
livestock to run at large and shall provide suitable fencing confining the
animals.
(Ord. 285, passed 4-10-2012) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.36 PERMIT PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Payment of fee which shall be set by resolution of the Council, as
stated in “Attachment A” (Application for Livestock Permit) incorporated in §
90.41.
   (B)   Livestock keeping permits issued for the first time shall expire at
the end of the following December.
   (C)   To renew a permit, the applicant shall apply for renewal by February
28 of the year in which the permit is set to expire. The application shall
contain the same information and shall be processed in the same manner as for
new applications.
(Ord. 285, passed 4-10-2012)
§ 90.37 ENFORCEMENT.
   The town shall, in not less than five business days of receipt of complaint,
investigate said complaint. Upon verification or validation of complaint, the
animal control officer will then notify the permittee in writing of said
complaint. The permittee will have five business days to bring violation into
compliance.
(Ord. 285, passed 4-10-2012)
§ 90.38 NOTIFICATION OF ANIMAL CONSTITUTING A NUISANCE.
   Notification to the permit holder shall be by certified mail, return receipt
requested. Notification shall be deemed completed upon deposit of notice in the
United States mail, postage and properly addressed with address provided by
permit holder at the time the permit was purchased. Notification shall also be
deemed complete upon personal notification by animal control officer.
(Ord. 285, passed 4-10-2012)
§ 90.39 PERMIT REVOCATION OR CANCELLATION.
   (A)   Any livestock keeping permit may be revoked, cancelled or suspended by
the Town Council at any time during the term thereof; provided that the Town
Clerk/Treasurer shall have first received, upon animal control officer’s
investigation, a notification to permit holder and non-compliance by permit
holder; hold a public hearing on the complaint, and take action upon the
complaint, including revocation, cancellation or suspension of the permit, as
in the best judgment of the Council and will best serve and protect the public
health and welfare of the town.
   (B)   Revocation of a permit shall disqualify the permit holder from keeping
livestock for the remainder of the original term of the permit.
(Ord. 285, passed 4-10-2012)
§ 90.40 VIOLATIONS.
   Keeping of livestock without first obtaining a permit pursuant to this
subchapter shall be a violation and is enforceable pursuant to this subchapter.
(Ord. 285, passed 4-10-2012) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.41 LIVESTOCK PERMIT.
 
Town of Cowley, Wyoming
20 S. Division                  (P.O. Box 635) Cowley, WY 82420             Phone 307-548-7700
Livestock Permit
____________________ ____________________         Renewal Date by February 28
Date             Fee/Fair animal         $5.00
                Other animal   $10.00
                Chicken flock   $10.00
___________________________________________          ___________________________________________
Name of Landowner                        Name - owner or caretaker of Livestock
___________________________________________          ___________________________________________
Physical Address                           Physical Address
___________________________________________          ___________________________________________
Mailing Address                           Mailing Address
___________________________________________          ___________________________________________
Phone Number                              Phone Number
Description of livestock (sex and whether
altered)_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________
Number of animals (of each type)______________________________________________________________________
Shelter provided (required for
chickens)_________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________________________ _________________
_________________________________________
Signature
Final Approval
___________________________________________          ___________________________________________
Approved - Mayor                           Date
___________________________________________          ___________________________________________
Attest - Clerk                              Date
 
(Ord. 285, passed 4-10-2012; Ord. 334, 2024, passed 10-8-2024)
§ 90.42 ANIMAL CRUELTY; UNLAWFUL ACTS DESIGNATED.
   (A)   No person shall override, overload, drive an overloaded, overwork,
torture or torment an animal or deprive an animal of necessary sustenance.
   (B)   No person shall unnecessarily or cruelly beat, mutilate or kill an
animal unless specifically authorized by law.
   (C)   No person shall cause, instigate, be a spectator at or permit a dog
fight, cock fight, bull fight (bloodless or otherwise) or other combat
involving animals.
   (D)   No person shall abandon any animal.
   (E)   No person shall fail to provide his/her animal with sufficient food
and water, proper shelter to protect it from weather (including sunlight and
extreme temperatures), veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering and
with humane care and treatment.
   (F)   It is unlawful to annoy, bait, harass, torment or tease a confined or
chained animal.
   (G)   Unless specifically authorized by law, no person shall willfully maim
or disfigure any domestic or wild animal or administer poison or cause to be
ingested any foreign object to any such animal, or expose any poisonous
substance with the intent that it shall be taken by any animal, except pests of
a public health concern.
   (H)   Provisions of this section shall not in any way limit the right of a
police officer or animal control officer to kill or destroy any wild or
domestic animal if any such officer determines that there is a reasonable
danger to the public safety.
(Ord. 332, 2023, passed 12-13-2023)
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of §§
90.30 through
90.41 shall be subject to a penalty of up to $750 per day. Each day in which
the violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. 45, passed 11-10-1915; Ord. 285, passed 4-10-2012)
CHAPTER 91: NUISANCES
Section
Public Health
   
91.01   Property becoming a public health nuisance
   
91.02   Depositing garbage and debris
Cleaning of Ditches and Cutting of Weeds on the Banks
   
91.15   Duty to keep in clean condition and maintain weeds
   
91.16   Failure to maintain property
   
91.17   Notice
   
91.18   Extent of duties
 
   
91.99   Penalty
PUBLIC HEALTH
§ 91.01 PROPERTY BECOMING A PUBLIC HEALTH NUISANCE.
   If any person within the corporate limits of the town shall suffer or permit
any cellar, vault, pool, privy or ground upon any premises belonging to or
occupied by him or her to become nauseous, foul, offensive or injurious to the
public health, he or she shall, on conviction thereof, be fined not less than
$5 nor more than $25 in each case, and shall be subject to a further fine of $2
per day for each day he or she shall fail to abate such nuisance after having
been notified by the Town Marshal.
(Ord. 7, passed 2-3-1908) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.02 DEPOSITING GARBAGE AND DEBRIS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to deposit or place any
garbage, litter, filth, manure, ashes or other rubbish, or any obstruction
whatever, on any vacant lot or lots, on any street, alley, sidewalk or other
public ground within the limits of the town.
(Ord. 7, passed 2-3-1908) Penalty, see §
91.99
CLEANING OF DITCHES AND CUTTING OF WEEDS ON THE BANKS
§ 91.15 DUTY TO KEEP IN CLEAN CONDITION AND MAINTAIN WEEDS.
   It shall be the duty of any owner of a lot or part of a lot within the
corporate limits of the town to clean out and keep in clean condition all
ditches adjoining such lot or part of lot, and to cut down all weeds on the
banks of such ditch or ditches during the irrigating season of each year.
(Ord. 44, passed 4-5-1915) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.16 FAILURE TO MAINTAIN PROPERTY.
   If any owner of such lot or part of lot within the corporate limits of said
town shall fail, neglect or refuse to clean out such ditch or ditches and to
cut down all weeds on the banks thereof for five days from and after he or she
has been served with a written notice so to do, such notice to be served
personally or by registered mail to his or her last known post office address,
he or she shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined in any sum
not less than $5 nor more than $20, to which shall be added the cost of such
action.
(Ord. 44, passed 4-5-1915) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.17 NOTICE.
   If any owner of such lot shall be a non-resident of the county, then and in
that event, after notice to him or her by registered mail, if his or her post
office address is known, or if unknown, after posting notice to him or her in
three public places in said town, requiring the work and labor herein provided
for to be done within five days from such posted notice, it shall be the duty
of said town, through its proper officer or officers, to proceed to clean out
such ditch or ditches and clean off such weeds from the banks thereof, all of
the expense of such work to be charged as a lien on such lot or part of lot;
and if said lien is not paid within 60 days after the date of the completion of
such work, then the said town shall proceed to collect said lien by the sale of
said lot or part of lot, such sale to be made after three weeks’ advertisement
thereof in a newspaper printed and published in said town, or if there is no
paper in said town, then by posting notice in three public places in said town,
in which said lot or part of lot shall be described with reasonable certainty
together with the amount claimed to be due thereon, and the name and address,
if known, of the owner thereof.
(Ord. 44, passed 4-5-1915)
§ 91.18 EXTENT OF DUTIES.
   The duties of property owners herein defined shall extend only to the
ditches on the streets adjoining their said premises.
(Ord. 44, passed 4-5-1915)
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §
91.02 shall, on conviction thereof, be fined in any sum not more than $750 for
each offense, to which may be added costs of $10, as described in §
10.99.
(Ord. 7, passed 2-3-1908; Ord. 250, passed 1-2-1998)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   BUSINESS LICENSING
      
111.   PEDDLERS, ITINERANT MERCHANTS AND SOLICITORS
CHAPTER 110: BUSINESS LICENSING
Section
Contractor Licenses
   
110.01   Registration required, exceptions, registration categories
   
110.02   Application and fee
   
110.03   Term of registration; initial and renewal fees; expired registration
   
110.04   Insurance required
   
110.05   Notification of place of business
   
110.06   Unlawful use of name of registered person
   
110.07   Application for building contractor’s registration
   
110.08   Contractor checklist
   
110.09   Contractor’s registration
 
   
110.99   Penalty
CONTRACTOR LICENSES
§ 110.01 REGISTRATION REQUIRED, EXCEPTIONS, REGISTRATION CATEGORIES.
   (A)   No person or other legal entity shall engage in the business of
general contractor, limited contractor, plumbing/HVAC contractor, electrical
contractor or handyperson without first having registered with the town, except
as herein provided for a property owner to do his or her work on his or her own
property. This subchapter shall not apply to those persons or other legal
entities which perform odd jobs with labor costs of less than $2,500 per job.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, install,
enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, demolish or do
plumbing, mechanical or electrical work in or on any building or structure
regulated by the town unless registered for the contracting category under the
provisions of this subchapter.
   (C)   Building permits for construction projects are required to be obtained
and paid for prior to work being started. The registered contractor shall
obtain the permit unless the homeowner is performing his or her own work. The
registrant, with his or her signature, shall acknowledge that he or she will
comply with all current codes, including building, electrical, plumbing,
mechanical, fire and other construction codes, and this subchapter; secure
building permits; and call for inspections as required by this subchapter.
Failure to call for inspections may result in revocation of the town
contractor’s registration. A permit checklist, if issued, must be displayed in
a visible area during construction.
(Ord. 323, 2022, passed 1-11-2022) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.02 APPLICATION AND FEE.
   (A)   Generally. Any person, corporation or other legal entity desiring to
do work within the town as a general contractor, limited contractor, plumbing/
HVAC contractor or electrical contractor shall complete and submit, five days
prior to beginning any work within the town, a written application for
contractor’s registration; the required registration fee; proof of insurance,
if required; and any other documentation required. The registration application
shall be $25 for general contractors, limited contractors, plumbing/HVAC
contractors and electrical contractors. The registration application fee shall
accompany the application. After receipt of written application for
registration, the town shall issue a contractor registration card upon a
determination that the registrant’s application is complete and that all
required documentation, registration fees and proof of insurance, if required,
have been received.
   (B)   Contractor’s registration. Contractor’s registration shall be required
of persons engaged in general construction contracting business (building,
residential, commercial, construction). Construction contracting shall include
the erection, construction, assembling, enlarging, structural altering,
roofing, siding, moving, removing, demolishing and doing of plumbing or
mechanical work on any project, including the supervision of such.
   (C)   Plumbing/HVAC contractor registration. Any person desiring to work
within the town as a plumbing/HVAC contractor shall complete a written
application for plumbing/HVAC contractor registration and submit the fee and
insurance requirements.
   (D)   Electrical contractor registration. Any person desiring to work within
the town as an electrical contractor shall complete a written application for
electrical contractor registration and submit the fee, copy of the master
electrician’s license and insurance requirements. Every apprentice and
journeyperson electrician shall work under the control and supervision of the
master electrician.
(Ord. 323, 2022, passed 1-11-2022) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.03 TERM OF REGISTRATION; INITIAL AND RENEWAL FEES; EXPIRED REGISTRATION.
   All registrations required herein and issued by the Town Clerk/Treasurer
shall be for the calendar year and shall expire on December 31 of the year in
which they are issued. The initial application fee shall be $25. Every
registrant in good standing may have his or her registration renewed annually
upon payment of the fee of $25. Any registration that has been expired for more
than 60 days shall be deemed as delinquent. A contractor found delinquent shall
cease activities until such time as the delinquent registrant completes a new
application and pays the application fee for a new registration pursuant to §
110.02, and then a new registration may be issued.
(Ord. 323, 2022, passed 1-11-2022) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.04 INSURANCE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No registration shall be issued for general, plumbing/HVAC or
electrical contractors until said contractor has filed with the Town Clerk/
Treasurer a certificate of liability insurance insuring the contractor; his or
her agents, employees and representatives; or anyone under registrant’s
supervision for the following insurance coverage while engaged in any activity
or work pursuant to contractor’s registration.
   (B)   All applicants required to carry liability insurance shall, at the
time of making application, provide evidence of liability insurance in a
minimum amount of $1,000,000 property damage, $1,000,000 bodily injury and an
aggregate of $1,000,000 per occurrence and shall keep insurance in full force
and effect.
   (C)   All registrants are required to carry liability insurance and shall
require their insurer to notify the Town Clerk/Treasurer within ten calendar
days of non-payment of insurance premiums and within 30 calendar days of the
effective date of a change in the licensee’s insurance and/or a registrant’s
notification of cancellation or non-renewal of the insurance, in whole or in
part. All registrants required to carry liability insurance shall be
responsible for filing a current certificate of insurance with the Town Clerk/
Treasurer, and the town shall not be responsible for notifying registrants of
impending expiration of insurance coverage.
(Ord. 323, 2022, passed 1-11-2022) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.05 NOTIFICATION OF PLACE OF BUSINESS.
   Every person registered under this subchapter shall notify the Town Clerk/
Treasurer of the address of his or her place of business and the name under
which such business is carried on, along with any names used in the last five
years, and shall give immediate notice to the Town Clerk/Treasurer of any
change in either.
(Ord. 323, 2022, passed 1-11-2022) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.06 UNLAWFUL USE OF NAME OF REGISTERED PERSON.
   No person who has registered as a contractor shall allow his or her name/
business to be used by another person either for the purpose of obtaining
permits or for doing business or work under this registration.
(Ord. 323, 2022, passed 1-11-2022) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.07 APPLICATION FOR BUILDING CONTRACTOR’S REGISTRATION.
 
Office Use Only:
Contractor’s License #:                                                Receipt#:                                    $25.00
Issued:                                                               
Town of Cowley
PO BOX 635
COWLEY, WY 82420
Phone: (307)-548-7700 FAX: (307)-548-6360
APPLICATION FOR 2022 BUILDING CONTRACTOR’S REGISTRATION
Business Name:                                                                                                                                                  
Physical Address:                                              City                                  State                          Zip                   
Mailing Address:                                               City                                  State                          Zip                   
Social Security Number or Employer Identification Number:                                                                                   
Driver’s License Number:                                                                             Issuing State:                                   
Liability Insurance Provider:                                                                  Policy#:                                                  
*Please provide the Town of Cowley with a copy of your insurance policy
Will you be using:   Employees                   Sub-Contractors                    or Working Alone                 
ALL CONTRACTORS, INCLUDING SOLE PROPRIETORS, MUST HAVE LIABILITY INSURANCE
Type of work to be performed under the license:                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                        
How long engaged in such work and specify full-time or part-time:                                                                          
List all other names under which you have done business in the last five (5) years:                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                         
List all litigation if any you or your business (any former names included) have been involved in:                               
                                                                                                                                                                        
Telephone Number:   Business                                                                  
Residence/Primary                                                   
When any excavation is performed, I (the above contractor) will restore all such streets to their original condition after repair work or said pipes, main or conduits have been laid or re-laid as the case may be at my exclusive expense and without charge to the Town. If, at the sole discretion of the Mayor and the Town Council, the said
streets or other public property, have not been repaired and restored within a time that said Mayor and Town Council deems responsible, then the Town shall repair and restore or cause the same to be repaired and restored, and I will pay the Town for all costs and expenses in repairing and restoring of said streets and public property.
 
                                                                                                                                                       
Name                                    Date
 
(Ord. 323, 2022, passed 1-11-2022)
§ 110.08 CONTRACTOR CHECKLIST.
 
Contractor Check List
Make sure you have the following documents completed
   1.   Current Year Town of Cowley Contractor’s Registration application
   2.   Certificate of Liability insurance showing minimum $1,000,000.00 coverage
and coverage dates.
   3.   Electrical Contractors will need to bring in a copy of Current Electrical
Contracting License
   4.   Detailed description of all liens, lawsuits and causes of action which have
been filed against the contractor or any property upon which the contractor
performed any work within the last five years.
   5.   Bring in all required documents with payment to The Town of Cowley for your
registration to be issued.
The application process in ANNUAL REQUIREMENT of The Town of Cowley.
There is an application fee of $25.00
If you mail your form, a receipt will be mailed to you. Until you receive your
license, please keep your receipt or a copy with you so that the building inspector
can verify your application for registration. A signed Contractor’s Registration
will be mailed to you once your check, application, and all documents are received
and verified.
Town of Cowley
PO Box 635
Cowley, WY 82420
Phone Number: 307-548-7700
Fax Number: 307-548-6360
Email address: cowleywy@gmail.com
 
(Ord. 323, 2022, passed 1-11-2022
§ 110.09 CONTRACTOR’S REGISTRATION.
 
Town of Cowley
2022 Contractor’s Registration
No.                                                                  $25.00
In Consideration of the sum of Twenty-Five Dollars authority is hereby given by the Town of Cowley to
                                                                                                                                                             to maintain and carry on the business of
                                                                                                                                                   in Cowley, Big Horn County, Wyoming, for the term beginning the 1st day of January, 2022 through the 31st day of December, 2022.
In witness whereof I, Lisa Woodis, Clerk/Treasurer of the Town of Cowley, do subscribe my name and cause the seal of said Town to be affixed, this                   day of                               , 2022
                                       Sig ned:                                                
                                             Joel Peterson, Mayor
Attest:                                                      
      Lisa Woodis Clerk/Treasurer
 
(Ord. 323, 2022, passed 1-11-2022)
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person violating any provision of §§
110.01 through
110.09, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $750 for each
such offense. Each day during which violations occur shall be deemed a separate
offense.
(Ord. 323, 2022, passed 1-11-2022)
CHAPTER 111: PEDDLERS, ITINERANT MERCHANTS AND SOLICITORS
Section
   
111.01   Definitions
   
111.02   License requirement
   
111.03   Application procedure
   
111.04   Standards for issuance
   
111.05   Revocation procedure
   
111.06   Standards for revocation
   
111.07   Appeal procedure
   
111.08   Exhibition of identification
   
111.09   Town policy on soliciting
   
111.10   Notice regulating soliciting
   
111.11   Duty of solicitors to ascertain notice
   
111.12   Prohibited solicitation
§ 111.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUSINESS. The business carried on by any person who is an itinerant
merchant, peddler or solicitor as defined in this section.
   GOODS. Merchandise of any description whatsoever, and includes, but is not
restricted to, wares and foodstuffs.
   ITINERANT MERCHANT. Any person, whether as owner, agent or consignee, who
engages in a temporary business of selling goods within the town and who, in
the furtherance of such business, uses any building, structure, vehicle or any
place within the town.
   PEDDLER. Any person, not an itinerant merchant, who:
      (1)   Travels from place to place by any means carrying goods for sale,
or making sales or making deliveries; or
      (2)   Without traveling from place to place, sells or offers goods for
sale from any public place within the town.
   SOLICITOR. Any person who travels by any means from place to place, taking
or attempting to take orders for sale of goods to be delivered in the future or
for services to be performed in the future. A person who is a SOLICITOR is not
a peddler.
§ 111.02 LICENSE REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   Any person who is an itinerant merchant, peddler or solicitor shall
obtain a license before engaging in such activity within the town.
   (B)   The fee for the license required by this chapter shall be as set from
time to time by the Town Council.
   (C)   No license issued under this chapter shall be transferable.
   (D)   All licenses issued under this chapter shall expire 90 days after the
date of issuance thereof. Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.03 APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   All applicants for licenses required by this chapter shall file an
application with the Town Administrator. This application shall be signed by
the applicant if an individual, or by all partners if a partnership or by the
president if a corporation. The applicant may be requested to provide
information concerning the following items:
      (1)   The name and address of the applicant;
      (2)   (a) The name of the individual having management authority or
supervision of the applicant’s business during the time that it is proposed to
be carried on in the town;
         (b)   The local address of such individual;
         (c)   The permanent address of such individual;
         (d)   The capacity in which such individual will act;
      (3)   The name and address of the person, if any, for whose purpose the
business will be carried on, and, if a corporation, the state of incorporation;
      (4)   The time period or periods during which it is proposed to carry on
applicant’s business;
      (5)   (a) The nature, character and quality of the goods or services to
be offered for sale or delivered;
         (b)   If goods, their invoice value and whether they are to be sold by
sample as well as from stock;
         (c)   If goods, where and by whom such goods are manufactured or
grown, and where such goods are at the time of application;
      (6)   The nature of the advertising proposed to be done for the business;
and
      (7)   Whether or not the applicant, or the individual identified in
division (A)(2)(a) above or the person identified in division (A)(3) has been
convicted of any crime or misdemeanor and, if so, the nature of each offense
and the penalty assessed for each offense.
   (B)   Applicants for peddler or solicitor licenses may be required to
provide further information concerning the following items, in addition to that
requested under division (A) above:
      (1)   A description of the applicant; and
      (2)   A description of any vehicle proposed to be used in the business,
including its registration number, if any.
   (C)   All applicants for licenses required by this chapter shall attach to
their application, if required by the town, credentials from the person, if
any, for which the applicant proposes to do business, authorizing the applicant
to act as such representative.
   (D)   Applicants who propose to handle foodstuffs shall also attach to their
application, in addition to any attachments required under division (C), a
statement from a licensed physician, dated not more than ten days prior to the
date of application, certifying the applicant to be free of contagious or
communicable disease.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.04 STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Upon receipt of an application, an investigation of the applicant’s
business reputation and moral character shall be made.
   (B)   The application shall be approved unless such investigation discloses
tangible evidence that the conduct of the applicant’s business would pose a
substantial threat to the public health, safety, morals or general welfare. In
particular, tangible evidence that the applicant has any of the following will
constitute valid reasons for disapproval of an application:
      (1)   Has been convicted of a crime of moral turpitude;
      (2)   Has made willful misstatements in the application;
      (3)   Has committed prior violations of ordinances pertaining to
itinerant merchants, peddlers, solicitors and the like;
      (4)   Has committed prior fraudulent acts; or
      (5)   Has a record of continual breaches of solicited contracts.
§ 111.05 REVOCATION PROCEDURE.
   Any license or permit granted under this chapter may be revoked by the Town
Administrator after notice and hearing, pursuant to the standards in §
111.06. Notice of hearing for revocation shall be given in writing, setting
forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the
hearing. Such notice shall be mailed to the licensee at his or her last known
address, at least ten days prior to the date set for the hearing.
§ 111.06 STANDARDS FOR REVOCATION.
   A license granted under this chapter may be revoked for any of the following
reasons:
   (A)   Any fraud or misrepresentation contained in the license application;
   (B)   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in connection
with the business being conducted under the license;
   (C)   Any violation of this chapter;
   (D)   Conviction of the licensee of any felony, or conviction of the
licensee of any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; or
   (E)   Conducting the business licensed in an unlawful manner or in such a
way as to constitute a menace to the health, safety, morals or general welfare
of the public.
§ 111.07 APPEAL PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved by a decision under §§
111.04 or
111.06 shall have the right to appeal to the Town Council. The appeal shall be
taken by filing with the Town Council, within 14 days after notice of the
decision has been mailed to such person’s last known address, a written
statement setting forth the grounds for appeal. The Town Council shall set the
time and place for a hearing, and notice for such hearing shall be given to
such person in the same manner as provided in §
111.05.
   (B)   The order of the Town Council after the hearing shall be final.
§ 111.08 EXHIBITION OF IDENTIFICATION.
   (A)   Any license issued to an itinerant merchant under this chapter shall
be posted conspicuously in or at the place named therein. In the event more
than one place within the town shall be used to conduct the business licensed,
separate licenses shall be issued for each place.
   (B)   The Town Administrator shall issue a license to each peddler or
solicitor licensed under this chapter. The license shall contain the words
“Licensed Peddler” or “Licensed Solicitor,” the expiration date of the license,
and the number of the license. The license shall be kept with the licensee
during such time as he or she is engaged in the business licensed.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.09 TOWN POLICY ON SOLICITING.
   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the town that the occupants of the
residences in the town shall make the determination of whether solicitors shall
be, or shall not be, invited to their respective residences.
§ 111.10 NOTICE REGULATING SOLICITING.
   (A)   Notice of the refusal of invitation to solicitors, to any residence,
shall be given on a weatherproof card, approximately three inches by four
inches in size, exhibited upon or near the main entrance door to the residence,
indicating the determination by the occupant, containing the applicable words,
as follows:
      “NO SOLICITORS INVITED”
   (B)   The letters shall be at least one-third-inch in height. For the
purpose of uniformity, the cards shall be provided by the Chief of Police to
persons requesting, at the cost thereof.
   (C)   The card so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to any
solicitor of the determination by the occupant of the residence of the
information contained thereon.
§ 111.11 DUTY OF SOLICITORS TO ASCERTAIN NOTICE.
   It shall be the duty of every solicitor upon going onto any premises in the
town upon which a residence is located to first examine the notice provided for
in §
111.10 if any is attached, and be governed by the statement contained on the
notice. If the notice states “NO SOLICITORS INVITED,” then the solicitor,
whether registered or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the
premises. Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence, whether
invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when
requested to do so by the occupant.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.12 PROHIBITED SOLICITATION.
   It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any
person to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door, or
create any sound in any manner calculated to attract the attention of the
occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the
occupant thereof and engage in soliciting in defiance of the notice exhibited
at the residence in accordance with the provisions of §
111.10 above.
Penalty, see §
10.99
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL OFFENSES
      
131.   WEAPONS
      
132.   OFFENSES INVOLVING MINORS
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
   
130.01   Simple assault and battery
   
130.02   Property destruction and defacement; grading; aggregated costs or
values
   
130.03   Breach of peace
   
130.04   Improper noise or disturbance; obscenity
   
130.05   Collection in towns
   
130.06   Disturbing congregations or assemblies of religious worship
   
130.07   Disturbing lawful assemblages
   
130.08   Public intoxication
   
130.09   Wearing weapons
   
130.10   Driving horses
   
130.11   Allowing boisterous or disorderly conduct in buildings
 
   
130.99   Penalty
§ 130.01 SIMPLE ASSAULT AND BATTERY.
   (A)   A person is guilty of simple assault if, having the present ability to
do so, he or she unlawfully attempts to cause bodily injury to another.
   (B)   A person is guilty of battery if he or she intentionally, knowingly or
recklessly causes bodily injury to another person by use of physical force.
(Ord. 313, 2018, passed 6-25-2018) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.02 PROPERTY DESTRUCTION AND DEFACEMENT; GRADING; AGGREGATED COSTS OR
VALUES.
   A person is guilty of property destruction and defacement if he or she
knowingly defaces, injures or destroys property of another without the owner’s
consent.
(Ord. 313, 2018, passed 6-25-2018) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.03 BREACH OF PEACE.
   A person commits breach of the peace if he or she disturbs the peace of a
community or its inhabitants by unreasonably loud noise or music or by using
threatening, abusive or obscene language or violent actions with knowledge or
probable cause to believe he or she will disturb the peace.
(Ord. 313, 2018, passed 6-25-2018) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.04 IMPROPER NOISE OR DISTURBANCE; OBSCENITY.
   If any person shall, within the limits of this town, make or assist in
making any improper noise or disturbance or breach of the peace, or shall use
profane, obscene or offensive language toward any person or persons, or shall
use language, signs or gestures toward another, calculated to provoke an
assault, or breach of the peace, any such person shall, upon conviction of any
of the offenses of this section, be fined not less than $5 nor more than $25
for each and every offense.
(Ord. 5, passed 1-14-1908)
§ 130.05 COLLECTION IN TOWNS.
   All persons who shall collect in crowds in this town for any unlawful
purpose, or for any purpose to the annoyance or disturbance of the citizens or
travelers therein, shall, upon conviction thereof, be severally fined in any
sum not exceeding $25.
(Ord. 5, passed 1-14-1908)
§ 130.06 DISTURBING CONGREGATIONS OR ASSEMBLIES OF RELIGIOUS WORSHIP.
   If any person shall annoy or disturb any congregation or assembly in this
town gathered together for religious worship by making noise, or by rude,
profane or indecent language or behavior, within the place of worship, or so
near the same as to annoy or disturb said congregation, every such person
shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined in any sum not less than $1 nor more
than $50 for each offense.
(Ord. 5, passed 1-14-1908)
§ 130.07 DISTURBING LAWFUL ASSEMBLAGES.
   If any person shall disturb any lawful assemblage of people by rude and
indecent behavior, or otherwise, every such person shall, upon conviction
thereof, be fined in any sum not exceeding $50.
(Ord. 5, passed 1-14-1908)
§ 130.08 PUBLIC INTOXICATION.
   If any person shall be drunk or shall be in a state of intoxication in any
highway, street or alley within the limits of the town, every such person shall
be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, on conviction thereof, shall be fined in
any sum not less than $5 nor more than $25, and the Town Marshal is hereby
authorized and empowered to, and it is hereby made his or her duty to, arrest,
or cause to be arrested, with or without process, any person or persons found
violating any of the provisions of this section, and to commit any person or
persons to some safe place in said town until sober, at which time, or as soon
thereafter as may be, such person shall be taken before the Police Justice to
be dealt with according to law.
(Ord. 5, passed 1-14-1908)
§ 130.09 WEARING WEAPONS.
   Every person not being a traveler who shall wear or carry any dirk, pistol,
bowie knife or sword in cane, or any other dangerous or deadly weapon,
concealed, or who shall carry or wear any such weapon with intent or avowed
purpose of injuring his or her fellow person, shall, upon conviction thereof,
be fined in any sum not exceeding $100.
(Ord. 5, passed 1-14-1908)
§ 130.10 DRIVING HORSES.
   If any person or persons shall immoderately drive or ride any horse or
horses in any avenue, street or alley within the limits of this town, every
such person, on conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than $1 nor more
than $50 for each offense.
(Ord. 5, passed 1-14-1908)
§ 130.11 ALLOWING BOISTEROUS OR DISORDERLY CONDUCT IN BUILDINGS.
   Any saloon keeper, hotel keeper or proprietor of any public place within the
limits of this town who shall permit or allow any boisterous or disorderly
conduct in his or her place of business, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and, on conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than $5 nor
more than $50 for each offense.
(Ord. 5, passed 1-14-1908)
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Any person who violates any provisions of §§
130.01 through
130.03 shall be subject to a penalty of up to $750 per day. Each day in which
the violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
      (2)   Pursuant to §
130.02, property destruction and defacement is a misdemeanor punishable by a
fine of not more than $750, or both, if the cost of restoring injured property
or the value of the property if destroyed is less than $1,000.
(Ord. 313, 2018, passed 6-25-2018)
CHAPTER 131: WEAPONS
Section
   
131.01   Definitions
   
131.02   Firearms
   
131.03   Air-powered weapons
   
131.04   Exception for firearms or air-powered arms
   
131.05   Exception for projectiles
   
131.06   Exception for peace officer
   
131.07   Enforcement
 
   
131.99   Penalty
§ 131.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AIR-POWERED ARM. Any instrument which utilizes compressed air to propel a
projectile, including “BB guns” and “pellet guns,” but excluding water guns.
Water by itself shall not be considered a projectile for purposes of this
section. Water in balloons or other containers shall be considered a
projectile.
   FIREARMS. Any instrument used in the propulsion of a projectile by the
action of gunpowder within it.
(Ord. 246, passed 6-13-1995)
§ 131.02 FIREARMS.
   It is unlawful for any person to fire or discharge any firearm within the
jurisdictional limits of the town.
(Ord. 246, passed 6-13-1995) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.03 AIR-POWERED WEAPONS.
   It is unlawful for any person to shoot or discharge any air-powered weapon
or slingshot or projectile from a bow or crossbow.
(Ord. 246, passed 6-13-1995) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.04 EXCEPTION FOR FIREARMS OR AIR-POWERED ARMS.
   There shall be an exception to the prohibition in this chapter for persons
discharging firearms or air-powered arms at formally established ranges
operated or approved by the town in the manner in which the range was intended
to be used.
(Ord. 246, passed 6-13-1995)
§ 131.05 EXCEPTION FOR PROJECTILES.
   There shall be an exception to the prohibition in this chapter for persons
shooting at discharge projectiles from bows or crossbows in an area which was
built for such with substantial backstops and the use of which does not pose a
danger to others.
(Ord. 246, passed 6-13-1995)
§ 131.06 EXCEPTION FOR PEACE OFFICER.
   There shall be an exception to the prohibition in this chapter for a peace
officer, as defined in Wyoming Statutes, in the performance of duties.
(Ord. 246, passed 6-13-1995)
§ 131.07 ENFORCEMENT.
   Enforcement of this chapter will be through citizen complaint to the
governing body of the town and the issuing of a citation. The fine, if any,
will be determined by the governing body of the town.
(Ord. 246, passed 6-13-1995)
§ 131.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific
penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
CHAPTER 132: OFFENSES INVOLVING MINORS
Section
   
132.01   Persons under 21 years of age prohibited from being under the
influence or possessing alcoholic beverages
   
132.02   Curfew
   
132.03   Sale of tobacco to minors prohibited
 
   
132.99   Penalty
§ 132.01 PERSONS UNDER 21 YEARS OF AGE PROHIBITED FROM BEING UNDER THE
INFLUENCE OR POSSESSING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
   (A)   Any person under the age of 21 years who has any alcoholic or malt
beverage in his or her possession or who is drunk or under the influence of
alcoholic or malt beverages on any street or highway in any public place is
guilty of a misdemeanor. This division (A) does not apply to possession of
alcoholic or malt beverages by a person under the age of 21 years:
      (1)   When making a delivery of alcoholic or malt beverages pursuant to
his or her employment;
      (2)   Who is in the physical presence of his or her parent or legal
guardian; and
      (3)   When serving alcoholic or malt beverages pursuant to his or her
employment in a restaurant which holds a license to serve alcoholic or malt
beverages, if the person is at least 18 years of age.
   (B)   Any person under the age of 21 years who attempts in any manner to
purchase alcoholic or malt beverages, or falsifies any identification or uses
any false identification in order to obtain alcoholic or malt beverages is
guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 307, 2016, passed 7-12-2016) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.02 CURFEW.
   It is an exemption to a violation under this section that the person engaged
in the prohibited conduct (e.g., loitering and the like) while:
   (A)   Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian;
   (B)   On an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent or guardian,
without any detour or stop;
   (C)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
   (D)   Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from
an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
   (E)   Involved in an emergency;
   (F)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence or abutting the
residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the
Police Department about the minor’s presence;
   (G)   Attending an official school, religious or other recreational activity
supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or
another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or
returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school, religious
or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city,
a civic organization or another similar entity that takes responsibility for
the minor;
   (H)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the
right of assembly; or
   (I)   Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in
accordance with state law.
§ 132.03 SALE OF TOBACCO TO MINORS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person in the town to sell or give away tobacco
in any form to any person under the age of 18 years within the corporate limits
of the town.
(Ord. 19, passed 6-24-1910) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person who violates any provisions of §
132.01 shall be subject to a penalty of up to $750 for each offense.
   (C)   Any person convicted of a violation of §
132.03 shall be fined in any amount not to exceed $750.
(Ord. 19, passed 6-24-1910; Ord. 250, passed 1-2-1998; Ord. 307, 2016, passed
7-12-2016)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
151.   BUILDING CODES
      
152.   DEVELOPMENT CODE
      
153.   UNSAFE BUILDINGS
      
154.   MOBILE HOMES
      
155.   TREES AND PLANTS
      
156.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
CHAPTER 150: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
House Numbering
   
150.01   House numbering required
   
150.02   Maps
   
150.03   Numbers on buildings
Vacant Lots and Buildings
   
150.15   Condition of premises
   
150.16   Determination of nuisance and abatement
Moving Buildings
   
150.30   Moving buildings
 
   
150.99   Penalty
HOUSE NUMBERING
§ 150.01 HOUSE NUMBERING REQUIRED.
   All lots, buildings and structures in the town shall be numbered in
accordance with the following plan: north and south numbers shall commence at
Highway 310; east and west numbers shall commence at Division Street. Odd
numbers shall be on all the east and north sides of the streets; even numbers
shall be on the south and west sides of the streets. House or building numbers
for structures not behind existing buildings shall have the same number as the
building in front with proper fractions added. Apartments, offices or business
suites, trailer courts and condominiums shall have a street address assigned to
the structure with the addition of either a numerical or alphabetical
designation for each separate unit.
(Ord. 216, passed 2-14-1984) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.02 MAPS.
   The Town Clerk/Treasurer’s office shall keep a record showing the proper
street number of every lot or structure in town of which the owner or occupants
of such property have requested for and received such designation. These
records shall be open to inspection by any interested person.
(Ord. 216, passed 2-14-1984)
§ 150.03 NUMBERS ON BUILDINGS.
   It shall be the duty of the owner and occupants of every house and occupied
building in the town to have placed thereon, in a place visible from the street
which such buildings faces, figures at least three inches high, showing the
number of the house or building. Any person, firm or corporation failing to so
number any house, building or other structure occupied by him or her, or after
receiving notice to do so from the town officials, shall have 90 days to comply
with this subchapter.
(Ord. 216, passed 2-14-1984) Penalty, see §
150.99
VACANT LOTS AND BUILDINGS
§ 150.15 CONDITION OF PREMISES.
   It shall be the duty of every person whether the owner, lessee or renter of
any vacant lot, building or premises, including place of business, dwelling
house or other establishments, at all times, to maintain the premises in a
clean, safe and orderly condition, not to permit any deposit or accumulation of
materials other than those ordinarily attendant upon the use for which such
premises are legally intended, not to permit the growth of weeds or other
plants in such manner as to cause infestation of adjoining property or causing
an unsightly appearance, not to permit said premises to become dangerous to
children or other persons who might enter thereon and not to permit said
premises to become a breeding place for rats or mice or other animals.
(Ord. 171, passed 7-26-1967) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.16 DETERMINATION OF NUISANCE AND ABATEMENT.
   It shall be the duty of the Town Council to determine whether any vacant
lot, building or premises within the town is in violation of §
150.15, and whether the same constitutes a public nuisance, and if such
determination is made, to cause a notice to be given to the owner, lessee or
renter of said premises, by certified mail, return receipt requested,
specifying what action must be taken to remove the violation and abate the
nuisance, and specifying a reasonable time within which such nuisance shall be
abated. In the event that the owner, lessee or renter of said premises fails to
comply with the requirements of said notice within the time specified, the Town
Council shall have the right to proceed with all necessary action to abate said
nuisance, keeping accurate records of the actual cost thereof, and the town
shall have a lien against said premises for the cost of such abatement. At any
time within six months after the work of abatement is completed, the town shall
have the right to proceed with the enforcement of said lien by an action
brought in its own name in the county district court. The lien may be
foreclosed in such proceeding, and the district court may enter judgment of
foreclosure and sale and order execution thereon. All proceedings supplemental
to judgment, including appeal, order of sale, period of redemption, sale and
the issuance of deed, shall be conducted in accordance with the law relating to
property sold upon foreclosure of real estate mortgages.
(Ord. 171, passed 7-26-1967; Ord. 178, passed 2-9-1971) Penalty, see §
150.99
MOVING BUILDINGS
§ 150.30 MOVING BUILDINGS.
   No person shall move any building or frame of any building into, upon or
across, or along any of the public streets, sidewalks, alley or other public
grounds or places, or cause the same to be upon any of said places; or
otherwise to obstruct the free passage of the streets and public thoroughfares
in the town without the written permission of the Mayor; provided that the
Mayor shall not give such written consent without the approval of the Town
Council in any regular meeting thereof. Such permit shall state the streets, or
parts thereof, in, through or upon which such building or parts thereof may be
moved; confining the obstruction to be caused to such streets or parts thereof
so as to cause the least inconvenience to travel and the public inconvenience
to. Nor shall any such building or frame of a building or part thereof be left
upon any of the public streets, sidewalks or alleys during night unless from
dusk to daylight there is placed on or about such building or frame of building
or part thereof on all sides a red light properly secured to serve as a sign of
danger. And no person or persons shall, during such time, remove any of such
lights so placed.
(Ord. 97, passed 3-12-1930) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person, association of persons, firm or corporation who or which
violates §§
150.01 through
150.03 will be fined $5. Each day upon which any violation of §§
150.01 through
150.03 exists shall be considered a separate violation.
   (C)   Any person who shall receive the notice provided in §
150.16, and shall fail to comply with the terms thereof in the time stated,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine of not less than $5 nor
more than $100 for each offense. Each additional day when such person shall
fail to comply with such notice shall constitute a separate offense.
   (D)   Any person, persons, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the
provisions of §
150.30 shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than
$100 or by imprisonment for any period not exceeding three months, or by both
such fine and imprisonment in whole or in part, to which shall be added the
cost of the action.
(Ord. 97, passed 3-12-1930; Ord. 171, passed 7-26-1967; Ord. 216, passed 2-14-
1984)
CHAPTER 151: BUILDING CODES
Section
Uniform Building Code
   
151.01   Adoption of code
   
151.02   Work before permit
   
151.03   Building permit fees
UNIFORM BUILDING CODE
§ 151.01 ADOPTION OF CODE.
   Certain documents, one copy of which is on file and is open for inspection
of the public in the office of the Town Clerk/Treasurer, being marked and
designated as: Uniform Building Code, 1997 edition, published by the
International Conference of Building Officials, and the same hereby adopted as
the code of the town for regulating the erection, construction, enlargement,
alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy,
equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of all buildings or structures in
the town, providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees
therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms
of such Uniform Building Code, 1997 edition, Volumes 1, 2 and 3, published by
the International Conference of Building Officials, which is on file in the
office of the Town Clerk/Treasurer, is hereby referred to, adopted and made a
part hereof as if fully set out in this subchapter, with the exception of Table
1-A-Building Permit Fees, replaced with the Town Building Permit Fees Schedule
A (see §
151.03), approved by the town.
(Ord. 271, passed 10-9-2007)
§ 151.02 WORK BEFORE PERMIT.
   Any person beginning any work for which a permit is required before
obtaining such permit shall pay double the amount for such permit.
(Ord. 271, passed 10-9-2007)
§ 151.03 BUILDING PERMIT FEES.
   (A)   Schedule A has been incorporated in the table below.
Total Valuation Permit Fee
Total Valuation     Permit Fee
1 to 1,000          $15
1,001 to 2,000      $15
2,001 to 5,000      $25
5,001 to 7,500      $30
7,501 to 10,000     $35
10,001 to 15,000    $50
15,001 to 20,000    $55
20,001 to 50,000    $65
50,001 to 75,000    $75
75,001 to 100,000   $100
100,001 to 150,000  $250
150,001 to 200,000  $400
200,000 to 250,000  $450
250,000 to 300,000  $500
300,00 to 350,000   $550
350,000 to 400,000  $650
400,00 to 450,000   $700
450,000 to 500,000  $800
500,000 to 550,000  $850
550,000 to +600,000 $900
 
   (B)   It is the responsibility of the property owner to see that a building
permit is obtained.
   (C)   It is the responsibility of the person doing the work to verify that a
permit has been obtained and to contact the Building Inspector for inspections
at the appropriate time.
   (D)   No permit is required for carpet, paint and similar finish work,
driveways and sidewalks (except driveways and sidewalks installed parallel to
the street for public use or on town property will require a permit).
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014)
CHAPTER 152: DEVELOPMENT CODE
Section
General Provisions
   
152.001   Findings stated
   
152.002   Resolution
   
152.003   Definitions
   
152.004   Building permit required
   
152.005   Falsification of information
   
152.006   Burden of proof
   
152.007   Relationship to other ordinances or regulations
   
152.008   Applicability
   
152.009   Amendments
Compliance Permits
   
152.020   Applicability
   
152.021   Form of application
   
152.022   Time of application
   
152.023   Permit approval including conditions
   
152.024   Permit is for development as represented
   
152.025   Duration of a permit
Permit Review Process
   
152.040   Permit review process generally
   
152.041   Review of single-family dwelling, duplex and accessory building
applications
   
152.042   Review of minor subdivision and applications
   
152.043   Review of major subdivisions and multi-family dwelling applications
   
152.044   Review commencement
   
152.045   Applicant’s presence required
   
152.046   On-site inspection
   
152.047   Substance of review
   
152.048   Further information requests
   
152.049   Hearings
   
152.050   Hearing action on application
   
152.051   Council action on applications
   
152.052   Plats of major subdivisions
   
152.053   Plans of manufactured home courts
Annexation and Services Extension Policy
   
152.065   Annexation and extension of services
Performance Standards
   
152.080   Use of public facilities
   
152.081   Single-family residences and accessory buildings
   
152.082   Multiple-family dwellings, duplexes and townhouses
   
152.083   Commercial developments in the Downtown Commercial District
   
152.084   Home businesses
   
152.085   Residential-scale businesses
   
152.086   Commercial developments
   
152.087   Industrial developments
   
152.088   Major subdivisions
   
152.089   Minor subdivisions
   
152.090   Manufactured home courts
   
152.091   Location of public and quasi-public uses
   
152.092   Mobile homes
   
152.093   Manufactured/modular homes
   
152.094   Landscaping
   
152.095   New construction required
Zoning District Regulations
   
152.110   Zoning districts established
   
152.111   Zoning map
   
152.112   District boundaries
   
152.113   Permitted uses
   
152.114   “R-1” Residential District
   
152.115   “C-1” Downtown Commercial District
   
152.116   “C-2” Business Park Commercial District
   
152.117   “P” Public Uses District
   
152.118   “FP” Floodplain District
   152.119   Manufactured/mobile home courts
   152.120   “MF” Multi-Family Dwelling District
Non-conforming Uses, Lots and Structures
   
152.130   Definitions
   
152.131   Continuation
   
152.132   Enlargement, expansion and relocation
   
152.133   Alteration, maintenance and repair
   
152.134   Destruction and reconstruction
   
152.135   Change of use
   
152.136   Discontinuance
   
152.137   Reduction of lot size
   
152.138   New construction on non-conforming lot
   152.139   Disclosure upon sale
Planning Commission
   
152.150   Appointment; composition; terms; removal; vacancies
   
152.151   Organization and meetings
   
152.152   Compensation; staff; consultants; expenditures
   
152.153   General powers of Commission
   
152.154   Specific powers of Commission
Board of Appeals
   
152.165   Composition; terms; removal; vacancies
   
152.166   Meetings; procedure; records
   
152.167   Appeals to Board; grounds; how conducted; stay of proceedings
   
152.168   Powers and duties
   
152.169   Vote required
Enforcement
   
152.180   Authority to enforce and right of entry
   
152.181   Identification of Building Official
   
152.182   “Violation” defined
   
152.183   Discovery of violations
   
152.184   Informal resolution
   
152.185   Notice of violation
   
152.186   Referral to Town Attorney
   152.187   Revocation of permits
   152.188   Other remedies
Schedule
   
152.200   Fee schedule
 
   
152.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.001 FINDINGS STATED.
   (A)    We, the Town Council, do hereby find that the pressures of
residential, commercial, and industrial development within and around the town
necessitate land use and development regulations to protect and to promote the
general health, safety and welfare of the community.
   (B)   We do further find that:
      (1)   A master plan has been prepared as a sufficient basis for this
chapter and shall be reviewed every ten years.
      (2)   The public has had numerous and sufficient opportunities to provide
input to the preparation of the master plan for the town and this chapter.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 152.002 RESOLUTION.
    Now in light of the above findings, be it ordained by the Town Council to
adopt this chapter pursuant to the authority contained in Wyo. Stat. §§ 15-1-
601 through 15-1-611.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 152.003 DEFINITIONS.
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING. A detached subordinate building; the use of which is
customarily incidental to that of the main building or to the main use of the
land and which is located on the same  parcel with the main building or use.
   APPLICANT. A person or entity making an application for any town permit. Any
person or entity named as an applicant may designate a representative to appear
before the Council and/or Commission and to engage in necessary negotiations
with the Council and/or Commission.
   AVERAGE TOWN LOT SIZE. The average lot size is the sum of the land area
within the lots in a subdivision divided by the number of lots in the
subdivision, not counting any land or lots dedicated for parks or other public
uses. The minimum lot size for new construction of a single-family residence
shall be 7,000 square feet.
   BUILDING. Any structure built for the shelter or enclosure of persons,
animals, or property of any  kind, and not including advertising signs or
fences.
   BUILDING OFFICIAL. An employee of the town responsible for enforcing the
provisions of this chapter.
   BUILDING PERMIT. A permit issued by the Building Official pursuant to
Ordinance 271, Adoption of the International Residential Code, giving
permission for the construction, repair alteration, relocation and/or
demolition, or addition to a structure. A building permit is not the same as a
compliance permit.
   COMMERCIAL. All development for the purposes of retailing, wholesaling,
providing business  services, personal services, or professional services.
   COMMISSION. The Planning and Zoning Commission of the town.
   COMPLIANCE PERMIT. A compliance permit issued by the town granting approval
of a given proposal. The compliance permit states any conditions imposed on any
subsequent permits and the period of time for which the compliance permit is
valid. Compliance permits are valid for one year from the date granted.
   COUNCIL. The governing body of the town.
   DEQ. The Wyoming Department of Environmental Quality.
   DEVELOPMENT. As used in this chapter, a comprehensive term, including any
and all building or construction and all changes in land use.
   DUPLEX. A building occupied by two families living independently of each
other.
   FRONTAGE. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at the
point where the side lot lines intersect a public street right-of-way.
   INDUSTRIAL. All development for the purposes of mining, manufacturing, or
processing materials.
   MAJOR ADJOINING STRUCTURE. A major structure that is on a separate,
adjoining lot or parcel from the reference parcel.
   MAJOR STRUCTURE. A primary structure on a site representing the primary use
of the site such as a business, residence, apartment building, etc; same as
PRINCIPAL BUILDING.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more dependent
sections, constructed in conformance with the National Manufactured Housing
Construction and Safety Standards Act (42 U.S.C. §§ 4501 et seq., as amended)
and HUD Standards, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be
used as a single-family residential dwelling unit or office/business unit.
   MANUFACTURED HOME COURT. An area under one ownership, occupied by two or
more mobile or manufactured homes or manufactured home spaces.
   MASTER PLAN. The plan adopted in accordance with the State Land Use Planning
Act of 1975 and Wyo. Stat. §§ 15-1-503 through 15-1-506. The terms LAND USE
PLAN and COMPREHENSIVE PLAN are synonymous.
   MOBILE HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, designed
for use as a single  residential dwelling unit, built on a permanent chassis,
that was constructed prior to June 15, 1976, or is lacking certification of
compliance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety
Standards Act. Such a structure shall be considered a mobile home, whether or
not the wheels originally mounted have been removed, and whether or not the
structure has been placed upon a permanent foundation. A TRAILER HOUSE is the
same as a mobile home.
   MODULAR HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more independent
sections, designed for use as a single-family residential dwelling unit, not
built on a permanent chassis, capable of being transported from the place of
fabrication to the site on which it is to be erected, where it is placed on a
permanent foundation and, when assembled, meets all of the provisions of the
International Residential Code.
   MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING. A building occupied by two or more families,
living independently of each other.
   PERFORMANCE STANDARDS. Specific requirements are used as rules by which
development  proposals are judged for compliance.
   PERMANENT FOUNDATION. A foundation system comprised of concrete footings
with stem walls consisting of six-inch-wide concrete, grouted block, or
concrete-filled foam forms with a minimum depth of 42 inches to footings. The
foundation must surround the entire perimeter of the structure.
   PLAT. A map illustrating a survey completed by a surveyor registered in the
State of Wyoming and showing all details of the completed survey.
   PRINCIPAL BUILDING. Same as MAJOR STRUCTURE.
   PUBLIC USES AND FACILITIES. Public and quasi-public buildings, structures,
and land uses operated by a government agency or nonprofit community
organization including non-residential schools,  churches, meeting halls,
parks, fairgrounds, animal shelters, governmental offices, fire, sheriff, and
ambulance stations.
      (1)   MAJOR PUBLIC USES AND FACILITIES. Public uses and facilities
consisting of buildings of 5,000 square feet of floor area or larger, or land
uses without major structures that occupy one acre or more of land.
      (2)   MINOR PUBLIC USES AND FACILITIES. Public uses and facilities
consisting of buildings of less than 5,000 square feet of floor area or land
uses without major structures that occupy less than one acre of land.
   SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING. For the purpose of this chapter, includes all
manufactured, modular, or conventional “stick-built” dwellings designed for
occupancy by a single-family.
   SKETCH PLAN. The basis for discussions between the applicant, the Building
Official and/or the Commission. It is intended that the sketch plan be flexible
and susceptible to modification in accordance with the recommendation of the
Commission and/or Building Official. The complexity of the sketch plan will
vary with the size and complexity of the development. At a minimum, the sketch
plan shall include:
      (1)   A location map (to scale).
      (2)   A complete overhead view drawing of the proposed development
showing all property lines, streets, alleys, and other public or private
rights-of-way. The drawing shall also show all setbacks and dimensions of all
structures (including driveways, parking lots, patios, etc.) to be erected. All
drawings shall be to scale.
   SUBDIVISION. A division of a unit of land into two or more lots, plots,
unit, sites or other subdivisions of land for the immediate or future purpose
of sale, building development or redevelopment, for residential, recreational,
industrial, commercial or public uses. The word SUBDIVIDE, or any derivative
thereof shall have reference to the term SUBDIVISION. This term includes the
division of original town lots.
      (1)   MAJOR SUBDIVISION. A subdivision that creates five or more lots or
a subdivision of any number of lots that require the extension of town
utilities, town streets, or other town infrastructure to serve the proposed
lots.
      (2)   MINOR SUBDIVISION. A subdivision that creates four or fewer lots
and does not require the extension of town utilities, town streets or other
town infrastructure to serve the proposed lots.
   TOWNHOUSE. A single-family dwelling in a row of at least three such units in
which each unit has its own front and rear access to the outside. No unit is
located over another unit. Each unit is separated from each other by one or
more vertical fire-resistant walls and each unit is on its own lot.
   VARIANCE. A request by an applicant who has applied for a permit for new
construction, renovation of an existing structure or change to a town lot,
whereas the applicant wishes to vary from any regulations governed by this
chapter. The request shall be in writing and submitted to the Commission or
Council for approval. The Building Official cannot approve any requests for
variance.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 152.004 BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful to erect, construct, reconstruct, move, or change the use of
any building, structure or land with the town without obtaining a building
permit, and no permit shall be issued unless the plans for the proposed
construction and/or change of use fully conform to this chapter. Accessory
buildings under 200 square feet do not require a permit.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.005 FALSIFICATION OF INFORMATION.
    Any person who falsifies or distorts information required by this chapter
shall be subject to the penalties provided for in §
152.999.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.006 BURDEN OF PROOF.
    The applicant shall be responsible for the submission and accuracy of all
information required or requested to meet the performance standards of this
chapter.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)  Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.007 RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER ORDINANCES OR REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Where other town and/or state regulations apply concurrently with this
chapter, the more restrictive shall govern.
   (B)   Proposed construction and/or change of building usage may require a
building permit pursuant to the most recent building code. No building permit
shall be issued by the town for the excavation for or erection of a building,
or part of a building, or for repairs to or alteration of, or moving of a
building or part of a building, or for the change-of-use of any building until
a compliance permit has been approved by the Building Official, Commission, or
Council.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.008 APPLICABILITY.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be generally applied in the favor of
the public interest.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 152.009 AMENDMENTS.
    This chapter may be amended by the process prescribed in Wyo. Stat. §§ 15-
1-602 through 15-1-603. Prior to adopting any amendment to this chapter, the
Council shall refer the amendment to the Commission for a recommendation on the
amendment. The Commission shall be allowed 40 days to make its recommendation
to the Council.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)
COMPLIANCE PERMITS
§ 152.020 APPLICABILITY.
   A compliance permit and a building permit shall be required for any
construction or development in the town. Any accessory building that is 200
square feet or less does not require a permit, provided all provisions of this
chapter are met.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)  Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.021 FORM OF APPLICATION.
    Application for a compliance permit shall be made on forms available at the
town office. A filing shall not be accepted until all the information required
is provided. Applications for multiple-family dwellings and minor subdivisions
shall be made to the Commission.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)  Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.022 TIME OF APPLICATION.
    Applications for a compliance permit shall be made prior to the physical
layout or construction of the proposed development. A completed application
shall be filed at the town office with the Town Clerk for approval by the
Building Official, Commission or Council. A building permit must be approved
and signed by the Building Official before proceeding with the approved
development.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)  Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.023 PERMIT APPROVAL INCLUDING CONDITIONS.
   The approval of a compliance or building permit may include conditions
provided the conditions are transferred in writing to the applicant by the
Commission and/or Council or Building Official with the signed permit.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 152.024 PERMIT IS FOR DEVELOPMENT AS REPRESENTED.
    The compliance permit is approved for the proposed development as
represented to the Building Official, Commission, or Council. Once construction
commences, modification or deviation of the development from its represented
and approved form shall void the compliance permit and subject the applicant to
the penalties provided for in § 152.999.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)  Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.025 DURATION OF A PERMIT.
    A compliance permit is valid for one year from the date of approval. A
building permit is valid for 180 days. If physical construction is not
substantially underway within 180 days from the date granted, the building
permit is said to be expired. Application would again be necessary before
proceeding.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)
PERMIT REVIEW PROCESS
§ 152.040 PERMIT REVIEW PROCESS GENERALLY.
    All new developments and subdivisions require an approved compliance permit
and building permit issued from the town. Different entities within the town
are responsible for granting approval depending on the size and type of project
and are identified in §§
152.041 through
152.043. Sections
152.044 through
152.053 of this chapter detail the review process.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)  Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.041 REVIEW OF SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING, DUPLEX AND ACCESSORY BUILDING
APPLICATIONS.
   On applications for single-family dwellings and accessory buildings, the
Building Official shall do the following within five days of receipt of a
completed compliance permit application: Verify that the plan as presented does
or does not meet the requirements of the code. If the Building Official is
satisfied that all requirements have been met, a building permit may be issued.
If he or she is not satisfied with the application content, he or she may
request additional information or send the application to the Commission for
further review and approval/disapproval at the next scheduled Commission
meeting. If the Commission does not approve the application, the applicant can
appeal the decision to the Council.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 152.042 REVIEW OF MINOR SUBDIVISION APPLICATIONS.
   An application for a minor subdivision shall be reviewed by the Commission.
The review of minor subdivisions shall be based on a sketch plan. The sketch
plan need not be prepared by a professional engineer providing the parcel’s
boundaries are accurate and drawn to scale. A preliminary plat and final plat
are not required for minor subdivisions. The Commission has the authority to
approve/disapprove minor subdivision applications and may also request
verification of ownership of the parcel being subdivided.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 152.043 REVIEW OF MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS AND MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING APPLICATIONS.
   Compliance permits for major subdivisions and construction of multi-family
buildings shall be reviewed by the Commission and Council. The Commission shall
provide the Council with a recommendation concerning the application. The
Council shall make the final decision concerning the application.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 152.044 REVIEW COMMENCEMENT.
    Review of the application shall begin at the first regular Commission
meeting following submission of a completed form, provided the filing deadline
has been met. At the meeting, the Commission shall conduct a preliminary review
of the application.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 152.045 APPLICANT’S PRESENCE REQUIRED.
    The applicant or agent of the applicant shall be present for consideration
of the application for a compliance permit to proceed.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 152.046 ON-SITE INSPECTION.
    The filing of an application for a compliance permit constitutes permission
for the town’s officials or its advisors to inspect the site for its
suitability for the proposed development.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 152.047 SUBSTANCE OF REVIEW.
    Application for compliance permits shall be reviewed for their conformance
to the performance standards, zoning district regulations, and other standards
contained in this chapter and to the general and specific intent of the master
plan for the town.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 152.048 FURTHER INFORMATION REQUESTS.
    Further information may be requested by the Commission or the Council at
the first meeting before each body where the application is reviewed. The
request may cover any aspect of a proposed development which is dealt with in
the performance standards, zoning district regulations, and other standards
contained in this chapter or the master plan for the town. Further information
shall be submitted before the review may continue.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 152.049 HEARINGS.
    The Council may elect at its option to hold a public hearing on any
application coming before the Council. When a hearing is required, the Town
Clerk shall post a public notice of the hearing in at least two public
locations in the town. In addition, the applicant shall provide written notice
of all adjoining property owners including those across a street or alley from
the subject property. All required notices shall be posted and provided at
least ten days prior to the hearing date. The notice shall be prepared by the
Town Clerk and shall contain the following information:
   (A)   A brief description of the project.
   (B)   The project’s location relative to landmarks or cross streets and the
address if available.
   (C)   An abbreviated legal description.
   (D)   Applicant’s name.
   (E)   Hearing date, time, and place.
   (F)   How additional information can be obtained.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 152.050 HEARING ACTION ON APPLICATION.
   Upon completion of the public hearing and its review, the Council shall
recommend one of the following:
   (A)   Approve the application with or without conditions.
   (B)   Reject the application, filing its reasons for doing so in writing
within five days after the decision is made.
   (C)   The Council shall act on the application no later than 30 days after
additional information has been received or a public hearing is held.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 152.051 COUNCIL ACTION ON APPLICATIONS.
   After receiving the Commission recommendation on an application for a
compliance permit, the Council may:
   (A)   Request the applicant to submit further information.
   (B)   Set a hearing date at the next regular meeting of the Council.
   (C)   Make a final decision on the application.
   (D)   The Council shall make its final decision after receipt of the
Commission recommendation, and after the public hearing, if one has been held,
or after any requested additional information has been submitted. In making a
final decision, the Council shall:
      (1)   Approve the application and issue a building permit, with or
without conditions; or
      (2)   Reject the application, filing its reasons for doing so in writing
within five days after the decision is made.
   (E)   In no case shall a decision be delayed more than 30 days after receipt
of the Commission recommendation, after the public hearing, or after the
receipt of additional information requested, whichever is later.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 152.052 PLATS OF MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS.
   The initial review of major subdivisions shall be based on a preliminary
plan. The preliminary plan need not be prepared by a professional engineer
providing it is accurate with respect to the parcel’s boundaries and
dimensions. The final plat and attachments required by the performance
standards of this chapter shall be submitted to the Town Clerk at least seven
days prior to any regular Council meeting after the applicant receives
approval. Any variances from the conditions of the approval shall be grounds
for rejection of the final plat. The compliance permit and building permit
shall not be signed until the final plat is approved. All plats shall be
professionally prepared and filed in accordance with state law and this
chapter.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 152.053 PLANS OF MANUFACTURED HOME COURTS.
   The initial review of manufactured home courts shall be based on a
preliminary plan. The preliminary plan need not be prepared by a professional
engineer providing it is accurate with respect to the parcel’s boundaries and
is drawn to scale. The final plan and attachments shall be submitted to the
Town Clerk at least seven days prior to any regular Council meeting after the
applicant receives approval. Any variance from the approved plan shall be
grounds for the rejection of the final plan. The compliance permit/building
permit shall not be signed until the final professionally prepared plan is
approved. The final plan shall be filed in the office of the County Clerk in
accordance with this chapter.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025) )
ANNEXATION AND SERVICES EXTENSION POLICY
§ 152.065 ANNEXATION AND EXTENSION OF SERVICES.
   For the purpose of maintaining adequate services with the existing town
limits, the following policies relating to annexations to the town and
extension of municipal services are adopted.
   (A)   The town shall approve no annexations to the town, except those areas
presently utilizing town central sewage or water services, until land within
the town limits is developed to the extent feasible and additional land is
required for the growth of the town.
   (B)   The town shall provide no municipal services, including streets,
outside of the town limits except for providing water to Council authorized
users on the town’s main water line and the town’s secondary water lines.
Individual services lines shall not be tapped into to add additional users.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)  Penalty, see §
152.999
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
§ 152.080 USE OF PUBLIC FACILITIES.
    The following standards apply to all new developments within the town
limits:
   (A)   All users of the town water and sewage systems shall have individual
hookups to the town mains.
   (B)   The town shall not extend or enlarge services including streets unless
the full cost of the necessary extension can be borne by the users.
   (C)   Extensions of sewer mains, water mains, electricity, and natural gas
lines shall be placed within platted streets on their logical extensions.
   (D)   All developments generating sewage effluent shall connect to the town
sewage system except those in the areas designated for individual septic
systems on the zoning map. Lots utilizing individual septic systems shall be
adequately sized to accommodate the system. Manufactured home courts and
subdivisions shall not be located where they cannot be served by the town
sewage system.
   (E)   All additions to the town water and sewer mains, except service
connections shall be approved by the Wyoming Department of Environmental
Quality.
   (F)   No water lines, except individual service connections, shall be less
than six inches in diameter.
   (G)   No sewage lines, except individual service connections, shall be less
than eight inches in diameter.
   (H)   An application may be rejected if there is not sufficient capacity in
the water or sewage systems for the development.
   (I)   Pretreatment of sewage effluent may be required prior to its entering
into the town sewage mains.
   (J)   Any damage to the public infrastructure caused by the builder/
developer shall be repaired by the builder/developer to the satisfaction of the
Building Official. All repair costs shall be borne by the builder/developer.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.081 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCES AND ACCESSORY BUILDINGS.
   The following standards shall apply to all single-family residences, and
accessory buildings constructed or placed after adoption of this chapter:
   (A)   All residences shall have usable, legal access onto a public street.
   (B)   All residences outside of mobile home courts shall have individual
hookups to town services except in those areas of town where septic systems are
specifically allowed.
   (C)   All residences shall be placed on permanent foundations, except mobile
homes inside mobile home courts.
   (D)   All residences shall have a minimum width of 16 feet and minimum
length of 32 feet.
   (E)   All buildings shall be adequately painted and sided to provide all
weather protection. Accessory buildings with metal siding shall be factory
painted.
   (F)   On any lot or parcel of land used principally for residential usage,
only one building intended for residential occupancy shall be permitted.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)  Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.082 MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLINGS, DUPLEXES AND TOWNHOUSES.
   The following standards shall apply to all multiple-family dwellings,
duplexes, and townhouses constructed or placed within the town limits after
adoption of this chapter:
   (A)   All multiple-family dwellings, duplexes, and townhouse developments
shall be evaluated for their impact on the town’s water supply and distribution
system, sewage collection and treatment system, solid waste collection and
disposal program, fire protection facilities, law enforcement program and
streets. Each multiple-family dwelling unit shall have its own hook up to water
and sewer and individual trash receptacles.
   (B)   All multiple-family dwellings, duplexes, and townhouses shall provide
adequate off-street parking at a rate of two side-by-side spaces per unit.
Garages are not considered “off-street parking” and shall not be added as off-
street parking. Such parking shall be adequately lit and drained and shall have
safe access to public streets. Where an internal access street(s) is provided
within the development, the width for such street(s) shall be not less than 20
feet. All roadways and parking spaces shall be dust-free, surfaced with either
concrete or asphalt type materials with individual parking spaces clearly
marked and identified.
   (C)   All multiple-family dwellings, duplexes, and townhouses shall provide
on-property solid waste collection containers adequately sized to contain all
refuse, and the containers shall be located in an area easily accessible for
pickup. Arrangements for garbage pickup shall be made, with tenants’
responsibility, if any, clearly identified.
   (D)   Multiple-family and duplex buildings shall not be located within 20
feet of other buildings on the same lot. See §§
152.110 through
152.120 for other applicable building setback requirements.
   (E)   No multiple-family, duplex dwelling structure or block of townhouses
shall occupy more than 60% of the parcel on which they are located. No more
than 60% of the open space obtained shall be devoted to parking. All applicable
setbacks shall be considered when locating the structures.
   (F)   Open space surrounding multiple-family dwellings, duplexes, and
townhouses shall be landscaped and maintained in accordance with the
requirements of §
152.094.
   (G)   All buildings shall be adequately painted or sided to provide all-
weather protection.
   (H)   All multiple-family dwellings and duplexes shall obtain the required
permit from the State Fire Marshall prior to final approval of a compliance
permit/and building permit.
   (I)   No more than four housing units shall be contained within a multi-
family housing building and no more than four townhouse units shall be
contained within a single block of units.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)  Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.083 COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENTS IN THE DOWNTOWN COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.
    The following standards shall apply to all commercial developments
constructed or placed within the “C-1” Downtown Commercial District after
adoption of this chapter:
   (A)   (1)   Where required by state statute, plan review by the State Fire
Marshall’s office shall be completed prior to approval of a permit.
      (2)   Plan review by State Fire Marshall’s office is required for:
         (a)   Buildings frequented by the public which are greater than 5,000
square feet or more than one story in height;
         (b)   Public bars, lounges, restaurants, night clubs, churches,
lodges, theaters, or public meeting places;
         (c)   Child care centers for more than 11 children; and
         (d)   All government buildings.
   (B)   Off-street parking shall not be required.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.084 HOME BUSINESSES.
   (A)    A home business is a business conducted in a dwelling unit or
accessory building by the residents of the unit provided the business activity
is incidental and secondary to the residential use of the property and does not
change the residential character of the neighborhood. Home businesses are
permitted with the approval of a compliance permit/building permit and
conformance with the following standards:
   (A)   The business does not regularly require product delivery or pickup
except by parcel post and not freight or common carrier shipping.
   (B)   The business does not require more parking for customers than can be
provided along the front property line of the applicant. All employee parking
shall be provided on-site.
   (C)   The business shall not be located within a structure with metal
siding, unless the siding is factory painted.
   (D)   No commercial structures shall be larger in size, in any dimension
than an average sized house in the neighborhood. The site shall not have open
storage.
   (E)   A single sign, no larger than 20 square feet, may be attached to the
building. The sign shall state only the name of the business and shall not
flash, blink, be lighted by colored light, or have any movable parts. The top
of the sign shall be located no higher than eight feet from ground level. Signs
shall harmonize with the exterior of the building and be of a material that can
be maintained. Electronic reader boards are prohibited.
   (F)   A plan for garbage disposal including pick-up shall be presented.
Garbage containers shall be provided which shall contain all refuse generated.
   (G)   See §§
152.110 through
152.120 for applicable setback requirements.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)  Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.085 RESIDENTIAL-SCALE BUSINESSES.
    Residential-scale businesses are permitted with the approval of a
compliance permit and conforming with the following standards:
   (A)   In general, the residential-scale business shall be designed and
operated such that the residential character of the area is retained, the
business is highly compatible with residential uses, and foreseeable negative
impacts to nearby residences are avoided.
   (B)   All outdoor lighting shall be planned and installed to be compatible
with the residential character of the area. Area lighting shall utilize full
cut-off shields and shall not be placed more than 18 feet above ground level.
Excessive site lighting is prohibited, and lighting of adjoining properties
shall be minimized.
   (C)   Signage is limited to a single sign, no larger than 20 square feet.
The sign shall not flash, blink, be lighted with colored light, be internally
illuminated, or have any movable parts. The top of the sign shall be located no
higher than five feet from ground level. The sign shall harmonize with the
exterior of the building and be of a material that can be maintained. Any
freestanding sign shall be located at least ten feet back from any property
lines. Electronic reader boards are prohibited. One neon sign not exceeding
three square feet is allowed.
   (D)   New buildings shall be designed using residential style architectural
features similar to those found among existing residential buildings in the
town. Commercial architectural styles featuring metal sided buildings, flat
roofs, large expanses of windows, and similar nonresidential features are
prohibited.
   (E)   No commercial structures shall be larger in size, in any dimension,
than an average sized house in the neighborhood. The site shall not have open
storage.
   (F)   On-site parking areas shall be provided with a sufficient number of
parking spaces to accommodate expected parking needs in excess of that which
can be met on-street in front of the property. Such off-street parking areas
shall be located to the side or rear of the building and not in front. Such
off-street parking areas shall not be located within the required building
setback area as specified in §§ 152.080 through 152.095. Solid fencing and/or
landscaping may be required between parking areas and adjoining residences.
   (G)   To the fullest extent practical, lawns, trees and other landscaping
shall be maintained around buildings and parking areas.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)  Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.086 COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENTS.
    The following standards shall apply to all commercial developments
constructed with the town limits after the adoption of this chapter, except
that this section does not apply to downtown businesses, home businesses and
residential-scale businesses.
   (A)   Landscaping. Landscaping is required for all new buildings and
additions. Landscaping shall meet the requirements of §
152.094, as well as the following additional standards:
      (1)   The lot shall be completely landscaped, except for those areas
occupied by utilities, access driveways, paved walks, walls and structures.
      (2)   All flanking street-side side yards shall be completely landscaped,
except for those areas occupied by utilities, access driveways, paved walks,
walls and structures.
   (B)   Parking. Commercial developments shall provide off-street parking
adequate for employees and customers. Parking shall have adequate drainage and
lighting and safe access to public streets. Parking areas shall be located no
closer than five feet to any property line.
   (C)   Buffers. The Council shall require reasonable buffer areas around
commercial developments, where adjacent lands are developed or platted for
residential use, and such areas will be landscaped and where necessary, fenced
by the applicant.
   (D)   Signs. Advertising signs utilized by commercial developments shall not
include moving, flashing, or blinking parts, or electronic reader boards. Off-
site signs or billboards are prohibited except for directional signs. No
directional sign shall exceed eight feet in height at its highest point or 32
square feet in coverage nor shall it display any promotional material.
   (E)   Lighting. All outdoor lighting shall be planned and installed to be
compatible with the area. Area lighting shall utilize full cut-off shields and
shall not be placed more than 18 feet above ground level. Excessive site
lighting is prohibited, and lighting of adjoining properties shall be
minimized.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)  Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.087 INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENTS.
    The following standards shall apply to all industrial developments
constructed within the town limits after the adoption of this chapter:
   (A)   No industrial development shall be allowed without a thorough analysis
of its impacts on the town’s water supply and distribution system, sewage
collection and treatment system, solid waste collection and disposal program,
fire protection facilities, law enforcement program, and streets.
   (B)   Industrial developments having emissions of odor, fly ash or other
particulate matters of toxic products of combustion or other industrial
processes may be excluded from the town on the basis of protecting local air
quality, even though Wyoming air quality standards are met.
   (C)   Developments generating heavy vehicle/truck traffic on streets
maintained by the town may be required to bear the cost of resurfacing or
reconstruction and signing and traffic signals whenever it is necessary.
   (D)   Industrial developments may be required to take safety measures such
as fencing of loose material stockpiles, trenches, etc., shielding of glaring
surfaces, arc lights or welding areas and noise reducing or muffling measures.
An industrial development may be rejected based on unreasonable noise, glare or
light, or safety hazards.
   (E)   The Council shall require reasonable buffer areas around industrial
developments, where adjacent lands are developed or platted for residential
use. These buffer areas shall be landscaped and, where necessary, fenced by the
applicant. Reasonable setbacks from public streets and/or alleys are also
required. Industrial development buffer zones shall amount to approximately 40%
of the space covered by structures, roadways, and materials handling areas. No
more than 60% of a buffer zone shall be devoted to parking.
   (F)   Industrial developments shall provide off-street parking adequate for
employees and customers. Parking shall have adequate drainage and lighting, and
safe access to public streets.
   (G)   Advertising signs utilized by industrial developments shall not
include moving, flashing, or blinking parts. Off-site signs or billboards are
prohibited except for directional signs. No directional sign shall exceed eight
feet in height at its highest point or 32 square feet in coverage, nor shall it
display any promotional material.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)  Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.088 MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS.
    All major subdivisions within the town limits, or as proposed as additions
to the town, shall conform to the following standards:
   (A)   Subdivisions shall be evaluated for their impact on the town’s water
supply and distribution system, sewage collection and treatment system, fire
protection and streets. Subdivisions shall also be evaluated on their internal
circulation and access system, storm water drainage and street maintenance
costs, lot arrangement and layout, their relationship to natural conditions of
soil type, drainage and hydrology and other natural resource considerations. To
accomplish this, a subdivision will not be approved without submission of a
preliminary plan containing the following information:
      (1)   All existing and proposed roads, streets and alleys.
      (2)   All existing waterways, drain courses and drainage ways.
      (3)   All existing and proposed sewage lines, water lines, utility lines
and easements.
      (4)   All proposed lighting facilities.
      (5)   Proposed lot lines, including dimensions.
      (6)   All existing property lines and names of property owners of the
tract and abutting parcels.
      (7)   Proposed land use for each lot or parcel of land.
      (8)   All proposed easements for drainage and pedestrian walkways.
      (9)   Written assurances from utility companies that easements will meet
the requirements of utility companies.
      (10)   North point, map scale and date of submission.
      (11)   No subdivision will be approved until the following factors have
been satisfactorily provided:
         (a)   Access to streets or roads and access for utilities and
services.
         (b)   Placement of structures to be erected.
         (c)   Open space, pedestrian movement systems, and recreational areas.
         (d)   Storm runoff and minimization of soil erosion during and after
construction.
         (e)   Maintenance or streets and open space after construction.
         (f)   Topographical features.
         (g)   Minimum disruption of irrigation and drainage systems serving
other lands.
         (h)   Solid waste disposal.
   (B)   All lots shall have usable access onto a public street. Principal
access to a lot from an alley is prohibited.
   (C)   Pavement and right-of-way width for streets shall be determined to be
adequate to accommodate two-way traffic flow through the subdivision, the use
of emergency and maintenance vehicles within the subdivision, and right-of-way
for all utilities and their maintenance. The right-of-way width shall not be
less than 45 feet.
   (D)   All streets will be paved and drained to the specifications of the
Council.
   (E)   All roads, streets, and alleys shall be graded to the full width of
said roadway and all culverts, bridges and storm sewers shall be constructed
for the full width of the roadway.
   (F)   Cul-de-sacs and dead-end streets shall have a turning radius of at
least 75 feet in diameter at their end and shall be no longer than 600 feet.
   (G)   Streets shall intersect at right angles whenever possible.
   (H)   When provided, an alley right-of-way shall be not less than 20 feet in
width.
   (I)   No town utilities shall be provided within private rights-of-way.
   (J)   All underground utilities shall be installed by the subdivider to the
property line of each lot prior to street surfacing.
   (K)   Drainage through natural or man-made drainage ways shall be certified
as adequate by a registered engineer prior to approval.
   (L)   All areas subject to erosion or made subject to erosion during
construction shall be stabilized.
   (M)   Street names shall be compatible with the existing street names and
shall be approved by the Council.
   (N)   Street lighting shall be provided of at least equal intensity as
existing lighting in the town.
   (O)   The final plat of the subdivision shall reflect all recommendations of
the Commission and approved by the Council. It shall conform to the drawing
standards of the Big Horn County Subdivision Regulations (Subdivision
Regulations for Big Horn County, Chapter XIV, Section 1, Quality of Final
Plat). The Town Clerk shall be provided with ten copies of as-built maps of all
utilities installed by the applicant.
   (P)   The final plat shall be accompanied by:
      (1)   Copies of all covenants attached to the subdivision.
      (2)   Evidence satisfactory to the Council that the applicant has
adequate financial resources to develop and complete any facility proposed or
represented to be the responsibility of the applicant, including but not
limited to water systems, sewage systems, streets and roadways. The applicant
shall provide a performance bond, escrow monies or other sufficient financial
commitments to assure that any facilities proposed or represented to be part of
the subdivision shall, in fact, be completed as proposed.
      (3)   Approval of the subdivision sewage collection and water
distribution system by the Department of Environmental Quality.
      (4)   A contract between the town and applicant, ready for signature,
approved by the Town Attorney, specifying the exact nature of public
improvements shall be completed by the applicant. The contract shall stipulate
the kind and quality of materials to be used and provide for continuing
inspections by a qualified and designated inspector as work progresses. The
guarantee of adequacy of improvements shall be contained in the contract and
shall be binding for one year after the completion date, assigning liability to
the applicant for failure due to poor workmanship or materials. Failure to meet
the terms of the contract shall cause the developer to forfeit the money set
aside as security to the town for the purpose of completing the terms of the
contract. A penalty may also be assigned as provided in §
152.999.
   (Q)   Subdivisions may contain a variety of uses, provided standards are
adopted to ensure compatibility or adequate buffering between those uses. These
standards shall include, but are not limited to setbacks, special building
arrangements, if necessary for proper solar alignment, and building standards
for individual uses, such as commercial or manufactured home parks. These
standards will be reviewed by the Commission and when approved by the Council,
shall be incorporated into this code as special neighborhood standards.
Individual covenants or the subdivision, such as the minimum square footage of
the structures, minimum price of home, style of architecture, etc. shall not be
incorporated into this code or enforced by the town but must meet or exceed the
standards established in this code.
   (R)   Sub-dividers shall be responsible for providing or constructing the
following improvements to the town’s standards:
      (1)   Streets and alleys.
      (2)   Street signs shall be installed at all intersections.
      (3)   Street lighting.
      (4)   Storm water drainage facilities.
      (5)   Sidewalks.
      (6)   Sanitary sewers.
      (7)   Potable water lines.
      (8)   Fire hydrants shall be installed at required intervals and provided
with standard hose connections as specified by the Fire District.
      (9)   Irrigation lines.
      (10)   Other improvements, such as bridges, culverts, etc., not
specifically mentioned herein but found necessary by the town due to conditions
found on the site.
   (S)   The sub-divider shall dedicate to the town, a park site equivalent in
area to at least 6% of the total area being subdivided, provided such park land
is located within 1,200 feet of all lots in the proposed subdivision and is
approved by the Council as to location or, at the option of the town, the sub-
divider shall, in lieu of such dedication, pay to the town a cash amount equal
to at least 6% percent of the raw land value of the total land area in the
proposed subdivision. The price of such land shall be established and agreed
upon by the town and the sub-divider prior to accepting the final plat of such
subdivision. If the town and sub-divider fail to agree on the value of said
land, the value shall be established by an independent appraiser mutually
acceptable to the sub-divider and the town. Such payment shall be used only for
the acquisition or development of parks, playgrounds or other similar public
purposes.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)  Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.089 MINOR SUBDIVISIONS.
    Minor subdivisions require a compliance permit approved by the Commission
and reported to the Council. All minor subdivisions shall be of sound layout,
create usable building lots, and meet applicable zoning requirements. To be
considered a minor subdivision, all required utilities, streets and other
infrastructure must already be in place and available to service the
subdivision. Subdivisions that require the extension of utilities, streets or
other infrastructure shall be processed as major subdivisions.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.090 MANUFACTURED HOME COURTS.
   (A)    All manufactured home courts shall be evaluated for their impact on
the town’s water supply and distribution system, sewage collection and
treatment system, solid waste collection and disposal program, fire protection
facilities and streets. Manufactured home courts shall also be evaluated for
their internal circulation and access patterns, unit size, arrangement and
layout and their relationship to natural conditions of soil type, drainage and
hydrology, slopes, floodplains and other natural resources considerations.
   (B)   All spaces shall be at least 4,000 square feet and at least 50 feet
wide.
   (C)   Manufactured homes shall be at least ten feet from all property lines.
Where spaces are located side-by-side, there shall not be less than 20 feet
between homes. Where spaces are located end-to- end, there shall not be less
than 20 feet between mobile homes.
   (D)   Manufactured homes shall be located at least 20 feet from all park
roadways and at least 20 feet from all public rights-of-way.
   (E)   All mobile home courts shall have safe access onto a public roadway.
   (F)   Pavement and right-of-way width shall be determined to be adequate to
accommodate two- way traffic flow through the courts, the movement and
manufactured home, the use of emergency and maintenance vehicles, and right of
way for all utilities and their maintenance. The right-of-way width shall not
be less than 45 feet.
   (G)   All streets will be engineered and paved to the specifications of the
town master plan.
   (H)   Drainage through natural or man-made drainage shall be certified as
adequate by a registered engineer prior to approval of the permit.
   (I)   An extra vehicle parking area for recreational vehicles, etc. shall be
provided at the rate of one space per mobile home lot.
   (J)   All areas subject to erosion, or made subject to erosion during
construction, shall be stabilized.
   (K)   All spaces shall be provided with a concrete pad or permanent material
with anchors provided to stabilize the mobile home.
   (L)   All spaces shall be provided with a paved parking space large enough
for two automobiles.
   (M)   Garbage containers shall be provided which are adequately sized to
contain all refuse generated. The containers shall be accessible by all-weather
walkways. Arrangements for garbage pickup shall be made with occupants,
responsibility, if any, clearly identified.
   (N)   All-weather sidewalks provided for pedestrian use must be a minimum of
three feet wide.
   (O)   All mobile home courts shall meet the minimum standards for fire
protection in mobile home courts set forth by the State Department of Fire
Protection and Electrical Safety.
   (P)   Skirting of all mobile homes shall be required within 60 days after
occupancy in the manufactured home court. Skirting material shall consist of
wood or wood products, stucco, brick, rock, lap steel, lap aluminum or lap
vinyl. One or a combination of these materials shall be used to cover the
exterior of the housing unit. The mobile home court owner shall be responsible
for enforcing this standard.
   (Q)   No attachments, additions, alterations or modifications of the
exterior walls of a mobile home are allowed except those approved by the
manufacturer for the specific unit. All other additions, porches, decks,
garage, or other add-on attachments must be free-standing and self-supporting
with no structural reliance on the manufactured unit. The mobile home court
owner shall be responsible for enforcing this standard.
   (R)   The final plan shall reflect all recommendations of the Council. The
Town Clerk shall be provided with one reproducible and ten paper copies of the
final plan. The Town Clerk shall also be provided with reproducible copies of
as-built maps of all utility lines installed by the applicant. The final plan
shall be filed in the office of the County Clerk as a Record of Survey and
shall meet the requirements of a Record of Survey.
   (S)   Street names shall be compatible with existing street names in the
town and will be approved by the Council.
   (T)   Street lighting shall be provided of at least equal intensity as
existing lighting in the town.
   (U)   The final plan shall be accompanied by:
      (1)   Approval of the sewage collection and water distribution systems
from the Department of Environmental Quality and approved by the State Health
Department.
      (2)   A contract between the town and the applicant ready for signature,
approved by the Town Attorney, specifying the exact nature of all improvements
to be completed by the applicant. This contract, when fulfilled, shall be
deemed a license to operate the mobile home court. No units may be occupied, or
spaces rented or leased until all improvements are completed. The contract may
include provisions for phased improvements subject to a plan approved by the
town.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.091 LOCATION OF PUBLIC AND QUASI-PUBLIC USES.
    Parks, schools, churches and other public or quasi-public uses may be
permitted in any area of town if approved by the Council. Parking space,
traffic flow, and safe access shall be required where applicable.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)  Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.092 MOBILE HOMES.
   MOBILE HOMES, as defined in §
152.003 are not allowed within the town, except in an approved mobile home
court, and shall not be installed, placed, set, or stored anywhere with the
town limits after the effective date of this chapter. Legally existing mobile
homes, including those in legally existing mobile or manufactured home courts,
are allowed to remain as non-conforming uses as defined in §§
152.130 through
152.139 and subject to the following additional requirements:
   (A)   Any non-conforming mobile home that is vacant for a period of 180
consecutive days shall be removed from within the town limits and the non-
conforming status of the property becomes void.
   (B)   An existing mobile home that becomes uninhabitable for any reason, is
destroyed, or that is removed from its present location, may not be replaced
with another mobile home. The existing mobile home may be replaced with a
manufactured home meeting the requirements of §
152.093.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 152.093 MANUFACTURED/MODULAR HOMES.
   (A)   MANUFACTURED HOMES, as defined in §
152.003, are allowed within the town, subject to the following requirements:
      (1)   Manufactured homes shall be attached to a permanent foundation as
defined in this code. Any reenforcing required along the interior framework, as
recommended by the manufacturer, shall be constructed of concrete suitable to
withstand the intended load.
      (2)   Manufactured homes shall have a minimum width of 16 feet and
minimum length of 32 feet.
      (3)   Siding material shall consist of wood or wood products, stucco,
brick, rock, lap steel, lap aluminum or lap vinyl. One or a combination of
these materials shall be used to cover the exterior of the housing unit.
      (4)   No attachments, additions, alterations or modifications to the
exterior walls of a manufactured home are allowed, except those approved by the
manufacturer for the specific unit. All other additions, porches, decks, garage
or other add-on attachments must be freestanding and self-supporting with no
structural reliance on the manufactured unit itself.
      (5)   All towing devices, wheels, axles, and undercarriage support used
solely for initial transportation of the home will be removed from the property
within 30 days of delivery to the site. This equipment may not be stored on
town property.
      (6)   The structure shall be oriented to the lot so that the front
entrance door of the structure faces a side of the lot that abuts a public
street.
      (7)   All manufactured homes shall be new units at the time of
installation.
   (B)   Manufactured homes to be installed in legally existing manufactured
home courts are not required to meet the requirements of divisions (A)(1) and
(A)(2). Such units shall meet the requirements of divisions (A)(3) and (A)(6).
   (C)   Manufactured homes to be installed as a replacement for non-conforming
mobile or manufactured homes on town lots outside of manufactured home courts
are not required to meet the requirements of division (A)(7). Such replacement
units shall meet the requirements of division (A)(1), through (A)(4) and (A)
(6), as well as the following additional requirements:
      (1)   The replacement unit shall be not more than ten years old.
      (2)   The original mobile home or manufactured home shall be removed from
the property and outside the town limits within 30 days following installation
of the replacement unit.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.094 LANDSCAPING.
    When landscaping is required by the chapter, the applicant shall provide a
landscaping plan for the Commission’s review and the Council’s approval as part
of the compliance permit application. Required landscaping shall consist of
planting materials, including but not limited to sod, trees, shrubs, ground
covers, grasses, flowers, decorative rock, bark, mulch, and similar materials.
Landscaping shall be completed within one year from the date of occupancy of
the building. All live landscaping shall be properly maintained. All dead or
dying landscaping shall be replaced immediately and all sodded areas mowed,
fertilized and irrigated on a regular basis.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 152.095 NEW CONSTRUCTION REQUIRED.
    All buildings of any type and in any zoning district constructed or
installed after adoption of this chapter, shall be of new construction or
alteration of existing construction already at the site. Replacement
manufactured homes are exempt from this requirement as provided in §
152.093(B) and (C).
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)
ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS
§ 152.110 ZONING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED.
    To carry out the provisions of this chapter, the town is divided into the
following zoning districts:
   (A)   “R-1” - Residential District.
   (B)   “C-1” - Downtown Commercial District.
   (C)   “C-2” – Business Park District.
   (D)   “P” – Public Uses District.
   (E)   “FP” – Floodplain District.
   (F)   “MH” - Mobile Home Court District.
   (G)   “MF” – Multi-Family Dwelling District.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 152.111 ZONING MAP.
    The official town zoning map shall be filed and available to the public at
the Town Hall. The Town Clerk shall be responsible for revising the map
whenever the Council amends the district boundaries.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 152.112 DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
    The zoning district boundaries are shown on the zoning map. Unless
otherwise defined on the zoning district map, district boundary lines are lot
lines; the centerline of streets, alleys, or such lines extended; public land
survey lines; municipal corporate lines; or other lines drawn to scale on the
zoning district map. Where a lot is divided at the time of enactment of this
chapter, or by subsequent amendments, by a zoning district boundary line, the
less restrictive zoning requirements may be extended not more than 25 feet into
the more restrictive zoning district adjacent to the zoning district boundary
line.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 152.113 PERMITTED USES.
    In the following sections, permitted uses are listed for each zoning
district. Uses not specifically listed are prohibited in that zoning district,
unless the Commission determines that the use is similar in nature to other
uses within the same district. All permitted land uses must also conform to all
applicable performance standards of §§
152.080 though
152.095.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 152.114 “R-1” RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. The Residential District is intended to promote peaceful,
attractive residential neighborhoods with housing types that are protected from
commercial and industrial uses. Limited commercial usage of properties fronting
on U.S. Highway 310 will be considered. Commercial uses are intended to be
highly compatible with, and not interfere with, residential uses.
   (B)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Single-family residences.
      (2)   Home businesses.
      (3)   Residential-scale businesses.
      (4)   Minor public uses and facilities.
   (C)   Minimum lot size.
      (1)   7,000 square feet for one- and two-family dwellings.
      (2)   7,000 square feet for all other listed uses.
   (D)   Average lot size minimum. In addition to meeting the minimum lot size
requirements of division (C) above, the average lot size for major subdivisions
in the “R-1” Residential District shall equal or exceed the following sizes:
 
Number of Lots in Major Subdivision Average Lot Size Minimum
1 to 4 lots                         7,000 square feet
5 to 10 lots                        8,800 square feet
11 to 20 lots                       10,700 square feet
21 or more lots                     12,500 square feet
 
   (E)   Minimum lot frontage.
      (1)   For all uses the minimum lot frontage shall be 70 feet.
   (F)   Minimum building setbacks. Buildings shall be setback from property
lines and adjoining major structures as follows:
 
                                         Corner Lot               Major
Use           Front Setback Side Setback Side Street Rear Setback Adjoining
                                         Setback                  Structure
Single-family 20 feet       10 feet      20 feet     10 feet      10 feet
dwellings
Home          20 feet       10 feet      20 feet     10 feet      10 feet
businesses
Accessory     20 feet       10 feet      20 feet     10 feet      10 feet
buildings
 
   (G)   Maximum building height.
      (1)   The maximum allowable building height as measured from the average
ground level around the building shall be 35 feet.
      (2)   The height limitations of this division shall not apply to church
spires, belfries, cupolas, chimneys, ventilators, skylights, water tanks,
parapet walls, cornices without windows, antennas or necessary mechanical
appurtenances usually carried above the roof level, nor to buildings located
more than one foot distant from the building setback lines for each two feet of
building height.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)  Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.115 “C-1” DOWNTOWN COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. The “C-1” Downtown Commercial District is the heart of the
town and contains buildings of outstanding architectural value. A wide range of
uses are anticipated here, primarily in existing buildings. These uses will
include civic buildings, offices, retail and service businesses, church
facilities and some residential use above storefronts.
   (B)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Single-family residences.
      (2)   Duplexes and townhouses.
      (3)   Multi-family residences not exceeding four housing units per
individual building.
      (4)   Home businesses.
      (5)   Minor public and quasi-public uses and facilities.
      (6)   Major public uses and facilities.
      (7)   Commercial uses.
   (C)   Minimum lot size.
      (1)   3,000 square feet for commercial uses.
      (2)   Same as “R-1” for all other uses.
   (D)   Minimum lot frontage.
      (1)   24 feet for commercial uses.
      (2)   Same as “R-1” for all other uses.
   (E)   Minimum building setbacks.
      (1)   There are no setback requirements for commercial uses in the “C-1”
District.
      (2)   Same as “R-1” for all other uses.
   (F)   Maximum building height. Same as “R-1.”
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 152.116 “C-2” BUSINESS PARK COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. The “C-2” Business Park Commercial District is intended to
facilitate the development of new commercial areas that can accommodate the
relocation of existing businesses in the town, as well as new businesses that
may be attracted to the town. Most available locations in town are small or are
in primarily residential areas and therefore not ideal for most new or
expanding businesses. The “C-2” district is intended to provide suitable sites
for a wide range of commercial uses particularly those requiring new buildings
on larger lots. The landscaping, site layout and architectural features of new
uses in this district should be such that the overall appearance would be of a
unified, spacious, and well-organized business district that creates a positive
impression at the entrance of the community.
   (B)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Minor public and quasi-public uses and facilities.
      (2)   Major public uses and facilities.
      (3)   Commercial uses.
      (4)   Industrial uses.
   (C)   Minimum lot size.
      (1)   10,000 square feet for commercial and industrial uses.
      (2)   Same as “R-1” for all other uses.
   (D)   Minimum lot frontage.
      (1)   80 feet for commercial and industrial uses.
      (2)   Same as “R-1” for all other uses.
   (E)   Minimum building setbacks.
 
Use      Front Setback Side Setback Rear Setback Major Adjoining Structure
All uses 40 feet       15 feet      15 feet      20 feet
 
   (F)   Maximum building height. Same as “R-1” for all uses.
   (G)   Floor area ratio. The floor area ratio for buildings in the “C-2”
District shall be 0.2 or lower. The floor area ratio is gross floor area of all
buildings on a lot divided by the total lot area.
   (H)   Additional requirements. All uses and structures in the “C-2” District
shall comply with the applicable performance standards of §§
152.080 through
152.095.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 152.117 “P” PUBLIC USES DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. The “P” Public Uses District is intended to accommodate
large-scale public uses and facilities including major parks, maintenance
yards, schools and other similar uses.
   (B)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Major public use and facilities.
      (2)   Minor public uses and facilities.
   (C)   Minimum lot size. The minimum lot size is 12,000 thousand square feet
for all permitted uses.
   (D)   Minimum lot frontage. The minimum lot frontage is 70 feet for all
permitted uses.
   (E)   Minimum building setbacks. The minimum building setback requirements
are as follows:
 
Use                Front Setback Side Setback Rear Setback Major Adjoining
                                                           Structure
All permitted uses 20 feet       10 feet      10 feet      10 feet
 
   (F)   Maximum building height. Same as “R-1” for all uses.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 152.118 “FP” FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT.
   (A)   The purpose of the Flood Management Overlay District is to minimize
public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas along flood
prone areas designed by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and the Federal
Insurance Administration. The requirements of this chapter must be met in
addition to those of the underlying zone district.
   (B)   The areas of special flood hazard are identified on the flood
insurance rate maps. The flood hazard area includes land within the 100-year
floodplain.
   (C)   The creation of this district does not imply that all areas outside of
the overlay district will always be safe from flooding. Therefore, the
establishment of this district shall not create liability on the part of the
town, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Emergency Management
Agency, for any flood damage that result from reliance on this chapter, or any
administrative decisions lawfully made thereunder.
   (D)   All uses permitted in the “FP” District are subject to special
construction requirements and the applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed
development will not increase the risk of flooding or flood damage for
properties upstream or downstream of the site.
   (E)   A compliance permit shall be obtained from the Council before
construction or development begins within the “FP” District. The compliance
permit application shall include information necessary to gauge the effect of
the proposed development on floodplain management including a report by a
Wyoming licensed professional engineer indicating the base flood height at the
proposed location and conformance of the project with the standards of the “FP”
District.
   (F)   In all areas of special flood hazards, compliance with the following
general standards is required:
      (1)   Anchoring shall be required for all structures in accordance with
the following:
         (a)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure.
         (b)   All manufactured homes must be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse or lateral movement of the structure and shall be installed using
methods and practices that minimize flood damage. Anchoring methods include,
but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors.
      (2)   Construction materials and methods shall conform to the following
standards:
         (a)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
         (b)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
         (c)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or otherwise
elevated or located to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding.
      (3)   Utilities shall conform to the following standards:
         (a)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.
         (b)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and
discharge from the systems into flood waters.
         (c)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
      (4)   Subdivision proposals shall conform to the following standards:
         (a)   All subdivision proposals shall be designed and constructed
consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
         (b)   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage.
         (c)   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided
to reduce exposure to flood damage.
   (G)   In all areas of the “FP” District, compliance with the following
specific standards is required.
      (1)   Residential construction shall conform to the following standards:
         (a)   New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement elevated to a level
equal to or greater than one foot above base flood elevation.
         (b)   Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to
flooding are prohibited or shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit
of flood waters. Designs for meeting this requirement shall be certified by a
Wyoming licensed professional engineer or architect.
      (2)   Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor,
including basement, elevated to the level of the base flood elevation, or,
together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall:
         (a)   Be flood-proofed so that below the base flood level the
structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water.
         (b)   Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
         (c)   Be certified by a Wyoming licensed professional engineer or
architect that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice for meeting provisions of this division based on
their development and/or review of the structural design, specifications and
plans.
         (d)   Nonresidential structures that are elevated, but not flood-
proofed, must meet the same standards for space below the lowest floor as
described in division (G)(1)(a).
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.119 MANUFACTURED/MOBILE HOME COURTS.
   Shall meet all requirements defined in §
152.090.
(Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 152.120 “MF” MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. The Multi-Family Dwelling District is intended to promote
peaceful, attractive residential neighborhoods with various housing types that
are protected from commercial and industrial uses. Commercial uses are intended
to be highly compatible with, and not interfere with, residential uses.
   (B)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Single-family residences.
      (2)   Duplexes and townhouses.
      (3)   Multi-family residences not exceeding four housing units per
individual building.
      (4)   Home businesses.
      (5)   Residential-scale businesses.
      (6)   Minor public uses and facilities.
   (C)   Minimum lot size.
      (1)   7,000 square feet for one- and two-family dwellings.
      (2)   4,000 square feet per housing unit for multi-family dwellings.
      (3)   4,000 square feet per housing unit for townhouses.
      (4)   7,000 square feet for all other listed uses.
   (D)   Average lot size minimum. In addition to meeting the minimum lot size
requirements of division (C) above, the average lot size for major subdivisions
in the “MF” Multi-Family District shall equal or exceed the following sizes:
 
Number of Lots in Major Subdivision Average Lot Size Minimum
1 to 4 lots                         7,000 square feet
5 to 10 lots                        8,800 square feet
11 to 20 lots                       10,700 square feet
21 or more lots                     12,500 square feet
 
   (E)   Minimum lot frontage.
      (1)   For all uses except townhouses, the minimum lot frontage shall be
70 feet.
      (2)   For townhouse dwellings, the minimum lot frontage shall be 20 feet
for interior units and 35 feet for end units.
   (F)   Minimum building setbacks. Buildings shall be setback from property
lines and adjoining major structures as follows:
 
                                         Corner Lot                  Major
Use           Front Setback Side Setback Side Street    Rear Setback Adjoining
                                         Setback                     Structure
Single-family 20 feet       10 feet      20 feet        10 feet      10 feet
dwellings
                                         20 feet for
Duplex and    20 feet       10 feet      end units. No  20 feet      20 feet
townhouses                               setback for
                                         interior units
Multi-family  20 feet       10 feet      20 feet        20 feet      20 feet
dwellings
Home          20 feet       10 feet      20 feet        10 feet      10 feet
businesses
Accessory     20 feet       10 feet      20 feet        10 feet      10 feet
buildings
 
   (G)   Maximum building height.
      (1)   The maximum allowable building height as measured from the average
ground level around the building shall be 35 feet.
      (2)   The height limitations of this division shall not apply to church
spires, belfries, cupolas, chimneys, ventilators, skylights, water tanks,
parapet walls, cornices without windows, antennas or necessary mechanical
appurtenances usually carried above the roof level, nor to buildings located
more than one foot distant from the building setback lines for each two feet of
building height.
(Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)
NON-CONFORMING USES, LOTS AND STRUCTURES
§ 152.130 DEFINITIONS.
    For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   NON-CONFORMING LOT. A recorded lot that legally existed at the time this
chapter was enacted, and which is smaller than the present minimum lot area
and/or frontage requirements of the zoning district where it is located.
   NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURE. One that legally existed at the time of enactment
of this chapter and does not conform to the present requirements of the zoning
district for setbacks or other dimensional requirements.
   NON-CONFORMING USE. Any use of land, premises, building, or structure that
legally existed prior to the enactment of this chapter, which has been
continuously in use and is no longer a permitted use in the zoning district
where it is located.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 152.131 CONTINUATION.
    Non-conforming uses and non-conforming structures legally established as
defined in §
152.130 may continue, subject to the limitations set forth in this subchapter.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 152.132 ENLARGEMENT, EXPANSION AND RELOCATION.
    Non-conforming uses and structures shall not be enlarged or expanded, and
no non-conforming uses or structures shall be moved to another location where
such use or structure would also be non-conforming with the following
exception: buildings that are non-conforming because of not meeting the side
and/or rear setback requirements may be enlarged or expanded, provided the new
sections of the building comply with all setback requirements.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)  Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.133 ALTERATION, MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR.
    Non-conforming uses and structures may be maintained and repaired as
necessary for their continued safe and convenient operation, although the use
and structure shall not be enlarged.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)  Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.134 DESTRUCTION AND RECONSTRUCTION.
    A non-conforming use or structure that is destroyed may be reconstructed if
it meets all the requirements of this code.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)  Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.135 CHANGE OF USE.
    A non-conforming use may be changed to any use that is allowed in the
zoning district in which the use is located. No non-conforming use shall be
changed to another use that is not authorized in that zoning district.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)  Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.136 DISCONTINUANCE.
    If a non-conforming use is discontinued for a period of one year, the non-
conforming use cannot be resumed. Any future use of the site and/or structure
must conform to the requirements of the zoning district.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)  Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.137 REDUCTION OF LOT SIZE.
   The lot area of a non-conforming lot or parcel may not be reduced in size by
division or subdivision of the lot.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.138 NEW CONSTRUCTION ON NON-CONFORMING LOT.
    Buildings and structures may be constructed or enlarged on any non-
conforming lot provided the proposed construction meets all other applicable
requirements of this chapter, including setbacks.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)  Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.139 DISCLOSURE UPON SALE.
   Any non-compliant issues of lots or structures shall be disclosed to the
buyer, upon which the new owner will have the option to correct the non-
compliance issue or request a variance.
(Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)
COMMISSION
§ 152.150 APPOINTMENT; COMPOSITION; TERMS; REMOVAL; VACANCIES.
   (A)    The Mayor, with the consent of the Council, shall appoint a
Commission, consisting of five members. Each member shall be appointed for a
term of three years.
   (B)   The Council may remove any Commission member for cause. Upon a written
request from the removed Commission member to the Council, a hearing before the
Council shall be granted. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired portion
of a term.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 152.151 ORGANIZATION AND MEETINGS.
   (A)    The Commission shall elect its own Chairperson, and may appoint a
qualified secretary, who need not be a member of the Commission, and shall
create and fill such other offices as it may determine it requires for the
proper conduct of the affairs and business of the Commission, such as a Vice-
Chairperson to conduct the business of the Commission in the absence of the
Chairperson. The Chairperson shall be elected annually at the regular
Commission meeting held in January of each year and shall be eligible for
reelection.
   (B)   The Commission shall hold at least one regular meeting each month, at
such a time and place as may be fixed by the Commission. Special meetings of
the Commission may be called by the Chairperson, or in his or her absence, by
the Vice-Chairperson. A majority of the Commission shall constitute a quorum
for the transaction of business.
   (C)   Any member of the Commission shall automatically disqualify themselves
from voting on any decision which they might have a personal interest in by
virtue of ownership of land to be affected by zoning, or other similar
situations.
   (D)   All meetings shall be open to the public. The Commission shall adopt
such other rules and regulations governing its organization and procedures as
it may deem necessary, consistent with the laws of the town and state.
   (E)   All Commission resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations
and minutes are public records and shall be filed in the Town Hall.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 152.152 COMPENSATION; STAFF; CONSULTANTS; EXPENDITURES.
   (A)    The Commission members shall serve without compensation, except for
reasonable expenses. The Commission, upon approval by the Council, may appoint
employees and staff necessary for its work and may contract with city planners
and other consultants, including any appropriate agencies or departments of the
state, for any service it requires.
   (B)   Commission expenditures shall not exceed the amount of funds
appropriated by the Council or obtained through gifts, donations, or otherwise.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 152.153 GENERAL POWERS OF COMMISSION.
    The Commission has all necessary powers to perform its functions and
promote municipal planning.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 152.154 SPECIFIC POWERS OF COMMISSION.
    This chapter gives the Commission the following specific powers and duties
in addition to any assigned to the Commission by statute:
   (A)   Review and make decisions on compliance permits for minor
subdivisions.
   (B)   Review and make decisions on variances for single residences and minor
subdivisions.
   (C)   Review and make non-binding recommendations to the Council on all
compliance permits that come before the Council.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)
BOARD OF APPEALS
§ 152.165 COMPOSITION; TERMS; REMOVAL; VACANCIES.
   (A)    The Commission of the town shall serve as the Board of Appeals.
   (B)   The Council may remove any Commission member for cause. Upon a written
request from the removed Commission member to the Council, a hearing before the
Council shall be granted. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired portion
of a term.
   (C)   Upon the resignation of a Commission member, the Council shall fill
the vacancy for the unexpired term.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 152.166 MEETINGS; PROCEDURE; RECORDS.
   (A)    Board meetings shall be held at the call of the Chairperson and at
such other times as the Board determines.
   (B)   The Chairperson, or in his or her absence, the acting Chairperson, may
administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
   (C)   All Board meetings are open to the public.
   (D)   The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of
each member upon each question or if the member was absent or failed to vote.
The Board shall also keep records of its examinations and other official
actions. All minutes are public records and shall be filed in the Town Hall.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 152.167 APPEALS TO BOARD; GROUNDS; HOW CONDUCTED; STAY OF PROCEEDINGS.
   (A)   Any aggrieved person or any officer, department, board or bureau of
the town affected by any decision of the Building Official may appeal to the
Board. Appeals shall be made within 14 days by filing with the Town Clerk and
with the Board, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds, thereof. The
Building Official shall immediately transmit to the Board the complete record
of the action from which the appeal is taken.
   (B)   An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed
from, unless the Building Official certifies to the Board that by reason of
facts stated in the certificate, a stay, in his or her opinion, would cause
imminent peril to life or property. In such cases, proceedings shall not be
stayed, other than by a restraining order granted by the district court for the
district, or a judge thereof, on notice to the Building Official is taken, and
on due cause shown.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 152.168 POWERS AND DUTIES.
    The Board makes final decisions for the items under its purview. Unlike
compliance permits, Board decisions are not recommendations precedent to the
Council’s final decision. The Board has the following powers and duties;
   (A)   The Board shall:
      (1)   Hear and decide appeals from and review any order, requirement,
decision or determination made by the Building Official.
      (2)   Fix a reasonable time for hearing an appeal, give public notice,
and adequate notice to the parties of interest and decide the appeal within a
reasonable time. Any party may appear in person at a hearing or by agent or
attorney.
      (3)   Adopt rules in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   The Board has the power to:
      (1)   Vary or adjust the strict application of any of the requirements of
this chapter in the case of any physical condition applying to a lot or
building, if the strict application would deprive the owner of the reasonable
use of the land or building involved. No adjustment in the strict application
of any provision of this chapter may be granted unless:
         (a)   The are special circumstances or conditions fully described in
the Board’s findings, which are peculiar to the land or building for which the
adjustment is sought and do not apply generally to land or buildings in the
neighborhood and have not resulted from any act of the applicant subsequent to
the adoption of this chapter;
         (b)   For reasons fully set forth in the Board’s findings, the
circumstances or conditions are such that the strict application of the
provisions of this chapter would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of
the land or building, the granting of the adjustment is necessary for the
reasonable use thereof and the adjustment as granted is the minimum adjustment
that will accomplish this purpose; and
         (c)   The granting of the adjustment is in harmony with the general
purposes and intent of this chapter and will not be injurious to the
neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare.
      (2)   Grant exceptions and variances upon request, after showing that an
illegal construction or a non-conforming building or use existed for a period
of at least five years in violation of this chapter and the town has not taken
steps toward enforcement.
      (3)   Reverse or affirm wholly or partly, the order, requirement,
decision or determination as necessary, but no power exercised under this
paragraph shall exceed the power or authority vested in the Building Official.
      (4)   Hear and decide special exemptions to the setback provisions of
this chapter which may, at the option of the Board, be granted with the
approval of the adjoining landowner or landowners.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 152.169 VOTE REQUIRED.
    The concurring vote of a majority of the Board is necessary to reverse any
order, requirement, decision or determination of any administrative official,
or to decide in favor of the application on any matter upon which it is
required to pass under this chapter or to allow any variation from this
chapter.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)
ENFORCEMENT
§ 152.180 AUTHORITY TO ENFORCE AND RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   The Building Official shall have the authority to enforce the International
Residential Code and this code. The Building Official or designee is authorized
to enter a structure or property at reasonable times when they have probable
cause to suspect that a condition contrary to, or in violation of, the
International Building Code or this code exists. Contrary conditions shall be
defined as those practices or uses deemed to be directly contrary to accepted
building practices as set forth in the International Building Code or this
code. If that structure or premises shall be occupied, the Building Official or
designee shall present to the owner their credentials and request entry in the
performance of their official duties. If such a structure or premises is
unoccupied, the Building Official shall first make a reasonable effort to
locate the owner, the owners authorized agent, or other person having charge or
control of the structure or premises and request entry. If entry is refused,
the Building Official shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to
secure entry.
(Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 152.181 IDENTIFICATION OF BUILDING OFFICIAL.
   The Building Official shall be required to have official identification, and
present such identification, as they perform the duties of inspections. This
may include a name badge or official shield.
(Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 152.182 “VIOLATION” DEFINED.
   It shall be a violation of this chapter to make any use of property or
commence construction or other land development activities not expressly
permitted by the chapter, without a compliance permit or a building permit, or
other approval granted pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 152.183 DISCOVERY OF VIOLATIONS.
   The Building Official shall act upon violations discovered by any of the
following means:
   (A)   Complaints of violations shall be made to the Building Official. Any
person, including any resident or landowner and including any town officer or
employee, may make a complaint. The Building Official shall investigate all
complaints and shall take further action only if the Building Official verifies
that a probable zoning violation exists.
   (B)   The Building Official is authorized to review any public records to
discover and investigate zoning violations.
   (C)   The Building Official is authorized to discover and investigate
violations by:
      (1)   Conducting on-site inspections of properties provided the party
responsible consents to the inspection.
      (2)   Inspecting properties by viewing them from public areas including
public streets, or from neighboring properties, provided the owner of such
neighboring properties consents.
      (3)   Observing violations in the course of conducting other town
business for which the Building Official has permission to enter the property,
or which otherwise allows the Building Official to witness a violation.
      (4)   Obtaining an inspection warrant from a court of competent
jurisdiction if other means of inspecting a probable violation are ineffective.
      (5)   Other methods approved in advance by the Town Attorney.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 152.184 INFORMAL RESOLUTION.
   Upon finding that a violation has probably occurred, the Building Official
may attempt to resolve the matter informally by contacting the responsible
party and discussing the violation. In the case of complaints, no more than 30
days shall be allowed for informal resolution. If informal resolution is not
successful with the specified time, the Building Official shall issue a notice
of violation.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 152.185 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   When the Building Official has determined that a violation has probably
occurred and informal resolution is unsuccessful or inappropriate due to the
nature of the violation, the Building Official shall send a notice of violation
to the responsible party by certified mail, return receipt requested. The
notice shall state the location of the property, the nature of the violation,
the section(s) of this chapter being violated, a time limit for compliance not
exceeding ten days, the penalty for violations, and suggested corrective
actions. At the Building Official’s discretion, the time limit for compliance
may be extended for an additional ten days if the landowner is making progress
toward compliance. If substantial compliance is not achieved with the specified
time, the Building Official shall refer the case to the Town Attorney for
enforcement action pursuant to §
152.186. A notice of violation may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment
pursuant to §§
152.165 through
152.169 and the notice of violation shall advise of this opportunity to appeal.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 152.186 REFERRAL TO TOWN ATTORNEY.
   If a violation is not remedied within the time limit specified in a notice
of violation, the Building Official shall refer the case to the Town Attorney
for prosecution.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 152.187 REVOCATION OF PERMITS.
   If the Building Official finds that any construction is not in accordance
with the information supplied on the permit application or is in violation of
this or any other pertinent regulations, or should the Building Official find
that there has been any misrepresentation in connection with the application
for the permit, the Building Official shall notify the responsible party of
such findings and notify him or her that the violation must be corrected. The
party responsible shall have ten working days in which to reply to such
notification. If such a reply or correction is not made, the Building Official
shall revoke the permit and shall provide the responsible party a written
notice of the revocation, including the reasons for the revocation and notice
of the right of appeal to the Board of Adjustment. No person shall proceed with
any part of such constructions after such notice is received.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 152.188 OTHER REMEDIES.
   In addition to any of the foregoing remedies, the Council may maintain an
action for injunction to restrain any violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)
SCHEDULE
§ 152.200 FEE SCHEDULE.
    The Council may, by resolution, establish and update a fee schedule for
permits, determinations, applications, and other services under this chapter,
including but not limited to compliance permits, variances, appeals and
amendments.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 152.999 PENALTY.
   (A)    Any person who knowingly violates any provision of this chapter shall
be subject to a penalty of up to $750. Each day on which the violation
continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
   (B)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not more than $750 for
each offense. Each day during which the illegal erection, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, maintenance, or use continues shall be deemed a
separate offense.
(Ord. 294, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 335, passed 3-11-2025)
CHAPTER 153: UNSAFE BUILDINGS
Section
   
153.01   Ratification
   
153.02   Authority
   
153.03   Short title
   
153.04   Definition
   
153.05   Prohibition
   
153.06   Abatement
   
153.07   Notice
   
153.08   Contents of notice
   
153.09   Hearing by Town Council
   
153.10   Appeals to the Town Council
   
153.11   Appeals from the Town Council
   
153.12   Emergencies
   
153.13   Lien and expenses
   
153.14   Uniform Abatement of Dangerous Buildings Code
 
   
153.99   Penalty
§ 153.01 RATIFICATION.
   The following provisions are hereby ratified and affirmed.
   (A)   The Town Council is concerned that the age and generally poor
condition of certain buildings in town could result in serious injury to life
and property.
   (B)   The existence of dangerous and unsafe building in town constitutes a
nuisance.
   (C)   The Town Council feels that it is necessary and appropriate to adopt
this chapter in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the town
residents and to improve the quality of life in the town.
(Ord. 263, 2017, passed 1-10-2017)
§ 153.02 AUTHORITY.
   This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority found in Wyo. Stat. §§ 15-
1-103(a)(v)(xix and xxvi) and (xli).
(Ord. 263, 2017, passed 1-10-2017)
§ 153.03 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known, cited and referred to as the “Dangerous
Buildings Ordinance” of the town.
(Ord. 263, 2017, passed 1-10-2017)
§ 153.04 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DANGEROUS BUILDINGS.
      (1)   Includes:
         (a)   Any building, mobile home, shed or fence or other human-made
structure which is dangerous to the public health because of its conditions,
and which may cause or aid in the spread of disease, or injury to the health of
the occupants of it or neighboring structures;
         (b)   Any building, mobile home, shed, fence or other human-made
structure which, because of faulty construction, age, lack of proper repair,
dilapidated condition or any other cause, is especially liable to fire and
constitutes or creates a fire hazard;
         (c)   Any building, mobile home, shed, fence or other human-made
structure which, by reason of faulty construction or any other cause, is liable
to cause injury or damage by collapsing or by a collapse or fall of any part of
such structure; and
         (d)   Any building, mobile home, shed, fence or other human-made
structure which, because of its condition or because of lack of doors or
windows, is available to and frequented by malefactors or disorderly persons
who are not lawful occupants of such structure, rodents, bats or stray animals.
      (2)   Any such dangerous building in the town is hereby declared to be a
nuisance.
(Ord. 263, 2017, passed 1-10-2017)
§ 153.05 PROHIBITION.
   It shall be unlawful to maintain or permit the existence of any dangerous
building in the town, and shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant or person
in custody of any dangerous building to permit the same to remain in a
dangerous condition, or to occupy such building or permit it to be occupied
while it is or remains in a dangerous condition.
(Ord. 263, 2017, passed 1-10-2017) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.06 ABATEMENT.
   Whenever the Building Inspector, the Fire Marshal or the Health Officer
shall be of the opinion that any building or structure in the town is a
dangerous building, he or she shall file a written statement to this effect
with the Town Clerk/Treasurer. The Town Clerk/Treasurer shall thereupon cause
written notice to be served upon the owner thereof, and upon the occupant
thereof, if any, in accordance with §
153.07.
(Ord. 263, 2017, passed 1-10-2017)
§ 153.07 NOTICE.
   (A)   The Town Clerk/Treasurer shall cause written notice to be served upon
the owner of any dangerous building and upon any lawful occupant thereof by
registered or certified mail, requesting a return receipt signed by the
addressee or any authorized agent of the addressee. Service of the notice shall
be deemed completed upon the date of receipt of the notice, as determined by
the date of the return receipt. If, for any reason, the receipt is returned
without an acceptance date, it shall be deemed to have been received three days
after the date of mailing.
   (B)   (1)   If the mailed notice is returned as undeliverable for any reason
or if the whereabouts of the owner are unknown and the same cannot be
determined by the Town Clerk/Treasurer in the exercise of reasonable diligence,
then the Town Clerk/Treasurer shall make an affidavit to that effect.
      (2)   After making the affidavit, the Town Clerk/Treasurer may then serve
the notice upon the person by publishing the same at least once a week for four
consecutive weeks in a newspaper published in the county.
      (3)   Service of the notice shall be deemed completed upon the date of
the last publication, and proof of service shall be established by securing a
“proof of publication” or similar statement from the newspaper. Upon completion
of the notice, the town may take the necessary action as set forth in the
notice.
   (C)   Notice shall be posted on the dangerous building stating:
 
THIS BUILDING IS DANGEROUS AND UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION. THE USE OR OCCUPANCY OF THIS BUILDING IS PROHIBITED AND UNLAWFUL.
BY                                                                             ,
                                                                              for
      (Name)                                        (Title)
The Town of Cowley, Wyoming
 
(Ord. 263, 2017, passed 1-10-2017)
§ 153.08 CONTENTS OF NOTICE.
   Regardless of whether the notice is served personally or by publication, it
shall contain the following:
   (A)   Name of owner;
   (B)   The general location of the building, which may include a legal
description;
   (C)   The decision reached concerning the building, including the name and
title of the person making the decision;
   (D)   The reasons or causes for the decision;
   (E)   The nature of the action requested and time in which action must be
taken by the owner or the town will take such action; and
   (F)   That an appeal of the decision may be taken to the Town Council,
provided written notice is given to the town within ten days after the service
of the notice. If an appeal is taken, the notice must contain the phone number
and address of the owner or authorized agent for purposes of notification of
the date, time and phone for the hearing before the Town Council.
(Ord. 263, 2017, passed 1-10-2017)
§ 153.09 HEARING BY TOWN COUNCIL.
   Any decision of the Building Inspector, the Fire Marshal or the Health
Officer requiring the repair or demolition of any dangerous building shall be
reviewed by the Town Council prior to actually implementing any such decision.
The review required by this section shall be deemed satisfied if an owner or
authorized agent appeals the decision and a hearing is held to consider that
appeal. If no appeal is filed, the Town Council shall hold a public hearing
after the expiration of the appeal period for purposes of reviewing the
decision. If, after a hearing on the matter, the Town Council is in concurrence
with the decision of the Building Inspector, the Fire Marshal or the Health
Officer, it may order the repair or demolition of any dangerous building in
accordance with the request or impose any condition or modification deemed
necessary.
(Ord. 263, 2017, passed 1-10-2017)
§ 153.10 APPEALS TO THE TOWN COUNCIL.
   Any decision of the Building Inspector, the Fire Marshal or the Health
Officer, as set forth in his or her written statement, may be appealed to the
Town Council by any aggrieved owner or his or her authorized agent. Any such
appeal shall be made within ten days from the date of service of notice and
shall be in writing, setting forth with specificity all reasons for
disagreement with the decision, and contain a phone number and address of the
owner or authorized agent. All appeals shall stay all proceedings in
furtherance of the decision until the Town Council, acting in its legislative
capacity, has held a public hearing thereon and given reasons for its decision,
unless a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property.
(Ord. 263, 2017, passed 1-10-2017)
§ 153.11 APPEALS FROM THE TOWN COUNCIL.
   All final decisions of the Town Council may be reviewed by a court of
competent jurisdiction in the same manner as the review of any other
legislative decision of a governing body.
(Ord. 263, 2017, passed 1-10-2017)
§ 153.12 EMERGENCIES.
   In cases where it reasonably appears that there is immediate danger to the
life or safety of any person unless a dangerous building, as defined herein, is
immediately repaired or demolished, the Building Inspector, the Fire Marshal or
the Health Officer shall report such facts to the Town Council and the Council
shall cause the immediate repair or demolition of such dangerous building; the
cost of such emergency repair or emergency demolition shall be a lien, and
collected in the same manner as provided in §
153.13.
(Ord. 263, 2017, passed 1-10-2017)
§ 153.13 LIEN AND EXPENSES.
   If the owner of any building or structure fails to comply with the decision
stated in the notice within the time fixed therein, the town may proceed to
cause the building, mobile home, shed, fence or other human-made structure to
be altered, repaired or demolished in accordance with the notice. If a building
or structure is demolished in accordance with the notice, the town may sell or
dispose of the salvaged materials therefrom at public auction upon ten days’
posted notice. The town shall keep an accurate account of the expenses incurred
in carrying out the decision and shall credit thereon the proceeds of any
salvage sale. The full amount of all expenses, with interest thereon at the
highest rate allowed by law, plus attorney’s fees, shall constitute a lien
against the real estate on which the building or structure is or was situated,
and if the amount thereof is not paid by the owner or other party in interest
within 90 days after completion of the work by the town, they may be foreclosed
and the real estate shall be sold in any manner provided by law for the sale of
real estate upon foreclosure. The proceeds of the sale shall be paid to the
town. If the amount received as salvage or on sale exceeds the expense incurred
by the town, the town shall forward the payment of the surplus to the previous
owner for his or her use and benefit.
(Ord. 263, 2017, passed 1-10-2017)
§ 153.14 UNIFORM ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS CODE.
   The Uniform Abatement of Dangerous Buildings Code 1997 is hereby adopted in
its entirety, copies of which will be available at Town Hall.
(Ord. 298, passed 6-9-2015)
§ 153.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   It shall be the responsibility of the Town Council, or its
authorized agents, namely the Building Inspector, the Fire Marshal or the
Health Officer, to administer §§
153.01 through
153.13.
      (2)   Any person, firm, partnership or corporation who violates §§
153.01 through
153.13 may be punished by a fine of not more than $750 for each offense. Each
day’s continuance of such violation shall be deemed to be a separate offence.
In addition to the remedies and fine provided for herein, any other
appropriated legal action in law or equity authorized by the Town Council may
be employed against violators of §§
153.01 through
153.13, including, but not limited to, injunctions, mandamus or abatement.
(Ord. 263, 2017, passed 1-10-2017)
CHAPTER 154: MOBILE HOMES
Section
   
154.01   Definitions
   
154.02   Prohibited
   
154.03   Existing non-conforming use
   
154.04   House trailer or mobile home upgrade
 
   
154.99   Penalty
§ 154.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   HOUSE TRAILERS. Any vehicle used, or intended for use, as a conveyance upon
the public streets or highways, and shall include self-propelled and towed
vehicles so designed, constructed and reconstructed or added to by means of
portable accessories in such manner as will permit the occupancy thereof as a
dwelling or sleeping place of one or more persons and having no foundation
other than wheels, jack or skirting so arranged as to be integral with or
portable by said HOUSE TRAILERS.
   MOBILE HOMES. Any structure designed for living quarters and constructed in
such a manner to be capable of being transported over the public streets and
highways and which is commonly known and referred to as a TRAILER or MOBILE
HOME UNIT, but shall not include prefabricated houses or modular dwellings
constructed and designed with no wheel base.
(Ord. 262, 2017, passed 1-10-2017)
§ 154.02 PROHIBITED.
   Other than in a designated and regularly equipped mobile home park, no
person who is the owner or occupant of any mobile home or house trailer, and no
person who is the owner of any property or dwelling within the town shall
permit a mobile home or house trailer to be used as a primary dwelling.
Temporary dwelling is permitted for no more than 14 consecutive days.
Exceptions may be granted upon petition to the Town Council. Extensions for
more than 30 consecutive days must be renewed every 30 days. Mobile homes,
house and camp trailers may be permanently occupied as a primary residence only
if they are located within a designated and regularly equipped mobile home
park.
(Ord. 262, 2017, passed 1-10-2017; Ord. 331, 2023, passed 11-14-2023) Penalty,
see §
154.99
§ 154.03 EXISTING NON-CONFORMING USE.
   When a property or an existing house trailer or mobile home, at the time of
the passage of the ordinance codified herein this chapter, has an existing use
or location which is not in compliance herewith prior to the passage of the
ordinance codified herein this chapter, such non-complying use or location may
continue even though the same is not in compliance with this chapter. If,
however, the use of the property or the location of the house trailer or mobile
home is changed, it shall be changed to a use in compliance with this chapter
and, after such change, it will not be permissible to change back again to the
original non- complying use or location.
(Ord. 262, 2017, passed 1-10-2017) Penalty, see §
154.99
§ 154.04 HOUSE TRAILER OR MOBILE HOME UPGRADE.
   If the use of the property or the location of the house trailer or mobile
home has changed according to §
154.03, then the owner would have to replace the existing house trailer or
mobile home with a newer house trailer or mobile home that is not more than
five years old. The new house trailer or mobile home must be placed on a
permanent foundation, which shall be constructed of concrete, block or brick
walls or concrete runners with concrete tiers and jacks under the center
support beams. The tongue and all axles must also be removed.
(Ord. 262, 2017, passed 1-10-2017) Penalty, see §
154.99
§ 154.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Misdemeanor. Any person who shall violate any provision of §§
154.01 through
154.04 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof in
the Municipal Court, shall be fined a sum not more than $750, plus court costs
for each offense.
      (2)   Separate offense. Each day that any such violation exists shall be
termed a separate offense and both the person in charge of such mobile home or
house trailer and the owner or occupant of the property on which the same may
be located shall be separately penalized hereunder.
(Ord. 250, passed 1-2-1998; Ord. 262, 2017, passed 1-10-2017)
CHAPTER 155: TREES AND PLANTS
Section
General Provisions
   
155.01   Purpose
   
155.02   Definitions
Tree Advisory Board
   
155.15   Creation of Tree Advisory Board
   
155.16   Tree Advisory Board terms
   
155.17   No compensation
   
155.18   Duties and responsibilities
   
155.19   Enforcement authority
Planting and Care
   
155.30   Location and spacing
   
155.31   Public tree care
   
155.32   Protection during excavation
Permit Requirements
   
155.45   Work performed by others
   
155.46   Permits to public utilities
   
155.47   Permission to plant and remove trees
Prohibited Trees; Conditions
   
155.60   Dangerous trees; obstruction
   
155.61   Injuring
   
155.62   Attachment to trees
   
155.63   Maintenance responsibility
   
155.64   Interference
 
   
155.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 155.01 PURPOSE.
   This chapter provides for the care of trees and shrubs on town property and
aids in the proper growth of a landscape program to enhance the beauty of the
town.
(Ord. 265, passed 6-14-2005)
Cross-reference:
   Weed maintenance requirements, see
Chapter 91
   Landscape performance standards, see §
152.094
§ 155.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOARD. The Tree Advisory Board.
   PERSON. Any corporation, firm, partnership, association, trust, estate, one
or more individuals or any unit of government or agency or subdivision thereof,
except for a town agency.
   PUBLIC NUISANCE. Any dangerous or unsafe tree or portions thereof on streets
or alleys, in parks, on other public places and private property, or posing a
hazard thereof; any destructive or communicable disease or pestilence which
endangers the growth, health, life or well-being of trees or shrubs in the
town.
   QUALIFIED CONTRACTORS. Any person, firm or corporation engaged in the
business of cutting, trimming, pruning, spraying, injecting chemicals or
removing trees or shrubs for compensation.
   TOWN. The Town of Cowley, Wyoming.
   TOWN PROPERTY. All town-owned property, including parks, dedicated rights-
of-way and other real property.
   TREES AND SHRUBS.
      (1)   Any woody plants which have self-supporting, above-ground parts
that are viable year-round.
      (2)   All shade and ornamental trees and all shrubs and other
beautification or landscape plantings, now or hereafter planted or growing on
any town property, except where otherwise indicated.
(Ord. 265, passed 6-14-2005)
TREE ADVISORY BOARD
§ 155.15 CREATION OF TREE ADVISORY BOARD.
   There is created and established a Tree Advisory Board, which will consist
of the Parks and Recreation Commissioner and not less than four members at
large, two of which must be residents of the town, who shall be appointed by
the Mayor with the approval of the Town Council.
(Ord. 265, passed 6-14-2005)
§ 155.16 TREE ADVISORY BOARD TERMS.
   The term of the members shall be three years, other than that of the Parks
and Recreation Commissioner. Terms shall be staggered to provide continuity to
the Board. Should a vacancy occur during the term of any appointed member, a
successor shall be appointed by the Mayor, as outlined in §
155.15, for the unexpired portion of the term.
(Ord. 265, passed 6-14-2005)
§ 155.17 NO COMPENSATION.
   Members of the Board shall serve without compensation.
(Ord. 265, passed 6-14-2005)
§ 155.18 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   It shall be the responsibility of the Board to study, investigate,
counsel, develop and/or update annually a written plan for the care,
preservation, trimming, variety selection, planting, removal or disposition of
trees and shrubs on town property. Such plan will be presented annually to the
Town Council, and upon its acceptance and approval, by minute action, shall
constitute the official comprehensive “Town of Cowley Tree Plan.” The Board
shall advise the Town Administrator in the administration of the plan.
   (B)   The Board, when requested by the Town Council, shall consider,
investigate, make findings, report and recommend upon any special matter or
question coming within the scope of this chapter.
(Ord. 265, passed 6-14-2005)
§ 155.19 ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.
   The Board, or its duly authorized agent, shall make recommendations to the
Town Council concerning planting, locating and replacing all trees on town
property and may make recommendations and provide oversight regarding the
supervision, direction and control of the care, trimming and removal thereof,
as well as enforcement duties with respect to the obligations imposed by this
chapter.
(Ord. 265, passed 6-14-2005)
PLANTING AND CARE
§ 155.30 LOCATION AND SPACING.
   (A)   No tree or shrub shall be planted closer than ten feet to any
fireplug.
   (B)   (1)   No tree or shrub on town or private property shall be kept,
planted, grown, maintained or permitted to remain in such a condition as to
limit visibility or in any other manner constitute a danger or hazard to
pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
      (2)   The adjacent property owner or occupant is responsible for,
including spraying when required, any tree or shrub located between any
property line and the street.
(Ord. 265, passed 6-14-2005) Penalty, see §
155.99
§ 155.31 PUBLIC TREE CARE.
   (A)   The town shall have the right to plant, trim, spray, preserve and
remove trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys and
public grounds as may be necessary to ensure safety when servicing town
utilities or to preserve the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds.
   (B)   The town may remove, or cause to be removed, any tree or part thereof
which, by reason of its nature, is injurious to sewers, water lines or other
public improvements.
   (C)   The town, with the property owner’s consent and at his or her expense,
may also treat or remove trees infected with an injurious fungus, insects or
pests that pose a threat to other vegetation.
(Ord. 265, passed 6-14-2005)
§ 155.32 PROTECTION DURING EXCAVATION.
   In making excavations in streets or other town property, care shall be taken
to avoid injury to the roots, bark or cambium of any tree or shrub wherever
possible.
(Ord. 265, passed 6-14-2005) Penalty, see §
155.99
PERMIT REQUIREMENTS
§ 155.45 WORK PERFORMED BY OTHERS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to prune, trim, plant, remove or replace
any tree or shrub on town property or within the public right-of-way without
first obtaining a permit for such activity from the town. Application for such
permit shall be made in writing and shall specifically describe the work to be
done and the location thereof. Any permit issued pursuant to an application
previously submitted shall expire not more than 60 days from the date of its
issuance. No charge shall be made for any permit or for the processing of any
application requesting a permit pursuant to the terms of this chapter. Said
permit may direct the specific manner in which said trimming and cutting is to
be done. It shall be the responsibility of the Board to establish reasonable
standards for these permits. In the event a permit is denied, the basis of
denial shall be given to the applicant, who shall have the right to appeal the
denial to the Town Council within five business days of the denial. Upon
receipt of a notice of appeal, the Town Council shall hear and decide the
appeal.
(Ord. 265, passed 6-14-2005) Penalty, see §
155.99
§ 155.46 PERMITS TO PUBLIC UTILITIES.
   (A)   In the absence of provision in the franchise concerning this subject,
upon application to the town by cable television, telephone, gas, electric
power or other service corporation or utility to trim trees or to perform other
operations affecting trees or shrubs on town property or within the public
right-of-way, or upon such application by a qualified contractor who has
entered into a contract with a cable television, telephone, gas, electric power
or other service corporation or utility to trim such trees or shrubs or to
perform other operations affecting trees or shrubs on town property or within
the public right-of-way, the town may grant an annual permit covering all tree
trimming and other operations affecting trees or shrubs on town property or in
the public right-of-way by such cable television, telephone, gas, electric
power, other service corporation or a qualified contractor. Such permits shall
be effective for a period of not more than one year. Such permits may be
revoked for cause.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the issuance of such permit, the Board shall be
notified of the time and location when and where such operation shall take
place. The amount of trimming or extent thereof, or other operation, shall be
performed in a manner consistent with standards set by the Board and all such
trimming, cutting, pruning or removal of trees or shrubs shall be accomplished
in a neat workpersonlike manner and consistent with generally accepted
practices. The Board may, if necessary, assign an inspector to supervise the
activities conducted pursuant to such permit and the cost of such inspection
shall be charged to the service corporation, utility or contractor.
(Ord. 265, passed 6-14-2005)
§ 155.47 PERMISSION TO PLANT AND REMOVE TREES.
   No trees or shrubs shall be planted in or removed from town property or
public rights-of-way within the town without prior acquisition of a written
permit from the town.
(Ord. 265, passed 6-14-2005) Penalty, see §
155.99
PROHIBITED TREES; CONDITIONS
§ 155.60 DANGEROUS TREES; OBSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Any tree growing over a public alley, street or highway, or so located
as to extend its branches over a public alley, street or highway, shall be
trimmed by the property owner on which the tree stands, or his or her duly
authorized agent, so that there shall be a clear height of 14 feet above the
surface of the alley, street or highway and eight feet above the surface of
sidewalks unobstructed by the branches or so that said tree does not obstruct
the light from any street light or the view of any intersection. Additionally,
such owner or agent shall remove all dead branches and stubs on any tree or
trees which have become likely to fall on or across the public alleys, streets
or highways of the town.
   (B)   For purposes of maintaining visibility for traffic at intersections,
existing hedges, shrubs or other plant material within ten feet from the face
of the curb on a corner lot shall be trimmed and maintained so as not to stand
more than 33 inches above the level of the sidewalk. On corners where existing
embankments, retaining walls or other objects are placed, no plant material
shall be planted unless a permit has previously been obtained from the town.
   (C)   If a tree or any of its parts on private property in any way other
than as stipulated in this section causes a hindrance to the general public, or
in any way endangers the security and usefulness of any public street, highway,
alley, sewer or sidewalk if so determined following an inspection, the same is
hereby declared to be a public nuisance. The Board, Town Administrator or a law
enforcement officer shall issue the property owner, or his or her agent, a
written notice in a manner prescribed by law, requiring the owner or agent to
correct or remove said nuisance within 15 calendar days. If the owner or agent
does not correct said nuisance within the time specified, the Board, Town
Administrator or a law enforcement officer shall cause the same to be corrected
or removed and the costs thereof shall be charged against the land or owner of
the land where same was situated.
(Ord. 265, passed 6-14-2005) Penalty, see §
155.99
§ 155.61 INJURING.
   It shall be unlawful to injure any tree or shrub planted or growing on town
property.
(Ord. 265, passed 6-14-2005) Penalty, see §
155.99
§ 155.62 ATTACHMENT TO TREES.
   (A)   Signs, notices. It shall be unlawful to attach any sign, advertisement
or notice to any tree or shrub on town property, including any public right-of-
way.
   (B)   Wires, ropes. It shall be unlawful to attach any wire, chain, cable or
rope to any tree or shrub in any public street or other town property without
permission from the town.
(Ord. 265, passed 6-14-2005) Penalty, see §
155.99
§ 155.63 MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITY.
   Any person or company which maintains poles and wires in the streets, alleys
or other town property shall, in the absence of provision in the franchise
concerning the subject, keep such poles and wires free from and away from any
trees and shrubs in such places as far as may be possible, and keep all such
trees and shrubs near poles and wires properly trimmed, subject to the
supervision of the Board, or its duly authorized representative, so that no
injury shall be done either to the poles or wires or to the trees and shrubs by
their contact.
(Ord. 265, passed 6-14-2005) Penalty, see §
155.99
§ 155.64 INTERFERENCE.
   No person shall prevent, delay or interfere with the Board, or any of its
duly authorized agents or assistants, in the execution or enforcement of this
chapter. Nothing herein contained shall be construed as an attempt to prohibit
a public hearing or to prohibit any legal or equitable remedy in any court of
competent jurisdiction for the protection of property rights by the owner of
the property within the town.
(Ord. 265, passed 6-14-2005) Penalty, see §
155.99
§ 155.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provisions of this
chapter may be cited for the violation or non-compliance and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be fined a sum of not more than $750, plus the cost of
rectifying damage to any tree or shrub on town property.
(Ord. 265, passed 6-14-2005)
CHAPTER 156: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
Excavations
   
156.01   Cut pavement repair section
   
156.02   Damaged pavement repair section
   
156.03   Pavement repair section around manholes and water valves
   
156.04   Diagrams
EXCAVATIONS
§ 156.01 CUT PAVEMENT REPAIR SECTION.
   (A)   Prior to cutting or excavating the street pavement section, written
permission should be obtained from the Town Council.
   (B)   Prior to removing any asphalt, a clean cut of the pavement section
should be performed. The horizontal limits of the cut should be as shown on the
attached standard detail incorporated in §
156.04.
   (C)   All backfill material placed beneath the asphalt pavement thickness
should be placed in loose lifts not exceeding eight inches in thickness, and
compacted to a minimum of 95% of ASTM D698 (Standard Proctor) maximum dry
density at a moisture content within 3% above or below the ASTM D698 optimum
moisture content.
   (D)   (1)   On-site soils removed from the trench excavation, free of
organic matter or debris, may be used as backfill beneath the pavement section.
      (2)   The PAVEMENT SECTION is defined as the asphalt thickness plus the
imported road base material.
      (3)   On-site soil used for backfill should be placed and property
compacted as described in division (C) above.
   (E)   (1)   Only on-site soil removed from the trench excavation may be used
for backfill beneath the pavement section as defined in division (D) above.
      (2)   If additional backfill is required other than the on-site soil
removed from the trench to obtain finish grade elevations, it shall be
approved, imported backfill material. APPROVED, IMPORTED BACKFILL MATERIAL is
defined as material, free of organic matter and debris, meeting attached
specifications.
      (3)   Approved imported backfill should be placed and properly compacted
as described in division (C) above.
   (F)   (1)   A minimum of 12 inches of crushed road base material shall be
placed directly below the asphalt pavement thickness.
      (2)   The road base material should comply with the attached State
Transportation Department’s Gradation K specifications for base course
aggregate incorporated in §
156.04.
      (3)   Road base material should be placed and properly compacted as
described in division (C) above.
   (G)   (1)   Replacement asphalt thickness should be one and one-half times
the original asphalt thickness, but not less than a minimum of four inches.
Asphalt pavement materials should meet applicable requirements of the 2021
edition of the State Highway Department’s Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction, §§ 402, 402, 702 and 703.07. The asphalt concrete should be
placed in maximum two-inch thick compacted lifts. Tack coats conforming with §
407 are recommended between lifts. One-half-inch maximum size aggregate should
be used for the upper lift. Either one-half or three-fourths inch maximum size
aggregate may be used for the lower lifts.
      (2)   Each lift of the asphalt concrete should be compacted to a minimum
of 95% of the 50 blow Marshall compaction (ASTM D1559) density of the placed
mixture. Marshall design should meet the following requirements:
         (a)   Stability: 1,500 pounds minimum;
         (b)   Flow: eight- to 18-hundredths of an inch;
         (c)   Air voids: 3 to 5%; and
         (d)   Voids in mineral aggregate (VMA): 14% minimum of one-half-inch
maximum size aggregate.
   (H)   The town personnel should approve the proposed horizontal limits of
the pavement cut and observe the repair of the pavement section to ensure the
above standards are met.
(Ord. 233, passed 12-10-1992) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 156.02 DAMAGED PAVEMENT REPAIR SECTION.
   (A)   Damaged pavement sections should be identified by the town personnel.
Evidence of a damaged pavement section is asphalt settlement, extensive
cracking or asphalt failure.
   (B)   Damaged pavement sections should be repaired by first performing a
clean asphalt cut around the horizontal limits of the damaged area as shown on
the attached detail incorporated in §
156.04.
   (C)   The asphalt pavement and underlying 12 inches of subsurface soils
should be over- excavated from the site. The existing exposed soils should be
scarified to a depth of eight inches and recompacted in place. The scarified
soil should be compacted to 95% of ASTM D698 (Standard Proctor) maximum dry
density at a moisture content within 3% above or below the ASTM D698 optimum
moisture content.
   (D)   (1)   A minimum of 12 inches of crushed road base material shall be
placed directly below the replacement asphalt pavement thickness.
      (2)   The road base material should comply with the attached State
Transportation Department Gradation K specifications for base course aggregate
incorporated in §
156.04.
      (3)   Road base should be placed in loose lifts not exceeding eight
inches in thickness, and compacted to a minimum of 95% of ASTM D698 (Standard
Proctor) maximum dry density at a moisture content within 3% above or below the
ASTM D698 optimum moisture content.
   (E)   (1)   Replacement asphalt thickness should be one and one-half times
the original asphalt thickness, but not less than a minimum of four inches.
Asphalt pavement materials should meet applicable requirements of the 2021
edition of the State Highway Department’s Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction, §§ 401, 402, 702 and 703.07. The asphalt concrete should be
placed in maximum two-inch thick compacted lifts. Tack coats conforming with §
407 are recommended between lifts. A one-half-inch maximum size aggregate may
be used for the lower lifts.
      (2)   Each lift of the asphalt concrete should be compacted to a minimum
of 95% of the 50 blow Marshall compaction (ASTM D1559) density of the placed
mixture. Marshall design should meet the following requirements:
         (a)   Stability: 1,500 pounds minimum;
         (b)   Flow: eight- to 18-hundredths of an inch;
         (c)   Air voids: 3 to 5%; and
         (d)   Voids in mineral aggregate (VMA): 14% minimum of three-fourths-
inch and 15% minimum of one-half-inch maximum size aggregate.
   (F)   The town personnel should approve the proposed horizontal limits of
the pavement cut and observe the repair of the pavement section to ensure the
above standards are met.
(Ord. 233, passed 12-10-1992) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 156.03 PAVEMENT REPAIR SECTION AROUND MANHOLES AND WATER VALVES.
   (A)   Asphalt pavement section repair around the sewer manholes and water
line valve boxes should be as shown on the attached detail incorporated in §
156.04.
   (B)   Prior to performing the asphalt repair, a clean cut should be
performed around the manhole or valve box. The asphalt cut should be performed
in a diamond shape according to the traffic direction as shown on the standard
detail incorporated in §
156.04.
   (C)   After removing the asphalt pavement thickness, the exposed soils
should be scarified to a depth of eight inches. The scarified soil should be
compacted to 95% of ASTM D698 (Standard Proctor) maximum dry density at a
moisture content within 3% above or below the ASTM D698 optimum moisture
content.
   (D)   Steel reinforcing rebar shall be grade 40 steel, and concrete shall
have a minimum compressive strength of 4,000 pounds per square foot.
   (E)   Traffic should not be allowed to travel on the concrete pavement
section until the concrete has obtained a minimum compressive strength of 3,000
pounds per square foot.
(Ord. 233, passed 12-10-1992) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 156.04 DIAGRAMS.
   (A)   Cut pavement repair section diagram.
   (B)   Gradation Envelope A diagram.
   (C)    Gr ad ati on en vel op e K dia gra m.
   (D)    Da ma ge d Pa ve me nt Rep air Section diagram.
   (E)   Pavement Repair Section Around Valve Box diagram.
   (F)    Pav eme nt Rep air Sect ion Aro und Ma nho les diag ram.
(Or d. 233, pass ed 12- 10- 199 2)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   FRANCHISES
      
II.   CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS
      
III.   GRANT APPLICATIONS
      
IV.   VACATING OF STREETS AND ALLEYS
      
V.   TRANSFER OF PROPERTY
      
VI.   ANNEXATIONS AND DEANNEXATIONS
      
VII.   DISTRICTS
      
VIII.   BONDS
      
IX.   APPROPRIATIONS
TABLE I: FRANCHISES
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
                          Granting a franchise to establish, operate and
53            11-5-1917   maintain a telephone system over, through and upon
                          the streets and alleys of the town to F.B. Rowe for a
                          period of 20 years
54            11-5-1917   Granting a franchise and certain privileges to Big
                          Horn Telephone Company
                          Granting a franchise and assigning use of the
                          streets, alleys and public places in the town and
56            11-16-1917  later additions thereto for the purpose of
                          manufacturing , buying, conveying, delivering and
                          selling gas to Cowley Gas Company
                          Granting a franchise and right to furnish, convey,
                          distribute and sell electric current and electricity,
64            12-22-1919  either manufactured and generated, or purchase to the
                          town for all uses and purposes for which electricity
                          is applicable to the Cowley Gas Company for a term of
                          25 years
                          Granting certain rights to the Mountain States
65            3-1-1920    Telephone and Telegraph Company for a term of 50
                          years
                          Amending Ord. 56; granting rights, privileges and
                          franchise to build, construct, erect and maintain its
87            10-7-1926   gas line, gas main, pipe lines, valves, meters,
                          regulators and all other necessary and suitable
                          appliances and machinery for the conveyance and
                          delivery of gas
                          Granting a franchise for construction, maintenance
144           7-6-1949    and operation of a gas distributing plant or system
                          to Rocky Mountain Gas Company for a term of 25 years
                          Granting a franchise and right to construct, maintain
                          and operate within and upon, in and under the
186           5-15-1974   streets, alleys and public grounds for a gas
                          distribution system for transmitting and distributing
                          natural or manufactured gas or a mixture of both to
                          Montana- Dakota Utilities Co.
                          Granting a franchise to operate a cable television
213           10-12-1982  system to Cowley Telecable Corporation for a term of
                          15 years
                          Granting a nonexclusive right and franchise to
                          construct, maintain and operate along, across and
                          under the present and future streets, alleys, public
220           11-11-1986  places and ways of the town an electric light and
                          power system for the purpose of supplying electricity
                          and electric service to the town to Pacificorp for a
                          period of 25 years; repealing Ord. 163
                          Granting a franchise and right to construct, maintain
                          and operate within and upon, in and under the
239           8-12-1993   streets, alleys and public grounds a gas distribution
                          system for transmitting and distributing natural or
                          manufactured gas or a mixture of both to Montana-
                          Dakota Utilities Co. for 25 years
251           2-12-1998   Granting a franchise to operate a cable television
                          system to Cowley Telecable Corporation for 15 years
                          Granting a franchise and right to construct, maintain
                          and operate a gas distribution system for
314           8-14-2018   transmitting and distributing natural or manufactured
                          gas or a mixture of both for public and private use
                          to Montana- Dakota Utilities Co.
                         
 
TABLE II: CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
                          Accepting the offer of $525 and agreeing to correct
                          construction deficiencies and release the Chicago
Res. 1981-B   11-10-1981  Bridge and Iron Company from further responsibility
                          for the cited deficiencies and paying any residual
                          amounts now legally due, including all contract
                          withholding
                          Loan agreement with the Bank of Lovell; addendum to
Res. 2000-A   1-13-2000   the lease agreement with the Workmans increasing the
                          monthly payments therein
                          Loan agreement extension with the Bank of Lovell;
Res. 2005-2   3-8-2005    addendum to the lease agreement with Ernest Workman
                          and Laura Workman
                          Statement that the town shall not impede the
Res. 2008-2   4-8-2008    establishment of WyoLink Communications System on
                          property owned by the town
                         
 
TABLE III: GRANT APPLICATIONS
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./ Date
Res.  Passed Description
No.
Res.  3-19-  Authorizing filing of the application with the Environmental Protection Agency
185   1974   for a grant under the Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.)
Res.  10-17- Submitting the application for a Mineral Royalty Grant to the State Farm Loan
1979- 1979   Board for improvement of the water distribution system
A
Res.  11-1-  Submitting the application for a Mineral Royalty Grant to the State Farm Loan
1983- 1983   Board for improvement of the water distribution system
A
Res.  8-13-  Authorizing the application to the State Farm Loan Board for assistance to pave
1985- 1985   selected streets within the town
2
Res.  4-8-   Authorizing the application to the State Farm Loan Board for assistance to pave
1986- 1986   selected streets within the town
1
Res.  10-11- Authorizing the application to the State Farm Loan Board for assistance to
1988- 1988   relay the two and one- half miles of transmission line
1
Res.  10-10- Authorizing the application to the State Farm Loan Board for assistance to
1989- 1989   relay the two and one- half miles of transmission line
B
Res.  4-10-  Authorizing the reactivation of the application to the State Farm Loan Board
1990- 1990   for assistance to relay the approximately two and one-half miles of
A            transmission line
Res.  11-13- Authorizing the application to the State Farm Loan Board for assistance to
1990- 1990   relay the two and one- half miles of transmission line
E
Res.  4-9-   Authorizing the application to the State Farm Loan Board for assistance to
1991- 1991   treat approximately 6.7 miles of existing asphalt streets with a chip and seal
A            coating
Res.  4-16-  Authorizing the application to the State Farm Loan Board for assistance to
1992- 1992   complete the final phase of construction on the asphalt streets in the town
A
Res.  9-7-   Authorizing the application to the Department of Commerce, Division of Economic
1992- 1992   and Community Development in the state for a community block grant
B
Res.  4-14-  Authorizing the application to the State Farm Loan Board for assistance in
1994- 1994   constructing the storage and repair building
A
Res.  4-14-  Authorizing the application to the State Farm Loan Board for assistance to
1994- 1994   complete the reconstruction and replacement of a new roof on the town’s
B            community recreational and civic center
Res.  3-9-   Authorizing the application to the State Farm Loan Board for assistance in
1995- 1995   constructing the storage and repair building
A
Res.  12-12- Authorizing the application to the State Farm Loan Board for assistance in the
1995- 1995   restoration of the Town Hall building
B
Res.         Authorizing the submission of a federal Mineral Royalty Capital Construction
1996- 4-11-  Account Grant application to the Farm Loan Board on behalf of the governing
C     1996   body for the town for the purpose of renovating a historic L.D.S.
             administration building to be used as a Town Hall, museum and library
Res.  6-11-  Applying to the State Highway Department of Transportation for an E.E.A.L.
1998- 1998   grant for the town’s walk-a-way
A
Res.  10-8-  Authorizing the application to the office of State Lands and Investments for
1998- 1998   assistance in emergency road rebuild and build
O
Res.  1-13-  Authorizing the submission of a grant application to the Land and Water
2004- 2004   Conservation Fund Program on behalf of the governing body for the town for the
1            purpose of the Cowley Community Western Heritage Park
Res.  2-8-   Authorizing the submission of a federal Mineral Royalty Capital Construction
2005- 2005   Account Grant application to the State Loan and Investment Board on behalf of
1            the governing body for the town for the purpose of infrastructure improvements
Res.  9-13-  Authorizing the submission of a Business Ready Grant Loan Program application
2005- 2005   to the State Business Council on behalf of the governing body for the town for
4            the purpose of the Main Street Enhancement Project
Res.  1-23-  Authorizing the submission of a Land and Water Conservation Grant application
2006- 2006   to the Department of State Parks and Cultural Resources on behalf of the
1            governing body for the town for the purpose of land acquisition
Res.  2-14-  Authorizing the submission of a federal Mineral Royalty Capital Construction
2006- 2006   Account Grant application to the State Loan and Investment Board on behalf of
3            the governing body for the town for the purpose of street renovation
Res.  4-27-  Authorizing the submission of a Community Development Block Grant application
2006- 2006   to the State Business Council on behalf of the governing body of the town for
5            the purpose of a Planning Only Grant for the town
Res.         Authorizing the submission of application to the State Department of
2006- 6-13-  Transportation for a Transportation Enhancement Activities – Local (T.E.A.L)
6     2006   Grant on behalf of the governing body for the town for the purpose of
             streetscape project design
Res.         Authorizing the submission of a federal Mineral Royalty Capital Construction
2006- 9-14-  Account Grant application to the State Loan and Investment Board on behalf of
7     2006   the governing body for the town for the purpose of installation of
             infrastructure to the Stevens Addition to the town
Res.         Authorizing the submission of a federal Mineral Royalty Capital Construction
2007- 1-9-   Account Grant application to the State Loan and Investment Board on behalf of
1     2007   the governing body for the town for the purpose of the Emergency Sewer Lagoon
             Project
Res.         Authorizing the submission of a federal Mineral Royalty Capital Construction
2007- 1-30-  Account Grant application to the State Loan and Investment Board on behalf of
2     2007   the governing body for the town for the purpose of street renovation for the
             town
Res.         Authorizing the submission of a federal Mineral Royalty Capital Construction
2007- 1-30-  Account Grant application to the State Loan and Investment Board on behalf of
3     2007   the governing body for the town for the purpose of infrastructure for the
             Stevens Addition to the town
Res.         Authorizing the submission of a federal Mineral Royalty Capital Construction
2007- 3-13-  Account Grant application to the State Loan and Investment Board on behalf of
4     2007   the governing body of the town for the purpose of water, sewer and streets
             infrastructure for the town
Res.  3-13-  Authorizing the submission of a grant application through the State Department
2007- 2007   of Transportation’s Safe Routes to School Program for the town’s Pathway
5            Project
Res.  8-14-  Authorizing the submission of a State Water Development Commission Grant
2007- 2007   application on behalf of the governing body for the town for the purpose of
6            repair/replacemen t of waterline
Res.  8-14-  Authorizing the submission of a Business Ready Grant Loan Program application
2007- 2007   to the State Business Council on behalf of the governing body for the town for
7            the purpose of the town’s Mainstreet Enhancement Project
Res.  10-27- Authorizing the submission of a State Water Development Commission grant
2007- 2007   application on behalf of the governing body for the town for the purpose of
8            repair/replacemen t of waterline
Res.         Authorizing the submission of a federal Mineral Royalty Capital Construction
2008- 2-28-  Account Grant application to the State Loan and Investment Board on behalf of
1     2008   the governing body for the purpose of phase three completion of the regional
             ball field
Res.         Authorizing the submission of a federal Mineral Royalty Capital Construction
2008- 5-5-   Account Grant application to the State Loan and Investment Board on behalf of
3     2008   the governing body of the town for the purpose of phase three completion of
             Main Street
Res.         Authorizing the submission of a federal Mineral Royalty Capital Construction
2008- 8-12-  Account grant application to the State Loan and Investment Board on behalf of
4     2008   the governing body of the town for the purpose of replacing the west end water
             line infrastructure
Res.  11-11- Authorizing the submission of a federal Mineral Royalty Capital Construction
2008- 2008   Account Grant application to the State Loan and Investment Board of the
5            governing body for the town for the purpose of phase one street repair
Res.  4-14-  Authorizing the submission of an application to the State Loan and Investment
2009- 2009   Board for a loan through the State Clean Water Revolving Fund on behalf of the
1            governing body for the town for the purpose of replacing clay tile line
Res.         Authorizing the submission of an application to the State Loan and Investment
2009- 4-14-  Board for a loan through the State Drinking Water Revolving Fund on behalf of
2     2009   the governing body of the town for the purpose of replacing inadequate two-
             inch water line with six-inch PVC
Res.         Approving participation in the State Water Development Commission (WWDC) Grant
2009- 12-8-  Program and acceptance of the awarded amount on behalf of the governing body
6     2009   for the town for the purpose of replacing deteriorated water transmission mains
             serving the town and west end water users
Res.         Authorizing the submission of a federal Mineral Royalty Capital Construction
2010- 4-13-  Account Grant application to the State Loan and Investment Board on behalf of
1     2010   the governing body of the town for the purpose of construction of the west end
             water loop
Res.  10-12- Authorizing the submission of a grant application through the State Department
2010- 2010   of Transportation’s Safe Routes to School Program
2
Res.  11-28- Authorizing the submission of application to the Community Facilities Grant and
2011- 2011   Loan Program for a Community Facilities Grant Project on behalf of the
2            governing body for the town
Res.  - -    Authorizing the submission of application to the Business Ready Community Grant
2013- 2013   and Loan Program for a Community Enhancement Grant Project on behalf of the
2            governing body for the town
Res.  5- -   Authorizing the submission of joint resolutions for the fiscal year 2011/2012
2013- 2013   and the fiscal year 2013/2014, Countywide Consensus Block Grant funding,
1            requesting authorization to reallocate unspent funding for the county
             Authorizing the submission of a federal Mineral Royalty Capital Construction
             Account Grant application to the State Loan and Investment Board on behalf of
Res.  9-9-   the governing body for the town for the purpose of capturing and reusing ground
04    2014   water from the north side of town and allowing 45 building sites to be
             developed and increasing potable water capacity by enhancing the raw water
             system in place
Res.         Authorizing the submission of application to the State Business Council under
2016- 2-11-  the Business Ready Grant and Loan Program for an enhancement grant on behalf of
1     2016   the governing body of the town for the purpose of expansion of the Log Gym
             Community Center
Res.         Authorizing the submission of a federal Mineral Royalty Capital Construction
2017- 1-10-  Grant Account grant application to the State Loan and Investment Board on
1     2017   behalf of the governing body of the town for the purpose of water tank
             replacement
Res.  2-13-  Authorizing the submission of application to the State Business Council under
2018- 2018   the Business Ready Community Grant and Loan Program for a business- committed
02           project on behalf of the governing body of the town
Res.  5-10-  Authorizing the submission of application to the State Business Council under
2018- 2018   the Business Ready Community Grant and Loan Program for an enhancement grant on
1            behalf of the governing body of the town
            
 
TABLE IV: VACATING OF STREETS AND ALLEYS
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Res. 1996-A   4-11-1996   Vacating the portion of the street lying between Lots
                          34 and 37
Res. 1996-D   4-11-1996   Vacating the portion of the street lying between
                          Blocks 34 and 37
Res. 2004-2   3-9-2004    Vacating the portion of the street lying between
                          Blocks 45 and 54
Res. 2005-3   7-12-2005   Vacating the portion of the street lying between
                          Blocks 4 and 11
                         
 
TABLE V: TRANSFER OF PROPERTY
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Res. 1989-A   6-13-1989   Attesting a deed conveying certain property owned by
                          the town to Fred William Miller and Linda Jo Miller
Res. 1999-A   8-12-1999   Transferring the titles on the real property located
                          on Lot 2, Block 32 of the original town
Res. 2000-B   7-5-2000    Transferring the titles on the real estate property
                          located on Lot 2, Block 32 of the original town
                         
 
TABLE VI: ANNEXATIONS AND DEANNEXATIONS
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./ Date
Res.  Passed Description
No.
Res.         “Sandhill Addition” – Annexation of all of that part of the northwest one-quarter
1992- 11-2-  of the southeast one-quarter and the northeast one-quarter of the southwest one-
C     1992   quarter of Section 32, Township 57 North, Range 96 West of the Sixth Principal
             Meridian
Res.         “Pryor Addition” – Annexation of all of that part of the northwest one-quarter of
1992- 11-2-  the northeast one-quarter and the southwest one-quarter of the northeast one-
D     1992   quarter of Section 32, Township 57 North, Range 96 West of the Sixth Principal
             Meridian
Res.  11-2-  “Wash Addition” – Annexation of all of that portion of the southeast one- quarter
1992- 1992   of the northeast one- quarter of Section 31, Township 57 North, Range 96 West of
E            the Sixth Principal Meridian
             “Pryor Addition” – Annexation of all of that part of the northwest one-quarter of
234   12-7-  the northeast one-quarter and the southwest one-quarter of the northeast one-
      1992   quarter of Section 32, Township 57 North, Range 96 West of the Sixth Principal
             Meridian
      12-7-  “Wash Addition” – Annexation of all of that portion of the southeast one- quarter
235   1992   of the northeast one- quarter of Section 31, Township 57 North, Range 96 West of
             the Sixth Principal Meridian
             “Sandhill Addition” – Annexation of all of that part of the northwest one-quarter
236   12-21- of the southeast one-quarter and the northeast one-quarter of the southwest one-
      1992   quarter of Section 32, Township 57 North, Range 96 West of the Sixth Principal
             Meridian
      10-13- De-annexation of a tract of land north 150 feet of the west 230 feet of the
242   1993   northwest one-quarter of the southeast one-quarter of Section 32, Township 57
             North, Range 96 West of the Sixth Principal Meridian
Res.  9-13-  “William M. Stevens Memorial Addition” – Annexation of a parcel of land located in
2005- 2005   the northeast one-quarter of the southwest one-quarter of Section 32, Township 57
5            North, Range 96 West of the Sixth Principal Meridian
      12-13- “William M. Stevens Memorial Addition” – Annexation of a parcel of land located in
267   2005   the northeast one-quarter of the southwest one-quarter of Section 32, Township 57
             North, Range 96 West of the Sixth Principal Meridian
Res.         “Third Street East Addition” – Annexation of all of that portion of the northwest
2009- 7-28-  one-quarter of the northeast one-quarter and the southwest one-quarter of the
3     2009   northeast one-quarter of Section 32, Township 57 North, Range 96 West of the Sixth
             Principal Meridian
             “Third Street East Addition” – Annexation of all of that portion of the northwest
275   10-13- one-quarter of the northeast one-quarter and the southwest one-quarter of the
      2009   northeast one-quarter of Section 32, Township 57 North, Range 96 West of the Sixth
             Principal Meridian
Res.  10-13- “Banks Addition” – Annexation of a parcel of land located in the southeast one-
2009- 2009   quarter of the northeast one-quarter of Section 31, Township 57 North, Range 96
4            West of the Sixth Principal Meridian
      11-24- “Banks Addition” – Annexation of a parcel of land located in the southeast one-
276   2009   quarter of the northeast one-quarter of Section 31, Township 57 North, Range 96
             West of the Sixth Principal Meridian
276   1-12-  Amendment to Ord. 276; as a condition of annexation, the property owners of the
      2010   Banks Addition shall construct and maintain a sanitary sewage system
      12-14- “Jaguar Addition” – Annexation of a portion of land located in the southeast one-
281   2010   quarter of the northeast one-quarter of Section 31, Township 57 North, Range 96
             West of the Sixth Principal Meridian
      4-22-  “Bennion Addition” – Annexation of a portion of the northwest one-quarter of the
290   2013   northeast one-quarter of Section 32, Township 57 North, Range 96 West of the Sixth
             Principal Meridian
Res.  6-9-   “Town Limit Annexation” – Annexation of all of that portion of the northwest one-
2015- 2015   quarter of the southeast one-quarter of Section 32, Township 57 North, Range 96
1            West of the Sixth Principal Meridian
      7-14-  “Town Limit Annexation” – Annexation of a portion of the northwest one-quarter of
299   2015   the southeast one-quarter of Section 32, Township 57 North, Range 96 West of the
             Sixth Principal Meridian
Res.  9-22-  “Tucker 2015 Annexation” – Annexation of a parcel of land located in the northwest
2015- 2015   one-quarter of the northeast one-quarter of Section 32, Township 57 North, Range
3            96 West of the Sixth Principal Meridian
      10-27- “Banks 2015 Annexation – Annexation of a parcel of land located in the southeast
300   2015   one-quarter of the northeast one-quarter of Section 31, Township 57 North, Range
             96 West of the Sixth Principal Meridian
      10-27- “Tucker 2015 Annexation” – Annexation of a parcel of land located in the northwest
301   2015   one-quarter of the northeast one-quarter of Section 32, Township 57 North, Range
             96 West of the Sixth Principal Meridian
      5-9-   “Rasmussen 2017 Annexation” – Annexation of that portion of southwest one-quarter
308   2017   of the northeast one-quarter of Section 32, Township 57 North of Range 96 West of
             the Sixth Principal Meridian
            
 
TABLE VII: DISTRICTS
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
52            10-6-1917   Paving District Number One
                          Sanitation districts; providing for the cleanup of
74            6-1-1921    their respective premises and places of business by
                          business houses and property owners, and districting
                          the town for this purpose
105           5-18-1932   Organization and creation of the Main Street
                          Improvement District Number One
 
TABLE VIII: BONDS
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./ Date
Res.  Passed Description
No.
      9-12-  Providing for the submission to the qualified voters of the town of the
51    1917   proposition to issue bonds of the town in the amount of $10,000 for the purpose
             of extending and improving the waterworks system
      1-1-   Providing for the issuance of negotiable coupon bonds of the town in the amount
55    1919   of $10,000 for the purpose of extending and improving the waterworks system of
             the town
      4-19-  Providing for the submission to the qualified voters of the town of the
68    1920   proposition to issue bonds of the town in the amount of $15,000 for the purpose
             of improving and extending the waterworks system
             Providing for the issuance by the town of its negotiable coupon bonds in the
             aggregate amount of $25,000, to be denominated “Refunding Water Bonds” for the
109   12-7-  purpose of refunding a like amount of outstanding bonded indebtedness of the town
      1933   which is optional for redemption; prescribing the form of said refunding water
             bonds and providing for the levy and collection of an annual tax to pay the same
             principal and interest
             Calling for special bond election; providing for the submission to a vote of the
169   12-27- qualified electors of the question of issuing the negotiable, coupon, general
      1966   obligation bonds in the aggregate principal amount of $150,000 for the purpose of
             supplying water to the town by constructing a municipal water works system
Res.  4-10-  Providing for the publication of notice of sale of the Town General Obligation
-     1967   Water Bonds, Series 1967 in the aggregate principal amount of $115,000
             Contracting an indebtedness on behalf of the town and upon credit thereof by
             issuing the “Town General Obligation Water Bonds, Series 1967” in the aggregate
170   5-11-  principal amount of $115,000 for the purpose of supplying water to the town by
      1967   constructing a municipal waterworks system; prescribing the form and other
             provisions concerning said bonds; providing for the levy of a tax to pay the
             principal and interest thereof; prescribing other details in connection therewith
             Providing for a bond election to be held in the town for the purpose of
             submitting to a vote of the qualified electors the question of authorizing the
             issuance of its General Obligation Bonds in an amount not exceeding $69,000 for
      3-22-  the purpose of establishing, by construction or purchase, a system of sewerage,
190   1976   and the question of authorizing the issuance of its sewerage system revenue bonds
             in an amount not exceeding $69,000 for the purpose of constructing and otherwise
             acquiring a sewerage treatment facility, collecting and outlet sewers and all
             other appurtenances and improvements necessary or useful for the collection,
             treatment and disposal of sewage
Res.  9-21-  Advertising the “Town General Obligation Sewer Bonds, Series November 1, 1976” in
1976- 1976   the aggregate principal amount of not exceeding $69,000 for sale
1
             Contracting an indebtedness on behalf of the town and upon the credit thereof by
      10-12- issuing the “Town General Obligation Sewer Bonds, Series 1976” in the aggregate
194   1976   principal amount of $69,000 for the purpose of establishing by construction or
             purchase a system of sewerage; providing for the levy of taxes to pay the
             principal and interest thereof; prescribing other details in connection therewith
Res.  12-8-  Contracting a bonded indebtedness in the amount not exceeding $26,000 to defray
2-    1976   in part the cost of the sewer project
1976
Res.  12-8-  Authorizing “Sewer Revenue Bonds, Series 1976” in the aggregate principal amount
3-    1976   of not exceeding $43,000
1976
195   12-8-  Repealing Ord. 194, Series 1976
      1976
             Contracting and indebtedness on behalf of the town and upon the credit thereof,
             by issuing the “Town General Obligating Sewer Bonds, Series 1976” in the
196   12-20- aggregate principal amount of $26,000 for the purpose of establishing by
      1976   construction or purchase a system of sewerage; providing for the levy of taxes to
             pay the principal and interest thereof; prescribing other details in connection
             therewith
             Authorizing the issuance of the sewerage system revenue bonds of the town in the
             aggregate principal amount of $43,000 for the\purpose of constructing and
             otherwise acquiring a sewerage treatment facility, collection and outlet sewers
197   12-20- and other appurtenances necessary for the collection, treatment and disposal of
      1976   sewage; providing the form, terms and conditions of such bonds; the manner of
             their execution and issuance; the method of paying the bonds; and the security
             therefor; prescribing other details concerning said bonds and system, including
             covenants and agreements in connection therewith
Res.         Accepting the bid submitted by Grant Taggart for the purchase of the “Town
4-    12-29- General Obligation Sewer Bonds, Series 1976” in the aggregate principal amount of
1976  1976   $26,000 for the principal amount, no premium, and bearing interest at the rate of
             1% per annum was the best bid submitted for said General Obligation Bonds
             Amending Ord. 197, Series 1976, concerning the authorization of the town’s sewer
      3-14-  revenue bonds; changing the designation of the bonds form Series 1976 to Series
199   1977   1977-A; increasing the amount of bonds to be issued from $43,000 to $69,000;
             modifying the maturity schedule for said bonds; prescribing other details in
             connection therewith
             Authorizing the issuance and delivery of anticipation notes during the interim
200   4-19-  between the authorization and delivery of the “Town Sewer Revenue Bonds, Series
      1977   1977-A” in the aggregate principal amount of $69,000; prescribing other details
             in connection therewith
Res.  6-9-   Advertising for sale the “Town Sewer Revenue Bonds, Series 1977-B” in the
1977- 1977   aggregate principal amount of not exceeding $43,000
2
             Authorizing the issuance of the sewerage system revenue bonds of the town in the
             aggregate principal amount of $43,000 for the purpose of constructing and
             otherwise acquiring a sewerage treatment facility, collecting and outlet sewers
201   6-9-   and other appurtenances necessary for the collection, treatment and disposal of
      1977   sewage; providing the form, terms and conditions of such bonds; the manner of
             their execution and issuance; the method of paying the bonds and the security
             therefor; prescribing other details concerning said bonds and system, including
             covenants and agreements in connection therewith
Res.  7-19-  Accepting Grant Taggart’s bid for the purchase of the “Town Sewer Revenue Bonds,
1977- 1977   Series 1977-B” in the aggregate principal amount of $43,000 for the principal
3            amount, no premium and bearing interest at the rate of 1% per annum
Res.  10-21- Issuing and selling “General Obligation Water Bonds” of the town in the principal
4-    1980   amount of $237,000
1980
             Authorizing the issuance and delivery of anticipation notes during the interim
207   10-21- between the authorization of the sale and delivery of the “Town General
      1980   Obligation Water Bonds” in the aggregate principal amount of $237,000;
             prescribing other details in connection therewith
             Authorizing the issuance of “General Obligation Water Bonds” in the principal
      10-21- amount of $237,000 for the purpose of paying part of the cost of extending and
208   1980   improving the municipal waterworks system of the town; prescribing the form of
             said bonds and providing for the levy of taxes to pay the principal and interest
             thereon
Res.  9-13-  Bond election for the question of issuing “General Obligation Water Bonds” in the
1984- 1984   maximum principal amount of $200,000 for the purpose of paying a portion of the
3            cost of extending and improving the municipal waterworks system of the town
Res.  12-11- Advertising “General Obligation Water Bonds” in the principal amount of $173,000
84-4  1984   for sale
 
TABLE IX: APPROPRIATIONS
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
191           - -         Annual appropriatio ns and tax levy for the fiscal
                          year beginning June 1, 1976, and ending May 31, 1977
14            4-30-1909   Appropriati ng funds for the debts and expenses for
                          the fiscal year 1909 and 1910
17            3-29-1910   Appropriati ng funds for the general expenses for the
                          fiscal year 1910 and 1911
43            4-3-1915    Appropriati ng funds for the fiscal year 1915 and
                          1916
45            4-5-1916    Appropriati ng funds for the general expenses for the
                          fiscal year 1916 and 1917
49            4-2-1917    Appropriati ng funds for the general expenses for the
                          fiscal year commencin g May 1, 1917
60            4-8-1918    Appropriati ng funds for the general expenses for the
                          fiscal year 1918 and 1919
61            3-31-1919   Appropriati ng funds for the general expenses for the
                          fiscal year 1919 and 1920
66            3-29-1920   Appropriati ng funds for the general expenses for the
                          fiscal year 1920 and 1921
67            3-29-1920   Fixing the amount of general and special taxes to be
                          levied for the year 1920
73            3-24-1921   Appropriati ng funds for the general expense for the
                          fiscal year 1921 and 1922
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
75            4-6-1922    Fixing the amount of the general and special taxes
                          for the year 1922 at the sum of $6,500
76            4-6-1922    Appropriating funds to defray the expenses for the
                          fiscal year 1922 and 1923
77            5-24-1922   Amending part of Ord. 76
80            4-6-1923    Appropriating funds to defray the expenses for the
                          fiscal year 1923 and 1924
79            4-28-1923   Fixing the amount of general and special taxes for
                          the fiscal year 1923 and 1924 at the sum of $5,800
81            4-2-1924    Fixing the amount of general and special taxes for
                          the fiscal year 1924 and 1925 at the sum of $6,400
82            4-2-1924    Appropriating funds to defray the expenses for the
                          fiscal year 1924 and 1925
83            4-6-1925    Fixing the amount of general and special taxes at the
                          sum of $6,400
84            4-6-1925    Appropriating funds to defray the expenses for the
                          fiscal year 1925 and 1926
85            4-7-1926    Fixing the amount of general and special taxes to be
                          levied for the fiscal year 1926
                          Appropriation of money for the current expenses for
86            4-7-1926    the fiscal year May 1, 1926, and ending April 30,
                          1927
88            4-6-1927    Fixing the amount of general and special taxes to be
                          levied for the fiscal year 1927
90            6-23-1927   Fixing the amount of general and special taxes to be
                          levied for the fiscal year 1927
                          Appropriation of money for the current expenses for
91            6-23-1927   the fiscal year April 1, 1927, and ending March 31,
                          1928
93            4-9-1928    Fixing the amount of general and special taxes to be
                          levied for the fiscal year 1928 through 1929
                          Appropriation of money for the current expenses for
94            4-9-1928    the fiscal year April 1, 1928, and ending March 31,
                          1929
95            4-3-1929    Fixing the amount of general and special taxes to be
                          levied for the fiscal year 1929
                          Appropriation of money for the current expenses for
96            4-3-1929    the fiscal year April 1, 1929, and ending March 31,
                          1930
                          Appropriation of money for the current expenses for
99            4-2-1930    the fiscal year April 1, 1930, and ending March 31,
                          1931
98            4-3-1930    Fixing the amount of general and special taxes to be
                          levied for the fiscal year 1930
                          Appropriation of money for the current expenses for
101           4-8-1931    the fiscal year April 1, 1931, and ending April 1,
                          1932
102           4-6-1932    Fixing the amount of general and special taxes to be
                          levied for the fiscal year 1932
                          Appropriation of money for the current expenses for
103           4-6-1932    the fiscal year April 1, 1932, and ending March 31,
                          1933
100           4-8-1932    Fixing the amount of general and special taxes to be
                          levied for the fiscal year 1931
106           4-12-1933   Fixing the amount of general and special taxes to be
                          levied for the fiscal year 1933
                          Appropriation of money for the current expenses for
107           4-12-1933   the fiscal year April 1, 1933, and ending March 31,
                          1934
112           4-4-1934    Fixing the amount of general and special taxes to be
                          levied for the fiscal year 1934 and 1935
                          Appropriation of money for the current expenses for
113           4-4-1934    the fiscal year April 1, 1934, and ending March 31,
                          1935
114           4-3-1935    Fixing the amount of general and special taxes to be
                          levied for the fiscal year 1935 and 1936
                          Appropriation of money for the current expenses for
115           4-3-1935    the fiscal year April 1, 1935, and ending March 31,
                          1936
116           4-3-1935    Fixing the amount of general and special taxes to be
                          levied for the fiscal year 1936 and 1937
                          Appropriation of money for the current expenses for
117           4-3-1936    the fiscal year April 1, 1936, and ending March 31,
                          1937
118           4-1-1937    Fixing the amount of general and special taxes to be
                          levied for the fiscal year 1937 and 1938
120           4-6-1938    Fixing the amount of general and special taxes to be
                          levied for the fiscal year 1937 and 1938
                          Appropriation of money for the current expenses for
121           4-7-1938    the fiscal year April 1, 1938, and ending March 31,
                          1939
122           4-5-1939    Fixing the amount of general and special taxes to be
                          levied for the fiscal year 1939 and 1940
                          Appropriation of money for the current expenses for
123           4-5-1939    the fiscal year April 1, 1939, and ending March 31,
                          1940
124           4-3-1940    Fixing the amount of general and special taxes to be
                          levied for the fiscal year 1940 and 1941
                          Appropriation of money for the current expenses for
125           4-3-1940    the fiscal year April 1, 1940, and ending March 31,
                          1941
126           4-3-1941    Fixing the amount of general and special taxes to be
                          levied for the fiscal year 1941 and 1942
                          Appropriation of money for the current expenses for
127           4-3-1941    the fiscal year April 1, 1941, and ending March 31,
                          1942
128           4-6-1942    Fixing the amount of general and special taxes to be
                          levied for the fiscal year 1942 and 1943
                          Appropriation of money for the current expenses for
129           4-6-1942    the fiscal year April 1, 1942, and ending March 31,
                          1943
130           4-7-1943    Fixing the amount of general and special taxes to be
                          levied for the fiscal year 1943 and 1944
                          Appropriation of money for the current expenses for
131           4-7-1943    the fiscal year April 1, 1943, and ending March 31,
                          1944
132           4-3-1944    Fixing the amount of general and special taxes to be
                          levied for the fiscal year 1944 and 1945
                          Appropriation of money for the current expenses for
133           4-3-1944    the fiscal year April 1, 1944, and ending March 31,
                          1945
134           4-15-1945   Fixing the amount of general and special taxes to be
                          levied for the fiscal year 1945 and 1946
                          Appropriation of money for the current expenses for
135           4-16-1945   the fiscal year April 1, 1945, and ending March 31,
                          1946
136           4-5-1946    Fixing the amount of general and special taxes to be
                          levied for the fiscal year 1946 and 1947
                          Appropriation of money for the current expenses for
137           4-5-1946    the fiscal year April 1, 1946, and ending March 31,
                          1947
138           4-6-1947    Fixing the amount of general and special taxes to be
                          levied for the fiscal year 1947 and 1948
                          Appropriation of money for the current expenses for
139           4-6-1947    the fiscal year April 1, 1947, and ending March 31,
                          1948
140           4-7-1948    Fixing the amount of general and special taxes to be
                          levied for the fiscal year 1948 and 1949
                          Appropriation of money for the current expenses for
141           4-7-1948    the fiscal year April 1, 1948, and ending March 31,
                          1949
                          Appropriation of money for the current expenses for
142           4-7-1949    the fiscal year April 1, 1949, and ending March 31,
                          1950
                          Appropriation of money for the current expenses for
143           4-7-1949    the fiscal year April 1, 1949, and ending March 31,
                          1950
145           4-5-1950    Fixing the amount of general and special taxes to be
                          levied for the fiscal year 1950 and 1951
                          Appropriation of money for the current expenses for
146           4-5-1950    the fiscal year April 1, 1950, and ending March 31,
                          1951
149           6-20-1951   Fixing the amount of general and municipal taxes to
                          be levied for the fiscal year 1951 and 1952
                          Appropriation of money for the current expenses for
150           6-20-1951   the fiscal year April 1, 1951, and ending March 31,
                          1952
151           4-2-1952    Fixing the amount of general and municipal taxes to
                          be levied for the fiscal year 1952 and 1953
                          Appropriation of money for the current expenses for
152           4-2-1952    the fiscal year April 1, 1952, and ending March 31,
                          1953
153           4-1-1953    Fixing the amount of general and municipal taxes to
                          be levied for the fiscal year 1953 and 1954
                          Appropriation of money for the current expenses for
154           4-1-1953    the fiscal year April 1, 1953, and ending March 31,
                          1954
155           4-7-1954    Fixing the amount of general and municipal taxes to
                          be levied for the fiscal year 1954 and 1955
                          Appropriation of money for the current expenses for
156           4-7-1954    the fiscal year April 1, 1954, and ending March 31,
                          1955
157           5-4-1955    Fixing the amount of general and municipal taxes to
                          be levied for the fiscal year 1955 and 1956
                          Appropriation of money for the current expenses for
158           5-4-1955    the fiscal year April 1, 1955 and ending March 31,
                          1956
159           4-5-1956    Fixing the amount of general and municipal taxes to
                          be levied for the fiscal year 1956, and 1957
                          Appropriation of money for the current expenses for
160           4-5-1956    the fiscal year April 1, 1956, and ending March 31,
                          1957
161           4-11-1957   Fixing the amount of general and municipal taxes to
                          be levied for the fiscal year 1957, and 1958
                          Appropriation of money for the current expenses for
162           4-11-1957   the fiscal year April 1, 1957, and ending March 31,
                          1958
174           7-26-1967   Annual appropriations and tax levy for the fiscal
                          year beginning June 1, 1967, and ending May 31, 1968
175           7-11-1968   Annual appropriations and tax levy for the fiscal
                          year beginning June 1, 1968, and ending May 31, 1969
176           6-9-1969    Annual appropriations and tax levy for the fiscal
                          year beginning June 1, 1969, and ending May 31, 1969
177           6-10-1970   Annual appropriations and tax levy for the fiscal
                          year beginning June 1, 1970, and ending May 31, 1971
180           7-13-1971   Annual appropriations and tax levy for the fiscal
                          year beginning June 1, 1971, and ending May 31, 1972
181           6-1-1972    Annual appropriations and tax levy for the fiscal
                          year beginning June 1, 1972, and ending May 31, 1973
184           6-28-1973   Annual appropriations and tax levy for the fiscal
                          year beginning June 1, 1973, and ending May 31, 1974
188           6-28-1974   Annual appropriations and tax levy for the fiscal
                          year beginning June 1, 1974, and ending May 31, 1975
189           6-19-1975   Annual appropriations and tax levy for the fiscal
                          year beginning June 1, 1975, and ending May 31, 1976
                          Amendment; annual appropriations and tax levy for the
191           7-15-1976   fiscal year beginning June 1, 1976, and ending May
                          31, 1977
202           6-21-1977   Annual appropriations and tax levy for the fiscal
                          year beginning June 1, 1977, and ending May 31, 1978
204           6-20-1978   Annual appropriations and tax levy for the fiscal
                          year beginning June 1, 1978, and ending May 31, 1979
205           6-12-1979   Annual appropriations and tax levy for the fiscal
                          year beginning June 1, 1979, and ending May 31, 1980
206           6-10-1980   Annual appropriations and tax levy for the fiscal
                          year beginning June 1, 1980, and ending May 31, 1981
211           6-18-1981   Annual appropriations and tax levy for the fiscal
                          year beginning June 1, 1981, and ending May 31, 1982
212           7-13-1982   Annual appropriations and tax levy for the fiscal
                          year beginning June 1, 1982, and ending May 31, 1983
215           6-14-1983   Annual appropriations and tax levy for the fiscal
                          year beginning June 1, 1983, and ending May 21, 1984
217           6-20-1984   Annual appropriations and tax levy for the fiscal
                          year beginning June 1, 1984, and ending May 31, 1985
218           6-26-1985   Annual appropriations and tax levy for the fiscal
                          year beginning June 1, 1985, and ending May 31, 1986
219           6-10-1986   Annual appropriations and tax levy for the fiscal
                          year beginning June 1, 1986, and ending May 31, 1987
222           6-16-1987   Annual appropriations and tax levy for the fiscal
                          year beginning June 1, 1987, and ending May 31, 1988
224           6-1-1988    Annual appropriations and tax levy for the fiscal
                          year beginning June 1, 1988, and ending May 31, 1989
225           5-16-1989   Annual appropriations and tax levy for the fiscal
                          year beginning June 1, 1989, and ending June 30, 1990
227           6-12-1990   Annual appropriations and tax levy for the fiscal
                          year beginning July 1, 1990, and ending June 30, 1991
229           6-11-1991   Annual appropriations and tax levy for the fiscal
                          year beginning July 1, 1991, and ending June 30, 1992
230           6-11-1991   Adjusting the 1990-1991 annual budget for unexpected
                          expenses
232           6-11-1992   Annual appropriations and tax levy for the fiscal
                          year beginning July 1, 1992, and ending June 30, 1993
240           6-15-1993   Annual appropriations and tax levy for the fiscal
                          year beginning July 1, 1993, and ending June 30, 1994
241           6-15-1993   Annual appropriations and tax levy for the fiscal
                          year beginning July 1, 1993, and ending June 30, 1994
243           6-9-1994    Annual appropriations and tax levy for the fiscal
                          year beginning July 1, 1994 and ending June 30, 1995
244           9-8-1994    Annual appropriations and tax levy for the fiscal
                          year beginning July 1, 1994, and ending June 30, 1995
245           6-13-1995   Annual appropriations and tax levy for the fiscal
                          year beginning July 1, 1995, and ending June 30, 1996
247           6-13-1996   Annual appropriations and tax levy for the fiscal
                          year beginning July 1, 1996, and ending June 30, 1997
248           6-12-1997   Annual appropriations and tax levy for the fiscal
                          year beginning July 1, 1997, and ending June 30, 1998
253           6-11-1998   Annual appropriations and tax levy for the fiscal
                          year beginning July 1, 1998, and ending June 30, 1999
255           6-10-1999   Annual appropriations and tax levy for the fiscal
                          year beginning July 1, 1999, and ending June 30, 2000
257           6- -2000    Annual appropriations and tax levy for the fiscal
                          year beginning July 1, 2000, and ending June 30, 2001
258           6-21-2001   Annual appropriations and tax levy for the fiscal
                          year beginning July 1, 2001, and ending June 30, 2002
259           6-20-2002   Annual appropriations and tax levy for the fiscal
                          year beginning July 1, 2002, and ending June 30, 2003
261           6-10-2003   Annual appropriations and tax levy for the fiscal
                          year beginning July 1, 2003, and ending June 30, 2004
264           6-15-2004   Annual appropriations and tax levy for the fiscal
                          year beginning July 1, 2004, and ending June 30, 2005
264           9-1-2004    Annual appropriations and tax levy for the fiscal
                          year beginning July 1, 2004, and ending June 30, 2005
266           6-14-2005   Annual appropriations and tax levy for the fiscal
                          year beginning July 1, 2005, and ending June 30, 2006
269           6-13-2006   Annual appropriations and tax levy for the fiscal
                          year beginning July 1, 2006, and ending June 30, 2007
270           6-12-2007   Annual appropriations and tax levy for the fiscal
                          year beginning July 1, 2007, and ending June 30, 2008
272           6-10-2008   Annual appropriations and tax levy for the fiscal
                          year beginning July 1, 2008, and ending June 30, 2009
274           6-9-2009    Annual appropriations and tax levy for the fiscal
                          year beginning July 1, 2009, and ending June 30, 2010
277           6-8-2010    Annual appropriations and tax levy for the fiscal
                          year beginning July 1, 2010, and ending June 30, 2011
282           6-14-2011   Annual appropriations and tax levy for the fiscal
                          year beginning July 1, 2011, and ending June 30, 2012
287           6-12-2012   Annual appropriations and tax levy for the fiscal
                          year beginning July 1, 2012, and ending June 30, 2013
291           6-11-2013   Annual appropriations and tax levy for the fiscal
                          year beginning July 1, 2013, and ending June 30, 2014
295           6-10-2014   Annual appropriations and tax levy for the fiscal
                          year beginning July 1, 2014, and ending June 30, 2015
297           6-9-2015    Annual appropriations and tax levy for the fiscal
                          year beginning July 1, 2015, and ending June 30, 2016
303           6-13-2016   Annual appropriations and tax levy for the fiscal
                          year beginning July 1, 2016, and ending June 30, 2017
309           6-13-2017   Annual appropriations and tax levy for the fiscal
                          year beginning July 1, 2017, and ending June 30, 2018
312           6-12-2018   Annual appropriations and tax levy for the fiscal
                          year beginning July 1, 2018, and ending June 30, 2019
316           6-11-2019   Annual appropriations and tax levy for the fiscal
                          year beginning July 1, 2019, and ending June 30, 2020
318           6-18-2020   Annual appropriations and tax levy for the fiscal
                          year beginning July 1, 2020, and ending June 30, 2021
326           6-14-2022   Annual appropriations and tax levy for the fiscal
                          year beginning July 1, 2022, and ending June 30, 2023
329           6-13-2023   Annual appropriations and tax levy for the fiscal
                          year beginning July 1, 2023, and ending June 30, 2024
333           6-11-2024   Annual appropriations and tax levy for the fiscal
                          year beginning July 1, 2024, and ending June 30, 2025
                         
 
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Wyoming Statutes
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO WYOMING STATUTES
Wyo. Stat. Cite Code Section
Wyo. Stat. Cite                        Code Section
9-3-401 et seq.                        31.07
9-3-412                                31.02
9-3-412(b)                             31.03
15-1-103(a)(v)(xix and xxvi) and (xli) 153.02
15-1-119                               70.01
15-1-503 through 15-1-506              152.003
15-1-601 through 15-1-611              152.002
15-1-602 through 15-1-603              152.009
16-1-101                               32.01
19-13-105                              32.24
19-13-108                              32.20
31-4-101(a)(i)                         70.01
31-4-503                               70.01
31-5-101 through 31-5-1214             70.01
31-5-212                               70.01
31-5-213                               70.01
31-5-227                               70.01
31-5-233                               70.01
31-5-302                               70.01
31-5-306                               70.01
31-5-501                               70.01
31-5-502                               70.01
31-5-959                               70.01
31-5-1110 through 31-5-1112            70.01
31-5-1201                              70.01
31-5-1303                              70.01
31-7-116                               70.01
31-7-117                               70.01
31-7-134                               70.01
31-9-102(a)(xi)                        70.16
31-9-405(b)                            70.16
39-15-202 et seq.                      34.01
                                       
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
  Res. No.Date Passed Code Section
  Res. No.Date Passed Code Section
-          4-10-1967   TSO Table VIII
185        3-19-1974   TSO Table III
1976-1     9-21-1976   TSO Table VIII
2-1976     12-8-1976   TSO Table VIII
3-1976     12-8-1976   TSO Table VIII
4-1976     12-29-1976  TSO Table VIII
1977-2     6-9-1977    TSO Table VIII
1977-3     7-19-1977   TSO Table VIII
1979-A     10-17-1979  TSO Table III
4-1980     10-21-1980  TSO Table VIII
1981-A     6-9-1981    51.10
1981-B     11-10-1981  TSO Table II
1983-A     11-1-1983   TSO Table III
1984-3     9-13-1984   TSO Table VIII
84-4       12-11-1984  TSO Table VIII
1985-2     8-13-1985   TSO Table III
1986-1     4-8-1986    TSO Table III
-          4-15-1988   32.20-
                       32.33
1988-1     10-11-1988  TSO Table III
1989-A     6-13-1989   TSO Table V
1989-B     10-10-1989  TSO Table III
1990-A     4-10-1990   TSO Table III
1990-E     11-13-1990  TSO Table III
1991-A     4-9-1991    TSO Table III
1992-A     4-16-1992   TSO Table III
1992-B     9-7-1992    TSO Table III
1992-C     11-2-1992   TSO Table VI
1992-D     11-2-1992   TSO Table VI
1992-E     11-2-1992   TSO Table VI
1994-A     4-14-1994   TSO Table III
1994-B     4-14-1994   TSO Table III
1995-A     3-9-1995    TSO Table III
1995-B     12-12-1995  TSO Table III
1996-A     4-11-1996   TSO Table IV
1996-C     4-11-1996   TSO Table III
1996-D     4-11-1996   TSO Table IV
1998-A     6-11-1998   TSO Table III
1998-O     10-8-1998   TSO Table III
1999-A     8-12-1999   TSO Table V
2000-A     1-13-2000   TSO Table II
2000-B     7-5-2000    TSO Table V
2004-1     1-13-2004   TSO Table III
2004-2     3-9-2004    TSO Table IV
2005-1     2-8-2005    TSO Table III
2005-2     3-8-2005    TSO Table II
2005-3     7-12-2005   TSO Table IV
2005-4     9-13-2005   TSO Table III
2005-5     9-13-2005   TSO Table VI
2006-1     1-23-2006   TSO Table III
2006-3     2-14-2006   TSO Table III
2006-5     4-27-2006   TSO Table III
2006-6     6-13-2006   TSO Table III
2006-7     9-14-2006   TSO Table III
2007-1     1-9-2007    TSO Table III
2007-2     1-30-2007   TSO Table III
2007-3     1-30-2007   TSO Table III
2007-4     3-13-2007   TSO Table III
2007-5     3-13-2007   TSO Table III
2007-6     8-14-2007   TSO Table III
2007-7     8-14-2007   TSO Table III
-          8-23-2007   33.03
2007-8     10-27-2007  TSO Table III
2008-1     2-28-2008   TSO Table III
2008-2     4-8-2008    TSO Table II
2008-3     5-5-2008    TSO Table III
2008-4     8-12-2008   TSO Table III
2008-5     11-11-2008  TSO Table III
2008-6     11-11-2008  50.01
2008-7     12-18-2008  31.02
2009-1     4-14-2009   TSO Table III
2009-2     4-14-2009   TSO Table III
2009-3     7-28-2009   TSO Table VI
2009-4     10-13-2009  TSO Table VI
2009-5     12-8-2009   31.03-
                       31.08
2009-6     12-8-2009   TSO Table III
2010-1     4-13-2010   TSO Table III
2010-2     10-12-2010  TSO Table III
2010-3     11-9-2010   33.02
2011-2     11-28-2011  TSO Table III
-          8-14-2012   31.01
2013-2     - -2013     TSO Table III
2013-1     5- -2013    TSO Table III
04         9-9-2014    TSO Table III
2015-1     6-9-2015    TSO Table VI
2015-3     9-22-2015   TSO Table VI
2016-1     2-11-2016   TSO Table III
2017-1     1-10-2017   TSO Table III
2017-2     1-10-2017   33.01
2018-02    2-13-2018   TSO Table III
2018-1     5-10-2018   TSO Table III
                      
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No.  Date Passed Description
191       - -         TSO Table IX
                      30.15,
3         1-14-1908   30.17-
                      30.21
4         1-14-1908   35.01-
                      35.06
5         1-14-1908   130.04-
                      130.11
1         1-16-1908   11.01
6         1-20-1908   31.35-
                      31.37
                      91.01,
7         2-3-1908    91.02,
                      91.99
13        2-4-1909    30.16
14        4-30-1909   TSO Table IX
17        3-29-1910   TSO Table IX
19        6-24-1910   132.03,
                      132.99
43        4-3-1915    TSO Table IX
44        4-5-1915    91.15-
                      91.18
45        4-5-1916    TSO Table IX
49        4-2-1917    TSO Table IX
51        9-12-1917   TSO Table VIII
52        10-6-1917   TSO Table VII
53        11-5-1917   TSO Table I
54        11-5-1917   TSO Table I
56        11-16-1917  TSO Table I
60        4-8-1918    TSO Table IX
55        1-1-1919    TSO Table VIII
61        3-31-1919   TSO Table IX
64        12-22-1919  TSO Table I
65        3-1-1920    TSO Table I
66        3-29-1920   TSO Table IX
67        3-29-1920   TSO Table IX
68        4-19-1920   TSO Table VIII
73        3-24-1921   TSO Table IX
74        6-1-1921    TSO Table VII
75        4-6-1922    TSO Table IX
76        4-6-1922    TSO Table IX
77        5-24-1922   TSO Table IX
80        4-6-1923    TSO Table IX
79        4-28-1923   TSO Table IX
81        4-2-1924    TSO Table IX
82        4-2-1924    TSO Table IX
83        4-6-1925    TSO Table IX
84        4-6-1925    TSO Table IX
85        4-7-1926    TSO Table IX
86        4-7-1926    TSO Table IX
87        10-7-1926   TSO Table I
88        4-6-1927    TSO Table IX
89        4-6-1927    TSO Table IX
90        6-23-1927   TSO Table IX
91        6-23-1927   TSO Table IX
93        4-9-1928    TSO Table IX
94        4-9-1928    TSO Table IX
95        4-3-1929    TSO Table IX
96        4-3-1929    TSO Table IX
97        3-12-1930   150.30,
                      150.99
99        4-2-1930    TSO Table IX
98        4-3-1930    TSO Table IX
101       4-8-1931    TSO Table IX
102       4-6-1932    TSO Table IX
103       4-6-1932    TSO Table IX
100       4-8-1932    TSO Table IX
105       5-18-1932   TSO Table VII
106       4-12-1933   TSO Table IX
107       4-12-1933   TSO Table IX
109       12-7-1933   TSO Table VIII
112       4-4-1934    TSO Table IX
113       4-4-1934    TSO Table IX
114       4-3-1935    TSO Table IX
115       4-3-1935    TSO Table IX
116       4-3-1935    TSO Table IX
117       4-3-1936    TSO Table IX
118       4-1-1937    TSO Table IX
120       4-6-1938    TSO Table IX
121       4-7-1938    TSO Table IX
122       4-5-1939    TSO Table IX
123       4-5-1939    TSO Table IX
124       4-3-1940    TSO Table IX
125       4-3-1940    TSO Table IX
126       4-3-1941    TSO Table IX
127       4-3-1941    TSO Table IX
128       4-6-1942    TSO Table IX
129       4-6-1942    TSO Table IX
130       4-7-1943    TSO Table IX
131       4-7-1943    TSO Table IX
132       4-3-1944    TSO Table IX
133       4-3-1944    TSO Table IX
134       4-15-1945   TSO Table IX
135       4-16-1945   TSO Table IX
136       4-5-1946    TSO Table IX
137       4-5-1946    TSO Table IX
138       4-6-1947    TSO Table IX
139       4-6-1947    TSO Table IX
140       4-7-1948    TSO Table IX
141       4-7-1948    TSO Table IX
142       4-7-1949    TSO Table IX
143       4-7-1949    TSO Table IX
144       7-6-1949    TSO Table I
145       4-5-1950    TSO Table IX
146       4-5-1950    TSO Table IX
92        12-11-1950  70.30,
                      70.99
149       6-20-1951   TSO Table IX
150       6-20-1951   TSO Table IX
151       4-2-1952    TSO Table IX
152       4-2-1952    TSO Table IX
153       4-1-1953    TSO Table IX
154       4-1-1953    TSO Table IX
155       4-7-1954    TSO Table IX
156       4-7-1954    TSO Table IX
157       5-4-1955    TSO Table IX
158       5-4-1955    TSO Table IX
159       4-5-1956    TSO Table IX
160       4-5-1956    TSO Table IX
161       4-11-1957   TSO Table IX
162       4-11-1957   TSO Table IX
169       12-27-1966  TSO Table VIII
170       5-11-1967   TSO Table VIII
                      150.15,
171       7-26-1967   150.16,
                      150.99
174       7-26-1967   TSO Table IX
175       7-11-1968   TSO Table IX
176       6-9-1969    TSO Table IX
177       6-10-1970   TSO Table IX
178       2-9-1971    150.16
180       7-13-1971   TSO Table IX
181       6-1-1972    TSO Table IX
182       11-14-1972  53.04,
                      53.99
184       6-28-1973   TSO Table IX
186       5-15-1974   TSO Table I
188       6-28-1974   TSO Table IX
189       6-19-1975   TSO Table IX
190       3-22-1976   TSO Table VIII
191       7-15-1976   TSO Table IX
194       10-12-1976  TSO Table VIII
195       12-8-1976   TSO Table VIII
196       12-20-1976  TSO Table VIII
197       12-20-1976  TSO Table VIII
199       3-14-1977   TSO Table VIII
200       4-19-1977   TSO Table VIII
201       6-9-1977    TSO Table VIII
202       6-21-1977   TSO Table IX
204       6-20-1978   TSO Table IX
205       6-12-1979   TSO Table IX
206       6-10-1980   TSO Table IX
207       10-21-1980  TSO Table VIII
208       10-21-1980  TSO Table VIII
211       6-18-1981   TSO Table IX
212       7-13-1982   TSO Table IX
213       10-12-1982  TSO Table I
215       6-14-1983   TSO Table IX
                      150.01-
216       2-14-1984   150.03,
                      150.99
217       6-20-1984   TSO Table IX
218       6-26-1985   TSO Table IX
219       6-10-1986   TSO Table IX
220       11-11-1986  TSO Table I
222       6-16-1987   TSO Table IX
224       6-1-1988    TSO Table IX
225       5-16-1989   TSO Table IX
227       6-12-1990   TSO Table IX
228       11-13-1990  31.20,
                      31.21
229       6-11-1991   TSO Table IX
230       6-11-1991   TSO Table IX
-         8-8-1991    32.01-
                      32.07
232       6-11-1992   TSO Table IX
238       6-11-1992   50.02-
                      50.03
234       12-7-1992   TSO Table VI
235       12-7-1992   TSO Table VI
233       12-10-1992  156.01-
                      156.04
236       12-21-1992  TSO Table VI
240       6-15-1993   TSO Table IX
241       6-15-1993   TSO Table IX
239       8-12-1993   TSO Table I
242       10-13-1993  TSO Table VI
243       6-9-1994    TSO Table IX
244       9-8-1994    TSO Table IX
245       6-3-1995    TSO Table IX
246       6-13-1995   131.01-
                      131.07
247       6-13-1996   TSO Table IX
248       6-12-1997   TSO Table IX
249       1-2-1998    70.01
                      10.99,
                      51.99,
                      52.99,
250       1-2-1998    53.99,
                      70.99,
                      91.99,
                      132.99,
                      154.99
251       2-12-1998   TSO Table I
252       6-11-1998   34.01,
                      34.02
253       6-11-1998   TSO Table IX
254       9-10-1998   30.01
255       6-10-1999   TSO Table IX
257       6- -2000    TSO Table IX
258       6-21-2001   TSO Table IX
249       2-12-2002   70.01
259       6-20-2002   TSO Table IX
260       1-14-2003   70.01
261       6-10-2003   TSO Table IX
264       6-15-2004   TSO Table IX
264       9-1-2004    TSO Table IX
                      155.01,
                      155.02,
                      155.15-
                      155.19,
                      155.30-
265       6-14-2005   155.32,
                      155.45-
                      155.47,
                      155.60-
                      155.64,
                      155.99
266       6-14-2005   TSO Table IX
267       12-13-2005  TSO Table VI
268       6-13-2006   53.01-
                      53.03
269       6-13-2006   TSO Table IX
270       6-12-2007   TSO Table IX
271       10-9-2007   151.01-
                      151.02
272       6-10-2008   TSO Table IX
                      70.16,
249       3-10-2009   70.17,
                      70.99
274       6-9-2009    TSO Table IX
275       10-13-2009  TSO Table VI
276       11-24-2009  TSO Table VI
276       1-12-2010   TSO Table VI
277       6-8-2010    TSO Table IX
                      51.01-
278       7-29-2010   51.09,
                      51.99
280       7-29-2010   53.01,
                      53.03
                      52.01-
279       8-10-2010   52.17,
                      52.99
281       12-14-2010  TSO Table VI
282       6-14-2011   TSO Table IX
284       11-8-2011   30.19
                      90.30-
285       4-10-2012   90.41,
                      90.99
286       6-12-2012   53.01,
                      53.03
287       6-12-2012   TSO Table IX
288       9-11-2012   51.08
289       4-9-2013    51.08
290       4-22-2013   TSO Table VI
291       6-11-2013   TSO Table IX
292       6-11-2013   53.01,
                      53.03
293       11-12-2013  51.08
                      151.03,
                      152.001-
                      152.009,
                      152.020-
                      152.025,
                      152.040-
                      152.053,
                      152.065,
                      152.080-
                      152.095,
294       3-25-2014   152.110-
                      152.118,
                      152.130-
                      152.138,
                      152.150-
                      152.154,
                      152.165-
                      152.169,
                      152.182-
                      152.188,
                      152.200,
                      152.999
295       6-10-2014   TSO Table IX
297       6-9-2015    TSO Table IX
298       6-9-2015    153.14
299       7-14-2015   TSO Table VI
300       10-27-2015  TSO Table VI
301       10-27-2015  TSO Table VI
303       6-13-2016   TSO Table IX
304       6-13-2016   52.09
305       6-13-2016   51.08
306, 2016 7-12-2016   70.15,
                      70.99
307, 2016 7-12-2016   132.01,
                      132.99
315       8-14-2016   90.30
                      154.01-
262, 2017 1-10-2017   154.04,
                      154.99
                      153.01-
263, 2017 1-10-2017   153.13,
                      153.99
308       5-9-2017    TSO Table VI
309       6-13-2017   TSO Table IX
312       6-12-2018   TSO Table IX
                      130.01-
313, 2018 6-25-2018   130.03,
                      130.99
314       8-14-2018   TSO Table I
316       6-11-2019   TSO Table IX
318       6-18-2020   TSO Table IX
319       7-14-2020   53.01,
                      53.03
320, 2020 8-11-2020   90.01-
                      90.16
322, 2021 12-14-2021  51.08
324, 2021 12-14-2021  51.08
                      110.01-
323, 2022 1-11-2022   110.09,
                      110.99
325       5-10-2022   52.09
326       6-14-2022   TSO Table IX
328       4-11-2023   53.01,
                      53.03
330       8-8-2023    Adopting Ordinance
331, 2023 11-14-2023  154.02
332, 2023 12-13-2023  90.32,
                      90.42
333       6-11-2024   TSO Table IX
334, 2024 10-8-2024   90.31,
                      90.41
                      152.001-
                      152.009,
                      152.020-
                      152.025,
                      152.040-
                      152.053,
                      152.065,
                      152.080-
                      152.095,
                      152.110-
335       3-11-2025   152.120,
                      152.130-
                      152.139,
                      152.150-
                      152.154,
                      152.165-
                      152.169,
                      152.180-
                      152.188,
                      152.200,
                      152.999
                     
 
