TOWN CODE
of
LYMAN, WYOMING
2020
Code current through:
Ord. 2025-01, passed 4-7-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
         This code of the Town of Lyman, as supplemented, contains ordinances
up to and including ordinance 2025-01, passed April 7, 2025. Ordinances of the
Town adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code to the
extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the Town
office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the code has
been amended, superseded or repealed.
                     American Legal Publishing
                     Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not affect the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 2025-05
 
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE PENALTY FOR DRIVING WITHOUT VALID INSURANCE WITHIN
THE TOWN OF LYMAN
WHEREAS, the Town of Lyman has a penalty for Driving Without Valid Insurance;
and
WHEREAS, the penalty for this offense needs to be amended to equal the State
Statute.
NOW THEREFORE BE IT ORDAINED BY THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE TOWN OF LYMAN, UINTA
COUNTY, WYOMING THAT THE TOWN CODE SHOULD BE MODIFIED IN THE FOLLOWING WAY:
 
6-3-5: OPERATING A MOTOR VEHICLE WITHOUT INSURANCE:  

B. Penalty: A violation of this section constitutes a class A misdemeanor
punishable as set forth in subsection 1-4-1 A1 of this code. Additionally, in
the event of a second or subsequent violation of this section, the judge may
require the defendant to deliver the registration and license plates of the
vehicle involved to the county treasurer for the county where the citation was
issued, and the registration and license plates shall be held by the county
treasurer until such time as the judge determines that the defendant has met
all obligations imposed by law.

First Reading – August 18, 2025
Second Reading – September 15, 2025
Public Hearing – September 15, 2025
Third Reading – October 6, 2025
Published – October 15, 2025
PASSED AND APPROVED BY THE COUNCIL THIS 6 th day of October, 2025.
 
 
(seal)      __________________________
   ATTEST:       Mayor, Shane Hooton
 
 
___________________________
Town Clerk, Lisa Bradshaw
 
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 5-04
   AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE LYMAN, WYOMING TOWN CODE
BE IT ORDAINED by the mayor and town council of the town of Lyman, Wyoming, as
follows:
   Section 1: From and after the date of passage of this ordinance, the town
code of the town of Lyman, Wyoming prepared by Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
containing the compilation of all ordinances of a general nature together with
the changes made to said ordinances, under the direction of the governing body
of the town, shall be accepted in all courts without question as the official
code and law of the town as enacted by the mayor and town council.
   Section 2: There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification,
the loose-leaf type of binding together with the continuous supplement service,
provided by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a
general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding or deleting provisions
of the official town code is identified by the proper catchline and is inserted
in the proper place in each of the official copies, one copy of which shall be
maintained in the office of the town clerk, certified as to correctness and
available for inspection at any and all times that said office is regularly
open.
   Section 3: All ordinances of a general nature included in this official town
code shall be considered as a continuation of said ordinance provision and the
fact that some provisions have been deliberately eliminated by the governing
body shall not serve to cause any interruption in the continuous effectiveness
of ordinances included in said official town code. All ordinances of a special
nature, such as tax levy ordinances, bond ordinances, franchises, vacating
ordinances and annexation ordinances shall continue in full force and effect
unless specifically repealed or amended by a provision of the town code. Such
ordinances are not intended to be included in the official town code.
   Section 4: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such code, or
to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such
code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the town to be
misrepresented thereby.
   Section 5: All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, are,
to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
   Section 6: This ordinance and the code adopted by the same shall be recorded
and shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval and
publication as provided by law.
PASSED AND APPROVED on the first reading this                       .
PASSED AND APPROVED on the second reading this                      .
PASSED, APPROVED AND ADOPTED on the third reading this  7-1-2004 .
                                                    
   Mayor Oliver H. Moretti
(seal)
ATTEST:
                                            
Lynn Arnell, Town Clerk
   CERTIFICATE OF PUBLICATION
   I hereby certify that the above and foregoing ordinance was duly published
on  7-9-2004  in the Bridger Valley Pioneer, a newspaper of general circulation
in the Town of Lyman, Wyoming, as required by law.
                                            
Lynn Arnell, Town Clerk
(seal)
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1
OFFICIAL TOWN CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Codification Authority
1-1-2: Title
1-1-3: Acceptance
1-1-4: Reference To Specific Ordinances
1-1-5: Amendments
1-1-6: Code Alterations
1-1-1: CODIFICATION AUTHORITY:
This code consists of all the ordinances of general application of the town of
Lyman, Wyoming, codified pursuant to the provisions of section 15 1-193(a)
(xxxviii), Wyoming Statutes, as amended. (1987 Code § 1.01.030; amd. 2004 Code)
1-1-2: TITLE:
Upon the adoption by the town council, this code is hereby declared to be and
shall hereafter constitute the official town code of Lyman. This town code of
ordinances shall be known and cited as the LYMAN TOWN CODE and is hereby
published by the authority of the council and shall be supplemented to
incorporate the most recent legislation of the town as provided in section
1-1-5 of this chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained
herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause
relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to
this code by title in any legal documents. (1987 Code § 1.01.020; amd. 2004
Code)
1-1-3: ACCEPTANCE:
This code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in administrative tribunals of this
state as the ordinances of the town of a general and permanent effect, except
the excluded ordinances enumerated in section
1-2-1 of this title. (2004 Code)
1-1-4: REFERENCE TO SPECIFIC ORDINANCES:
The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record
which refer to, or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein
specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within
this code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding
provision contained within this code. (1987 Code § 1.01.070)
1-1-5: AMENDMENTS:
A. Style: Any ordinance amending the town code shall set forth the title,
chapter and section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this
shall constitute sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement
pertaining to the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this code.
(2004 Code)
B. Reference: Whenever a reference is made to this code as the Lyman town code
or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the town of Lyman, Wyoming,
the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions
heretofore, now or hereafter made. (1987 Code § 1.01.050)
C. Codification: All such amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be
immediately forwarded to the codifiers, and the ordinance material shall be
prepared for insertion in its proper place in each copy of this code. Each such
replacement page shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each
individual copy of this code. (2004 Code)
1-1-6: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may
be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized by the
town council. The town clerk shall see that the replacement pages are properly
inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the clerk. Any
person having custody of a copy of this code shall make every effort to
maintain said code current as to the most recent ordinances passed. Such person
shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such are
delivered or made available to such person through the office of the town
clerk. Said code books, while in actual possession of officials and other
interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the town and shall be
returned to the office of the town clerk when directed so to do by order of the
town council. (2004 Code)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal Of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Ways And Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-4: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the town passed prior to the adoption of this code
are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this code or are by
necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving
clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the following
ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation
ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations; franchise
ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or
corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances
establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places;
improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections;
ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the
town; and all special ordinances. (2004 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC WAYS AND PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways,
or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall
be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this code or by virtue of the
preceding section, excepting as this code may contain provisions for such
matters, in which case, this code shall be considered as amending such
ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (2004 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   Prior Acts: No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a
former ordinance whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as
to any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done,
any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or
claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any
such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as
practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party
affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes
effect.
   B.   Extend To All Repeals: This section shall extend to all repeals, either
by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making
any new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   C.   Currently Pending Actions: Nothing contained in this chapter shall be
construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general
ordinance of the town herein repealed, and the provisions of all general
ordinances contained in this code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions
and not a new enactment of the same provisions; nor shall this chapter be
deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or
to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or
as waiving any right of the town under any ordinance or provision thereof in
force at the time of the adoption of this code. (1987 Code §1.01.080; amd. 2004
Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
of this code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional
or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision
shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of
this code, or any part thereof. The town council hereby declares that it would
have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause
or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections,
subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be
declared unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. (1987 Code § 1.01.100; amd.
2004 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Construction Of Words
1-3-2: Definitions, General
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
   A.   Whenever any word in any section of this code importing the plural
number is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons,
any single matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although
distributive words may not have been used. When any subject matter, party or
person is referred to in this code by words importing the singular number only,
or a particular gender, several matters, parties or persons and the opposite
gender and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included; provided, that
these rules of construction shall not be applied to any section of this code
which contains any express provision excluding such construction or where the
subject matter or context may be repugnant thereto.
   B.   The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the town has been
changed in the content of this code to "title", "chapter", "section" and/or
"subsection" or words of like import for organizational and clarification
purposes only. Such change to the town's ordinances is not meant to amend
passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (2004 Code)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code, they shall have
such meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIAL: The board, commission, committee, officer, agent or
employee of the town charged by the governing body with the administration,
enforcement or both the administration and enforcement of the particular
provisions of this code in which the term is used.
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either
expressly or by implication.
CODE: The municipal code of the town of Lyman.
COMPUTATION OF TIME: The time within which an act is to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first and including the last day unless the last day
is a Saturday, a Sunday or a legal holiday, in which case the period shall run
until the end of the next day which is not a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday.
COUNCIL: Unless otherwise indicated, the town council of the town of Lyman.
COUNTY: Uinta County, in the state of Wyoming, in which the town of Lyman is
located.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this code to a town employee by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the town of
Lyman".
GENDER: A word importing either the masculine or feminine gender only shall
extend and be applied to the other gender and to persons.
GOVERNING BODY: The elected legislative body of the municipality, i.e., the
mayor and town council.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession
or occupation.
MAY: Permissive.
MONTH: A calendar month.
MUNICIPALITY OR MUNICIPAL: The town of Lyman.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive to the sensibilities of reasonable persons, or any
act or activity creating a hazard which threatens the health and welfare of
inhabitants of the town, or any activity which by its perpetuation can
reasonably be said to have a detrimental effect on the property of a person or
persons within the community.
OATH: Includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may
be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" are
equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed".
OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with
others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of any
act required by the provisions of this code.
OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this code to a town officer by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the town of
Lyman".
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: When applied to a building or land, shall include not only the owner of
the whole but also any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common or joint
tenant of the whole or part of such building or land and shall include any
agent of such owner; and where such owner is a body corporate, it shall include
the managing agent or officer within the town of Lyman.
PERSON: Any natural person, firm, association, joint venture, joint stock
company, partnership, organization, club, fraternal organization, company,
corporation, business, trust, or their manager, lessee, agent, servant,
officer, or employee or any of them.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Includes every description of money, goods, chattels,
effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any
pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged,
transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or
interest therein.
PRECEDING, FOLLOWING: The next before and next after, respectively.
PROPERTY: Includes both real and personal property.
REAL PROPERTY: Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate
to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things direct to the consumer.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other
property.
SHALL: Mandatory.
SIDEWALK: Any portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
STATE: The state of Wyoming.
STATE LAW: The Wyoming Statutes, as amended.
STREET: Includes streets, highways, avenues, boulevards, parkways, roads,
lanes, walks, alleys, viaducts, subways, tunnels, bridges, public easements and
rights of way and other ways in the town of Lyman.
TENANT; OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person
who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or
with others.
TOWN: The town of Lyman, county of Uinta, state of Wyoming.
WHOLESALER: The terms "wholesaler" and "wholesale dealer" as used in this code,
unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the
sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things to persons who purchase for the
purpose of resale.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: Includes printing, lithographing or modes of representing
words and letters; provided, that in all cases where the written signature of a
person is required, the proper handwriting of such person, or his mark, shall
be required.
YEAR: A calendar year. (1987 Code § 1.04.010; amd. 2004 Code)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or
reenacted. (1987 Code §§ 1.01.060, 1.04.020; amd. 2004 Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: General Penalty
1-4-2: Application Of Provisions
1-4-3: Parties To A Crime
1-4-4: Liability Of Officers
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY 1 :
   A.   Misdemeanor: Whenever in this code or in any ordinance, rule or
regulation promulgated by any officer or agency of the town of Lyman under
authority vested in him by law or ordinance, any act is prohibited or is
declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or the doing of any act
is required, or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or an
offense or a misdemeanor, unless otherwise designated, the penalties shall be
as follows:
      1.   Class A Misdemeanor: For offenses designated class A misdemeanors,
the violation of any such provision of this code or any such ordinance, rule or
regulation may be punished by a fine of not more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00), or imprisonment for a period not exceeding six (6) months,
or both such fine and imprisonment, at the discretion of the court, to which
shall be added costs.
      2.   Class B Misdemeanor: For offenses designated class B misdemeanors,
the violation of any such provision of this code or any such ordinance, rule or
regulation may be punished by a fine of not more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) to which shall be added costs. Defendants accused of a class
B misdemeanor may not be entitled to court appointed counsel and shall be tried
by the bench.
Any offense for which no specific penalty is designated shall be considered a
class A misdemeanor. (Ord. 2012-11, 1-17-2013)
   B.   Additional Remedies: The imposition of any such fine shall not bar
institution of appropriate legal actions or proceedings by the town to
restrain, correct or abate the violation nor shall the institution of such
legal actions or proceedings be deemed a bar to the imposition of such fine.
   C.   Continuing Violations: Except as otherwise provided, each day any
violation of this code or any such ordinance, rule or regulation continues,
shall constitute a separate offense. (1987 Code §1.16.010)
   D.   Court Costs: Upon conviction of a violation of this code or any
ordinance, rule or regulation, the municipal judge shall assess court costs not
exceeding thirty dollars ($30.00), which shall be paid by the person or persons
convicted of such violation. (Ord. 2012-11, 1-17-2013)
   E.   Action For Recovery: All actions brought to recover any penalty or fine
shall be brought in the corporate name of the town.
   F.   Collected Recoveries: The recoveries, when collected, shall be paid
into the treasury of the town. (1987 Code §1.16.010)
 
Notes
1 1. See WS §§ 5-6-301, 6-10-103, 15-1-103(a)(xli). See WS § 6-10-105 for
  commitment for refusal to pay fine or costs; rate per day.
1-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   The penalty provided in this chapter, unless otherwise provided, shall
be applicable to every section of this code the same as though it were a part
of each and every separate section.
   B.   In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by
different clauses or sections of this code, the prosecuting officer may elect
under which to proceed, but not more than one recovery shall be had against the
same person for the same offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or
permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other
penalty being enforced.
   C.   Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes
a breach of any section or provision of this code and there shall be no fine or
penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of this chapter
shall apply. (2004 Code)
1-4-3: PARTIES TO A CRIME:
Every person who commits, attempts to commit, conspires to commit, or aids or
abets in the commission of any act declared herein to be a crime, whether
individually or in connection with one or more other persons as a principal
agent or accessory, shall be guilty of such offense. Every person who falsely,
fraudulently, forcibly or wilfully induces, causes, coerces, requires,
encourages or directs another to violate any provisions of this code is
likewise guilty of such offense and shall be punishable the same as the crime
that was committed. (Ord. 3-2002, 3-21-2002)
1-4-4: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee
shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine
or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of
the town council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or employee is
specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (2004
Code)
CHAPTER 5
GENERAL AND CORPORATE PROVISIONS
SECTION:
1-5-1: Ordinances, Numbering System
1-5-2: Corporate Seal
1-5-3: Elections
1-5-1: ORDINANCES, NUMBERING SYSTEM 1 :
Each ordinance passed by the governing body shall be systematically identified
by a number assigned to such ordinance pursuant to the following systematic
numbering system, which system is adopted:
   A.   The number for each ordinance shall consist of the sequential numbering
system for all ordinances during that year, followed by a dash and the last two
digits of the year; e.g., the first ordinance introduced in 1987 shall have as
its ordinance number the number "1-87".
   B.   The number system adopted in this section shall reflect the sequence of
adoption of all the town's ordinances from the adoption of the code from which
this section is derived and shall assign a particular number to only one
ordinance. (1987 Code § 1.08.010)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section 1-7-10 of this title.
1-5-2: CORPORATE SEAL:
A seal, the impression of which shall be in circular form, bearing the words
"Corporate Seal" and around the outer edges the words "Town of Lyman, Wyoming",
shall be and the same is hereby declared to be the seal of the town. (1987 Code
§ 1.12.010)
1-5-3: ELECTIONS:
   A.   Statutes Adopted:
      1.   Adoption: All applicable sections of the Wyoming election code,
Wyoming Statutes Annotated, 1977 republished edition, sections 22-1-101 through
22-27-101, as amended, are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated into
this section as fully as if completely set out herein.
      2.   Copy On File: One copy of such provisions shall be kept on file in
the office of the town clerk where it shall be available for inspection by the
public during the normal office hours of the town clerk. (1987 Code § 2.04.010)
   B.   Elective Officers Designated: Elective officers of the town shall
consist of one mayor and four (4) town councilmen. (1987 Code § 2.04.020)
   C.   Disorderly Conduct At Elections: If any person in the town conducts
himself in a disorderly manner at any municipal election, he may be arrested
without a warrant. (1987 Code § 2.04.030)
CHAPTER 6
MAYOR 1
SECTION:
1-6-1: Duties
1-6-2: Compensation
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  1-7-17 of this title for vacancy in office.
1-6-1: DUTIES 1 :
Unless otherwise provided, the mayor shall:
   A.   Preside at all meetings of the town council, and in his absence a
council member shall be appointed to act as mayor pro tem;
   B.   Have superintending control of all officers and affairs of the town;
   C.   Take care that the ordinances and laws are complied with;
   D.   Administer oaths;
   E.   Sign all contracts, leases, bonds, ordinances, commissions,
appointments and other obligations required to be signed on behalf of the town;
   F.   Have one vote on all propositions coming before the town council; and
   G.   Designate such committees and the officers thereof as he shall find
necessary for the proper consideration of administrative problems. (1987 Code §
2.08.010; amd. 2004 Code)
 
Notes
1 2. WS § 15-1-108.
1-6-2: COMPENSATION:
The salary of the mayor shall be six hundred dollars ($600.00) per month. (Ord.
8-2002, 6-6-2002)
CHAPTER 7
TOWN COUNCIL 1
SECTION:
1-7-1: Regular Meetings
1-7-2: Special Meetings
1-7-3: Record Of Meetings
1-7-4: Presiding Officer
1-7-5: Call To Order
1-7-6: Roll Call
1-7-7: Quorum
1-7-8: Procedure
1-7-9: Open Meetings
1-7-10: Ordinances
1-7-11: Resolutions
1-7-12: Introduction And Passage
1-7-13: Executive Session
1-7-14: Council Member Duties; Vote
1-7-15: Suspension Of Rules
1-7-16: Compensation
1-7-17: Vacancies; Mayor Or Council Members
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  1-5-3 of this title for designation of elected officials.
1-7-1: REGULAR MEETINGS:
   A.   The Town Council shall hold regular meetings to be set by Resolution.
When the day of the regular meeting falls on a legal holiday, such meeting
shall be held on a date determined by the governing body. All regular meetings
shall be held at the Lyman Town Hall or at such other public place as the
governing body may designate.
   B.   Any change in the regular Town Council meeting shall be published by
placing notices at the Lyman Post Office and social media. The Town newspaper
of record shall also be notified. A copy of the Resolution shall be posted on
the door of the Town Hall for a minimum of two weeks. (Ord. 2012-08, 11-15-
2012; amd. Ord. 2022-02, 5-19-2022)
1-7-2: SPECIAL MEETINGS:
The mayor or any two (2) members of the council may call a special meeting.
Each member of the council shall be notified, either in person or by notice, in
writing, left at his place of residence, at least twelve (12) hours before the
meeting starts. (1987 Code § 2.12.020)
1-7-3: RECORD OF MEETINGS:
The town clerk or his representative shall attend all meetings of the council
and make an accurate record of all business transacted at each meeting. (1987
Code § 2.12.030)
1-7-4: PRESIDING OFFICER:
The mayor shall preside at all meetings of the town council, and in his absence
a councilman shall be appointed to act as mayor pro tem. Any resolutions or
ordinances passed by the council must be signed by the mayor and recorded by
the clerk before the resolutions or ordinances are in force. (1987 Code §
2.12.040)
1-7-5: CALL TO ORDER:
At the hour appointed for the meeting, the council shall be called to order by
the presiding officer. (1987 Code § 2.12.050)
1-7-6: ROLL CALL:
   A.   Required: Before proceeding with the business of the council, the town
clerk or some person acting for him shall call the roll of the members, and the
names of those present shall be entered in the minutes.
   B.   Quorum Present: If a quorum is present, the council shall proceed to
the business which may come before it. (1987 Code § 2.12.060)
1-7-7: QUORUM:
The town council shall consist of a mayor and four (4) councilmen. A simple
majority of the town council shall constitute a quorum at any regular or
special meeting of the town council. In the absence of a quorum, the presiding
officer shall postpone the meeting to a date certain in the near future. (1987
Code § 2.12.070)
1-7-8: PROCEDURE:
The town council shall follow the procedure established in "Robert's Rules Of
Order", most current edition, unless specific provisions in this chapter are
applicable or the rule is in conflict with state law. (1987 Code § 2.12.080)
1-7-9: OPEN MEETINGS:
All regular meetings of the town council shall be open to the public. (1987
Code § 2.12.090)
1-7-10: ORDINANCES 1 :
   A.   Numbering; Title: All laws of the town shall be enacted by passage of
ordinances. Ordinances shall be numbered consecutively and shall bear a title
which:
      1.   Shall set forth in general terms its subject;
      2.   Shall contain an enacting clause;
      3.   Shall bear the date, signatures of the mayor and attesting officer,
and the town seal.
   B.   Permanent Log Book: The town clerk shall keep a permanent log book in
which the original of each ordinance considered shall be kept. (1987 Code §
2.12.100)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section 1-5-1 of this title for numbering system and WS §§ 5-1-114
  through 5-1-118.
1-7-11: RESOLUTIONS:
   A.   When Appropriate: Resolutions shall be used in every case where an
ordinance is not required and shall be appropriate in the following instances:
      1.   Entering into a contract;
      2.   Directives of the council or staff member;
      3.   Adoption of a policy concerning employees, utility services or
equipment;
      4.   Granting of a right or privilege to any person when a contract is
not required;
      5.   Changes in the master plan of the town;
      6.   In every other case where it is deemed in the public interest that a
full and permanent record be made and kept of the action of the governing body.
   B.   Numbering System: The number for each resolution shall consist of the
sequential numbering system for all resolutions during that year, followed by a
dash and the last two (2) digits of the year; e.g., the first resolution
introduced in 1988 shall have as its resolution number the number "1-88".
   C.   Title: Resolutions shall bear a title which shall set forth in general
terms their subject matter, shall contain a resolving clause, and shall bear
the date, signature of the mayor and attesting officer and the town seal.
   D.   Permanent Log Book: The town clerk shall keep a permanent logbook in
which the original of each resolution considered shall be kept. (1987 Code §
2.12.110)
1-7-12: INTRODUCTION AND PASSAGE:
   A.   Introduction; Reading: All ordinances and resolutions shall be
introduced in writing. Ordinances of a permanent or general nature shall be
fully and distinctively read on three (3) different days, unless three-fourths
(3/4) of the council shall dispense with the rule. Under the suspension of this
rule, an ordinance may be passed after the reading of the same in full once,
and on the same day of such reading or any other day. The final reading shall
be in full unless the measure shall have been printed or typewritten and a copy
thereof furnished to each member prior to such reading.
   B.   Vote Required: Every ordinance and resolution shall require, on final
passage, the affirmative vote of a majority of all the members.
   C.   Emergency Ordinance: Nothing contained herein shall be construed as
prohibiting or preventing the council from passing any ordinance in case of
emergency as an emergency ordinance. (1987 Code § 2.12.120)
1-7-13: EXECUTIVE SESSION:
During an executive session, the council may, by vote of two-thirds (2/3) of
the members present, exclude from the council chambers all persons other than
the mayor and council members. (1987 Code § 2.12.130)
1-7-14: COUNCIL MEMBER DUTIES; VOTE:
It shall be the duty of each member of the council to attend all meetings of
the council. He shall carry out in an efficient manner those duties assigned to
him by the council and the mayor. Each member of the council shall have one
vote upon all questions coming before the council. (1987 Code § 2.12.140)
1-7-15: SUSPENSION OF RULES:
The foregoing rules may be amended or repealed at any regular meeting of the
council; provided, that any proposed amendment or repeal has been proposed, in
writing, at a previous meeting; and provided further, that a majority of the
council shall agree to the amendment or repeal. (1987 Code § 2.12.150)
1-7-16: COMPENSATION:
The salary of the council members shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00)
for actual attendance at each regular or special meeting of the town council.
(Ord. 8-2002, 6-6-2002)
1-7-17: VACANCIES; MAYOR OR COUNCIL MEMBERS 1 :
   A.   Deemed To Exist: A vacancy in the position of a mayor or council member
shall be deemed to exist when a majority of the mayor and all elected council
members determine that a mayor or council member:
      1.   Is no longer a resident of the town;
      2.   Has been convicted of a felony;
      3.   Has been determined to be insane or mentally incompetent.
      4.   Has become disqualified from holding office for any reason specified
by law;
      5.   Has had his or her term expire when no successor has been elected
and qualified;
      6.   Has refused to take the oath of office;
      7.   Has his or her election voided;
      8.   Is convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude constituting a
breach of his or her oath of office;
      9.   Has died;
      10.   Resigns;
      11.   Is elected or appointed mayor, and takes office; or
      12.   Fails to perform the duties of office.
   B.   Procedure For Declaring Vacancy: Procedure for declaring a vacancy
shall be as follows:
      1.   Upon investigation by the council or its designated official, and a
determination of the existence of a certified copy of an order of a court of
competent jurisdiction, a vacancy shall be deemed to exist with respect to
subsection A3, A4 or A7 of this section.
      2.   A mayor or council member shall be deemed a nonresident and a
vacancy therefore to exist as to subsection A1 of this section, when he or she
shall have failed to occupy a place of fixed, permanent and customary place of
habitation within the boundaries of the municipality.
      3.   A mayor or council member shall be deemed to have been convicted of
a felony, a crime involving moral turpitude, or a breach of his or her oath of
office as to subsection A2 or A8 of this section upon receipt of a certified
copy of an order of a court of competent jurisdiction showing a conviction,
plea of guilty or plea of nolo contendere.
      4.   As to subsection A9 of this section, the death of a mayor or council
member shall be evidenced by a certified copy of a death certificate.
      5.   As to subsection A10 of this section, a resignation shall be deemed
effective and a vacancy to have occurred as follows:
         a.   A mayor or council member desiring to resign from his or her
position on the governing body shall submit a resignation, in writing, to the
town clerk specifying the date he or she desires the resignation to be
effective, which date shall not be more than thirty (30) days after the
postmark date of the letter if mailed, or after the date of delivery to the
town clerk.
         b.   The town clerk shall place the question of resignation before the
governing body for acceptance or rejection at a special meeting or at the
regular meeting next succeeding the postmark date of the letter of resignation
or the delivery thereof to the town clerk.
         c.   The resignation may be withdrawn at any time prior to acceptance
or rejection by the governing body; provided, that a request for withdrawal of
a resignation must also be in writing and received by the town clerk prior to
the agenda day of the special or regular meeting at which the resignation shall
be considered.
         d.   The resignation, unless withdrawn as stated in subsection B5c of
this section, shall be deemed effective and a vacancy to exist on the date of
acceptance by the governing body.
      6.   The refusal of the mayor or council member to take the oath of
office, as required by law, at the time and place and before the person
designated, shall constituted a failure to take the oath as required by this
subsection and a vacancy shall be deemed to exist at said time.
      7.   Relating to actions taken pursuant to subsections A and B of this
section, an abstention by any voting member of the governing body shall be
considered a no vote.
   C.   Aggrieved Person; Public Hearing: Any person aggrieved by the
determination of the governing body on a vacancy shall be entitled to an
informal public hearing before the governing body and may be represented by
legal counsel, after which the governing body shall confirm, modify or reverse
an earlier determination.
   D.   Filling Of Vacancy: Once determined to exist, a vacancy shall be filled
as follows:
      1.   A vacancy shall be filled by the governing body by appointment of a
temporary successor to serve until a successor for the remainder of the
unexpired term is elected at the next general municipal election and is
qualified and takes office.
      2.   Upon the declaration by the governing body that a vacancy exists or
will exist, the governing body shall receive applications from qualified
electors to fill the vacancy, except a vacancy in the office of the mayor must
be filled by an existing member of the town council.
      3.   The term "qualified elector" includes every citizen of the United
States who is a bona fide resident of the municipality, who has registered to
vote and who is at least eighteen (18) years of age. No person is a qualified
elector who is an incompetent person or who has been convicted of a felony and
whose civil rights have not been restored or who is otherwise barred from
holding office by reason of state or federal law.
      4.   The application shall be filed with the town clerk on an approved
form, which form shall require that the applicant submit information
establishing applicant's legal qualifications to hold office.
      5.   The governing body may specify a time period for submitting
applications and shall then review applications received, and may conduct any
further review of candidates deemed necessary and, by a majority vote of all
members of the governing body, shall appoint a temporary successor. (Ord. 14-
92, 12-17-1992)
 
Notes
1 1. WS § 15-1-107.
CHAPTER 8
TOWN OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
SECTION:
1-8-1: Appointment Of Officers; Term
1-8-2: Term; Removal; Vacancies
1-8-3: Clerk
1-8-4: Treasurer
1-8-5: Attorney
1-8-6: Building Inspector
1-8-7: Duties Of Other Officers
1-8-8: Compensation
1-8-1: APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS; TERM:
The mayor, with the consent and approval of the town council, may appoint for
the town the following officers, who shall serve for a period of two (2) years,
commencing on July 1 of the year in which the mayor's term commences:
   A.   Attorney;
   B.   Two (2) municipal judges;
   C.   Town administrator;
   D.   Clerk/treasurer;
   E.   Chief of police;
   F.   Director of public works; and
   G.   Any and all other town officers hereafter approved and authorized by
the governing body. (Ord. 4-98, 5-21-1998)
1-8-2: TERM; REMOVAL; VACANCIES:
   A.   Term: Unless the town council determines otherwise, each appointive
officer shall hold office for the term of two (2) years or until his successor
is appointed and qualified.
   B.   Removal: In the case of inefficiency, incompetency, neglect of duty or
maladministration of office, any appointed officer may be removed by the mayor;
the majority of the council concurring.
   C.   Vacancies: Should a vacancy occur in any office, the new appointment
shall be only for a period to complete such unexpired term. (1987 Code §
2.16.020)
1-8-3: CLERK:
The duties of the town clerk shall be as follows:
   A.   Corporate Seal, Records And Books: Safely keep the corporate seal,
papers, records, and books belonging to the town.
   B.   Meetings; Minutes: Attend the meetings of the town council, recording
the minutes thereof, which minutes, after approval of each meeting, shall be
signed by the mayor, attested by the town clerk and have the town seal affixed.
   C.   Resolutions And Ordinances: Preserve consecutive record of all
resolutions and ordinances passed by the council, promptly filing with each
town department copies of any ordinance which may be of concern to such
department.
   D.   Mayor's Signature: Attest the signature of the mayor and affix the seal
of the town to all minutes of council proceedings, all resolutions and new
ordinances passed, all bonds and business licenses issued, and such other
documents as shall be required.
   E.   Orders And Warrants: Attest all orders and warrants upon the town,
keeping an accurate permanent record thereof.
   F.   Record Of Bonds: Keep a record of all outstanding bonds against the
town.
   G.   Licenses: Issue business licenses.
   H.   Other Duties: Perform such other duties as may be required of him by
the mayor or the town council, or by law. (1987 Code § 2.16.030)
1-8-4: TREASURER:
The duties of the treasurer shall be as follows:
   A.   Receipts: Receive all money derived for the benefit of the town, from
any and every source, in each instance giving his official receipt therefor.
   B.   Disbursements: Disburse money on proper orders signed by the mayor,
attested by the town clerk, and having affixed thereto the corporate seal.
   C.   Accounts And Records: Keep permanent, accurate and complete accounts
and records of all receipts, orders and warrants.
   D.   Account Of Town Council: As often as required, render an account of the
town council showing the state of the treasury at the date of such account, and
the amount of money remaining in each fund, and the amount paid therefrom, and
the balance of the money in the treasury.
   E.   Annual Budget: Prepare and compile, with the assistance of the mayor
and town council and town officers, the annual budget as required by state law.
   F.   Other Duties: Perform such other duties as may be required of him by
the mayor or the town council, or by law. (1987 Code § 2.16.040)
1-8-5: ATTORNEY:
The duties of the town attorney shall be as follows:
   A.   Suits: Commence, prosecute and defend all suits to which the town is a
party.
   B.   Prosecute Violations: Prosecute all suits for the violation of any
provision of this code or other town ordinance.
   C.   Advice: Advise the mayor and town council on legal questions relating
to the business of the town.
   D.   Contracts; Legal Instruments: Prepare all contracts and legal
instruments to which the town is a party.
   E.   Ordinances: Draft, prepare and revise all ordinances when so requested
by the mayor or town council.
   F.   Meetings: Attend town council meetings.
   G.   Other Duties: Do all legal work relating to the town's business and
perform such other duties as may be required of him by the mayor or the town
council, or by law. (1987 Code § 2.16.050)
1-8-6: BUILDING INSPECTOR:
   A.   Office Created: The office of building inspector is hereby created.
   B.   Qualifications: The person chosen to fill such office shall be
qualified to interpret and properly enforce the provisions of the regulatory
codes adopted in this chapter.
   C.   Appointment; Term: The building inspector shall be appointed by the
mayor with the approval of the town council. His appointment shall continue
during good behavior and satisfactory service until such appointment is revoked
by action of the mayor and town council.
   D.   Compensation: Compensation and salary for the building inspector shall
be fixed by the governing body and shall be commensurate with the
qualifications of the person appointed and the duties performed by him.
   E.   Acting Building Inspector: The building inspector may designate an
acting building inspector who shall be the appointive authority during
temporary absences or disabilities of the building inspector.
   F.   Duty; Quarterly Reports: It is the duty of the building inspector to
enforce all laws relating to the construction, alteration, removal and
demolition of buildings and structures. He shall report quarterly to the
council, or more often if needed, on the work of his office.
   G.   Authority To Enter: The building inspector, in discharge of his
official duties and upon proper identification, shall have authority to enter
any building, structure, or premises at any reasonable hour.
   H.   Records: It is the duty of the building inspector to keep complete
records of all permits issued, inspections conducted and other official work
performed under the provisions of this code.
   I.   Power To Stop Construction: The building inspector shall have the power
to order stopped the construction or the making of alterations or repairs on
any building or structure where such work is being done in violation of title 9
of this code. (1987 Code § 2.16.070)
1-8-7: DUTIES OF OTHER OFFICERS:
The duties of other appointed officers shall be as set forth under this code or
other ordinances pertaining to their respective departments. (1987 Code §
2.16.080)
1-8-8: COMPENSATION:
Compensation and salaries of all appointed officers and other employees of the
town shall be fixed by the mayor and town council and shall be commensurate
with the qualifications of the person appointed and the duties of the
employment to be performed. (1987 Code § 2.16.090)
CHAPTER 9
MUNICIPAL COURT
SECTION:
1-9-1: Established; Judges
1-9-2: Jurisdiction
1-9-3: Powers
1-9-4: Wyoming Rules Of Criminal Procedure
1-9-5: Complaint
1-9-6: Warrants
1-9-7: Arrest Without Warrant
1-9-8: Bail
1-9-9: Forfeiture Of Bond
1-9-10: Change Of Venue
1-9-11: Trial
1-9-12: Judgment
1-9-13: Court Costs
1-9-14: Cases Not Covered By Ordinances
1-9-15: Penalties
1-9-16: Appeals
1-9-17: Judges To Be Bonded
1-9-1: ESTABLISHED; JUDGES:
The municipal court of the town is created, which shall be presided over by a
municipal judge, appointed by the mayor with the consent of the town council.
In cases of conflict of interest, illness or other exigency, the municipal
judge may appoint a qualified municipal court commissioner to preside over an
individual case or for a limited period of time. (Ord. 2011-14, 1-5-2012)
1-9-2: JURISDICTION:
The municipal court and municipal judge presiding therein shall have exclusive
jurisdiction over all violations of town ordinances. It shall be the duty of
the municipal judge to hear and determine all offenses against the ordinances
of the town arising within the town limits. (1987 Code § 2.28.010)
1-9-3: POWERS:
The municipal judge shall enforce due obedience to all orders, rules and
judgments made by him. The judge has the same power within his jurisdiction as
the district court does in the issuance of warrant, search warrant, subpoena,
or other necessary process and may fine or imprison for contempt offered to him
or to process issued by him in the same manner and to the same extent as the
district court. (1987 Code § 2.28.010)
1-9-4: WYOMING RULES OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE:
At all trials before any municipal judge in the town, the trial shall be
conducted in accordance with the Wyoming rules of criminal procedure for minor
courts. (1987 Code § 2.28.130)
1-9-5: COMPLAINT:
   A.   Filing: Action for violations of ordinances may be commenced by filing
with the municipal judge a complaint, under oath, made by the town attorney,
any member of the police department, or any responsible citizen of the town,
stating the nature of the offense. (1987 Code § 2.28.020)
   B.   Defects In Form: No action before a municipal judge shall be dismissed
for any defect of form in said complaint if it substantially sets forth the
nature of the violation alleged so as to give the defendant notice of the
charge which he is required to answer. Such complaint may include several
persons charged with the same offense. (1987 Code § 2.28.030)
1-9-6: WARRANTS:
Upon the filing of the complaint, the municipal judge shall enter the case on
his docket in the usual manner as required by law, and shall issue a warrant
which may be in the form pursuant to form no. 2, Wyoming rules of criminal
procedure for minor courts. When a person is brought before the municipal judge
upon warrant, the judge shall hear and determine the complaint alleged against
the defendant. (1987 Code § 2.28.040)
1-9-7: ARREST WITHOUT WARRANT:
Whenever any person has been arrested on view, or otherwise according to law
without a warrant, the municipal judge shall enter in his docket the fact of
his arrest, by whom made, and shall hear and determine such charge as if a
warrant had been issued. (1987 Code § 2.28.050)
1-9-8: BAIL:
Any person arrested for any offense under any ordinance of the town may be
admitted to bail by executing a bond to the town, with good and sufficient
surety, to be approved by the municipal judge, in such reasonable sum as the
municipal judge shall fix and direct, conditioned that he will appear upon a
day therein named before the municipal judge and answer the accusation for
which he has been arrested, and not depart the court without leave; which bond
shall be approved by the municipal judge and filed in his office. The bond may
be in form pursuant to form no. 5, Wyoming rules of criminal procedure for
minor courts. (1987 Code § 2.28.060)
1-9-9: FORFEITURE OF BOND:
   A.   Failure To Appear; Departing Without Leave: If the principal in such
bond shall fail to appear according to the condition of the bond, or upon
appearing shall depart the court without leave, the municipal judge shall note
the fact upon the bond and issue a summons, on behalf of the town, against the
parties liable thereon. Upon trial of such causes, the same defenses shall be
allowed that are allowed under the general laws of the state in the like cases
before justices of the peace.
   B.   Failure To Appear Or Comply: If the principal fails to appear or comply
with all the requirements of the bond, the municipal judge, shall, if there are
not mitigating circumstances, declare the bond forfeited and order the cash
deposited into the general fund of the treasury of the town. (1987 Code §
2.28.070)
1-9-10: CHANGE OF VENUE:
No change of venue shall be granted in any case arising under the ordinances of
the town. (1987 Code § 2.28.080)
1-9-11: TRIAL:
   A.   Jury; Conduct: There shall be no right to demand a jury trial in the
municipal courts unless a jail sentence is to be imposed upon conviction; but
in all other respects, except as otherwise provided, the trial shall be
conducted in like manner as criminal cases are tried before justices of the
peace. (1987 Code § 2.28.090)
   B.   Postponement: If a person charged with a violation of a town ordinance
is held to appear for examination or trial before the municipal judge, the
judge may postpone the trial of the case to a certain day. The judge may
require the defendant to enter into recognizance with sufficient sureties
conditioned that he will appear before the judge at the time and place
appointed to answer the complaint alleged against him. (1987 Code § 2.28.100)
1-9-12: JUDGMENT:
If the defendant is found guilty, the municipal judge shall declare and assess
punishment and render judgment accordingly. The municipal judge shall punish
for contempt in the same manner as a justice of the peace. (1987 Code §
2.28.110)
1-9-13: COURT COSTS:
Upon conviction of a violation of an ordinance of the town, the municipal judge
shall assess court costs as provided in subsection
1-4-1D of this title, which shall be paid by the person or persons convicted of
such violation. All costs collected shall be turned into the treasury of the
town. (1987 Code § 2.28.010)
1-9-14: CASES NOT COVERED BY ORDINANCES:
The municipal judge and chief of police in all matters pertaining to the duties
of their respective offices in judicial proceedings, and concerning which there
are no specific provisions by the town charter or ordinances, shall be governed
by the laws of the state regulating the practice and proceedings in cases
before justices of the peace and constable, so far as the same may be
applicable. The town may, by ordinance, provide any additional rules of
procedure found necessary for the proper conduct of municipal courts, provided
these rules do not conflict with the general laws of the state. (1987 Code §
2.28.120)
1-9-15: PENALTIES:
Every person convicted for a violation of any ordinance of the town shall be
punished according to the provisions set forth in section
1-4-1 of this title. (1987 Code § 2.28.140)
1-9-16: APPEALS:
Appeals to the district court shall be allowed in all cases as now provided by
law for appeals from justices of the peace. (1987 Code § 2.28.150)
1-9-17: JUDGES TO BE BONDED:
The municipal judge(s) shall be bonded to the town in an amount as determined
by the town council by resolution, but no less than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00). The bond shall be conditioned on the performance of his or her
duties in accordance with the ordinances of the town including the duty to turn
over to the parties entitled or as prescribed by ordinance all monies collected
by the municipal judge by virtue of that office. (Ord. 2010-05, 6-3-2010)
CHAPTER 10
REVENUE AND FINANCE
SECTION:
1-10-1: Fiscal Year
1-10-2: Annual Appropriation And Budget
1-10-1: FISCAL YEAR:
The fiscal year of the town shall commence on July 1 of each calendar year and
continue through June 30 of the succeeding year. (1987 Code § 3.04.010)
1-10-2: ANNUAL APPROPRIATION AND BUDGET:
An ordinance setting forth the appropriation of funds and proposed budget shall
be enacted yearly by the mayor and town council in accordance with state law.
(1987 Code § 3.04.020)
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 1
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-1-1: Established; Membership
2-1-2: Term
2-1-3: Officers
2-1-4: Removal
2-1-5: Vacancies
2-1-6: Master Plan
2-1-7: Other Duties And Guidelines
2-1-8: Prohibitions
2-1-9: Appeal
2-1-10: Compensation
2-1-1: ESTABLISHED; MEMBERSHIP:
There is created a planning and zoning commission of the town, consisting of
five (5) members, to be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the town
council. (Ord. 2011-02, 2-17-2011)
2-1-2: TERM:
Appointments shall be for a three (3) year term. (1987 Code § 2.32.010)
2-1-3: OFFICERS:
The planning and zoning commission shall designate the terms and officers of
the commission from its own membership. (1987 Code § 2.32.030)
2-1-4: REMOVAL:
Should a member of the planning and zoning commission have unexcused absences
at three (3) consecutive meetings, that member shall be replaced upon
notification by the chairman of the commission. (1987 Code § 2.32.020)
2-1-5: VACANCIES:
Vacancies on such commission shall be filled from recommendations by the
commission to the mayor and town council, for the unexpired term of the person
leaving such vacancy. (1987 Code § 2.32.020)
2-1-6: MASTER PLAN:
   A.   Preparation: It shall be the function and duty of the planning and
zoning commission, after holding public hearings, to make and adopt and certify
to the town council a master plan for the physical development of the town. In
preparation of the master plan, the commission shall make careful and
comprehensive surveys and studies of the existing conditions and probable
future growth of the town and its environs. The plan shall be made with the
general purpose of guiding and accomplishing a coordinated and harmonious
development of the town which will, in accordance with existing and future
needs, best promote public health, safety, morals, convenience, prosperity, and
the general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of
development.
   B.   Contents: The master plan, with the accompanying maps, plats, charts
and descriptive and explanatory matter, shall show the commission's
recommendations for the physical development of the town, and may include,
among other things, the general location, character, and extent of streets,
bridges, parks, waterways, playgrounds, public buildings and public utilities,
and a zoning plan for the regulation of the height, area, location and use of
public and private structures and premises and of population density. The
commission may from time to time amend, extend or add to the plan or carry any
part or subject matter into greater details. (1987 Code § 2.32.040)
2-1-7: OTHER DUTIES AND GUIDELINES:
Other duties and guidelines for the planning and zoning commission are
contained in title 12 of this code. (1987 Code § 2.32.050)
2-1-8: PROHIBITIONS:
Any noncompliance with any properly instituted order, variance or conditional
permit issued by the planning and zoning commission constitutes a class B
misdemeanor punishable as set forth in subsection
1-4-1A2 of this code. (Ord. 2012-11, 1-17-2013)
2-1-9: APPEAL:
Any person or entity aggrieved by the action of the commission or
administrative personnel of Lyman in carrying out any official act, may, if
they so desire, file with the town council, a written request for hearing the
same, setting forth reasons for which they feel the commission and/or personnel
have been unjustly enforced within thirty (30) days of the act or acts alleged
to be unjust. Within sixty (60) days of receipt of the request, the town
council shall hold a public hearing to determine the proper application of the
subdivision rules. (Ord.2020-01, passed 6-4-2020)
2-1-10: COMPENSATION:
Compensation for the services of members of the Planning Commission may be
given and set by Resolution of the Lyman Town Council. Such compensation may
include considerations of length of service and meeting attendance, but
otherwise by neutrally applied. (Ord. 2023-02, 9-21-2023)
TITLE 3
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BUSINESS PERMITS 1
SECTION:
3-1-1: Purpose
3-1-2: License Required
3-1-3: Business Designated
3-1-4: Responsibility For Obtaining Permit
3-1-5: Application
3-1-6: Multiple Businesses
3-1-7: Fee
3-1-8: Businesses Commenced During The Year
3-1-9: Annual Fee Payment
3-1-10: Certificate
3-1-11: Nontransferability
3-1-12: Exhibition Of Certificate
3-1-13: Public Utilities
3-1-14: Event Vendors
3-1-15: Revocation And Suspension
3-1-16:    Safety Review Required
 
3-1-99:    Penalty
 
Notes
  1. See title 12, chapter 5 of this code for provisions regarding sexually
1 oriented businesses; section
  12-12-3 of this code for provisions regarding home occupations; and section
  12-12-6 of this code for provisions regarding gaming.
3-1-1: PURPOSE:
A business permit shall be granted and a business permit fee shall be levied,
collected, and regulated as provided in this chapter for the purpose of
assuring compliance with existing zoning laws, and promoting the health, safety
and general welfare of the residents of the town. (1987 Code § 5.04.010)
3-1-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person or entity to engage in or carry on any
occupation, trade, profession or business or to use in connection therewith any
vehicles, premises, machines or devices for which a license is required by this
chapter or any other ordinance of the town, without first obtaining and keeping
in effect a license therefor.
   B.   No license shall issue unless the applicant first obtains a safety
review as specified in
3-1-16 herein. (1987 Code § 5.04.020; amd. Ord. 2022-04, 10-20-2022)
3-1-3: BUSINESS DESIGNATED:
For the purpose of this chapter, any person shall be deemed to be in business
and thus subject to the requirements of this chapter when doing any of the
following:
   A.   Selling any goods or services.
   B.   Soliciting business or hire.
   C.   Acquiring or using any vehicle or any premises in the town for any
business purpose. (1987 Code § 5.04.030)
3-1-4: RESPONSIBILITY FOR OBTAINING PERMIT:
Any nonresident agent or representative doing business in the town or an agent
of any domestic corporation shall be personally responsible for compliance with
this chapter by their principals or assigns of and for the occupation, trade,
profession or business that they represent. (1987 Code § 5.04.040)
3-1-5: APPLICATION:
   A.   Required Information: The applicant for a business permit shall make
application therefor, in writing, as provided by the town, stating the
following:
      1.   The name of the person, association, firm or corporation making such
application.
      2.   A description of the nature of the business the applicant shall be
engaged in.
      3.   The date such application is made.
      4.   The address and phone number of the person, association, firm, or
corporation making such application.
      5.   The address where the described business shall take place.
      6.   Vehicle description and license plate number.
   B.   Filing With Clerk; Effective Date: Upon receipt by the town clerk, such
application shall be filed with the town and become effective not sooner than
twenty four (24) hours thereafter. (1987 Code § 5.04.050)
3-1-6: MULTIPLE BUSINESSES:
If a person, association, firm or corporation be engaged in more than one
occupation, trade, profession or business in the town, a business permit fee
shall hereby be levied, collected and regulated for each such business as
herein enumerated. (1987 Code § 5.04.060)
3-1-7: FEE:
A business permit fee shall be assessed herein by the town and made payable to
the town clerk in the amount of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for all
applicants. No distinction whatsoever is made or intended to be made toward
applicants who are or are not residents of the town. (Ord. 06-2001, 12-6-2001)
3-1-8: BUSINESSES COMMENCED DURING THE YEAR:
Any business, occupation, trade, or profession commenced after February 1 in
any given year shall, in making application for a business permit, pay to the
town a fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for whatever the remaining months of
the calendar year. (Ord. 06-2001, 12-6-2001)
3-1-9: ANNUAL FEE PAYMENT:
Any business, occupation, trade, or profession continuing as such entity within
the town following December 31 shall pay to the town a business permit fee as
described in this chapter to remain in effect through the end of that calendar
year. The fee shall be due January 1 and payable on or before February 1 each
calendar year. Upon receipt by the town clerk, a certificate of payment shall
be issued as described in this chapter. (1987 Code § 5.04.090)
3-1-10: CERTIFICATE:
Upon payment of the business permit fee herein assessed by the town and made
payable to the town clerk, the clerk shall then issue to the applicant a
certificate reflecting the following data:
   A.   The name of the person, association, firm or corporation paying such
fee.
   B.   A description of the nature of the business in which the applicant
shall be engaged.
   C.   The date such fee is paid.
   D.   The address of the person, association, firm or corporation paying such
fee.
   E.   The address where the business physically shall be located.
   F.   The amount paid for such fee. (1987 Code § 5.04.100)
3-1-11: NONTRANSFERABILITY:
No receipt or certificate showing the payment of a business permit fee herein
assessed shall in any manner be assignable or transferable. (1987 Code §
5.04.110)
3-1-12: EXHIBITION OF CERTIFICATE:
Every person, association, firm or corporation doing business in the town as
herein enumerated shall exhibit at all times, on the premises of an established
business, a business certificate of payment herein described or when requested
by an officer or employee of the town for businesses conducted in a residential
zone. (1987 Code § 5.04.120)
3-1-13: PUBLIC UTILITIES:
   A.   Definition: "Gross revenue", as used in this section, shall be
construed to mean any revenue of the grantee derived from the sale and use of
natural gas, telephone service, or cable television within the town, after
adjustment for write off of the uncollectible accounts and corrections of bills
theretofore rendered.
   B.   Franchise Fee: The grantee of any franchise to furnish natural gas,
telephone service, or cable television in the town shall pay a franchise fee
equal to one percent (1%) of the gross revenue derived from customers within
the corporate limits of the town during each calendar year.
   C.   Quarterly Reports; Payment:
      1.   Filing: Within forty five (45) days after the close of each quarter
in each calendar year, the grantee shall file with the town clerk a report of
the gross revenues for the quarter.
      2.   Contents: The report shall contain a statement of gross revenues and
any deductions made because of adjustments or corrections, together with a
computation of the tax to be paid.
      3.   Payment: Coincidentally with the filing of the report, the grantee
shall pay to the town clerk the amount of the tax thus computed.
      4.   Review By Clerk; Errors: Within thirty (30) days after the filing of
the report, or within such reasonable additional time as he may request, the
town clerk shall examine the report, determine the accuracy of the amounts
reported, and, if he finds any errors, report them to the grantee for
correction.
      5.   Deficient/Excessive Payment: If the tax as paid be found deficient,
the grantee shall promptly remit the difference, and if the tax as paid be
found excessive, the town shall promptly refund the difference.
      6.   Inspection Of Records: The records of the grantee pertaining to such
report shall be open for inspection by the town council or its representative
at all reasonable hours for the purpose of verifying the report.
   D.   Taxes: The franchise fee as provided herein shall be in lieu of all
other license taxes, occupation taxes and franchise taxes. However, the
franchise fee shall not be deemed to preclude the assessment of general
property taxes or special assessments for local improvements. (1987 Code §
5.04.130)
3-1-14: EVENT VENDORS:
No person, business or entity shall sell or offer to sell any good or service
at an event wherein such vendors are required to provide a fee to participate
in said event, or wherein a fee is required for admission to such an event,
without the authorization of the event organizers. (Ord. 2016-03, 2-18-2016)
3-1-15: REVOCATION AND SUSPENSION:
   A.   Revocation: Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter may be
revoked by the governing body, after notice and hearing.
   B.   Suspension: Licenses issued under the provisions of this Chapter may be
suspended by the governing body, the Mayor, law enforcement and or any other
person so authorized by the Town.
   C.   Grounds For Revocation: Licenses issued under the provisions of this
chapter may be revoked or suspended for any of the following causes:
      1.   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for license.
      2.   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying on the business.
      3.   Any violation of this chapter.
      4.   The commission or conviction of any crime or misdemeanor.
      5.   Conducting the business in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as
to constitute a breach of the peace of the community or individual household,
or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the
public.
   D.   Notice Of Hearing upon Suspension: Upon suspension, notice of right to
have a hearing concerning said suspension shall be given orally by the
suspending authority with direction to request a hearing date at the next Town
Council Meeting by application at the Town Clerk's Office during regular
business hours. Failure to request such a hearing shall be deemed grounds for
the revocation of said license.
   E.   Notice of Proposed Revocation: A proposed revocation of a business
license without suspension shall be given in writing, setting forth
specifically the grounds of complaint and the time and place of a review
hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the licensee at his
last known address at least five (5) days prior to the date set for hearing.
   F.   Hearing: At a hearing as requested above, the Town Council may revoke
the business license, reinstate the license or provisionally reinstate the
license on condition of good behavior or any other condition. At the hearing,
the Town Council may hear and consider any information they deem relevant
concerning the matter of the hearing. (Ord. 2012-11, 1-17-2013; amd. Ord. 2016-
03, 2-18-2016; Ord. 2021-02, 4-15-2021)
3-1-16: SAFETY REVIEW REQUIRED:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person or entity to engage in and/or operate any
occupation, trade, profession or business without first receiving an occupancy
permit from the local Fire Inspector authorized to inspect such a business as
designated by the Uinta County Fire and Ambulance Emergency Services Board.
   B.   The Fire Inspector may require any such person or entity to correct any
practice or make any changes to a location where business is conducted before a
permit may be issued. The inspection herein shall not necessarily be limited to
fire hazards, but can include ADA compliance, ingress and egress safety and/or
any danger to property, health and/or safety the inspector observes.
   C.   The Fire Inspector may issue a temporary permit with appropriate
deadlines at the Inspector's discretion, wherein a temporary business license
may be issued. It is unlawful for any business to continue after the issuance
of a temporary permit without the consent of the Fire Inspector.
   D.   This Safety Review in no way does, nor intends to, constitute a
guarantee or insurance of fire safety of a business location, and the Town of
Lyman does not indemnify any business, person or entity by passage or
application of this chapter.
   E.   This chapter is Effective November 1, 2022 for all new business license
applications. (Ord. 2022-04, 10-20-2022)
3-1-99: PENALTY:
Unless specifically set out in this chapter, any violation of the provisions of
this chapter constitutes a class B misdemeanor punishable as set forth in
subsection
1-4-1 (A)(2) of this code. (Ord. 2022-04, 10-20-2022)
CHAPTER 2
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 1
SECTION:
3-2-1: Applicability
3-2-2: Definitions
3-2-3: Licenses
3-2-3-1: Application
3-2-3-2: Disqualifications
3-2-3-3: Notice Of Application; Grant Or Denial
3-2-3-4: Contents Of License
3-2-3-5: Deposit Of Fees
3-2-3-6: Term
3-2-3-7: Retail License
3-2-3-8: Club; Limited Retail License
3-2-3-9: Bottle Club
3-2-3-10: Resort License
3-2-3-11: Restaurant License
3-2-3-12: Temporary Alcohol Permits
3-2-3-13: Medical And Religious Purchasers
3-2-3-14: Transfer
3-2-4: Restrictions Upon Licenses
3-2-4-1: Hours
3-2-4-2: Places Of Sale
3-2-4-3: Storage Outside Place Of Sale
3-2-4-4: Minors In Dispensing Room
3-2-4-5: Prohibited Acts Within Dispensing Room
3-2-4-6: Drive-In Areas
3-2-4-7: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. See title 5, chapter 2, article A of this Code for general offenses
  regarding minors and alcohol.
3-2-1: APPLICABILITY:
The general control and regulatory provisions of this chapter apply to all
licenses and permits authorized under this chapter, unless otherwise provided.
(1987 Code § 5.08.010)
3-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR: Any spirituous or fermented fluid, substance, or compound,
other than malt beverage, intended for beverage purposes which contains at
least one-half of one percent (0.5%) of alcohol by volume.
BUILDING: A roofed and walled structure set in place for permanent use.
CLUB: Any of the following organizations:
   A.   A post, charter, camp, or other local unit composed only of veterans
and its duly organized auxiliary, chartered by the Congress of the United
States for patriotic, fraternal, or benevolent purposes and, as the owner,
lessee or occupant, operates an establishment for these purposes within the
State.
   B.   A chapter, lodge, or other local unit of an American national fraternal
organization and, as the owner, lessee or occupant, operates an establishment
for fraternal purposes within the State. As used in this definition, "American
national fraternal organization" means an organization actively operating in
not less than thirty six (36) states or having been in active continuous
existence for not less than twenty (20) years, but does not mean a college
fraternity.
   C.   A hall or building association of a local unit specified in subsections
A and B of this definition, of which all of the capital stock is owned by the
local unit or its members, operating clubroom facilities for the local unit.
   D.   A golf club having more than fifty (50) bona fide members owning,
maintaining or operating a bona fide golf course together with a clubhouse.
   E.   A social club with more than one hundred (100) bona fide members who
are residents of the county in which it is located, owning, maintaining or
operating club quarters, incorporated and operating solely as a nonprofit
organization under the laws of this state and qualified as a tax exempt
organization under the internal revenue service code and having been
continuously operating for a period of not less than one year. The club shall
have had, during this one-year period, a bona fide membership paying dues of at
least twenty five dollars ($25.00) per year as recorded by the secretary of the
club, quarterly meetings and an actively engaged membership carrying out the
objects of the club. A social club shall, upon applying for a license, file
with the town council and the Wyoming liquor commission a true copy of its
bylaws and shall further, upon applying for a renewal of its license, file with
the town council and the Wyoming liquor commission a detailed statement of its
activities during the preceding year which were undertaken or furthered in
pursuit of the objects of the club, together with an itemized statement of
amounts expended for such activities. Club members, at the time of application
for a limited retail liquor license, pursuant to section
3-2-3-8 of this chapter, shall be in good standing by having paid at least one
full year in dues.
   F.   "Club" does not mean college fraternities or labor unions.
DRUGSTORE: Space in a building maintained, advertised and held out to the
public as a place where drugs and medicines are sold and prescriptions are
compounded and where a registered pharmacist is regularly employed.
INTOXICATING LIQUOR, ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR, ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE AND SPIRITUOUS
LIQUOR: Construed as synonymous in meaning and definition.
LICENSEE: A person holding a:
   A.   Retail liquor license;
   B.   Limited retail liquor license;
   C.   Resort liquor license;
   D.   Malt beverage permit;
   E.   Restaurant liquor license; or
   F.   Catering permit.
LIMITED RETAIL LIQUOR LICENSE: The authority under which clubs shall be
permitted to sell alcoholic and/or malt beverages.
MALT BEVERAGE: Any fluid, substance or compound intended for beverage purposes
manufactured from malt, wholly or in part, or from any substitute therefor
containing at least one-half of one percent (0.5%) of alcohol by volume.
ORIGINAL PACKAGE: Any receptacle or container used or labeled by the
manufacturer of the substance, containing any alcoholic liquors or malt
beverages.
PERSON: An individual person, a partnership, a corporation, or an association.
RESIDENT: A domiciled resident and citizen of Wyoming for a period of not less
than one year, who has not claimed residency elsewhere for any purpose within a
one year period immediately preceding the date of application for any license
or permit authorized under this chapter.
RESTAURANT: Space in a building maintained, advertised and held out to the
public as a place where individually priced meals are prepared and served
primarily for on premises consumption and where the primary source of revenue
from the operation is from the sale of food and not from the sale of alcoholic
or malt beverages. This means that the building shall have a dining room or
rooms, a kitchen and the number and kinds of employees necessary for the
preparing, cooking and serving of meals in order to satisfy the town council
that the space is intended for use as a full service restaurant. The service of
only fry orders or such food and victuals as sandwiches, hamburgers or salads
shall not be deemed a restaurant for the purposes of this chapter.
RETAIL LIQUOR DEALER: Any licensee who sells alcoholic or malt liquor under a
retail license.
RETAILER: A person who sells or offers for sale any alcoholic or malt beverage
for use or consumption and not for resale.
ROOM: An enclosed, partitioned space within a building. Partitions may contain
windows and doorways, but any partition shall extend from floor to ceiling.
SELL, SALE: Offering for sale, trafficking in, bartering, delivering or
dispensing and pouring for value, exchange for goods, services or patronage or
an exchange in any way other than purely gratuitously. Every delivery of any
alcoholic liquor or malt beverage made otherwise than by gift constitutes a
sale. (1987 Code § 5.08.020)
3-2-3: LICENSES:
3-2-3-1: APPLICATION:
   A.   Form: Any person desiring a license or permit authorized by this
chapter shall apply to the town council. The application shall be made under
oath upon a form prepared by the attorney general of the state of Wyoming,
filed in the office of the town clerk, and shall contain the following
provisions:
      1.   Location; Description Of Room: The location and a description of the
room in which the applicant will sell under the license if the building is in
existence at the time of application. If the building is not in existence, the
location and an architect's drawing or suitable plan of the room in the
premises to be licensed.
      2.   Age And Residence Of Applicant: The age and residence of the
applicant and of each applicant or partner if the application is made by more
than one individual or by a partnership.
      3.   Criminal Record: A disclosure of any criminal record of the
applicant or any partner equal to a felony conviction under Wyoming law and of
any conviction of a violation of Wyoming law relating to the sale or
manufacture of alcoholic liquor or malt beverages within ten (10) years prior
to the filing of the application.
      4.   Corporation: If the applicant is a corporation:
         a.   The name, age and residence of each officer, director and
stockholder holding, either jointly or severally, ten percent (10%) or more of
the outstanding and issued capital stock of the corporation; and
         b.   Whether any officer, director or stockholder with ten percent
(10%) or more ownership has been convicted of a violation of law as provided in
subsection A3 of this section.
      5.   Financial Condition: A statement indicating the financial condition
and financial stability of the applicant.
      6.   Site; Zoning: The site and the zoning of the site where the
applicant will sell under the license.
   B.   Fee: The application shall be accompanied by a fee sufficient to defray
the cost of publication of the notice that such applicant has made application
for such a license.
   C.   Verification: No person or partner shall have any interest directly or
indirectly, in a license or permit unless he signs and verifies the application
for the license or permit. No corporation shall be granted a license or permit
unless two (2) or more of the officers or directors sign and verify upon their
oath as individuals that the statements and provisions are true. (1987 Code §
5.08.030)
3-2-3-2: DISQUALIFICATIONS:
   A.   Persons Not Qualified: A license or permit, authorized by this chapter,
shall not be held by, issued or transferred to:
      1.   Any mayor, member of the town council or county commissioner, within
their respective jurisdictions;
      2.   Any person employed by the state or a city, town or county as a law
enforcement officer or who holds office as a law enforcement officer through
election;
      3.   Any person who does not own the building in which the sales room is
located or hold a written lease for the period for which the license will be
effective containing an agreement by the lessor that alcoholic or malt
beverages may be sold upon the leased premises, except as provided by
subdivision A4 of this section;
      4.   Any licensee whose building in which alcoholic or malt beverages may
be sold is not in existence or operational within two (2) years after the
license or permit has been issued;
      5.   Any licensee who does not annually purchase at least two hundred
fifty dollars ($250.00) of alcoholic or malt beverages from the commission or
any authorized malt beverage wholesaler, except any licensee having a planned
building not in existence or not operational pursuant to subsection A4 of this
section;
      6.   A manufacturer of alcoholic beverages or wholesaler of malt
beverages; (1987 Code § 5.08.040)
      7.   A person under twenty one (21) years of age; (1987 Code § 5.08.040;
amd. 2004 Code)
      8.   A college fraternity or organization created by one or more college
fraternities;
      9.   A chamber of commerce;
      10.   A corporation which is not qualified to do business in Wyoming;
      11.   An individual who is not a resident; or
      12.   Any partnership or group of two (2) or more persons unless each
individual interested, directly or indirectly, is a resident.
   B.   Limitation On Number Of Licenses: No more than one license or permit
shall be issued to any one person. (1987 Code § 5.08.040)
3-2-3-3: NOTICE OF APPLICATION; GRANT OR DENIAL:
   A.   Notice Of Application:
      1.   Preparation; Posting; Publication: When an application for a
license, permit, renewal or any transfer of location or ownership thereof has
been filed with the town council, the town clerk shall promptly prepare a
notice of application and place the notice conspicuously upon the premises
shown by the application as the proposed place of sale and publish the notice
in the newspaper of local circulation once a week for four (4) consecutive
weeks.
      2.   Contents: The notice shall state that a named applicant has applied
for a license, permit, renewal or transfer thereof and that protests against
the issuance, renewal or transfer of the license or permit will be heard at a
designated meeting of the town council.
      3.   Cost Of Publication: Each applicant shall, at the time of filing his
application, pay the town clerk the amount sufficient to cover the costs of
publishing notice.
   B.   Hearing Required Prior To Issuance: Any license or permit authorized
under this chapter shall not be issued, renewed or transferred until on or
after the date set in the notice for hearing protests. If a renewal or transfer
hearing, the hearing shall be held not later than thirty (30) days preceding
the expiration date of the license or permit.
   C.   Grounds For Denial: A license or permit shall not be issued, renewed or
transferred if the town council finds from evidence presented at the hearing:
      1.   The welfare of the people residing in the vicinity of the proposed
license or permit premises shall be adversely and seriously affected;
      2.   The purpose of this chapter shall not be carried out by the
issuance, renewal or transfer of the license or permit;
      3.   The number, type and location of existing licenses or permits meet
the needs of the vicinity under consideration;
      4.   The desires of the residents of the town will not be met or
satisfied by the issuance, renewal or transfer of the license or permit; or
      5.   Any other reasonable restriction or standards which may be imposed
by the town council shall not be carried out by the issuance, renewal or
transfer of the license or permit.
   D.   Preference Right: The owner and holder of an expired liquor license or
permit or one due for expiration has a preference right to a new license for
the same location. After the required notice and public hearing, each
application claiming renewal preference shall be promptly considered and acted
upon by the town council.
   E.   Appeal:
      1.   Renewal License Or Permit: An applicant for a renewal license or
permit may appeal to the district court from an adverse decision by the town
council.
      2.   New License: No applicant for a new license shall have a right of
appeal from the decision of the town council denying an application. (1987 Code
§ 5.08.050)
3-2-3-4: CONTENTS OF LICENSE:
   A.   Required Signatures: Each license issued by the municipality shall be
signed by the mayor and attested by the clerk.
   B.   Information: The following shall be shown in each license:
      1.   The name of the licensee.
      2.   Description of the place in which alcoholic and/or malt beverages
may be sold.
      3.   The date of issuance.
      4.   The amount of the fee and that the same has been paid.
   C.   Display Required: Each licensee shall display his license in a
conspicuous place in the licensed room. (1987 Code § 5.08.060)
3-2-3-5: DEPOSIT OF FEES:
All fees for licenses and permits issued by the town council paid under this
chapter shall be deposited into the treasury of the town. No refund of all or
any part of a license fee shall be made at any time following issuance. (1987
Code § 5.08.070)
3-2-3-6: TERM:
   A.   One Year: A license or permit is considered a personal privilege to the
holder, and the term of the license or permit is for one year unless sooner
revoked. When a valid license or permit is determined to be part of the estate
of a deceased holder, the administrator or executor of the estate may exercise
the privilege of the deceased under the license or permit until the expiration
of the license or permit.
   B.   Less Than One Year: The term of a license or permit may be less than
one year if specified by the town council to coincide with the annual date or
dates set by the town council for consideration of license and permit issuance,
renewal and transfer. For a license or permit issued by the town council for a
period less than one year, the annual fee shall be prorated accordingly. Any
licensee not attempting to renew a newly issued prorated license or permit
valid for one year shall not be eligible for any license or permit authorized
under this chapter for a period of two (2) years after the expiration of the
prorated license or permit. (1987 Code § 5.08.080)
3-2-3-7: RETAIL LICENSE:
   A.   Generally: A retail liquor license is the authority under which a
licensee is permitted to sell alcoholic liquor or malt beverages for use or
consumption but not for resale.
   B.   License Fee: Every person granted a retail liquor license by the
provisions of this chapter shall pay annually in advance, for a license
hereunder, the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00). The license fee shall be
paid to the town clerk before the license is issued. (1987 Code § 5.08.090)
   C.   Drugstores: All sales of alcoholic or malt beverages by drugstores
holding a retail liquor license under the provisions of this chapter shall be
sold only in the original container received by the druggist. No container or
original package shall be opened upon the premises where sold or in any room or
building in connection with the drugstore. Any sale shall be made only by a
licensed pharmacist or an adult clerk. The drugstore shall be limited in its
sales to the amount that may be sold by holders of other retail licenses. (1987
Code § 5.08.100)
3-2-3-8: CLUB; LIMITED RETAIL LICENSE:
   A.   Fee: Bona fide "clubs" as defined in section
3-2-2 of this chapter may be licensed by the town council under a limited
retail liquor license for which the licensee shall pay a license fee of one
hundred dollars ($100.00) annually in advance.
   B.   Petition; Required Signatures: At least fifty one percent (51%) of the
membership of a "social club" as defined in section
3-2-2 of this chapter shall sign a petition indicating a desire to secure a
limited retail liquor license. The form of the petition shall be prescribed by
the Wyoming liquor commission and shall include the residence address of each
member signing the petition.
   C.   Sales: A club holding a limited retail liquor license shall not sell
alcoholic or malt beverages for consumption anywhere except within the licensed
premises and for consumption by its members and their accompanying guests only.
It shall be the duty and obligation of the club to check and regulate sales to
members and their accompanying guests to ensure that all alcoholic or malt
beverages sold are consumed within the building space or premises. (1987 Code §
5.08.110)
3-2-3-9: BOTTLE CLUB:
   A.   Definition: A "bottle club" is an operation or enterprise giving or
renting space to persons upon the club premises for the keeping or storage of
alcoholic or malt beverages for consumption upon the club premises by the
persons or their guests, where the income, profits, or fees of the operator of
the bottle club are derived from sales of or furnishing mixes, ice, food or
glasses, or from dues, charges, contributions, membership cards or assessments.
   B.   Penalty For Operating Unlicensed Bottle Club: It is unlawful to operate
an unlicensed bottle club in the town. Any person operating an unlicensed
bottle club is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined not
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. Each day of
operation shall be deemed a separate offense. (1987 Code § 5.08.120)
3-2-3-10: RESORT LICENSE:
   A.   Authorized: The town council may issue resort retail liquor licenses to
applicants who are owners or lessees of a resort complex meeting the
qualifications of subsection B of this section.
   B.   Qualifications: To qualify for a resort retail liquor license, the town
council shall require the resort complex to:
      1.   Have an actual valuation, or the applicant shall have committed or
expended on the complex, not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00),
excluding the value of the land;
      2.   Include a restaurant and a convention facility, which convention
facility shall seat no less than one hundred (100) persons; and
      3.   Include motel or hotel accommodations with a minimum of one hundred
(100) sleeping rooms. (1987 Code § 5.08.130)
   C.   Sale For Off Premises Consumption: Resort liquor licensees shall not
sell alcoholic or malt beverages for consumption off the premises owned or
leased by the licensee. The dispensing of alcoholic or malt beverages licensed
to be sold hereunder shall be controlled by section
3-2-4-2 of this chapter. (1987 Code § 5.08.140)
   D.   License Fee: The annual fee for a resort liquor license shall be one
thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) payable in advance. (1987 Code §
5.08.150)
   E.   Other Regulations: The general control and regulatory provisions of
this chapter shall apply to resort liquor licenses except as otherwise
provided. (1987 Code § 5.08.160)
3-2-3-11: RESTAURANT LICENSE:
   A.   Authorized: "Restaurants" as defined by section
3-2-2 of this chapter may be licensed by the town council under a restaurant
liquor license.
   B.   Additional Requirement: In addition to the application requirements
required by this chapter, the license applicant shall submit a valid food
service permit upon application. (1987 Code § 5.08.170)
   C.   Primary Source Of Revenues: An applicant for a restaurant liquor
license shall satisfy the Town Council that the primary source of revenue from
the operation of the restaurant to be licensed will be derived from food
services and not the sale of alcoholic or malt beverages.
   D.   Condition For Renewal: When renewing a restaurant liquor license, the
Town Council shall condition renewal upon a requirement that not less than
sixty percent (60%) of gross sales from the preceding twelve (12) months'
operation of a licensed restaurant be derived from food services.
   E.   Annual Report: Upon application for a license renewal, a license holder
shall submit an annual report to the Town Council of the sales of the licensed
restaurant. The reports shall contain the annual gross sales figures of the
restaurant and shall separate the gross sales figures into two (2) categories:
      1.   Food service sales; and
      2.   Alcoholic and malt beverage sales. (1987 Code § 5.08.180)
   F.   License Fee: The annual fee for a restaurant liquor license shall be
one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00), payable in advance. (1987 Code §
5.08.210)
   G.   Transfer: No restaurant liquor licenses shall be transferred to another
location. License ownership may be transferred to a purchaser or lessee of the
licensed premises with the approval of the Town Council. (1987 Code § 5.08.190)
   H.   Restrictions:
      1.   Consumption Off Premises: Restaurant liquor licensees shall not sell
alcoholic or malt beverages for consumption off the premises owned or leased by
the licensee.
      2.   Dispensing Room: Alcoholic and malt beverages shall be dispensed and
prepared for consumption in one room upon the licensed premises separated from
the dining area in which alcoholic and malt beverages may be served. No
consumption of alcoholic or malt beverages shall be permitted within the
dispensing room, nor shall any person other than employees of twenty one (21)
years of age, or employees who were at least nineteen (19) years of age on the
effective date hereof shall be permitted to enter the dispensing room. If a
restaurant has a dispensing room separate from the dining area which is
licensed prior to February 1, 1979, for purposes of alcoholic or malt beverage
sales and consumption, the restaurant may dispense alcoholic or malt beverages
in the separate dispensing room under a restaurant liquor license, and any
person over twenty one (21) years of age is permitted to enter the separate
dispensing room.
      3.   Hours Sales Allowed: All sales of alcoholic and malt beverages
authorized by a restaurant liquor license shall cease at the time food sales
and services cease or at the hours specified by section
3-2-4-1 of this chapter if food sales and services extend beyond the hours
specified therein. (1987 Code § 5.08.200)
3-2-3-12: TEMPORARY ALCOHOL PERMITS:
   A.   Temporary Alcohol Sale Permit: A Temporary Alcohol Sale Permit
authorizing the sale of alcohol in a public area may only be issued by the Town
Council to any person or entity holding a Wyoming retail liquor license
lawfully issued by an entity in Uinta, Sweetwater or Lincoln Counties,
authorizing the off-premises sale of alcoholic beverages. No person or
organization holding the permit shall allow any alcoholic beverage to be sold
or consumed off the premises authorized by the permit.
   B.   Temporary Alcohol Use Permit: A Temporary Alcohol Use Permit
authorizing the use of alcohol in a public area may only be issued by the Town
Council to any responsible person or organization. No person or organization
holding the temporary alcohol use permit shall sell any alcoholic beverage
pursuant to the permit nor shall any alcoholic beverage be consumed off the
premises authorized by the permit.
   C.   Term; Hours Of Sale; Number Of Permits Restricted: The permits
authorized for this section shall be issued for one (1) twenty-four (24)-hour
period subject to the schedule of operating hours provided by section
3-2-4-1 of this chapter. Nothing in this Ordinance shall be read to prevent the
Town Council from authorizing multiple temporary alcohol permits on successive
days so long as such issuance does not conflict with the liquor laws and
regulations of the State of Wyoming.
   D.   Application: The permits herein shall be issued on application to the
Town Council without public notice or hearing.
   E.   Fee: The fees for permits under this section shall be set by resolution
of the Town Council, payable in advance. (Ord. 2019-03, 4-4-2019; amd. Ord.
2021-09, 9-16-2021)
3-2-3-13: MEDICAL AND RELIGIOUS PURCHASERS:
An alcoholic beverage permit is required for the purchase from the Wyoming
Liquor Commission or a wholesaler of alcoholic or malt beverages by hospitals,
religious organizations, and licensed physicians and dentists, but the permit
shall not authorize resale and shall be issued gratis by the Town Council.
(1987 Code § 5.08.230)
3-2-3-14: TRANSFER:
   A.   Licensed Location: After public hearing and with the approval of the
Town Council, a license or permit, except a restaurant license, may be
transferred to or renewed on different premises on the same basis as the
original application except that no additional license fee is required during
the term of the license or permit. The transferred license or permit shall
expire on the same date as the original license or permit.
   B.   Ownership: A licensee, or the executor or administrator of the estate
of a deceased licensee, may assign and transfer the license or permit by a sale
made in good faith. The assignment and transfer shall first have the approval
of the Town Council which consideration shall be based in part upon a public
hearing and application filed under oath by the assignee or the transferee
showing the person or entity to be qualified to hold a license or permit under
Wyoming law. The approval of the transfer shall not be given by the Town
Council if proceedings are pending to suspend, revoke, or otherwise penalize
the original license or permit holder. A transferable license or permit shall
not require the payment of any additional license fee for the transfer and,
upon assignment, the assignee may exercise the privilege of continuing the
business authorized by the license or permit. (1987 Code § 5.08.240)
   C.   Unlawful Transfer Or Sale: No license or permit shall be transferred or
sold except as provided by subsections A and B of this section, used for any
place not described in the license or permit at the time of issuance, or
subject to attachment, garnishment, or execution. (1987 Code § 5.08.250)
3-2-4: RESTRICTIONS UPON LICENSES:
3-2-4-1: HOURS:
   A.   Schedule For Operating Hours: All liquor licensees and/or holders of
alcohol permits shall be controlled by the following schedule for operating
hours:
      1.   A licensee and/or permit holder may begin the sale and/or
distribution of alcohol no earlier than six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
      2.   No licensee and/or permit holder shall allow any intoxicating liquor
to be dispensed or consumed on the premises of the liquor licensee or permit in
any manner after two o'clock (2:00) A.M.
   B.   Modification Of Hours: The hours of operation designated in subsection
A of this section may be modified on a case by case basis by a Resolution or
agreement made by the Town Council. (1987 Code § 5.08.260; amd. Ord. 2017-11,
7-6-2017)
3-2-4-2: PLACES OF SALE:
   A.   Principal Place Of Sale:
      1.   Limited To One Room: The principal place in which alcoholic and malt
beverages are sold under a license shall be located in one room upon the
premises for which the license is issued and as approved by the town council.
      2.   Additional Dispensing Room: Upon payment of an additional license
fee equal to two-thirds (2/3) of the fee paid for the original license, a
licensee may have and maintain one additional dispensing room in the same
building under the authority of the original license.
      3.   Serving Area: Alcoholic beverages secured in the licensed room by a
server may be served only in the building in which the licensed room is
located.
      4.   Items Sold: Only alcoholic and malt beverages, nonalcoholic
beverages, food, tobacco, and national alcoholic and malt beverage promotional
sales items sold to the licensee bearing the name and trademark of the national
alcoholic liquor and malt beverage firm or company whose products the item is
advertising may be sold and served in the licensed room.
      5.   Inspections: The town council shall, as often as necessary, inspect
the licensed room adjoining rooms where alcoholic beverages are served to
ensure that the licensee is in compliance with sanitation and fire hazard
requirements and other applicable laws.
      6.   Off Premises Consumption: A licensee may separate the facility for
the sale of alcoholic liquor and malt beverages for off premises consumption
from the facility used to serve customers for on premises consumption without
payment of an additional fee. A separated facility for making sale for off
premises consumption shall be located adjoining the facility for making sale
for on premises consumption. The two (2) facilities may be separated by a glass
or other suitable partition.
   B.   Convention Facilities: If a licensee is engaged in a business operation
with convention facilities, the licensee may maintain more than one additional
dispensing room under the same fee referred to in subsection A of this section.
For purposes of this subsection, a convention facility shall have and maintain
all of the following:
      1.   Motel or hotel sleeping room accommodations;
      2.   Restaurant facilities; and
      3.   Conference facilities.
   C.   Twenty Four Hour Permits: The town council may issue a twenty four (24)
hour permit to any licensee authorizing the sale of alcoholic or malt beverages
in one additional dispensing room in the same building licensed by the original
license for a twenty four (24) hour period only. No one licensee shall be
issued more than six (6) permits in any one year period. The fee for the period
will be ten dollars ($10.00), payable in advance. (1987 Code § 5.08.270)
3-2-4-3: STORAGE OUTSIDE PLACE OF SALE:
Retail licensees shall not store alcoholic liquor outside of the licensed
premises unless he files with the Wyoming liquor commission a written statement
that he stores liquor in a place other than his place of business and states
the exact location of the storage place. (1987 Code § 5.08.280)
3-2-4-4: MINORS IN DISPENSING ROOM:
   A.   Prohibited: No licensee or agent, employee, or servant thereof shall
knowingly permit any person under the age of twenty one (21) to enter or remain
in the licensed room or rooms where alcoholic or malt beverages are dispensed.
   B.   Minor Employees: When the licensed room or rooms are not open for the
sale or dispensing of alcoholic or malt beverages, employees of the licensee
under the age of twenty one (21) may be permitted in the course of their
employment to work in the room or rooms. (1987 Code § 5.08.290)
3-2-4-5: PROHIBITED ACTS WITHIN DISPENSING ROOM:
No licensee or agent or employee thereof shall knowingly permit prostitution,
lewdness, or assignation as defined by Wyoming Statutes section 6-4-101 et
seq., any unlawful act pursuant to Wyoming Statutes section 6-7-101, or
gambling as prohibited by Wyoming Statutes section 6-6-101, within any
dispensing room, building or premises licensed under this chapter. (1987 Code §
5.08.300; amd. 2004 Code)
3-2-4-6: DRIVE-IN AREAS:
   A.   Restrictions: A drive-in area adjacent or contiguous to the licensed
room may be used by the holder of a retail liquor license for taking orders,
making delivery of, and receiving payment for alcoholic or malt beverages under
the following conditions:
      1.   The holder of the retail liquor license shall own the area or hold a
written lease for the period for which the license was issued.
      2.   No part of the area used for orders, delivery, or making payment
shall be more than forty feet (40') distant from the licensed room.
      3.   The area shall be well lighted and subject to inspection by the town
council at any and all times.
      4.   No walls or screens shall interfere with observing and checking the
part of the area used for orders, delivery, and payment.
      5.   No orders shall be received from, nor delivery made to, a person
under the age of twenty one (21) years or intoxicated person in the area.
      6.   No part of a publicly owned sidewalk, highway, street or alley shall
be used for taking orders or conducting sales.
      7.   Alcoholic liquor or malt beverages shall be sold and delivered in
the drive-in area only in the original, unopened package, and consumption of
alcoholic liquor or malt beverages in the drive-in area shall not be permitted.
(1987 Code § 5.08.310)
   B.   Authority To Forbid Or Restrict: The agents and officers of the town
council administering the retail liquor license shall determine whether traffic
conditions or physical circumstances hindering law enforcement should require a
decision forbidding or restricting sales and delivery in any drive-in area. If,
by resolution of the town council, the right of the licensee to use certain
drive-in areas is forbidden or restricted, that resolution shall be complied
with by the licensee. (1987 Code § 5.08.320)
3-2-4-7: PENALTY:
Unless specifically set out in this chapter, any violation of the provisions of
this chapter constitutes a class B misdemeanor punishable as set forth in
subsection
1-4-1A2 of this code. (Ord. 2012-11, 1-17-2013)
CHAPTER 3
RESERVED
(Ord. 2011-15, 1-5-2012)
CHAPTER 4
PEDDLERS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
SECTION:
3-4-1: Definitions
3-4-2: License Required
3-4-3: Fees
3-4-4: Bond
3-4-5: Service Of Process
3-4-6: Investigation; Issuance
3-4-7: Term
3-4-8: Exhibition
3-4-9: Transferability
3-4-10: Signs Prohibiting Peddlers, Obedience
3-4-11: Private Residences, Entering Without Permission
3-4-12: Association With Local Dealer
3-4-13: Revocation
3-4-14: Appeals
3-4-15: Penalty
3-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
CANVASSER OR SOLICITOR: Any individual, except a bona fide resident of Uinta
County, Wyoming, traveling either by foot, or any type of conveyance, from
place to place or from house to house, or from street to street, taking or
attempting to take orders for sale of goods, wares and merchandise, personal
property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for service to be
furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such individual has,
carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or whether he
is collecting advance payments on such sales or not; provided, that such
definition shall include any person who, for himself, or for another person,
hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, tent, railroad boxcar,
boat, hotel room, lodging house, apartment, shop or any place within the
municipality for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for
future delivery.
PEDDLER: Any person, except a bona fide resident of Uinta County, Wyoming,
traveling by foot, wagon, automobile, vehicle or any other type of conveyance,
from place or place, from house to house, or from street to street, carrying,
conveying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, meats, fish, vegetables,
fruits, garden truck, farm products or provisions, offering and exposing the
same for sale, or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers; provided,
that one who solicits orders and as a separate transaction makes deliveries to
purchasers as a part of a scheme or design to evade the provisions of this
chapter shall be deemed a peddler subject to the provisions of this chapter.
"Peddler" includes "hawker" and "huckster".
TRANSIENT MERCHANT: Any person whether as owner, agent, consignee or employee,
except for a bona fide resident of Uinta County, Wyoming, who engages in a
temporary business of selling and delivering goods, wares and merchandise, and
who, in furtherance of such purpose, hires, leases, uses or occupies any
building, structure, motor vehicle, tent, railroad boxcar, or boat, public
rooms in hotels, lodging houses, apartments, shops or any streets, alleys or
other places for the exhibition and sale of such foods, wares and merchandise,
either privately or at public auction; provided, that such definition shall not
be construed to include any person who, while occupying such temporary
location, does not sell from orders for future delivery only. "Transient
merchant" includes "itinerant merchant" and "itinerant vendor".
WHOLESALER: One who buys in comparatively large quantities, and then resells,
usually in smaller quantities, but never to the ultimate consumer. He sells
either to a "jobber", a sort of middleman, or to a retailer, who in turn sells
to the consumer. (1987 Code § 5.16.010)
3-4-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   Required: It is unlawful for a transient merchant, peddler, solicitor
or canvasser to engage in any such business without first obtaining a license
therefor in compliance with the provisions of this section, section
3-4-3, sections
3-4-6 through
3-4-9, and section
3-4-13 of this chapter. (1987 Code § 5.16.090)
   B.   Application: Applicants for a license under this chapter shall file
with the town clerk a sworn application, in writing, which shall give the
following information:
      1.   The name and description of the applicant.
      2.   The permanent home address and full local address of the applicant.
      3.   A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to
be sold.
      4.   If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with
credentials establishing the exact relationship.
      5.   The length of time for which the right to do business is desired.
      6.   The place where the goods or property proposed to be sold, or orders
taken for the sale thereof, are manufactured or produced, where such goods or
products are located at the time such application is filed and the proposed
method of delivery.
      7.   A photograph of the applicant and one set of fingerprints shall be
taken by the police department prior to the issuance of a license. This shall
be done during regular business hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to four
o'clock (4:00) P.M.
      8.   The names of at least two (2) reliable property owners of the
municipality who will certify as to the applicant's good character and business
respectability or, in lieu of the names of references, such other available
evidence as to the good character and business responsibility of the applicant
as will enable an investigator to properly evaluate such character and business
responsibility.
      9.   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of
any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal law, the nature of the
offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor.
      10.   The names, addresses and dates of birth for all employees and
associates actively participating in the business within the city limits shall
be provided to the police department prior to the issuance of the license.
(1987 Code § 5.16.100)
   C.   Exemptions:
      1.   Farm Products: Nothing in this chapter shall apply to any farmer or
producer who sells or disposes of his own agricultural products, including
fruits or vegetables, or of beef, mutton or pork; provided, that such meats are
produced in accordance with all health regulations and laws, if such
merchandise is produced by him in the state. (1987 Code § 5.16.050)
      2.   Nonprofit Organizations: No license shall be required of drummers,
traveling salesmen or other persons engaged in soliciting or taking orders
exclusively from the trade of established wholesale or retail dealers, for the
delivery of goods, wares or merchandise by wholesale, nor shall a license be
required of wholly nonprofit organizations. (1987 Code § 5.16.060)
3-4-3: FEES:
The license fee which shall be paid to the town clerk upon the issuance of a
license under this chapter shall be as established by the governing body from
time to time; provided, that if any person has more than one person engaged in
the business of peddling or uses more than one motor truck, wagon or other
vehicle in such business of peddling, the license fees shall be paid for each
of such persons, motor truck, wagon or vehicle used in such business; and
provided, that if any person has more than one person engaged in the business
of soliciting or canvassing, the foregoing license fee shall be paid for each
person engaged in such business. (1987 Code § 5.16.120)
3-4-4: BOND:
Before any license to engage in any business regulated by this chapter shall be
issued, the applicant for such license shall file with the town clerk, a bond
running to the town in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), executed by
the applicant, as principal, and two (2) sureties upon which service of process
may be made in the state; such bond to be approved by the town attorney
conditioned that the applicant shall comply fully with all of the provisions of
this chapter and all of the provisions of this code and state law, regulating
and concerning the business of which the applicant seeks a license and the
payment of license fees, and will pay all judgments rendered against the
applicant for any violation of such laws together with all judgments and costs
that may be recovered against him by any person for damage growing out of any
misrepresentation or deception practiced on any person transacting such
business with such applicant, whether such misrepresentations or deceptions
were made or practiced by the owners or by their servants, agents or employees,
either at the time of making the sale or through any advertisement of any
character whatsoever, printed or circulated with reference to the goods, wares,
and merchandise sold or any part thereof. Action on the bond may be brought in
the name of the municipality to the use of the municipality or aggrieved
person, as the case may be. Such bond must be approved by the town attorney
both as to form and as to the responsibility of the sureties thereon. (1987
Code § 5.16.020)
3-4-5: SERVICE OF PROCESS:
Before any license shall be issued for engaging in any business regulated by
this chapter, such applicant shall file with the town clerk an instrument
nominating and appointing the town clerk his true and lawful agent with full
power and authority to acknowledge service or notice of process for and on
behalf of the applicant in respect to any matters connected with or arising out
of the business transacted under such license and the bond given as required by
this chapter, or for the performance of the conditions of such bond or for any
breach thereof, which instrument shall also contain recitals to the effect that
such applicant for license consents and agrees that service of any notice or
process may be made upon the agent, and when so made shall be taken and held to
be as valid as if personally served upon the person applying for the license
under this chapter, according to the law of this state, and waiving all claim
or right of error by reason of such acknowledgment of service or manner of
service. Immediately upon service of process upon the town clerk, as herein
provided the town clerk shall send to the licensee at his last known address,
by registered mail, a copy of such process. (1987 Code § 5.16.030)
3-4-6: INVESTIGATION; ISSUANCE:
   A.   Application Referred To Chief Of Police: Upon receipt of such
application, it shall be referred to the chief of police who shall cause
investigation of the applicant's business and moral character to be made as he
deems necessary for the protection of the public good.
   B.   Unsatisfactory Findings: If the applicant's character or business
responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the chief of police shall endorse
on such application his disapproval and his reasons for the same, and return
the application to the town clerk, who shall notify the applicant that his
application is disapproved and that no permit and license will be issued.
   C.   Satisfactory Findings: If the character and business responsibility of
the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the chief of police shall endorse
on the application his approval, execute a permit addressed to the applicant
for the carrying on of the business applied for and return such permit, along
with the application, to the town clerk, who shall, upon payment of the
prescribed license fee, issue a license.
   D.   Issuance Of Permit; Contents: Such license shall contain the signature
and seal of the town clerk and shall show the name, address and photograph of
the licensee, the class of license issued and the kind of goods to be sold
thereunder, the amount of fee paid, the date of issuance and the period for
which the same shall be operative, as well as the license number and other
identifying description of any vehicle used.
   E.   Record Of Permits: The town clerk shall keep a permanent record of all
licenses issued, and shall issue all approved licenses within twenty four (24)
hours of the time of application. (1987 Code § 5.16.110)
3-4-7: TERM:
   A.   One Day: The town clerk shall not issue any license under this chapter
nor accept any license fee for less than one day. A license issued for one day
shall expire at twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight of the date of issuance of such
license.
   B.   One Week: A license issued for one week shall expire at twelve o'clock
(12:00) midnight on the seventh day after issuance.
   C.   One Month: A license issued for one month shall expire at twelve
o'clock (12:00) midnight on the thirtieth day after issuance, counting both
first and last days.
   D.   Annual License: An annual license may be issued for the calendar year,
commencing on January 1 and expiring on December 31 of any such year. (1987
Code § 5.16.130)
3-4-8: EXHIBITION:
Any person licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall exhibit his
license in plain view at all times of business operation. (1987 Code §
5.16.140)
3-4-9: TRANSFERABILITY:
No license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be transferred.
(1987 Code § 5.16.150)
3-4-10: SIGNS PROHIBITING PEDDLERS, OBEDIENCE:
It is unlawful for any peddler or solicitor or canvasser to ring the doorbell
or knock on the door of any residence, dwelling, flat or apartment whereon a
sign bearing the words "No Peddlers", or other words of similar import is
painted or affixed or exposed to public view, or to attempt to gain admittance
thereto; provided, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to any
solicitor or canvasser who knocks at any door, or rings any bell at the
invitation or with the consent of some member of the household at which he so
applied for admission. (1987 Code § 5.16.040)
3-4-11: PRIVATE RESIDENCES, ENTERING WITHOUT PERMISSION:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to engage in the practice of going in and
upon private residences in the municipality by solicitors, agents or
representatives, peddlers, hawkers, itinerant merchants and transient vendors
of merchandise, not having been requested or invited to do so by the owners or
occupants of such private residences, for the purpose of soliciting orders for
the sale of goods, wares and merchandise or for the purpose of disposing of or
peddling or hawking the same or soliciting orders for goods or service or for
taking orders for any type of contract for present or future completion or
continuation. Any attempt, by telephone or other means, to obtain an invitation
to visit such places shall be deemed a violation of this section.
   B.   A violation of this section constitutes a class A misdemeanor
punishable as set forth in subsection
1-4-1A1 of this code. (Ord. 2012-11, 1-17-2013)
3-4-12: ASSOCIATION WITH LOCAL DEALER:
Persons engaged in any business regulated by this chapter shall not be relieved
from complying with provisions of this chapter merely by reason of associating
temporarily with any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer or by
conducting such transient business in connection with, as a part of, or in the
name of any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer. (1987 Code §
5.16.070)
3-4-13: REVOCATION:
   A.   Revocation: Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter may be
revoked by the governing body, after notice and hearing.
   B.   Suspension: Licenses issued under the provisions of this Chapter may be
suspended by the governing body, the Mayor, law enforcement and or any other
person so authorized by the Town.
   C.   Grounds For Revocation: Licenses issued under the provisions of this
chapter may be revoked or suspended for any of the following causes:
      1.   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for license.
      2.   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying on the business.
      3.   Any violation of this chapter.
      4.   The commission or conviction of any crime or misdemeanor.
      5.   Conducting the business in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as
to constitute a breach of the peace of the community or individual household,
or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the
public.
   D.   Notice Of Hearing upon Suspension: Upon suspension, notice of right to
have a hearing concerning said suspension shall be given orally by the
suspending authority with direction to request a hearing date at the next Town
Council Meeting by application at the Town Clerk's Office during regular
business hours. Failure to request such a hearing shall be deemed grounds for
the revocation of said license.
   E.   Notice of Proposed Revocation: A proposed revocation of a business
license without suspension shall be given in writing, setting forth
specifically the grounds of complaint and the time and place of a review
hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the licensee at his
last known address at least five (5) days prior to the date set for hearing.
   F.   Hearing: At a hearing as requested above, the Town Council may revoke
the business license, reinstate the license or provisionally reinstate the
license on condition of good behavior or any other condition. At the hearing,
the Town Council may hear and consider any information they deem relevant
concerning the matter of the hearing. (1987 Code § 5.16.160; amd. Ord. 2019-10,
11-21-2019)
3-4-14: APPEALS:
   A.   Right Of Appeal: Any person aggrieved by the action of the chief of
police or the town clerk in the denial of a permit or license as provided in
this chapter shall have the right of appeal to the governing body.
   B.   Notice Of Appeal: Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the
governing body, within fourteen (14) days after notice of the action
complained, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal.
   C.   Hearing: The governing body shall set a time and place for a hearing on
such appeal and notice of such hearing shall be given to the appellant in the
same manner as provided in this chapter for notice of hearing on revocation.
   D.   Decision And Order: The decision and order of the governing body on
such appeal shall be final and conclusive. (1987 Code § 5.16.170)
3-4-15: PENALTY:
Unless specifically set out in this chapter, any violation of the provisions of
this chapter constitutes a class B misdemeanor punishable as set forth in
subsection
1-4-1A2 of this code. (Ord. 2012-11, 1-17-2013)
CHAPTER 5
SALES TAX
SECTION:
3-5-1: Lodging Tax
3-5-1: LODGING TAX:
   A.   The Town hereby imposes, pursuant to Wyoming Statute § 39-15-204(a)
(ii), a two percent (2%) excise tax on all lodging services, as defined by
Wyoming Statute § 35-15-101, provided in the Town.
   B.   This excise tax shall be effective on January 1, 2021 and remain in
effect unless and until this excise tax represents an additional tax burden on
the provider of lodging services over and above the tax imposed by the State of
Wyoming. (Ord. 2020-06, 11-19-2020)
TITLE 4
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
CHAPTER 1
NUISANCES
SECTION:
4-1-1: Nuisance Defined
4-1-2: Causing Or Permitting
4-1-3: Initiation Of Abatement
4-1-4: Notice To Abate
4-1-5: Abatement By Town
4-1-6: Costs Of Abatement
4-1-7: Summary Abatement
4-1-8: Obstructing Abatement
4-1-9: Residency Without Utilities
4-1-10: Penalty
4-1-1: NUISANCE DEFINED:
   A.   Defined: For the purpose of this chapter, "nuisance" means the doing or
failure to do something that injuriously affects the safety, health or morals
of the public. A "nuisance" is the maintenance by any person of any condition
or use of real or personal property in such a manner as to unreasonably
interfere with the use and enjoyment of the property of another, or which is
detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the town or
causes substantial diminution in the value of other property in the
neighborhood in which such nuisance is maintained.
   B.   Enumerated: The unlawful doing of any act or the omission to perform a
duty, which either annoys, injures or endangers the public health, safety,
welfare or quiet enjoyment of property of the citizens of the town, or which
unlawfully interferes with or tends to obstruct, or in any way render unsafe
and insecure, other persons in life or in the use of their property is hereby
declared a "nuisance". "Nuisance", as used in this chapter, includes, but is
not limited to, the following:
      1.   The keeping of inflammable or combustible material in such a manner
as to endanger by fire any property or structure within the town, unless
guarded and protected so far as practicable to prevent fires from originating
therein or from spreading when started near such materials.
      2.   The accumulation without roof or cover or other protection upon any
property, or within any structure within the town, of junk, rubbish, trash,
waste, discarded material or salvage in such a manner as to harbor rats,
rodents, mice, skunks or other animals which may transmit disease to human
beings, or in such a manner as to provide a breeding place for flies,
mosquitoes or other harmful insects.
      3.   Abandoned and unsheltered, discarded or unused objects or equipment
such as automobiles, furniture, stoves, refrigerators, old clothes, tin cans,
wastepaper or any combustible material, rubbish or filth of any kind.
      4.   Unsheltered storage of old, unused, stripped, junked and other
automobiles not in good and safe operating condition and of any other vehicles,
machinery, implements, equipment and personal property of any kind which are no
longer safely usable for the purposes for which they were manufactured, which
hereinafter are collectively described as "personalty", for a period of thirty
(30) days or more (except in licensed junkyards) within the corporate limits of
this town.
      5.   Any foul or offensive liquid or substance of any kind discharged
into or upon any public or private property within the town.
      6.   Any dead animal within the limits of the town that is not moved
within twenty four (24) hours.
      7.   Any handbills placed upon any public or private building, fence, or
other structure without permission from the owner or occupant of the same.
      8.   Any barn, corral, pigpen, outhouse, or other unsanitary or
objectionable building on any of the streets of the town.
      9.   Any structure, fence, advertising device, tree, etc., that is in an
unsafe condition or does not conform to the requirements of the building or
electrical codes.
      10.   The keeping or maintaining of premises in a manner causing
substantial diminution in the value of property of others in the vicinity.
(1987 Code § 8.16.010)
4-1-2: CAUSING OR PERMITTING:
   A.   No person shall cause or be in any manner whatsoever instrumental in
causing or permitting any "nuisance" as herein defined within the limits of the
town.
   B.   No person shall permit any building, grounds, vehicles or premises to
be in such condition as to be offensive or a nuisance to any persons or to the
neighborhood in which such property is found.
   C.   No person in charge of or in control of premises, whether as owner,
lessee, tenant, occupant or otherwise, shall keep or maintain such premises in
a manner causing substantial diminution in the value of other property in the
neighborhood in which such premises are located. (1987 Code § 8.16.020)
   D.   The proceedings for the addressing of a nuisance violation in municipal
court may be instituted by citation or information. (Ord. 2010-04, 4-1-2010)
4-1-3: INITIATION OF ABATEMENT:
   A.   Proceedings: All proceedings for the abatement of nuisances shall be
governed by rules of practice and procedure in the municipal court. In the
absence of such provisions, proceedings under this chapter shall be governed by
the statutes of Wyoming governing practice and procedure before justices of the
peace, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
   B.   Complaint: All actions for abatement of nuisances shall be commenced by
filing with the municipal court a sworn complaint and affidavit by any
responsible citizen or citizens of the town, or by any member of the police
department, detailing with particularity the facts showing the existence of a
"nuisance" as herein defined and praying that such nuisance be abated. (Ord.
2010-04, 4-1-2010)
   C.   Entry On Docket: Upon the filing of such complaint and affidavit, the
municipal judge shall enter the case on his docket in the usual manner as
required by law.
   D.   Summons: Upon the filing of such complaint and affidavit, the municipal
judge shall issue summons which shall be dated the date it is issued, signed by
the judge, directed to any police officer of the town and containing the name
of the defendant, if known, and commanding the officer serving the same to
summon the defendant to appear before the judge at a time specified therein,
but in any event not more than ten (10) days from the date of service, to show
cause why the nuisance complained of should not be abated and stating that if
defendant fails to appear, judgment as prayed for in the affidavit and
complaint will be entered against him. The summons must be returnable not more
than ten (10) days from its date and must be served at least three (3) days
before the time of appearance by delivering a copy of the summons to the
defendant, or leaving the same at his usual place of residence or business. If
personal service cannot be made upon defendant, the judge shall give notice to
the defendant by posting a copy of the summons at some conspicuous place on the
property where the nuisance is maintained and by publishing said summons for
two (2) consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the town.
   E.   Hearing: At the hearing, the court shall try the issues raised by the
affidavit and complaint and defendant's answer or response thereto, and from
the testimony and evidence adduced at such hearing, the judge shall determine
whether the conditions complained of exist and whether the same constitutes a
"nuisance" as defined in this chapter.
   F.   Order To Abate And Remove: Upon finding that a nuisance exists, the
judge shall order the same to be abated and removed and shall make a minute
entry of such order on the docket in the proceedings before him. (1987 Code §
8.16.030)
4-1-4: NOTICE TO ABATE:
If the municipal judge shall find and recommend, pursuant to section
4-1-3 of this chapter, that the condition complained of constitutes a
"nuisance" as defined in this chapter and should be removed and abated, a
notice forthwith shall be given by him to the owner or occupant containing a
description of the condition found to be a nuisance, upon what lot and block it
is situated, requiring the abatement and removal of the same within ten (10)
days of the service of such notice in person or other prescribed time set by
the judge. (Ord. 2010-04, 4-1-2010)
4-1-5: ABATEMENT BY TOWN:
Upon failure or refusal of the owner or occupant of such premises and the
property constituting such nuisance to remove and abate the same under the
terms of this notice, and within the prescribed time set by the judge, the
judge shall, without further proceedings, order and direct the police officers
or other employees of the town to abate the nuisance or remove the property
constituting such nuisance to a suitable location selected by the town. The
police officer or other employee of the town shall thereupon proceed to tear
down, destroy, remove and abate such nuisance and condition, and use all
reasonable means and force to do so, and shall keep a just and accurate account
of the expense thereof, and return it to the town clerk to be presented to the
town council for further action thereon. (1987 Code § 8.16.050)
4-1-6: COSTS OF ABATEMENT:
The town council, at a regular meeting, shall consider such expense, and, by
resolution, finally determine actual cost of removal and abatement, and assess
the same against the lot and block from which said nuisance was removed, and
fine the amount charged against the same. Any amount so found due is a special
assessment which shall be levied and assessed as such, and be collected in like
manner as any other town taxes. (1987 Code § 8.16.060)
4-1-7: SUMMARY ABATEMENT:
Whenever any nuisance is found within the town, contrary to any ordinance, the
mayor, in his discretion, is hereby authorized to cause the same to be
summarily abated in such a manner as he may direct. (1987 Code § 8.16.070)
4-1-8: OBSTRUCTING ABATEMENT:
Any owner or occupant of any premises upon which any condition or nuisance is
ordered abated, or any other person who shall in any manner obstruct the
removal, abatement or destruction of the same, or who fails to remove and abate
such nuisance or condition after notice as provided in this chapter, shall be
deemed guilty of maintaining a nuisance and shall be guilty of a class A
misdemeanor punishable as set forth in subsection
1-4-1A1 of this code. (Ord. 2012-11, 1-17-2013)
4-1-9: RESIDENCY WITHOUT UTILITIES:
   A.   Residing or operating a business within the town of Lyman in a
structure without valid and legal access and connection to the town water and
wastewater systems shall constitute a class B misdemeanor punishable as set
forth in subsection
1-4-1A2 of this code.
   B.   The provisions of this section may be subject to abrogation by the
granting of a valid conditional use permit. (Ord. 2012-11, 1-17-2013)
4-1-10: PENALTY:
Unless specifically set out in this chapter, any violation of the provisions of
this chapter constitutes a class B misdemeanor punishable as set forth in
subsection
1-4-1A2 of this code. (Ord. 2012-11, 1-17-2013)
CHAPTER 2
GARBAGE AND REFUSE
SECTION:
4-2-1: Definitions
4-2-2: Responsibility Of Owner
4-2-3: Garbage And Refuse Containers
4-2-4: Reserved
4-2-5: Rocks, Dirt, Building Materials
4-2-6: Placing Materials For Collection
4-2-7: Reserved
4-2-8: Reserved
4-2-9: Improper Disposal
4-2-10: Littering
4-2-11: Penalty
4-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
GARBAGE: Wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking or
consumption of foods, wastes from the handling, storage and sale of produce, or
any other matter whatsoever that may decompose and become foul, offensive,
unsanitary or dangerous to health.
REFUSE: Combustible and noncombustible discarded materials including, but not
limited to, paper, wood, glass, metal and cloth products, yard trimmings, tree
branches, furniture, bedding, building materials, leaves, ashes and solid
wastes resulting from industrial and manufacturing processes. (1987 Code §
8.12.010)
4-2-2: RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER:
   A.   Duty To Maintain: It shall be the duty of any owner, agent, tenant,
purchaser, contractor or lessee of any premises within the town, including
places of business, dwelling houses, apartments, tenements, construction sites
or other establishments, at all times, to maintain the premises in a clean and
orderly condition, permitting no deposit or accumulation of materials other
than those necessary or ordinarily attendant upon construction or upon the use
for which such premises are legally intended. Any such accumulation constitutes
a nuisance and a nonconforming use of the premises.
   B.   Provide Garbage Containers: All such persons, where cooking or eating
is done, shall provide and keep at their expense, at all times, garbage
containers which are suitable for the purpose of holding all garbage and refuse
without running over.
   C.   Prevent Blowing Of Refuse: It shall be the affirmative duty of any
owner, agent, tenant, purchaser, contractor or lessee of any premises within
the town, including places of business, dwelling houses, apartments, tenements,
construction sites or other establishments, at all times, not to allow refuse
to blow from the premises of the aforementioned persons onto public property or
the property of other persons and any such owner, agent, tenant, purchaser,
contractor or lessee of any premises shall take whatever reasonable means to
contain said refuse from blowing in any manner not inconsistent with the
provisions of section
4-2-3 of this chapter. Any such failure to affirmatively prevent such blowing
of refuse is hereby declared to constitute a nuisance and a nonconforming use
of the premises. (1987 Code § 8.12.020)
4-2-3: GARBAGE AND REFUSE CONTAINERS:
All garbage and refuse cans shall be watertight and shall have a close fitting
lid or cover and which shall be at all times so maintained in position as to
prevent the ingress and egress of flies and other insects. (1987 Code §§
8.12.030, 18.12.040; amd. Ord. 2020-03, 6-4-2020)
4-2-4: RESERVED:
(Repealed by Ord. 2020-03, 6-4-2020)
4-2-5: ROCKS, DIRT, BUILDING MATERIALS:
Rock, stone, brick, concrete, dirt and other building materials or mineral
waste shall not be permitted to accumulate in alleyways or at the curb. (1987
Code § 8.12.060; amd. Ord. 2020-03, 6-4-2020)
4-2-6: PLACING MATERIALS FOR COLLECTION:
All garbage prepared for collection by waste or garbage collectors shall be
placed on private property adjacent to the alleyway where such exists, or at
the lot line of the street on all lots not contiguous to an adjacent alleyway,
in such a manner as to be readily accessible for collection. Such materials
shall not be permitted to remain at the lot line of the street for more than
twenty-four (24) hours unless completely housed in a decorative enclosure.
(1987 Code § 8.12.070; amd. Ord. 2020-03, 6-4- 2020)
4-2-7: RESERVED:
(Repealed by Ord. 2020-03, 6-4-2020)
4-2-8: RESERVED:
(Repealed by Ord. 2020-03, 6-4-2020)
4-2-9: IMPROPER DISPOSAL:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to use land or places within the town
other than those designated by the governing body for the purpose of dumping
ashes, refuse, garbage, waste or other matter.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to place, deposit, abandon or dump any
refuse or garbage in any dumpster, refuse container or garbage receptacle not
the personal property of that person or his/her landlord without the express
permission of the owner, manager, tenant or person in lawful occupancy of the
unit upon which the refuse or garbage has been placed, deposited, abandoned or
dumped. (1987 Code § 8.12.110)
4-2-10: LITTERING:
   A.   Definition: "Littering" means the disposal or discharge of any waste
product in a public area other than in properly identified waste receptacles.
   B.   Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person to knowingly engage in
littering within the town. (Ord. 05-00, 5-18-2000)
4-2-11: PENALTY:
Unless specifically set out in this chapter, any violation of the provisions of
this chapter constitutes a class B misdemeanor punishable as set forth in
subsection
1-4-1A2 of this code. (Ord. 2012-11, 1-17-2013)
CHAPTER 3
WEEDS
SECTION:
4-3-1: Removal Required
4-3-2: Notice To Comply
4-3-3: Removal By Town
4-3-4: Penalty
4-3-1: REMOVAL REQUIRED:
It shall be the duty of any owner, occupant or agent having control of any lot
or premises to mow or otherwise destroy and remove weeds and/or excessive
vegetation that may grow upon such lot or premises, as well as upon any parking
space between such property and the street and upon that portion of any alley
adjoining such premises. (1987 Code § 8.20.010; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 8-5-2021)
4-3-2: NOTICE TO COMPLY:
It shall be the duty of the officer appointed by the Town to require compliance
with this chapter. The owner, agent or occupant of any premises shall be held
liable for such compliance, and if such person shall refuse or fail to destroy
and remove any weeds and/or excessive vegetation upon any premises under his
care and control, he shall be served with verbal or written notice requiring
removal of such weeds and/or excessive vegetation within three (3) days from
the receipt of such notice. (1987 Code § 8.20.020; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 8-5-2021)
4-3-3: REMOVAL BY TOWN:
Upon failure to comply with any notice given pursuant to section
4-3-2 of this chapter, the Town may have such weeds and/or excessive vegetation
destroyed and removed, charging the cost thereof as a special bill for refuse
removal. Should such bill not be paid promptly, the same shall become a lien
against such property and collectible as such. (1987 Code § 8.20.030; amd. Ord.
2021-06, 8-5-2021)
4-3-4: PENALTY:
Unless specifically set out in this chapter, any violation of the provisions of
this chapter constitutes a class B misdemeanor punishable as set forth in
subsection
1-4-1A2 of this code. (Ord. 2012-11, 1-17-2013)
CHAPTER 4
SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES
SECTION:
4-4-1: Definitions
4-4-2: Prohibition Of Smoking In Public Places
4-4-3: Prohibition Of Smoking In Places Of Employment
4-4-4: Prohibition Of Smoking In Outdoor Areas
4-4-5: Declaration Of Establishment As Smoking
4-4-6: Declaration Of Establishment As Nonsmoking
4-4-7: Where Smoking Not Regulated
4-4-8: Other Applicable Restrictions
4-4-9: Retaliation Prohibited
4-4-10: Notice Not Required
4-4-11: Penalties
4-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings,
unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended:
BUSINESS: Any sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation or
other business entity formed for profit making purposes, including retail
establishments where goods or services are sold, as well as professional
corporations and other entities where legal, medical, dental, engineering,
architectural or other professional services are delivered.
EMPLOYEE: Any person who is employed by an employer in consideration for direct
or indirect monetary wages, experience or profit, and a person who volunteers
his or her services for a nonprofit or business entity.
EMPLOYER: A person, business, partnership, association, corporation, including
a Municipal corporation or other political subdivision of the State, trust, or
nonprofit entity that employs the services of one or more individual persons.
ENCLOSED AREA: All space between a floor and ceiling that is enclosed on all
sides by solid walls or windows, exclusive of doorways, which extend from the
floor to the ceiling.
FIRE DEPARTMENT: The Uinta County Fire Protection and Emergency Services Joint
Powers Board.
HEALTHCARE FACILITY: An office or institution providing care or treatment of
diseases, whether physical, mental, or emotional, or other medical,
physiological, or psychological conditions, including, but not limited to,
hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals or other clinics, including weight control
clinics, nursing homes, homes for the aging or chronically ill, laboratories,
and offices of surgeons, chiropractors, physical therapists, physicians,
dentists, and all specialists with these professions. This definition shall
include all waiting rooms, hallways, private rooms, semiprivate rooms, and
wards with healthcare facilities.
OUTDOOR PATIO: An outdoor area, open to the air at all times, that either: a)
is enclosed by a roof or other overhead covering and not more than two (2)
walls or other side coverings; or b) has no roof or other overhead covering at
all regardless of the number of walls or other side coverings.
PERFORMANCE HALL: Any area or facility that is primarily used for the
exhibition of any motion picture, stage, drama, lecture, musical recital or
other similar performances, including, but not limited to, concert halls and
theaters.
PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT: An area under the control of a public or private employer
which is intended for occupancy by employees during the course of employment,
including, but not limited to, work areas, employee lounges, restrooms,
conference rooms, meeting rooms, classrooms, employee cafeterias, waiting
areas, offices, stairways, and hallways. A private residence is not a "place of
employment" unless it is used as a licensed childcare, licensed adult daycare,
or healthcare facility, or any other aforementioned business.
PRIVATE CLUB: Those organizations or entities defined as a "club" in Wyoming
Statutes section 12-1-101(a)(iii) or successor statute if amended or replaced,
which are not open to the public.
PUBLIC PLACE: An enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which the
public is permitted, including, but not limited to, banks, and other financial
institutions, publicly funded buildings, public conveyances, recreational
facilities, bars, educational facilities, healthcare facilities, laundromats,
public transportation facilities, reception areas, restaurants, retail food
production and marketing establishments including grocery stores, supermarket
and stores where food items are sold for on premises or off premises
consumption, retail service establishments, retail stores, shopping malls,
sports arenas, theaters, and waiting rooms. A private residence is not a
"public place" unless it is used as a licensed childcare, licensed adult
daycare, or healthcare facility.
PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION: A vehicle used in mass public transportation or in the
transportation of the public, including a train, passenger bus, school bus or
other vehicle used to transport pupils, and taxi; or a vehicle that is owned
by, or operated by a business and is open to the public or intended for
exclusive use by employees to travel to and from a place of employment,
including tour vehicles, passenger buses or vans regularly used to transport
customers. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a private vehicle not open to the
public or not used for the transportation of the public or employees during the
times of use, including a private passenger vehicle, a private charter or
rental of a limousine, bus or van, shall not be considered public
transportation.
RESTAURANT: An eating establishment, including, but not limited to, coffee
shops, cafeterias, and public and private school cafeterias, which gives or
offers for sale food to the public, guests, or employees, as well as kitchens
and catering facilities in which food is prepared on the premises and served
elsewhere. The term "restaurant" shall include a bar area within the
restaurant.
RETAIL SALES: Establishments engaged in the sale of goods or merchandise to the
general public for personal or household consumption and rendering services
incidental to the sale of such goods. A retail sales establishment is usually a
place of business and is engaged in activity to attract the general public to
make purchases.
SHOPPING MALL: An enclosed public walkway or hall area that serves to connect
retail or professional establishments.
SMOKE OR SMOKING: The inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying of any lighted
tobacco product, weed, plant or other combustible product in a smoking
instrument or the placement of smoking instrument containing a lighted tobacco
product, weed, plant or other combustible product in an ashtray or other
receptacle and allowing smoke to diffuse into the air, as well as the use of
personal vaporizers, e-cigarettes, vaping liquid, e-liquid, e-juice and/or
other devices or products creating vapor and/or aerosol for recreational
inhalation. This definition does not include incense unless that incense
product consists of or includes tobacco or other controlled substance.
SMOKING INSTRUMENT: Any cigar, cigarette, pipe, hookah or water pipe, personal
vaporizer, e-cigarette or any other device used or intended to be used to aid
in the consumption, inhalation or ingestion of a lighted tobacco product, weed,
plant or other combustible product or aerosol or vapor for recreational
purposes.
SPORTS ARENA: Sports pavilions, stadiums, health clubs, gymnasiums, health
spas, swimming pools, roller and ice rinks, bowling alleys, and other similar
places where members of the general public assemble to engage in physical
exercise, participate in athletic competition, or witness sports or other
events.
TAVERN, LOUNGE OR BAR: An establishment whose primary source of income derives
from the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests
on the premises and in which the serving of food is only incidental to the
consumption of such beverages, including, but not limited to, taverns,
nightclubs, cocktail lounges, and cabarets.
YOUTH: Any person who has not attained twenty-one (21) years of age. (Ord.
2011-04, 4-21-2011; amd. Ord. 2018-02, 4-5-2018; Ord. 2020-05, 8-20-2020)
4-4-2: PROHIBITION OF SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES:
Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed areas of public places within the
Town of Lyman, including, but not limited to, the following places:
   A.   Galleries, libraries and museums;
   B.   Areas available to and customarily used by the general public in
businesses and nonprofit entities patronized by the public, including, but not
limited to, professional offices, banks, laundromats, hotels and motels;
   C.   Bingo facilities;
   D.   Convention facilities;
   E.   Elevators;
   F.   Taverns, lounges or bars;
   G.   Healthcare facilities;
   H.   Licensed childcare and adult daycare facilities;
   I.   Lobbies, hallways and other common areas in apartment buildings,
condominiums, trailer parks, retirement facilities, nursing homes, and other
multiple-unit residential facilities;
   J.   Performance halls;
   K.   Polling places;
   L.   Private clubs;
   M.   Restaurants;
   N.   Restrooms, lobbies, reception areas, hallways, and other common use
areas;
   O.   Retail stores;
   P.   Rooms, chambers, places of meeting or public assembly, including school
buildings, under the control of an agency, board, commission, committee or
council of the Town of Lyman or a political subdivision of the State, to the
extent the place is subject to the jurisdiction of the Town of Lyman;
   Q.   Shopping malls;
   R.   Sports arenas and convention halls, including bowling facilities;
   S.   Public transportation;
   T.   Athletic facilities;
   U.   Buildings, facilities and vehicles owned, leased or operated by the
Town of Lyman. (Ord. 2011-04, 4-21-2011)
4-4-3: PROHIBITION OF SMOKING IN PLACES OF EMPLOYMENT:
   A.   Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed areas within places of
employment. This includes common work areas, auditoriums, classrooms,
conference and meeting rooms, elevators, hallways, medical facilities,
cafeterias, employee lounges, stairs, restrooms, vehicles and all other
enclosed facilities.
   B.   All employers subject to this chapter shall communicate this
prohibition on smoking to all existing employees by the effective date hereof
and to all prospective employees on their application for employment. (Ord.
2011-04, 4-21-2011)
4-4-4: PROHIBITION OF SMOKING IN OUTDOOR AREAS:
Smoking shall be prohibited in the following outdoor places:
   A.   In any and all locations under the direct control of the town of Lyman
adjacent to and contiguous to the Heritage Barn.
   B.   In any and all locations under the direct control of the town, or any
street or sidewalk thereof, during any scheduled event attended by more than
fifty (50) people.
   C.   In any park or playground under the direct control of the town wherein
minors are presently located.
   D.   In any land owned, leased or under the direct control of Uinta County
school district 6 or other public educational facility used primarily by youth.
   E.   Within ten feet (10') of any exits, entrance, operable window, or
ventilation system of enclosed areas where smoking is prohibited. (Ord. 2011-
04, 4-21-2011)
4-4-5: DECLARATION OF ESTABLISHMENT AS SMOKING:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, an owner, operator,
manager, or other person in control of an establishment, facility or outdoor
area may declare that entire establishment, facility or outdoor area as a
smoking place by posting prominent signs clearly and conspicuously declaring
the same to be a smoking establishment on or near every public entrance. Such
declaration shall not be a defense against any other state, local or federal
smoking regulation outside of this chapter. (Ord. 2011-04, 4-21-2011)
4-4-6: DECLARATION OF ESTABLISHMENT AS NONSMOKING:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, an owner, operator,
manager, or other person in control of an establishment, facility or outdoor
area may declare that entire establishment, facility or outdoor area as a
nonsmoking place by posting "No Smoking" signs or the international "no
smoking" symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning
cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it) clearly and
conspicuously. Violators of a privately declared nonsmoking area prohibition
are subject to the same penalties established herein for town established
nonsmoking areas. (Ord. 2011-04, 4-21-2011)
4-4-7: WHERE SMOKING NOT REGULATED:
   A.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary,
the following areas shall be exempt from the provisions of sections
4-4-2 and
4-4-3 of this chapter:
      1.   Private residences, except when used as a licensed childcare,
licensed adult daycare or healthcare facility;
      2.   Hotel and motel rooms that are rented to guests and are designated
as smoking rooms;
      3.   Outdoor places of employment, except those covered by the provisions
of section
4-4-4 of this chapter;
      4.   Private offices, provided that the private office is not open to
public, the public is not invited, and the office is not intended for occupancy
by employees during the course of their employment;
      5.   Outside patios. If sliding or folding windows or doors or other
windows or doors from any part of the border to the outdoor patio, the openings
shall be closed to prevent the migration of smoke into the enclosed area. If
sliding or folding windows or doors or other windows or doors do not prevent
the migration of smoke into the enclosed area, the outdoor patio shall be
considered an extension of the enclosed area and subject to the prohibitions of
this chapter;
      6.   Private or business vehicles, except those used for public or
multiple employee transportation. (Ord. 2011-04, 4-21-2011)
4-4-8: OTHER APPLICABLE RESTRICTIONS:
Smoking shall not be permitted, and smoking areas shall not be designated, in
those areas where smoking is prohibited by the fire chief, state statute,
ordinances or regulations of the town or other applicable laws or regulations.
Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to permit smoking where it
is otherwise restricted by law. (Ord. 2011-04, 4-21-2011)
4-4-9: RETALIATION PROHIBITED:
No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire, or in any manner
retaliate against an employee, applicant for employment or customer because
that employee, applicant, or customer exercises any rights afforded by this
chapter or reports or attempts to prosecute a violation of this chapter. (Ord.
2011-04, 4-21-2011)
4-4-10: NOTICE NOT REQUIRED:
Failure of the owner, manager, operator or employee of an establishment to
inform a person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited by the
provisions of this chapter shall not constitute a defense for a violation of
this chapter. (Ord. 2011-04, 4-21-2011)
4-4-11: PENALTIES:
   A.   A person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited by the
provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by:
      1.   A fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first
violation.
      2.   A fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second
violation within a one year period.
      3.   A fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a third or
subsequent violation within a one year period.
   B.   A person who owns, manages, operates or otherwise controls a public
place or place of employment and who knowingly fails to comply with the
provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by:
      1.   A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first
violation.
      2.   A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second
violation within a one year period.
      3.   A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a third or
subsequent violation within a one year period.
   C.   In addition to the fines established by this section, violation of this
chapter by a person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls a public
place or place of employment may result in the suspension or revocation of any
permit or license issued to the person for the premises on which the violation
occurred. Further, a violation of this chapter constitutes a public nuisance;
the town attorney may initiate appropriate enforcement proceedings, including
injunctive or other appropriate action to prevent or enjoin such violation.
   D.   Each separate occurrence of a violation of this chapter shall be
considered a separate and distinct violation.
   E.   A licensee who violates this chapter and section is declared to be in
violation of law. (Ord. 2011-04, 4-21-2011)
TITLE 5
POLICE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
5-1-1: Established
5-1-2: Mayor To Head Department
5-1-3: Chief Of Police
5-1-4: Officers
5-1-5: Record Keeping
5-1-6: Interfering With Police
5-1-1: ESTABLISHED:
There is established a police department for the town, to be composed of a
chief of police and such number of subordinate police officers of such rank as
the town council shall, from time to time, determine. (1987 Code § 2.24.010)
5-1-2: MAYOR TO HEAD DEPARTMENT:
   A.   Mayor To Superintend: The mayor shall be the head of the police
department and shall superintend and direct the police generally and take such
measures as he may deem expedient for the preservation of the peace and good
order and the enforcing of the laws and ordinances in the town.
   B.   Special Police Officers: The mayor shall have power to appoint special
police officers on occasions when an increase in the department is required for
the peace and good order of the town. (1987 Code § 2.24.020)
5-1-3: CHIEF OF POLICE:
The police chief shall be the chief of the acting police and all police
officers shall be in subordination to him, except in cases otherwise provided
for by ordinance. It shall be his duty to cause the public peace to be
preserved and to see that all laws and ordinances are enforced and to perform
such other duties as the council may require of him or that he is required to
do by the town ordinances. (1987 Code § 2.24.030)
5-1-4: OFFICERS:
   A.   Qualifications; Oath: Every person appointed to the office of police
officer shall be at the time of his appointment a citizen of the United States
and, previous to exercising any function of his office, shall take and
subscribe an oath or affirmation that he will faithfully and impartially
discharge the duties of his office according to the best of his knowledge and
ability. (1987 Code § 2.24.040)
   B.   Duties: It shall be the duty of the police officers to aid and assist
the police chief in the execution of his duties. They shall have power and
authority in the town to serve and execute warrants and other processes for the
apprehension and commitment of persons charged with or held for examination or
trial or taken in execution for the commission of any crime or misdemeanor or
violation of any law or ordinance of the town. They shall be vested with and
have all the power and authority conferred upon police officers pursuant to the
laws of the state. (1987 Code § 2.24.050)
   C.   Failure To Perform: Any police officer who neglects or refuses to
perform any duty required of him by the ordinances of the town, or who in the
discharge of his official duties, is guilty of any fraud, extortion,
oppression, partiality, or wilful wrong or injustice, shall be punished
according to the provisions set forth in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1987 Code § 2.24.060)
5-1-5: RECORD KEEPING:
   A.   Police Records: The chief of police shall be and is hereby designated
as "custodian", as defined in Wyoming Statutes section 16-4-201, of all police
records except personnel records, and shall be charged with the keeping of the
records according to the standards which may be set for by the Wyoming state
archives. Such standards shall include, but are not limited to, keeping the
records in a secured, fire safe, water safe and climate controlled environment
and for the storage of historical records in acid free containers.
   B.   Personnel Records: The town clerk, as "official custodian" shall
maintain all personnel records for all employees of the town, including police
personnel, according to the standards set by the Wyoming state archives. (Ord.
14-00, 11-16-2000)
5-1-6: INTERFERING WITH POLICE:
Whoever in the town resists any police officer or member of the police
department in the discharge of his duties or who in any way interferes with or
hinders or prevents him from discharging his duties, and whoever in any manner
assists any person to escape or attempt to escape from custody, or rescues or
attempts to rescue any person in custody of a police officer, shall be punished
according to the provisions set forth in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1987 Code § 2.24.070)
CHAPTER 2
GENERAL OFFENSES
SECTION:
5-2-1: Penalty
5-2-2: Accessory Before The Fact
5-2-3: Attempt To Commit An Offense
5-2-4: Solicitation
5-2-5: Conspiracy
5-2-1: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any section of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor
and upon conviction thereof shall be punished according to the penalty
provisions prescribed for the underlying offense. (Ord. 2012-11, 1-17-2013)
5-2-2: ACCESSORY BEFORE THE FACT:
   A.   A person who knowingly aids or abets in the commission of an offense,
or who counsels, encourages, hires, commands or procures an offense to be
committed, is an accessory before the fact.
   B.   An accessory before the fact:
      1.   May be indicted, informed against, tried and convicted as if he were
a principal;
      2.   May be indicted, informed against, tried and convicted either before
or after and whether or not the principal offender is indicted, informed
against, tried or convicted; and
      3.   Upon conviction, is subject to the same punishment and penalties as
are prescribed by law for the punishment of the principal. (Ord. 2010-11, 11-4-
2010)
5-2-3: ATTEMPT TO COMMIT AN OFFENSE:
   A.   A person is guilty of an attempt to commit a crime if:
      1.   With the intent to commit the crime, he does any act which is a
substantial step towards commission of the crime. A "substantial step" is
conduct which is strongly corroborative of the firmness of the person's
intention to complete the commission of the crime; or
      2.   He or she intentionally engages in conduct which would constitute
the crime had the attendant circumstances been as the person believes them to
be.
   B.   A person is not liable under this section if, under circumstances
manifesting a voluntary and complete renunciation of his criminal intention, he
avoided the commission of the crime attempted by abandoning his criminal
effort. Within the meaning of this subsection, renunciation of criminal purpose
is not voluntary if it is motivated, in whole or in part, by circumstances, not
present or apparent at the inception of the person's course of conduct, which
increase the probability of detection or apprehension or which make more
difficult the accomplishment of the criminal intention. Renunciation is not
complete if it is motivated by a decision to postpone the criminal conduct
until a more advantageous time or to transfer the criminal effort to another
but similar objective or victim. (Ord. 2010-11, 11-4-2010)
5-2-4: SOLICITATION:
   A.   A person is guilty of solicitation to commit a crime if, with intent
that a crime be committed, he or she commands, encourages or facilitates the
commission of that crime under circumstances strongly corroborative of the
intention that the crime be committed but the solicited crime is not attempted
or committed.
   B.   A person is not liable under this section if, after soliciting another
person to commit a crime, he or she persuaded the other person not to do so or
otherwise prevented the commission of the crime, under circumstances
manifesting a voluntary and complete renunciation of his criminal intention.
(Ord. 2010-11, 11-4-2010)
5-2-5: CONSPIRACY:
   A.   A person is guilty of conspiracy to commit a crime if he or she agrees
with one or more persons that they or one or more of them will commit a crime
and one or more of them does an overt act to effect the objective of the
agreement.
   B.   A person is not liable under this section if after conspiring he or she
withdraws from the conspiracy and thwarts its success under circumstances
manifesting voluntary and complete renunciation of his criminal intention.
   C.   A conspiracy may be prosecuted in the town if the agreement was entered
into or any act evidencing the conspiracy or furthering the purpose took place.
(Ord. 2010-11, 11-4-2010)
ARTICLE A. ALCOHOL
SECTION:
5-2A-1: Furnishing To Minors
5-2A-2: Endangering Welfare Of A Minor
5-2A-3: Purchase And Possession By Minors
5-2A-4: Possession In Vehicle With Intent To Distribute To Minor
5-2A-5: Public Impairment And/Or Intoxication
5-2A-6: Open Containers In Vehicles
5-2A-7: Alcohol On Public Property
5-2A-8: Penalty
5-2A-1: FURNISHING TO MINORS:
   A.   Prohibited: Any person who sells, furnishes, gives or causes to be
sold, furnished or given away any alcoholic liquor or malt beverage to any
person under the age of twenty one (21) years, who is not his legal ward,
medical patient or member of his own immediate family, is guilty of a class A
misdemeanor punishable as set forth in subsection
1-4-1A1 of this code.
   B.   Exception: This section does not apply to sales by the commission or a
wholesaler to a licensee under this title. (Ord. 2012-11, 1-17-2013)
5-2A-2: ENDANGERING WELFARE OF A MINOR:
   A.   Offense Described: A person who is not the parent or guardian of the
minor, commits the offense of endangering the welfare of a minor if the person
knowingly allows or permits a person under twenty one (21) years of age to:
      1.   Enter or remain in a place under the person's control in which
unlawful activities involving controlled substances or alcohol are maintained
or conducted.
      2.   Consume alcohol or controlled substances in violation of the law in
a place under the person's control.
   B.   In Control Defined: A person is considered to be "in control" of a
place or property when that person is the owner, renter, tenant, keeper,
caretaker or in fact has control over the persons allowed on the premises.
(Ord. 1-95, 4-20-1995)
   C.   Penalty: A violation of this section constitutes a class A misdemeanor
punishable as set forth in subsection
1-4-1A1 of this code. (Ord. 2012-11, 1-17-2013)
5-2A-3: PURCHASE AND POSSESSION BY MINORS:
   A.   Prohibited: No person under the age of twenty one (21) years shall buy,
sell, drink, consume, possess, or solicit the sale or purchase of alcoholic
liquor or malt beverage, or be drunk or under the influence of alcoholic liquor
or malt beverage or a controlled substance in the town. (Ord. 2012-11, 1-17-
2013)
   B.   Exception: This subsection does not apply to possession and/or
consumption of alcoholic or malt beverages by a person under the age of twenty
one (21) years under the following conditions:
      1.   When making a delivery of alcoholic or malt beverages pursuant to
his employment;
      2.   When the consumption has occurred in the physical presence of, and
with consent of, the parent or legal guardian;
      3.   When licensed under this title; or
      4.   When serving alcoholic or malt beverages pursuant to his employment
in a restaurant which holds a license to serve alcoholic or malt beverages, if
the person is at least eighteen (18) years of age. (Ord. 3-97, 6-19-1997)
   C.   False Identification: No person under the age of twenty one (21) years
shall attempt in any manner to purchase alcoholic or malt beverages, nor
falsify any identification nor use any false identification or identification
of another in order to obtain alcoholic or malt beverages.
   D.   Prima Facie Evidence Of Age And Identity: A motor vehicle driver's
license, a registration certificate issued under the federal selective service
act, an identification card issued to a member of the armed forces or an
identification card issued by the department of revenue is prima facie evidence
of the age and identity of a person. Proof that a licensee or his employee or
agent demanded, was shown and acted in reasonable reliance upon the information
contained in any one of the above documents as identification is a defense to
any criminal prosecution or action for the suspension or revocation of a
license.
   E.   Penalty: A violation of this section constitutes a class B misdemeanor
punishable as set forth in subsection
1-4-1A2 of this code. (Ord. 2012-11, 1-17-2013)
5-2A-4: POSSESSION IN VEHICLE WITH INTENT TO DISTRIBUTE TO MINOR:
   A.   Prohibited: No person who is at least twenty one (21) years of age
shall transport, or have in his possession or control, any alcoholic liquor or
malt beverage, with the intent of furnishing the same to any person under the
age of twenty one (21) years, while operating or occupying a motor vehicle.
(1987 Code § 9.04.030)
   B.   Penalty: A violation of this section constitutes a class A misdemeanor
punishable as set forth in subsection
1-4-1A1 of this code. (Ord. 2012-11, 1-17-2013)
5-2A-5: PUBLIC IMPAIRMENT AND/OR INTOXICATION:
   A.   No person who is or remains in any public place or public gathering,
shall drink or otherwise consume any intoxicating liquor, malt liquor,
intoxicating substance, intoxicating compound(s) or illegal controlled
substances of any kind, or any inhale glue, paint or other intoxicating
substance(s).
   B.   No person who is or remains in any public place or public gathering,
shall be impaired, drunk, intoxicated or under the influence from drinking or
consuming intoxicating liquor, intoxicating malt liquor, intoxicating substance
(s) or intoxicating compound(s), illegal controlled substances of any kind, nor
be intoxicated from inhaling inhale glue, paint or other intoxicating substance
(s) so used for the purpose of becoming intoxicated; nor be intoxicated from
the overuse and/or misuse of any legally prescribed controlled substance(s).
   C.   A person in violation of this section is guilty of a class A
misdemeanor punishable as set forth in subsection
1-4-1A1 of this code. (Ord. 2016-07, 7-7-2016)
5-2A-6: OPEN CONTAINERS IN VEHICLES:
   A.   Definition: For the purposes of this section, an "open container" is
any glass, cup, bottle, can or other receptacle used for drinking which is not
sealed or capped.
   B.   Consumption Or Possession Prohibited: It is unlawful to consume or to
possess alcoholic or malt beverages in an open container while operating a
motor vehicle.
   C.   Open Container Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person to consume or
to carry in an open container any alcoholic or malt beverage while upon a
public street, sidewalk, curb or other public area, except areas designated by
the town council for the consumption of such beverages, and areas licensed by a
twenty four (24) hour malt beverage or catering permit in accordance with
section
3-2-3-12 of this code. (1987 Code § 9.04.050)
   D.   Penalty: A violation of this section constitutes a class B misdemeanor
punishable as set forth in subsection
1-4-1A2 of this code. (Ord. 2012-11, 1-17-2013)
5-2A-7: ALCOHOL ON PUBLIC PROPERTY:
No person shall possess an open container or keg of alcoholic liquor or malt
beverage, nor imbibe, drink, consume, distribute, give, furnish, sell or cause
to be sold, given or distributed any alcoholic liquor or malt beverage on any
town property or public place without a valid permit or license granted
pursuant to and within the scope of title 3, chapter 2 of this code. (Ord.
2012-04, 5-3-2012)
5-2A-8: PENALTY:
Unless specifically set out in this article, any violation of the provisions of
this article constitutes a class A misdemeanor punishable as set forth in
subsection
1-4-1A1 of this code. (Ord. 2012-11, 1-17-2013)
ARTICLE B. OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST PUBLIC OFFICERS AND GOVERNMENT
SECTION:
5-2B-1: Impersonating An Officer
5-2B-2: Interference With Town Officials
5-2B-3: Duty To Assist An Officer
5-2B-4: Interference With Fire Alarm System
5-2B-5: Interference With Fire Hydrants Or Water Mains
5-2B-6: Failure To Appear In Court
5-2B-7: Failure To Pay
5-2B-8: Penalty
5-2B-1: IMPERSONATING AN OFFICER:
It is unlawful to impersonate any law enforcement officer in the town. (1987
Code § 9.08.010)
5-2B-2: INTERFERENCE WITH TOWN OFFICIALS:
No person in the town shall resist any town officers in the discharge of their
duties, or in any way interfere with or hinder or prevent them from discharging
their duties. (1987 Code § 9.08.020)
5-2B-3: DUTY TO ASSIST AN OFFICER:
It shall be the duty of all persons within the town, when called upon by any
police officer, to promptly aid and assist him in the execution of his duties.
(1987 Code § 9.08.030)
5-2B-4: INTERFERENCE WITH FIRE ALARM SYSTEM:
No person shall interfere with any part of the fire alarm system unless so
authorized by the fire chief. (1987 Code § 9.08.040)
5-2B-5: INTERFERENCE WITH FIRE HYDRANTS OR WATER MAINS:
No person shall shut off or turn on or interfere in any way with any fire
hydrant, valve or water main in the town unless so authorized by the governing
body. (1987 Code § 9.08.050)
5-2B-6: FAILURE TO APPEAR IN COURT:
   A.   Any person who fails to appear in response to any summons, citation,
information or subpoena served on such person shall be guilty of a violation of
this section.
   B.   Upon a finding by the court that a person has failed to appear in
response to a summons, personally signed citation, information or subpoena
served on such person, the court may issue a warrant for the arrest of said
person. (Ord. 8-2004, 9-16-2004)
5-2B-7: FAILURE TO PAY:
   A.   Guilty Of Violation: Any person who fails to pay any fines, costs,
fees, restitution or other money ordered to be paid by the municipal court of
the town of Lyman in the time and manner ordered shall be guilty of a violation
of this article.
   B.   Issuance Of Summons, Citation Or Warrant: Upon a finding by the court
that a person has failed to pay as directed by the court in a valid order, the
court may issue a summons commanding the appearance of that person, order law
enforcement officers of the town of Lyman to issue a citation to that person,
or issue a warrant for the arrest of that person. (Ord. 2007-02, 2-15-2007)
   C.   Penalty: A violation of this section constitutes a class B misdemeanor
punishable as set forth in subsection
1-4-1A2 of this code. (Ord. 2012-11, 1-17-2013)
5-2B-8: PENALTY:
Unless specifically set out in this article, any violation of the provisions of
this article constitutes a class A misdemeanor punishable as set forth in
subsection
1-4-1A1 of this code. (Ord. 2012-11, 1-17-2013)
ARTICLE C. OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON
SECTION:
5-2C-1: Assault
5-2C-2: Assault And Battery
5-2C-3: Dangerous Airtight Containers
5-2C-4: Domestic Abuse
5-2C-5: Penalty
5-2C-1: ASSAULT:
Whoever, having the present ability to do so, unlawfully attempts to commit a
violent injury on the person of another, is guilty of assault. (1987 Code §
9.12.010)
5-2C-2: ASSAULT AND BATTERY:
   A.   A person is guilty of battery if that person intentionally, knowingly
or recklessly causes bodily injury to another person by use of physical force.
Battery constitutes a class A misdemeanor punishable as set forth in subsection
1-4-1A1 of this code.
   B.   A person is guilty of unlawful contact if that person touches another
person in a rude, insolent or angry manner without intentionally using
sufficient physical force to cause bodily injury to another. Unlawful contact
constitutes a class B misdemeanor punishable as set forth in subsection
1-4-1A2 of this code. (Ord. 2012-11, 1-17-2013)
5-2C-3: DANGEROUS AIRTIGHT CONTAINERS:
It is unlawful for any person to leave or permit to remain outside of any
dwelling, building or other structure, or within any unoccupied or abandoned
building, dwelling or other structure under his control, in a place accessible
to children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or
other container which has an airtight door or lid, snap lock or other locking
device which may not be released from the inside, without first removing said
door or lid, snap lock or other locking device from the icebox, refrigerator or
container. A violation of this section constitutes a class B misdemeanor
punishable as set forth in subsection
1-4-1A2 of this code. (Ord. 2012-11, 1-17-2013)
5-2C-4: DOMESTIC ABUSE:
   A.   Definitions: As used in this section, the following words and terms
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
    ADULT: A person who is sixteen (16) years of age or older or legally
married.
   BODILY INJURY: Physical pain, injury, illness or any impairment of physical
condition.
   DOMESTIC ABUSE: Physical abuse, threats of physical abuse or acts which
unreasonably restrain the personal liberty of any household member by any other
household member.
   DOMESTIC DISPUTE: Any verbal or physical argument or confrontation between
household members.
   HOUSEHOLD MEMBER:
      1.   Persons married to each other;
      2.   Persons living with each other as if married;
      3.   Persons formerly married to each other;
      4.   Persons formerly living together as if married;
      5.   Parents and their adult children;
      6.   Other adults sharing common living quarters; and
      7.   Persons who are the parents of a child but who are not living with
each other.
   PHYSICAL ABUSE: Touching another in a rude, insolent or angry manner, or
attempting or threatening to cause bodily injury to another while having the
present ability to do so.
   B.   Prohibited: Any person who inflicts or causes physical abuse of a
household member during a domestic dispute is guilty of a crime. (Ord. 1-2002,
3-21-2002)
5-2C-5: PENALTY:
Unless specifically set out in this article, any violation of the provisions of
this article constitutes a class A misdemeanor punishable as set forth in
subsection
1-4-1A1 of this code. (Ord. 2012-11, 1-17-2013)
ARTICLE D. OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC DECENCY
SECTION:
5-2D-1: Gambling
5-2D-2: Indecent Behavior
5-2D-3: Public Nudity
5-2D-4: Prostitution
5-2D-5: Voyeurism
5-2D-6: Marijuana
5-2D-7: Hypnotics And Narcotics
5-2D-8: Drug Paraphernalia
5-2D-9: Lewd And Lascivious Behavior
5-2D-10: Penalty
5-2D-1: GAMBLING:
   A.   Prohibited: No person shall play, deal, carry on or conduct any game of
chance for remuneration whatsoever or any plan, scheme or device for money,
checks, credits, goods, chattels or anything of value by means of cards, dice,
wheels, slot machines, pinball machines, vending devices, tops, punchboards,
lotteries, raffles or any contrivance, means, device or machine of any
denomination or name whatsoever within the town unless said game is expressly
authorized by Wyoming law. (Ord. 2014-04, 11-20-2014)
   B.   Allowing: No person shall knowingly permit subsection A of this section
to be violated in or upon the premises owned, managed, or controlled by him.
(1987 Code § 9.16.020)
   C.   Confiscation Of Devices: It shall be the duty of the chief of police to
seize any game, device, cards, tools and implements or other articles or things
designed for the purpose of gambling, employed or used by or in the possession
of parties arrested for gambling, and, upon conviction of the parties so
arrested and upon order of the judge, to confiscate and destroy them. (1987
Code § 9.16.030)
   D.   Penalty: A violation of this section constitutes a class B misdemeanor
punishable as set forth in subsection
1-4-1A2 of this code. (Ord. 2012-11, 1-17-2013)
5-2D-2: INDECENT BEHAVIOR:
No person shall appear in any public place within the town in a state of nudity
or indecent dress, or make any indecent exposure of his or her person, or be
guilty of any lewd or indecent behavior, or exhibit, sell or offer to sell any
obscene books or materials, or perform any indecent, immoral or lewd act. (1987
Code § 9.16.040)
5-2D-3: PUBLIC NUDITY:
It is unlawful for any person to appear in a state of nudity in any public
place. For the purposes of this section, "nudity" means the showing of the
human male or female genitals or pubic area or female breasts with less than a
fully opaque covering. (1987 Code § 9.16.050)
5-2D-4: PROSTITUTION:
   A.   House Of Prostitution: No person shall keep, set up, maintain or
operate any place, structure, building or conveyance for the purpose of
prostitution, or with knowledge or reasonable cause to know that the same is or
is to be used for such purpose, or receive or offer to agree to receive any
person in any place, structure, building or conveyance for the purpose of
prostitution or permit any person to remain therein for such purpose.
   B.   Transport: No person shall direct, take, transport or offer or agree to
take or transport any person to any place, structure or building or to any
other person with knowledge or reasonable cause to know that the purpose of
such directing, taking or transporting is prostitution.
   C.   Reside, Enter Or Remain: No person shall reside in, enter or remain in
any place, structure or building, or enter or remain in any conveyance for the
purpose of prostitution.
   D.   Engage In Or Solicit Prostitution: No person shall engage in or solicit
prostitution or aid or abet prostitution, by solicitation or by any means
whatsoever. (1987 Code § 9.16.060)
5-2D-5: VOYEURISM:
No person shall, without consent of the person being viewed, look, peer or peep
into any window, restroom, bath, shower, dressing or fitting room, tanning
booth and/or any other enclosed area where the person viewed has a reasonable
expectation of privacy. The misdemeanor of voyeurism includes peering or
peeping by means of electronic, video, mechanical, physical means and/or any
method of recording and/or transmission of images. Voyeurism is a class A
misdemeanor pursuant to subsection
1-4-1A1 of this code. (Ord. 2016-10, 10-20-2016)
5-2D-6: MARIJUANA:
Any person who knowingly or intentionally uses or is under the influence of
marijuana within the corporate limits of the town is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(1987 Code § 9.16.080)
5-2D-7: HYPNOTICS AND NARCOTICS:
   A.   Hypnotics:
      1.   Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person, except as provided in
subsection A2 of this section, to possess, transport, sell, manufacture,
compound, furnish, administer or give away any hypnotic drug, including, but
not limited to, the following:
         a.   Acetyluria derivatives, lysergic acid, "LSD" (lysergic acid
diethylamide) and "DMT" (N-N-dimethyltryptamine), including their salts and
derivatives, or any compounds, mixtures or preparations which are chemically
identical with such substances.
         b.   Barbituric acid or its derivatives, chloral, paraldehyde,
sulfomethane derivatives, amphetamine or its optical isomers or their salts, or
any compounds, mixtures or preparations that may be used for producing hypnotic
effects.
      2.   Exceptions: Subsection A1 of this section shall not apply to a
physician, dentist, veterinarian or other person licensed in the state to
prescribe or administer drugs; or to employees of physicians, dentists,
veterinarians or other persons licensed in the state to prescribe or administer
drugs, or pharmacies, hospitals, clinics or public health agencies, or
manufacturers, compounders, processors, wholesale druggists, common or contract
carriers or law enforcement officials acting in the scope of their respective
employments; or to any person who has obtained such drug upon a valid
prescription of physician, dentist, veterinarian or other person licensed in
the state to prescribe or administer drugs, so long as such drugs are held in
the original containers in which such drugs were delivered. (1987 Code §
9.16.090)
   B.   Narcotics: It is further unlawful for any person, not so authorized by
law, to be in possession of, use, sell, barter, give away or in any manner
distribute marijuana, cocaine, opium, chloral hydrate, methylene dioxy
pyrrolidin ketone, synthetic cannabinoids (including, but not limited to,
cannabicyclohexanol, JWH-018, JWH-073, and HU-210) or any other narcotic,
opiate or drug or derivatives of any of them, or any product the effect of
which is to induce sleep or delirium. Any person who shall be the owner or
occupant of any building, place or premises, who shall knowingly permit on such
premises any of the products, drugs or derivatives referred to in this section
as not authorized by law is guilty of violation of this section. (Ord. 2010-13,
12-16-2010)
5-2D-8: DRUG PARAPHERNALIA:
   A.   Definition: "Drug paraphernalia" as used in this section means all
equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use
or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting,
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing,
testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing,
injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body a
"controlled substance" as defined by the Wyoming controlled substances act of
1971 1 , hereinafter referred to as the "act". Such act by this reference is
hereby incorporated in this section as if fully set forth. "Drug paraphernalia"
includes, but is not limited to:
      1.   Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which
is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived.
      2.   Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing controlled
substances.
      3.   Isomerization devices used, intended for use or designed for use in
increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance.
      4.   Testing equipment used, intended for use or designed for use in
identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled
substances.
      5.   Scales and balances used, intended for use or designed for use in
weighing or measuring controlled substances.
      6.   Dilutents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol,
mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for use or designed for use in
cutting controlled substances.
      7.   Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use or designed for
use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining,
marijuana.
      8.   Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used,
intended for use or designed for use in compounding controlled substances.
      9.   Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended
for use or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled
substances.
      10.   Containers and other objects used, intended for use or designed for
use in storing or concealing controlled substances.
      11.   Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended for
use or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances into
the human body. (1987 Code § 9.16.100)
      12.   Objects used, intended for use or designed for use in ingesting,
inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana or other controlled substance into
the human body, such as: (Ord. 2012-11, 1-17-2013)
         a.   Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, ceramic pipes,
with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or punctured metal
bowls.
         b.   Water pipes.
         c.   Carburetion tubes and devices.
         d.   Smoking and carburetion masks.
         e.   "Roach clips", meaning objects used to hold burning material,
such as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be
held in the hand.
         f.   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials.
         g.   Chamber pipes.
         h.   Carburetor pipes.
         i.   Electric pipes.
         j.   Air driven pipes.
         k.   Chillums.
         l.   Bongs.
         m.   Ice pipes or chillers.
   B.   Determination: In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia,
a court or other authority should consider, in addition to all other logically
relevant factors, the following:
      1.   Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object
concerning its use.
      2.   Prior convictions, if any, of an owner or of anyone in control of
the object, under any state or federal law relating to any controlled
substance.
      3.   The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct
violation of the act.
      4.   The proximity of the object to controlled substances.
      5.   The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object.
      6.   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of the owner, or of
anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom he knows, or
should reasonably know, intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of
the act. The innocence of the owner, or of anyone in control of the object, as
to a direct violation of the act shall not prevent a finding that the object is
intended for use or designated for use as drug paraphernalia.
      7.   Instruction, oral or written, provided with the object concerning
its use.
      8.   Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or
depict its use.
      9.   National and local advertising concerning its use.
      10.   The manner in which the object is displayed for sale.
      11.   Whether the owner or anyone in control of the object is a
legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a
licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products.
      12.   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the
object to the total sales of the business enterprise.
      13.   The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the
community.
      14.   Expert testimony concerning its use.
   C.   Possession: It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with
intent to use, "drug paraphernalia" as defined in this section, to plant,
propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce,
process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject,
ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled
substance in violation of the act.
   D.   Manufacture Or Delivery: It is unlawful for any person to deliver,
possess with intent to deliver or manufacture with intent to deliver drug
paraphernalia, knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should
know, that it will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest,
manufacture, compound, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or
otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of
the act.
   E.   Advertisement: It is unlawful for any person to place in any newspaper,
magazine, handbill or other publication any advertisement, knowing, or under
circumstances where one reasonably should know, that the purpose of the
advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote the sale of objects designed
or intended for use as drug paraphernalia.
   F.   Civil Forfeiture And Seizures; Property Subject To Forfeiture: The
following are subject to forfeiture: all "drug paraphernalia" as defined by
this section.
   G.   Seizure Of Property Subject To Forfeiture: Property subject to
forfeiture under subsection F of this section may be seized by any law
enforcement officer of the state upon process issued by any court having
jurisdiction over the property. Seizure without process may be made if:
      1.   The seizure is incident to an arrest or a search warrant.
      2.   The property subject to seizure has been the subject of a prior
judgment in favor of the state in a criminal injunction or forfeiture
proceedings based upon the act.
   H.   Prompt Institution Of Proceedings: In the event of seizure pursuant to
subsection G of this section, proceedings under subsection I of this section
shall be instituted promptly.
   I.   Seized Property Not Repleviable; Sealing Or Removal Of Seized Property:
Property taken or detained under this section shall not be subject to replevin
but is deemed to be in the custody of the town, subject only to the orders and
decrees of the court having jurisdiction over the forfeiture proceedings. When
property is seized under this section, the law enforcement officer may:
      1.   Place the property under seal;
      2.   Remove the property to a place designated by him; or
      3.   Remove it to an appropriate location for disposition in accordance
with the law.
   J.   Disposition Of Forfeited Property: When property is forfeited under
this section, the law enforcement officer may:
      1.   Retain it for official use, in which case it shall become the
property of the town;
      2.   Sell any such property which is not required to be destroyed by law
and which is not harmful to the public. The proceeds shall be used for payment
of all proper expenses of the proceedings for forfeiture and sale, including
expenses of seizure, maintenance of custody, advertising and court costs;
      3.   Remove it for disposition in accordance with law; or
      4.   Transfer ownership and control of the property to the state or any
political subdivision of the state for its official use.
   K.   Severability: If any provision of this section or the application
thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the invalidity does not
affect other provisions or applications of this section which can be given
effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the
provisions of this section are severable. (1987 Code § 9.16.100)
 
Notes
1 1. WS, 1977, §§ 35-7-1001 to 35-7-1057, as amended.
5-2D-9: LEWD AND LASCIVIOUS BEHAVIOR:
   A.   A person is guilty of lewd and lascivious behavior if a person performs
any of the following acts in a public place or under circumstances which the
person knows or should know will likely cause affront or alarm to, on, or in
the presence of another:
      1.   An act of sexual intrusion or contact, as defined by Wyoming
Statutes section 6-2-301;
      2.   Exposes his or her genitals, buttocks, anus, pubic area or the
female breast below the top of the areola;
      3.   Masturbates or manipulates his or her genitals, buttocks, anus,
pubic area or the female breast below the top of the areola in a manner
intended or likely to cause sexual arousal in the actor or others;
      4.   Verbally or visually describing, enticing, propositioning or
graphically referencing any act of sexual intrusion or contact, as defined by
Wyoming Statutes section 6-2-301, in a place or manner observed, or likely to
be observed, by the general public; or
      5.   Any other lewd or lascivious behavior.
   B.   A woman breast feeding, including breast feeding in any location where
the woman otherwise may rightfully be, does not constitute a lewd and
lascivious act, irrespective of whether or not the breast is covered during or
incidental to feeding. (Ord. 2012-06, 9-20-2012)
5-2D-10: PENALTY:
Unless specifically set out in this article, any violation of the provisions of
this article constitutes a class A misdemeanor punishable as set forth in
subsection
1-4-1A1 of this code. (Ord. 2012-11, 1-17-2013)
ARTICLE E. OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
SECTION:
5-2E-1: Disorderly Conduct
5-2E-2: Disturbing Assemblages
5-2E-3: False Alarm Or Report
5-2E-4: Loitering
5-2E-5: Noise
5-2E-6: Penalty
5-2E-1: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
   A.   Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person to be guilty of disorderly
conduct.
   B.   Acts Enumerated: A person shall be deemed guilty of disorderly conduct
if he wilfully:
      1.   Commits an act in a violent and tumultuous manner toward another
whereby the property of any person is placed in danger of being destroyed or
damaged.
      2.   Causes, provokes or engages in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct
so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another.
      3.   Incites, attempts to incite, or is involved in attempting to incite
a riot. For the purposes of this section, "riot" means a tumultuous disturbance
of the peace by persons assembled and acting with a common intent to the terror
of the people of the municipality, either in executing a lawful enterprise in a
violent or turbulent manner or in executing an unlawful enterprise in a violent
or turbulent manner.
      4.   Obstructs, either singly or together with other persons, the flow of
vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuses to clear such public way when
ordered to do so by the police or other lawful authority known to be such.
      5.   Damages, befouls or disturbs public property or the property of
another so as to create a hazardous, unhealthy or physically offensive
condition.
      6.   Fails to obey a lawful order to disperse by a police officer, when
known to be such an official, where one or more persons are committing acts of
disorderly conduct in the immediate vicinity, and the public health and safety
is imminently threatened.
      7.   Resists or obstructs the performance of duties by police or any
other authorized official of the town, when known to be such an official.
      8.   Commits an act in a violent and tumultuous manner toward another
whereby that other is placed in danger of his life, limb or health.
      9.   Interferes with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation by acts of
violence.
      10.   Uses abusive, profane or obscene language in any public place.
(1987 Code § 9.20.010)
5-2E-2: DISTURBING ASSEMBLAGES:
   A.   Lawful Assemblage: No person shall disturb any lawful assemblage of
people in the town by rude, boisterous or indecent behavior or otherwise.
   B.   Religious Congregation Or Assembly: No person shall annoy or disturb
any congregation or assembly, gathered together for religious worship in the
town, by making a noise, by rude or indecent behavior or profane discourse
within the place of worship or so near the same as to be heard by the persons
so assembled or to disturb the order or solemnity of the meeting. (1987 Code §
9.20.020)
5-2E-3: FALSE ALARM OR REPORT:
No person in the town shall intentionally make, turn in or give a false alarm
of fire or of need for police or ambulance assistance or aid or abet in the
commission of such an act, nor shall any person make to or file with the chief
of police or town attorney any false, misleading or unfounded statement or
report concerning the commission or alleged commission of any crime occurring
within the town. (1987 Code § 9.20.030)
5-2E-4: LOITERING:
   A.   Definitions: As used in this section, the following words and terms
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
    LOITERING: Remaining idle in essentially one location and includes the
concepts of spending time idly, loafing, or walking about aimlessly, and also
includes the colloquial expression "hanging around".
   PUBLIC PLACE: Includes any place of business which is open to the public.
   B.   Offense Described: No person shall loiter in a public place in such a
manner as to:
      1.   Create or cause to be created a danger of a breach of the peace.
      2.   Create or cause to be created any disturbance or annoyance to the
comfort and repose of any person.
      3.   Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles.
      4.   Obstruct, molest or interfere with any person lawfully in any public
place.
      5.   Obstruct, molest or interfere with the operation of any lawful
business in the town.
   C.   Unsolicited Remarks: This section includes the making of unsolicited
remarks of an offensive, disgusting or insulting nature or which are calculated
to annoy or disturb the person to or within whose hearing they are made, or
which cause persons to avoid patronizing a place of business.
   D.   Order To Leave: Whenever the presence of any person in any public place
is causing or is likely to cause any of the conditions enumerated above, any
police officer may order that person to leave that place. Any person who shall
refuse to leave after being ordered to do so by a police officer is guilty of a
violation of this section. (1987 Code § 9.20.040)
5-2E-5: NOISE:
No person in the town shall make or cause to be made or continued any excessive
or unusually loud noise as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of any
reasonable person of normal sensitivity residing in the same vicinity,
neighborhood, trailer or mobile home park, apartment house or apartment
complex. A violation of this section constitutes a class B misdemeanor
punishable as set forth in subsection
1-4-1A2 of this code. (Ord. 2012-11, 1-17-2013)
5-2E-6: PENALTY:
Unless specifically set out in this article, any violation of the provisions of
this article constitutes a class A misdemeanor punishable as set forth in
subsection
1-4-1A1 of this code. (Ord. 2012-11, 1-17-2013)
ARTICLE F. OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
SECTION:
5-2F-1: Vandalism
5-2F-2: Malicious Mischief
5-2F-3: Shoplifting
5-2F-4: Larceny And Petty Larceny
5-2F-5: Criminal Trespass
5-2F-6: Criminal Entry
5-2F-7: Fraud By Check
5-2F-8: Possession Of Stolen Property
5-2F-9: Penalty
5-2F-1: VANDALISM:
   A.   Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person to wilfully or wantonly or
recklessly break, deface, injure or destroy any public property or any private
property without the consent of the owner thereof. Public property includes,
but is not limited to, all tangible items under the care, custody and control
of the town.
   B.   Consent Required: It is unlawful for any person to wilfully or wantonly
or recklessly break, injure, destroy or deface any public property or any
private property, whether said injury, destruction or defacing be eradicable or
permanent, without the consent of the owner. (Ord. 6-00, 5-18-2000)
5-2F-2: MALICIOUS MISCHIEF:
It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally or recklessly drive upon,
break, destroy or deface in any manner, or to displace any property or item of
another or the town. Such property shall include, but is not limited to, snow
plowed to the middle of town streets during snow removal operations, and items
placed by the town or other government or public or private entity for safety
or comfort such as gravel, signs, traffic and parking cones or devices. (Ord.
2-2002, 3-21-2002)
5-2F-3: SHOPLIFTING:
   A.   Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person to wilfully conceal or take
possession of any goods offered for sale by wholesale or retail stores or other
mercantile establishments, without the knowledge or consent of the owner
thereof and with intent to convert the goods to his own use without paying the
purchase price.
   B.   Detention; Interrogation: Any officer, merchant or merchant's employee
who has reasonable cause for believing that a person has committed the crime of
shoplifting as described in subsection A of this section, may detain and
interrogate such person in regard thereto in a reasonable manner and for a
reasonable time.
   C.   Defense To Civil Action: When a police officer, merchant or merchant's
employee, with reasonable cause for believing that a person has committed the
crime of shoplifting as described in subsection A of this section, detains and
interrogates such person in regard thereto, and such person thereafter brings
action for slander, false arrest, false imprisonment, assault, battery or
wrongful detention based upon the detention and interrogation, such reasonable
cause shall be a defense to the action if the detention and interrogation were
done in a reasonable manner and for a reasonable time. (1987 Code § 9.24.020)
5-2F-4: LARCENY AND PETTY LARCENY:
A person who steals, takes and carries, leads or drives away property of
another with intent to deprive the owner or lawful possessor, or a bailee or
any other person entrusted with the control, care or custody of any money or
other property, who with the intent to steal or deprive the owner of the
property converts the property to his or another's use, is guilty of a class A
misdemeanor punishable as set forth in subsection
1-4-1A1 of this code. (Ord. 2012-11, 1-17-2013)
5-2F-5: CRIMINAL TRESPASS:
A person is guilty of criminal trespass if he enters or remains on or in the
land or premises of another person, knowing he is not authorized to do so or
after being notified to depart or to not trespass. Notice is given by personal
communication to the person by the owner or occupant, or his agent, or by a
peace officer or by posting of signs reasonably likely to come to the attention
of the intruders. (1987 Code § 9.24.040)
5-2F-6: CRIMINAL ENTRY:
   A.   Offense Described: A person is guilty of criminal entry if, without
authority, he knowingly enters a building, occupied structure, vehicle or cargo
portion of a truck or trailer, or a separately secured or occupied position of
those enclosures.
   B.   Affirmative Defenses: It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under
this section that:
      1.   The entry was made because of a mistake of fact or to preserve life
or property in an emergency;
      2.   The enclosure was abandoned;
      3.   The enclosure was at the time open to the public and the person
complied with all lawful conditions imposed on access to or remaining in the
enclosure; or
      4.   The person believed that the owner of the enclosure, or other person
empowered to licensed access to the enclosure, would have authorized him to
enter. (1987 Code § 9.24.050)
5-2F-7: FRAUD BY CHECK:
   A.   Statute To Apply: For purposes of this section, the definitions of
Wyoming Statutes section 6-3-701, 1988, as amended, shall apply.
   B.   Offense Described: Any person who knowingly issues a check which is not
paid because the drawer has insufficient funds or credit with the drawee has
issued a fraudulent check and commits misdemeanor fraud by check, if the check
was for a sum less than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
   C.   Restitution: Upon sentencing, the court may require any person
convicted of check fraud to make restitution in an amount not to exceed twice
the amount of the dishonored check in addition to any other punishment imposed
under this section.
   D.   Prima Facie Evidence: Any of the following is prima facie evidence that
the person, at the time he issued the check or other order for the payment of
money, intended that it should not be paid:
      1.   Proof that, at the time of issuance, he did not have an account with
the drawee;
      2.   Proof that, at the time of issuance, he did not have sufficient
funds with the drawee and that he failed to pay the check or other order within
five (5) days after receiving notice of nonpayment or dishonor, personally
given or sent to the address shown on the check or other order; or
      3.   Proof that, when presentment was made in a reasonable time, the
issuer did not have sufficient funds with the drawee and he failed to pay the
check or other order within five (5) days after receiving notice of nonpayment
or dishonor, personally given or sent to the address shown on the check or
other order.
   E.   Proof Of Knowledge: Proof the drawer opened an account with the drawee
on a certain date shall be considered evidence of the drawer's knowledge of the
account balance on that date. (1987 Code § 9.24.060)
   F.   Penalty: A violation of this section constitutes a class B misdemeanor
punishable as set forth in subsection
1-4-1A2 of this code. (Ord. 2012-11, 1-17-2013)
5-2F-8: POSSESSION OF STOLEN PROPERTY:
   A.   Prohibited: A person who possesses, buys, receives, conceals or
disposes of property which he or she knows, believes or has reasonable cause to
believe was obtained in violation of law is guilty of a misdemeanor.
   B.   Venue: A person may be charged and convicted under this section even if
the property was unlawfully obtained in another jurisdiction. (Ord. 2008-21, 1-
6-2009)
5-2F-9: PENALTY:
Unless specifically set out in this article, any violation of the provisions of
this article constitutes a class A misdemeanor punishable as set forth in
subsection
1-4-1A1 of this code. (Ord. 2012-11, 1-17-2013)
ARTICLE G. OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST MINORS
SECTION:
5-2G-1: Contributing To Delinquency
5-2G-2: Curfew
5-2G-3: False Statement Of Age
5-2G-4: Tobacco Sales
5-2G-1: CONTRIBUTING TO DELINQUENCY:
It is unlawful for any person to cause or encourage any person under the age of
nineteen (19) years to violate any law of the United States, the State or the
Town, or to knowingly commit any immoral, indecent or obscene act in the
presence of such person, or to entice any minor of either sex to enter into any
place for the purpose of practicing fornication or adultery, or to cause any
child to be guilty of any vicious or immoral conduct. A violation of this
section constitutes a Class B misdemeanor punishable as set forth in subsection
1-4-1A2 of this Code. (Ord. 2012-11, 1-17-2013)
5-2G-2: CURFEW:
It is unlawful for any person under the age of sixteen (16) years to be found
loitering about or in or upon any of the streets, alleys, public or private
places in the Town, between the hours of nine thirty o'clock (9:30) P.M. and
dawn of the next succeeding day during the months of November through March,
and between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and dawn of the next
succeeding day during the months of April through October, unless such person
is traveling to or from any school or church activity, or is engaged in
necessary business or employment, or in works of charity, necessity or mercy.
(1987 Code § 9.28.020)
5-2G-3: FALSE STATEMENT OF AGE:
It is unlawful for any minor in the Town to make false statements or to
furnish, present or exhibit any fictitious or false registration card,
identification card, or note or other document, or to furnish, present or
exhibit such document or documents issued to a person other than the one
presenting the same, for the purpose of gaining admission to prohibited places
or for the purpose of procuring the sale, gift, or delivery of prohibited
articles. (1987 Code § 9.28.030)
5-2G-4: TOBACCO SALES:
   A.   Definitions: As used in this section, the following words and terms
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
 
                  Means any substance containing tobacco leaf, including, but
                  not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff,
                  chewing tobacco or dipping tobacco. It also includes any
                  electronic cigarette, pipe, hookah, vaporizer, personal
                  vaporizer or other device designed to introduce a smoke,
TOBACCO PRODUCTS: vapor or aerosol into a person for recreational purposes. The
                  definition of tobacco products, herein, does not include any
                  scheduled controlled substance, and nothing in these
                  Ordinances shall be read as authorizing the use of or
                  decriminalization of such substances without a valid and
                  authorized prescription by a duly licensed Wyoming Physician
                  taken in the manner prescribed by said physician.
                  Any mechanical, electric or electronic self-service device
VENDING MACHINE:  which, upon insertion of money, tokens or any other form of
                  payment, dispenses tobacco products.
 
   B.   Prohibited Sales Or Delivery:
      1.   Prohibited: No person shall sell, offer for sale, give away or
deliver tobacco products to any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years.
      2.   Defense to Prosecution: It is a defense to a prosecution under
subsection B1 of this section if, in the case of a sale, the person who sold
the tobacco product was presented with, and reasonably relied upon, an
identification card which identified the person buying or receiving the tobacco
product as being over twenty-one (21) years of age.
   C.   Posted Notice Required; Location Of Vending Machines:
      1.   Sign Required: Any person who sells tobacco products shall post
signs informing the public of the age restrictions provided in this section at
or near every display of tobacco products and on or upon every vending machine
which offers tobacco products for sale. Each sign shall be plainly visible and
shall state:
      THE SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO PERSONS UNDER TWENTY-ONE YEARS OF AGE IS
PROHIBITED BY LAW
      2.   Location Of Vending Machines: No person shall sell or offer tobacco
products for sale by use of a vending machine unless the vending machine is
located in a business premises where alcoholic or malt beverages are sold or
dispensed and where entry by individuals under twenty-one (21) is prohibited.
   D.   Purchase By Minors Prohibited: No person under the age of twenty-one
(21) years shall purchase tobacco products, or misrepresent his identity or
age, or use any false or altered identification for the purpose of purchasing
tobacco products.
   E.   Possession Or Use By Persons Under Twenty-One (21): It is unlawful for
any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to possess or use any tobacco
products. (Ord. 2008-20, 10-16-2008; amd. Ord. 2012-11, 1-17-2013; Ord. 2018-
02, 4-5-2018; Ord. 2020-05, 8-20-2020)
ARTICLE H. WEAPONS
SECTION:
5-2H-1: Concealing Or Displaying
5-2H-2: Possessing Or Discharging
5-2H-3: Exceptions
5-2H-4: Penalty
5-2H-1: CONCEALING OR DISPLAYING:
   A.   Prohibited: No person in the town shall wear under his clothes or
conceal about his person or display in a threatening manner any dangerous
weapon, including, but not limited to, any pistol, revolver, slingshot, brass
knuckles, bowie knife or switchblade.
   B.   Exceptions: This section shall not prohibit firearms in the possession
of:
      1.   A peace officer as defined by Wyoming Statutes section 7-2-101(a)
(iv);
      2.   A person who possesses a valid concealed weapon permit pursuant to
Wyoming Statutes section 6-8-104;
      3.   Any person who possesses a permit as described in Wyoming Statutes
section 6-8-104(a)(iii);
so long as said persons are in compliance with all provisions of Wyoming
Statutes section 6-8-104, including the prohibitions included in section 6-8-
104(t). (Ord. 2009-02, 7-16-2009)
5-2H-2: POSSESSING OR DISCHARGING:
   A.   Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person to use or discharge any
firearm, BB gun, or any other gun, slingshot, bow or other dangerous weapon
except in a shooting gallery or range approved by the town council or in
compliance with section
5-2H-3 of this article. (Ord. 4-2002, 3-21-2002; amd. Res. 2009-08, 3-5-2009)
   B.   Law Enforcement Officers: The prohibition of subsection A of this
section shall not be construed to forbid law enforcement officers from carrying
or using while on duty such weapons as shall be necessary in the proper
discharge of their duties. (Ord. 4-2002, 3-21-2002)
5-2H-3: EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Any citizen may erect and use an archery range within the town of Lyman
so long as:
      1.   The range is entirely contained on the land owned by the prospective
range user, and
      2.   The range is equipped only with manufacturer's recommended targets
and sufficient backstops appropriate for the archery equipment used and the
surrounding environs, as determined by the town's chief of police or his
assigned agent, and
      3.   The prospective range owner submits a statement indemnifying the
town for any and all injuries arising from the use or misuse of the archery
range, and that the range will only be used for private, noncommercial
purposes, and
      4.   The prospective range owner pays a forty dollar ($40.00) application
fee to recompense the town for the processing time and review by town
employees. (Res. 2009-08, 3-5-2009)
5-2H-4: PENALTY:
Unless specifically set out in this article, any violation of the provisions of
this article constitutes a class A misdemeanor punishable as set forth in
subsection
1-4-1A1 of this code. (Ord. 2012-11, 1-17-2013)
CHAPTER 3
ANIMAL CONTROL
ARTICLE A. CARE, CONTROL AND REGULATION
SECTION:
5-3A-1: Definitions
5-3A-2: Keeping Of Animals
5-3A-3: Keeper Considered Owner
5-3A-4: Running At Large
5-3A-5: Impoundment
5-3A-6: Dead Animal Disposal
5-3A-7: Animal Excrement
5-3A-8: Noisy Animals
5-3A-9: Biting And Vicious Animals
5-3A-10: Animals Left In Streets
5-3A-11: Licensing Of Dogs And Cats
5-3A-12: Vaccination
5-3A-13: Cruelty To Animals
5-3A-14: Keeping Of Chickens
5-3A-15: Dangerous Animals
5-3A-99: Penalty
5-3A-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
ALTERED: An animal that has been spayed or neutered.
ANIMAL: Any mammal, bird, or reptile.
AT LARGE: Off the premises of the owner and not under immediate restraint by a
competent person.
BITING ANIMAL: Any animal that bites a person, or other animal, in a way that
breaks the skin or causes bodily injury.
BODILY INJURY: Physical pain, bruising, bleeding, or any impairment of physical
condition is a bodily injury.
OWNER: Any person or persons, firm, association or corporation owning, keeping
or harboring an animal.
RESTRAINT: The animal is controlled by a leash, or similar device, or in the
immediate company of a competent person and obedient to that person's command,
or in a vehicle.
UNCONFINED: Any animal which is not securely confined indoors or confined in a
securely enclosed and locked pen or structure upon the premises of the owner of
such animal. Such pen or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top. If
the pen or structure has no bottom secured to the sides, the sides shall be
embedded into the ground no less than one foot (1').
VICIOUS ANIMAL: Any animal with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to
attack unprovoked, to cause injury to or otherwise endanger the safety of
humans or other domestic animals; or any animal which attacks a human being or
other domestic animal without provocation. (Ord. 7-96, 1-9-1997; amd. Ord. 6-
2004, 9-16-2004)
5-3A-2: KEEPING OF ANIMALS:
The keeping of any animal shall be in compliance with town ordinances,
including section
12-7-9, "Animal Grazing Permits", of this code; article B, "Multiple Animal
Permits", of this chapter; and title 4, chapter 1, "Nuisances", of this code.
(Ord. 7-96, 1-9-1997)
5-3A-3: KEEPER CONSIDERED OWNER:
Any person who shall keep or harbor any animal or permit the same to habitually
remain or be fed in or upon or about his premises shall be considered and held
to be the owner of such animal and responsible therefor under the terms of this
article. (Ord. 7-96, 1-9-1997)
5-3A-4: RUNNING AT LARGE:
   A.   Prohibited: No person owning or having custody of an animal shall fail
to take adequate and necessary steps to prevent said animal from being at large
within the corporate limits of the town. (Ord. 2016-02, 2-18-2016)
   B.   Destruction Or Relocation Of Animals At Large: It shall be the duty of
the chief of police and/or municipal court judge to destroy, relocate, or have
the same accomplished, any animal found running at large contrary to the
provisions of this article if the treatment of such animal is the only manner
of preventing such animal from running at large. (Ord. 2011-09, 6-2-2011)
5-3A-5: IMPOUNDMENT:
   A.   Duty To Apprehend And Impound: If any animal is found running at large,
it shall be the duty of the chief of police or other designated public official
of the town to apprehend and impound such animal in a secure pen, pound or
other place provided for that purpose.
   B.   Registry: The chief of police or other designated official, upon
receiving any animal, shall make a registry entering the breed, color and sex
of such animal and whether licensed or unlicensed. If licensed, he shall enter
the name and address of the owner and the number of the license tag.
   C.   Notice Of Impoundment: No later than forty eight (48) hours after the
impounding of any animal, the owner shall be notified, or if the owner is
unknown, written notice shall be posted for not less than two (2) days at one
conspicuous place in the town describing the animal and the place and time of
taking. The owner of any animal so impounded may redeem such animal upon
payment of the established impound fee and license, if required. (Ord. 7-96, 1-
9-1997)
   D.   Impound Fees: The fees to be paid to the town for impounding any animal
shall be set by resolution of the town council. (Ord. 2009-5, 7-16-2009)
   E.   Payment Required For Release: No animal so impounded shall be released
until the owner shall pay such sum as the governing body has determined to be a
just and suitable fee for the impoundment and care of the type of animal so
impounded. (Ord. 7-96, 1-9-1997)
   F.   Shelter Abandonment:
      1.   Prohibited: An owner of an animal who wilfully fails or refuses to
redeem and retrieve an impounded animal as provided herein within five (5) days
after having been given notice or having actual notice of said impoundment as
provided in subsection C of this section is guilty of a crime. (Ord. 2011-09,
6-2-2011)
      2.   Penalty: A person found guilty of this section shall be punished as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code and, in addition, is subject to all other remedies,
penalties, and fees described herein including those described in subsections G
and H of this section and subsection
5-3A-11E of this article. (Ord. 6-2002, 3-21-2002)
   G.   Sale Of Unredeemed Animals:
      1.   Authority; Notice Of Sale: At the discretion of the chief of police
or other designated official the town may sell at public auction any animal so
impounded, upon giving five (5) days' previous notice to the owner or person in
charge of the impounded animal, if known, of the time and place of such sale,
which notice shall describe the animal with reasonable accuracy; provided, that
any such animal may be redeemed at any time before the sale by payment of the
fees and charges provided for in subsection D of this section and subsection
5-3A-11E of this article.
      2.   Excess Funds: In case any animal sold pursuant to the provisions of
this section, shall be sold for more than an amount sufficient to pay the fees
and charges required pursuant to subsection D of this section and subsection
5-3A-11E of this article, the excess shall be deposited with the treasurer of
the town. Such excess shall be paid to the owner of such animal or to the
person entitled to the possession of such animal, upon claim and proper proof
presented by such person. (Ord. 7-96, 1-9-1997)
   H.   Treatment Of Unclaimed Animals: It shall be the duty of the chief of
police to keep all animals so impounded for a period of seventy two (72) hours.
At the expiration of seventy two (72) hours from the date of notice or proof of
actual notice to the owner or the posting of notice, any animal which shall not
have been reclaimed may be forthwith destroyed, adopted or relocated. (Ord.
2011-09, 6-2-2011)
   I.   Breaking Open Pound: No person shall, directly or indirectly, break
open or assist in breaking open any pen or enclosure with the intention of
releasing any animal confined therein pursuant to this article. (Ord. 7-96, 1-
9-1997)
5-3A-6: DEAD ANIMAL DISPOSAL:
It shall be the duty of the owner of any animal found dead within the town to
remove such animal beyond the corporate limits of the town and to bury such
animal; provided, that if the town has designated a particular area for the
burial of dead animals, the owner of any dead animal shall remove the dead
animal to such designated area and bury the dead animal therein. (Ord. 7-96, 1-
9-1997)
5-3A-7: ANIMAL EXCREMENT:
   A.   Prohibited: It is unlawful for any animal owner to encourage, permit,
allow, or fail to prevent their animal from:
      1.   Urinating: Urinating on public or private property not under the
control of the animal owner.
      2.   Defecating: Defecating on public or private property not under the
control of the animal owner without removing said excrement promptly.
      3.   Exceptions: Exceptions to this section apply to use of the
designated rodeo area of the town recreation complex and organized drives or
parades wherein livestock passes upon and through the streets of town. (Ord. 7-
96, 1-9-1997)
5-3A-8: NOISY ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor within the limits of the
town any animal if that animal makes noise which disturbs the quiet of any
neighborhood or person. It shall be the duty of the chief of police and/or
municipal court judge to destroy or relocate or have destroyed or relocated any
noisy animal if the treatment of such animal is the only manner of preventing
such animal from making excessive noise. (Ord. 2011-09, 6-2-2011)
5-3A-9: BITING AND VICIOUS ANIMALS:
   A.   Owner Prevention: No person who owns, possesses, keeps or exercises
control over any animal shall fail to:
      1.   Prevent the animal from attacking, rushing, snapping at, growling,
snarling, biting or causing any bodily injury to any person, livestock or
domestic animal not on the premises of such owner, possessor or keeper.
      2.   Prevent the animal from attacking, rushing, snapping at, growling,
snarling, biting or causing any bodily injury to any person, livestock or
domestic animal lawfully present upon the premises of the residence of such
owner, possessor or keeper.
         a.   It is an affirmative defense to this subsection A.2., if such
premises have previously posted warning signs about the animal:
            (1)   At each entrance;
            (2)   With a prominent and conspicuous sign; and
            (3)   With lettering not less than two inches (2") in height.
         b.   It is also an affirmative defense to this subsection A.2. if the
bite or bodily injury caused by the animal was necessary to prevent or
apprehend a person engaged in committing an act of violence, robbery or theft
on the property.
      3.   Prevent the animal from attacking, rushing, snapping at, growling,
snarling, biting or causing any bodily injury to any person or domestic animal
upon the premises of any business establishment that is open to the public.
         a.   It is an affirmative defense to this subsection A.3. if the bite
or bodily injury caused by the animal was necessary to prevent or apprehend a
person engaged in committing an act of violence, robbery or theft on the
property.
      4.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any law
enforcement officer who uses an animal while engaged in law enforcement
activities, nor to any owner, possessor or keeper of any animal which attacks,
bites or causes bodily injury to a person engaged in physically attacking or
striking such owner, possessor or keeper.
   B.   Biting Animal Impoundment: Any animal which bites a human being (or
another animal) so as to break the skin, may be immediately impounded for up to
ten (10) days as an examination period to determine whether the animal is
infected with rabies. The owner, possessor or keeper shall pay a seventy five
dollar ($75.00) rabies impound fee at the time, or before, the animal is
released.
      1.   Any human being, or parent or guardian of any human being, who has
been bitten by any animal may make application to the chief of police to
destroy that animal in order to determine if that animal has rabies, if that
animal has not been vaccinated against rabies within thirty six (36) months
prior to the bite occurring. It shall be at the sole discretion of the chief of
police whether such request shall be granted.
   C.   Ownership: No person shall own, keep or harbor any vicious animal or
any animal that may manifest a disposition to bite anyone, without having such
animal properly secured and muzzled at all times.
   D.   Vicious Animals Off Premises: The owner of a vicious animal shall not
suffer or permit such animal to go beyond the premises of such person unless
such animal is securely leashed and muzzled or otherwise securely restrained
and muzzled.
   E.   Unconfined Vicious Animals: The owner of a vicious animal shall not
permit such animal to go unconfined.
   F.   Destruction Or Relocation Of Vicious Animals: It shall be the duty of
the chief of police and/or municipal court judge to destroy, relocate, or have
the same accomplished, any animal found to be vicious contrary to the
provisions of this article if the treatment of such animal is the only manner
of preventing such animal from biting or acting viciously. (Ord. 6-2004, 9-16-
2004; amd. Ord. 2011-09, 6-2-2011; Ord. 2021-10, 1-20-2022)
5-3A-10: ANIMALS LEFT IN STREETS:
   A.   Fastening Required: No person shall leave any animal in any street or
alley within the limits of the town without securely fastening such animal.
   B.   Tying To Trees Or Fences: No person shall tie any animal to any growing
tree within the limits of the town, without the permission of the owner of such
tree, nor shall any animal be tied to any fence or otherwise so as to obstruct
any sidewalk within the town limits. (Ord. 2011-09, 6-2-2011)
5-3A-11: LICENSING OF DOGS AND CATS:
   A.   Licensing Required: Any person owning, harboring or caring for a dog or
cat within the Town may be permitted to do so by obtaining an annual license
from the town clerk or other officer appointed by the town. Any person owning,
harboring or caring for a dog or cat which was born in the Town and continually
maintained in the Town may be permitted to do so by obtaining an annual license
from the Town Clerk or other Officer appointed by the Town on or before the
date the animal reaches ninety (90) days old.
   B.   Vaccination Certificate Required: The license shall be issued after the
owner, harborer, or keeper provides a certificate of vaccination showing the
dog or cat is currently vaccinated against rabies and parvo, and paying a
license fee as set forth in subsection E of this section. Should a license be
issued for an animal less than six (6) months old, that animal’s owner,
harborer or keeper shall submit proof of such vaccination upon the animal
reaching the age of six (6) months.
   C.   Term: The license shall be valid for one year from the date of
issuance.
   D.   Collar And Tag: It shall be the duty of the owner of such dog or cat so
licensed to provide such dog or cat with a suitable collar to attach the
license tag issued by the town clerk, or in lieu of a collar, provide other
suitable identification recognized by the chief of police. Any dog or cat
licensed but not collared and tagged or identified as aforesaid found running
at large will be impounded and the owner subject to the same penalty as the
owner for an unlicensed dog or cat. Any dog or cat impounded under this section
shall be well housed, well fed and well watered. (Ord. 7-96, 1-9-1997)
   E.   Annual License Fees: The fees to be paid to the town for licensing any
dog or cat will be set by resolution of the town council.
   F.   Exceptions: The provisions of this section shall not apply to dogs and
cats whose owners are nonresidents temporarily within the town, nor to seeing
eye dogs when such dogs are actually being used by blind persons, nor to dogs
and cats licensed under a multiple animal permit as provided in article B of
this chapter. For purposes of this subsection, "temporarily within the town"
shall mean any person who does not own, lease or control property within the
town, and/or resides within the town less than one month per year,
cumulatively, and/or one week per occasion. In calculating said time periods,
brief absences from the town shall not be considered. (Ord. 2011-09, 6-2-2011;
amd. Ord. 2023-03, 10-5-2023)
5-3A-12: VACCINATION:
Any person owning, harboring or desiring to keep a dog or cat, over the age of
six (6) months, within the Town must have proof of current certification,
subscribed by a doctor of veterinary medicine, or the serial number of self-
administered parvo vaccination that the dog or cat owned, harbored, kept or to
be kept has been vaccinated against rabies and parvo. (Ord. 2011-09, 6-2-2011)
5-3A-13: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:
   A.   Definitions: As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
 
                                   All costs incurred by the impounding entity
                                   in providing necessary food and water,
COSTS OF THE ANIMAL'S IMPOUNDMENT: veterinary attention and treatment for any
                                   animal which is the subject of a violation
                                   of this Code.
                                   Any privately owned dog, cat, rabbit, guinea
                                   pig, hamster, mouse, gerbil, ferret, bird,
                                   fish, reptile, amphibian, invertebrate or
HOUSEHOLD PET:                     any other species of domesticated animal
                                   sold, transferred or retained for the
                                   purpose of being kept as a pet in or near a
                                   house. "Household pet" shall not include any
                                   livestock;
                                   Horses, mules and asses, rabbits, llamas,
                                   cattle, swine, sheep, goats, poultry, or
                                   other animal generally used for food or in
                                   the production of food or fiber, working
LIVESTOCK:                         animals and guard animals actively engaged
                                   in the protection or management of
                                   livestock. Bison are considered livestock
                                   unless otherwise designated by the Wyoming
                                   livestock board and the Wyoming game and
                                   fish commission.
 
   B.   Animal abuse.
      1.   A person commits animal abuse if the person:
         a.   Knowingly overrides an animal or drives an animal when
overloaded;
         b.   Intentionally or knowingly, unnecessarily injures or beats an
animal;
         c.   Knowingly carries an animal in a manner that poses undue risk of
injury or death;
         d.   Has the charge and custody of any animal and under circumstances
which manifest extreme indifference to the animal's safety, health or life:
            (1)   Fails to provide it with proper food, drink or protection
from the weather adequate for the species;
            (2)   Abandons the animal. Relinquishment of an animal to a public
or private animal shelter or like facility is not a violation of this
subparagraph;
            (3)   In the case of immediate, obvious, serious illness or injury
to the animal, fails to provide the animal with appropriate care; or
            (4)   Keeps any household pet in a manner that results in chronic
or repeated serious physical harm to the household pet.
         e.   Owns, possesses, keeps or trains fowls or dogs with the intent to
allow the dog or fowl to engage in an exhibition of fighting with another dog
or fowl;
         f.   For gain causes or allows any dog to fight with another dog or
any fowl to fight with another fowl;
         g.   Promotes any dog or fowl fighting;
         h.   Knowingly permits any act prohibited under paragraphs (a) through
(g) of this subsection on any premises under the person's charge or control.
   C.   Willful killing of domestic animals. No person in the town shall
willfully kill, maim, or disfigure any horse, dog or other domestic animal or
administer poison to any such animal, or expose any poisonous substance with
the intent that it shall be taken by any such animal except in the exercise of
a lawful business or in discharge of an official duty. This Ordinance shall not
prevent the humane killing of a terminally injured or ill animal by law
enforcement, animal control officer a veterinarian or owner of said animal.
   D.   Other Abuse Misdemeanors
      1.   A person shall not destroy an animal by the use of a high?altitude
decompression chamber or a carbon monoxide gas chamber utilizing a gasoline
engine.
      2.   A person is guilty of a misdemeanor if he knowingly is present at
any place where an exhibition of fighting of fowls or dogs is occurring for
amusement or gain.
      3.   A person is guilty of a misdemeanor if he keeps a household pet
confined in conditions which constitute a public health hazard.
   E.   Exemptions
      1.   Nothing in this Chapter may be construed to prohibit:
         a.   A person humanely destroying an animal, including livestock;
         b.   The use of industry accepted agricultural and livestock practices
on livestock or another animal used in the practice of agriculture;
         c.   Rodeo events, training for rodeo events or participating in rodeo
events, whether the event is performed in a rodeo, fair, jackpot, agricultural
exhibition or other similar event;
         d.   The use of dogs in the management of livestock by the owner of
the livestock, his employees or agents or other persons in lawful custody of
the livestock;
         e.   The use of dogs or raptors in hunting;
         f.   The training of dogs or raptors or the use of equipment in the
training of dogs or raptors for any purpose not prohibited by law;
         g.   The hunting, capture, killing or destruction of any predatory
animal, pest or other wildlife in any manner not otherwise prohibited by law.
   F.   Penalty.
      1.   Any prohibited act under this Chapter is a misdemeanor punishable by
imprisonment for not more than six (6) months, a fine of not more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), or both.
      2.   Additionally, the Municipal Court Judge may order any or all of the
following:
         a.   If the defendant is the owner of the animal, require the
defendant to forfeit ownership of the animal. This paragraph shall not affect
the interest of any secured party or other person who has not participated in
the offense;
         b.   Require the defendant to pay all reasonable costs of the animal's
impoundment, if the animal has been impounded;
         c.   Impose continuing prohibitions or limitations on the defendant's
ownership, possession or custody of any animal.
      3.   Each animal affected by the defendant's conduct may constitute a
separate count for the purposes of prosecution, conviction, sentencing and
penalties under this article. (Ord. 2011-09, 6-2-2011; amd. Ord. 2021-07, 8-5-
2021)
5-3A-14: KEEPING OF CHICKENS:
   A.   Chickens Permitted: So long as the owners and keepers are in compliance
with all other provisions herein and in this Code, the keeping of chickens
shall be allowed within Town limits. The maximum number of chickens allowed
pursuant to this section is six (6) without a conditional use permit, and such
chickens shall not be included in the number of animals calculated in article B
of this chapter. (Ord. 2017-07, 5-4-2017)
   B.   Roosters And Other Poultry: No rooster over one (1) month in age or any
other poultry shall be kept in Town without an applicable and active
conditional use permit.
   C.   Containment: All chickens must be maintained in an appropriately fenced
area contained completely on the one (1) lot. Any chicken found outside the
property of any owner or keeper shall constitute a nuisance and may be treated
as such pursuant to title 4, chapter 1 of this Code. Additionally, such animal
may be considered at large as regulated by section
5-3A-4 of this article.
   D.   Clean And Orderly: All areas accessible by chickens shall be maintained
in a clean and orderly manner, and any keeping of chickens in a manner which is
likely to spread odor, noise or disease, such as salmonella is prohibited. The
failure to do so may constitute a separate offense for nuisance prosecutable
under title 4, chapter 1 of this Code.
   E.   Business Prohibited: No chicken or product thereof, including meat and
eggs, may be sold or exchanged for goods or services without the owner or
keeper first obtaining an applicable conditional use and business permit.
Nothing in this provision shall prohibit the sharing, without remuneration, of
such products. (Ord. 2013-03, 9-19-2013)
   F.   Exemption: Except for the sections regarding chickens running at large
and maintaining a clean premises, no restriction herein shall be applicable in
R-A Zones. (Ord. 2017-07, 5-4-2017)
5-3A-15: DANGEROUS ANIMALS:
The Chief of Police and or their designee is authorized to immediately remove
and/or destroy an animal which presents a clear and immediate danger to the
public, property and/or other animals and when such removal is the only means
by which public safety can be reasonably assured. (Ord. 2019-08, 10-3-2019)
5-3A-99: PENALTY:
Unless specifically set out in this article, any violation of the provisions of
this article constitutes a Class B misdemeanor punishable as set forth in
subsection
1-4-1A2 of this Code. Additionally, restitution may include the expenses for
care incurred by the Town or other party, including, but not limited to,
medical care, veterinary care and impound fees. Further, no cat or dog whose
residence is in the Town shall be released from impoundment unless that animal
is properly licensed and vaccinated pursuant to Town ordinances. (Ord. 2012-11,
1-17-2013; amd. Ord. 2013-03, 9-19-2013)
ARTICLE B. MULTIPLE ANIMAL PERMITS
SECTION:
5-3B-1: License Required; Zoning Compliance
5-3B-2: License Fees
5-3B-3: Inspections
5-3B-4: Standards
5-3B-5: Effective Date
5-3B-6: Penalty
5-3B-1: LICENSE REQUIRED; ZONING COMPLIANCE:
No person or persons may own, rent, lease or otherwise occupy premises where a
combination of six (6) or more adult (over 12 weeks of age) animals, no more
than three (3) of which are canines, are kept without an annual multiple animal
permit. For dogs and cats, a multiple animal permit will be in lieu of
individual licenses. Possessors of a multiple animal permit must comply with
all applicable town zoning laws and maintain proof of current rabies and parvo
vaccination for each dog or cat over six (6) months of age. A conditional use
permit, as described in title 12, chapter 12 of this code, must first be
obtained from the town planning and zoning commission before a multiple animal
permit may be granted. Animals that are commonly intended to be constantly
maintained in a small, self-contained enclosure, such as caged birds and fish,
are exempt from this article. Animals commonly intended to be kept as
livestock, such as horses, sheep and cattle, are exempt from this article in
premises located in R-A and R-1-A zones. (Ord. 2011-09, 6-2-2011)
5-3B-2: LICENSE FEES:
   A.   Annual Fees: The annual fee for a multiple animal permit shall be
according to a schedule set by resolution of the town council.
   B.   Exception: No multiple animal fee shall be required of any veterinary
hospital, humane society or municipal animal control facility. (Ord. 2011-09,
6-2-2011)
5-3B-3: INSPECTIONS:
It shall be a condition of issuance of a multiple animal permit that the
appropriate town officials are permitted to inspect all animals and the
premises where animals are kept. Such inspections shall be conducted during
daylight hours upon reasonable suspicion of a violation of the multiple animal
permit or other animal control regulation. Additionally, the appropriate town
officials may conduct random inspections during daylight hours no more
frequently than once every three (3) months. If permission for an inspection is
refused, the license shall be revoked and all animals impounded. (Ord. 2011-09,
6-2-2011)
5-3B-4: STANDARDS:
All holders of multiple animal permits shall, in addition to the other
requirements of this title, comply with the minimum standards of this section.
Failure to meet these standards shall be grounds to deny or revoke the multiple
animal permit, and such failure shall be unlawful:
   A.   Enclosures: Secure animal enclosures must be provided which shall allow
adequate protection against weather extremes. (Ord. 2011-09, 6-2-2011)
   B.   Maintenance: All animal quarters and runs are to be kept clean and in
sanitary condition.
   C.   Food And Water: All food and water shall be free from contamination,
wholesome, palatable and of sufficient quantity and nutritive value to meet the
normal daily requirements for the conditions and size of the animal.
   D.   Space: Each animal shall have a sufficient and reasonable amount of
space unto itself to stand up, lie down and turn around without touching the
sides or tops of enclosures. Runs shall provide an adequate exercise area and
protection from the weather. (Ord. 7-96, 1-9-1997)
5-3B-5: EFFECTIVE DATE:
The provisions of this chapter shall take effect on April 1, 1997. Only animal
owners subject to the provisions of this article, who register with the Lyman
police department prior to March 31, 1997, will be considered nonconforming
uses as described in title 12, chapter 10 of this code. (Ord. 7-96, 1-9-1997)
5-3B-6: PENALTY:
Unless specifically set out in this article, any violation of the provisions of
this article constitutes a class B misdemeanor punishable as set forth in
subsection
1-4-1A2 of this code. (Ord. 2012-11, 1-17-2013)
ARTICLE C. BEES
SECTION:
5-3C-1: Keeping Of Bees
5-3C-2: Applicability; Effective Date
5-3C-3: Penalty
5-3C-1: KEEPING OF BEES:
No person shall establish any hive or box where bees are kept, or keep any bees
on the premises within three hundred feet (300') of any dwelling (except the
dwelling of the owner of such bees) or within one hundred feet (100') of any
exterior boundary of the property on which the hive or box is located, except:
a) when the bees are stored in containers from which they cannot escape; or b)
when the owner of the property upon which the bees are kept first obtains a
conditional use permit pursuant to title 12, chapter 12 of this code. (Ord. 1-
99, 3-4-1999)
5-3C-2: APPLICABILITY; EFFECTIVE DATE:
This article shall apply to all persons keeping bees within the municipal
limits of the town of Lyman, Wyoming, effective May 1, 1999. (Ord. 1-99, 3-4-
1999)
5-3C-3: PENALTY:
Unless specifically set out in this article, any violation of the provisions of
this article constitutes a class B misdemeanor punishable as set forth in
subsection
1-4-1A2 of this code. (Ord. 2012-11, 1-17-2013)
CHAPTER 4
UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
SECTION:
5-4-1: Authority To Sell
5-4-2: Records Required
5-4-3: Time Of Sale
5-4-4: Notice Of Sale
5-4-5: Proceeds Of Sale
5-4-1: AUTHORITY TO SELL:
The chief of police shall sell at public auction any bicycles, automobiles,
guns, revolvers, watches or any other personal items of property or parts
thereof which may have been entrusted to the care of the police department or
come into its possession in the course of official police department duties
which may not have been redeemed or claimed. (1987 Code § 2.40.010)
5-4-2: RECORDS REQUIRED:
A record shall be kept of all articles received by the police department giving
the date, the origin of receipt, the name of the owner, if known, the purpose
for which held and any other information that may be available, including the
date such articles were sold and to whom sold. (1987 Code § 2.40.020)
5-4-3: TIME OF SALE:
Sales under this chapter may be conducted at intervals of three (3) months or
semiannually as may be deemed advisable, but in no case may an article be sold
that has been in the possession of the police department for a period of less
than thirty (30) days. (1987 Code § 2.40.030)
5-4-4: NOTICE OF SALE:
When a sale of any article is to be held, notice of the time and place of the
sale shall be given at least ten (10) days prior to the date of sale in one of
the following ways:
   A.   Posting: By posting a notice of such sale in three (3) public places in
the town.
   B.   Publication: By one publication thereof in some newspaper of general
circulation published in the town.
   C.   Mail: By mailing a written notice to the owners of the various articles
to be sold at their last known or given address. (1987 Code § 2.40.040)
5-4-5: PROCEEDS OF SALE:
   A.   Disposition: In case any article is sold for more than a sufficient
amount to make recompense on the purpose for which it was held or to pay any
necessary charges of the police department, plus incidental expense for
advertising or notification, etc., such excess shall be deposited with the town
treasurer and, upon order of the town council, paid to the person entitled to
the possession of same, provided claim and proper proof is made before the town
council.
   B.   Unclaimed Proceeds: In the event no claim for the proceeds of any
article offered for sale is made within thirty (30) days after such sale, the
proceeds thereof shall be listed as "Sale of Personal Property", and remitted
to the town treasurer as a part of the police department receipts. (1987 Code §
2.40.050)
TITLE 6
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
6-1-1: Undefined Words
6-1-2: General Definitions
6-1-1: UNDEFINED WORDS:
Words or phrases used in this title and not defined by this chapter but defined
in section 31-5-102 of the Wyoming Statutes shall have the meanings set out in
section 31-5-102 of the Wyoming Statutes. (1987 Code § 10.04.010; amd. 2004
Code)
6-1-2: GENERAL DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this title, the words and phrases set out in this chapter
shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:
AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES: Vehicles of the fire department, police
vehicles, and such ambulances and emergency vehicles of municipal departments
or public service corporations as are designated or authorized by the chief of
police of the municipality. Private ambulances, wreckers and funeral cars are
emergency vehicles if they are so authorized by the chief of police in writing.
BUS: Every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than ten (10) passengers
and used for the transportation of persons, and every motor vehicle, other than
a taxicab, designed and used for the transportation of persons for
compensation.
BUSINESS DISTRICT: The territory contiguous to, and including, a street when
within any six hundred feet (600') along such street where there are buildings
in use for business or industrial purposes, including, but not limited to,
hotels, banks, or office buildings, railroad stations and public buildings
which occupy at least three hundred feet (300') of frontage on one side or
three hundred feet (300') collectively on both sides of the street.
CONTROLLED ACCESS ROADWAY: Every street or roadway in respect to which owners
or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal right of access
to or from the same except at such points only and in such manner as may be
determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over such street or
roadway.
CROSSWALK: That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the
connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the
street measured from the curbs or, in the absence of curbs, from the edges of
the traversable roadway; any portion of a street at an intersection or
elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other
markings on the surface.
DISABLED MOTOR VEHICLE: Every vehicle which is self-propelled and is in such
state of condition that it cannot be safely operated, and particularly, cars
which have had the motor or tires removed, the rear end dismantled, or any part
missing, so as to be incapable of operating under its own power for any reason
whatever.
DRIVER: Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle.
EXPLOSIVES: Any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is commonly used
or intended for the purpose of producing an explosion and which contains any
oxidizing and combustive units or other ingredients in such proportions,
quantities or packing that an ignition by fire, by friction, by concussion, by
percussion or by detonator of any part of the compound or mixture may cause
such a sudden generation of highly heated gases that the resultant gaseous
pressures are capable of producing destructive effects on contiguous objects or
of destroying life or limb.
FARM TRACTOR: Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily as a farm
implement for drawing plows, mowing machines and other implements of husbandry.
FLAMMABLE LIQUID: Any liquid which has a flash point below one hundred degrees
Fahrenheit (100°F), and has a vapor pressure not exceeding forty (40) pounds
per square inch (absolute) at one hundred degrees Fahrenheit (100°F).
INTERSECTION:
   A.   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral
curb lines, or, if none, the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two (2)
streets which join one another at, or approximately at, right angles, or the
area within which vehicles traveling upon different streets joining at any
other angle may come in conflict.
   B.   Where a street includes two (2) roadways thirty feet (30') or more
apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided street by an
intersecting street shall be regarded as a separate intersection. In the event
such intersecting street also includes two (2) roadways thirty feet (30') or
more apart, then every crossing of two (2) roadways of such street shall be
regarded as a separate intersection.
LANED ROADWAY: A roadway which is divided into two (2) or more clearly marked
lanes for vehicular traffic.
MOTOR DRIVEN CYCLE: Every motorcycle, including every motor scooter, with a
motor which produces not more than five (5) horsepower and every bicycle with
motor attached.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which is
propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires, but not
operated upon rails.
MOTORCYCLE: Every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the
rider and designed to travel on no more than three (3) wheels in contact with
the ground, but excluding a tractor.
OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES: All signs, signals, markings and devices not
inconsistent with the provisions of this title placed or erected by the
governing body or by an official with proper authority of the governing body
for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic.
OFF-ROAD RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PER WYOMING STATUTE § 31-1-101(K):
   A.   Type 1 - Any recreational vehicle primarily designed for off-road use
which has an unladen weight of one thousand one hundred (1,100) pounds or less;
   B.   Type 2 - Any unlicensed motorcycle which has an unladen weight of six
hundred (600) pounds or less and is designed to be ridden off-road with the
operator astride upon a seat or saddle and travels on two (2) tires; and
   C.   Type 3 - Any multi-wheeled motorized vehicle not required by law to be
licensed and is designed for cross-country travel on or over land, sand, snow,
ice or other natural terrain and has an unladen weight of more than nine
hundred (900) pounds.
OPERATOR: Every person who operates or is in actual physical control of the
operation of an off-road vehicle.
OWNER: A person who holds the legal title of a vehicle or, in the event a
vehicle is the subject of an agreement for the conditional sale or lease
thereof with the right of purchase upon performance of the conditions stated in
the agreement and with an immediate right of possession vested in the
conditional vendee or lessee or in the event a mortgagor of a vehicle is
entitled to possession, such conditional vendee or lessee or mortgagor.
PARK: The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than
temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or
unloading.
PEDESTRIAN: Any person afoot.
POLICE OFFICER: Every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to
make arrests for violation of traffic regulations.
PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY: Every way or place in private ownership and used for
vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied permission
from the owner, but not by other persons.
RAILROAD: A carrier of persons or property upon cars, other than streetcars,
operated upon stationary rails.
RAILROAD SIGN OR SIGNAL: Any sign, signal or device erected by authority of a
public body or official or by a railroad and intended to give notice of the
presence of railroad tracks or the approach of a railroad train.
RAILROAD TRAIN: A steam engine, electric or other motor, with or without cars
coupled thereto, operated upon rails, except streetcars.
RESIDENCE DISTRICT: The territory contiguous to and including a street not
comprising a business district when the property on such street for a distance
of three hundred feet (300') or more is in the main improved with residences or
residences and buildings in use for business.
RIGHT OF WAY: The right of one vehicle or pedestrian to proceed in a lawful
manner in preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching under such
circumstances of direction, speed and proximity as to give rise to danger of
collision unless one grants precedence to the other.
ROAD TRACTOR: Every motor vehicle designed and used for drawing other vehicles
and not so constructed as to carry any load thereon either independently or any
part of the weight of a vehicle or load so drawn.
ROADWAY: That portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for
vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In the event a street
includes two (2) or more separate roadways, the term "roadway" shall refer to
any such roadway separately but not to all such roadways collectively.
SAFETY ZONE: The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the
exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked or
indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set
apart as a safety zone.
SCHOOL BUS: Every motor vehicle that complies with the color and identification
requirements set forth in the most recent edition of "Minimum Standards For
School Buses" and is used to transport children to or from school or in
connection with school activities, but not including buses operated by common
carriers in urban transportation of school children.
SEMITRAILER: Every vehicle with or without motive power, other than a pole
trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a
motor vehicle and so constructed that some part of its weight and that of its
load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle.
SIDEWALK: That portion of a street between curb lines, or the lateral lines of
a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for use of pedestrians.
STOP: Complete cessation from movement.
STOP, STOPPING OR STANDING: When prohibited, means any stopping or standing of
a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or
traffic control sign or signal.
STREET: The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly
maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes
of vehicular travel.
THROUGH STREET: Every street or portion thereof on which vehicular traffic is
given preferential right of way, and at the entrances to which vehicular
traffic from intersecting streets is required by law to yield the right of way
to vehicles on such through highway in obedience to a stop sign, yield sign or
other official traffic control devices, when such signs or devices are properly
erected.
TRAFFIC: Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other conveyances
either singly or together while using any street for purposes of travel.
TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL: Any device, whether manually, electrically or
mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and
permitted to proceed.
TRAILER: Every vehicle with or without motive power, other than a pole trailer,
designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor
vehicle and so constructed that no part of its weight and that of its load
rests upon or is carried by another vehicle.
TRUCK: Every motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the
transportation of property.
TRUCK TRACTOR: Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing
other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of
the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn.
URBAN DISTRICT: The territory contiguous to and including any public street
which is built up with structures devoted to business, industry or dwelling
houses situated at intervals of less than one hundred feet (100') for a
distance of a quarter of a mile or more.
VEHICLE: Every device, in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a street, except devices moved by human power or used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (1987 Code §§ 10.04.010 –
10.04.430; amd. Ord. 7-94, 1-19-1995; 2004 Code; Ord. 2021-03, 5-6-2021)
CHAPTER 2
STATE PROVISIONS ADOPTED
SECTION:
6-2-1: Adopted State Provisions Designated
6-2-1: ADOPTED STATE PROVISIONS DESIGNATED:
   A.   Sections Adopted: Sections 31-5-101 through and including 31-5-1214,
31-7-404 and 31-5-1402 of the Wyoming Statutes and all subsequent amendments
thereto, being the uniform act regulating traffic on highways, except such
sections of said act as are specifically deleted therefrom by subsection B of
this section, are adopted by reference and incorporated as a part of this
section as fully as if completely set out herein. (Ord. 2017-01, 2-2-2017; amd.
Ord. 202-08, 1-21-2021)
   B.   Sections Deleted Or Excepted: The following sections of the uniform act
regulating traffic on highways, and all amendments thereto, are specifically
deleted and excepted therefrom before adoption by the governing body of the
town: sections 31-5-111, 31-5-120, 31-5-225, 31-5-227, 31-5-228, 31-5-133, 31-
5-301, 31-5-501, 31-5-502, 31-5-801, 31-5-1107 through 31-5-1113, 31-5-1115,
31-5-1116, and 31-5-1201. (Ord. 2009-07, 8-20-2009)
   C.   Copy On File: One copy of such provisions shall be kept on file in the
office of the town clerk, where it shall be available for inspection by the
public during the normal office hours of the town clerk. (1987 Code §
10.08.010)
   D.   Violations: Any violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be
punished pursuant to the state statute prohibiting such an act. (Ord. 2012-11,
1-17-2013)
CHAPTER 3
LICENSING AND REGISTRATION
SECTION:
6-3-1: Driver's License Required
6-3-2: Minimum Age Of Operator
6-3-3: Registration And License Plates
6-3-4: Driving While License Canceled, Suspended Or Revoked
6-3-5: Operating A Motor Vehicle Without Insurance
6-3-6: Operating A Motor Vehicle Without Proof Of Insurance
6-3-1: DRIVER'S LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle, motorcycle or power
cycle in the town unless he or she is in possession of a valid driver's license
or permit issued by the licensing authority of the state. (1987 Code §
10.12.010)
6-3-2: MINIMUM AGE OF OPERATOR:
Any person under fifteen (15) years of age who operates a motor vehicle, and
any owner, dealer or manufacturer who authorizes or permits a person under
fifteen (15) years of age to operate a motor vehicle, and any owner, dealer or
manufacturer who authorizes or permits a person who is not licensed for the
type or class of vehicle to be driven to operate a motor vehicle shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in this title
for violation of this title. (1987 Code § 10.12.020)
6-3-3: REGISTRATION AND LICENSE PLATES:
   A.   Required: No person shall operate, nor shall an owner knowingly permit
to be operated within the town any vehicle required to be registered unless
there is attached thereto and displayed thereon when and as required by Wyoming
Statutes 31-4-101 through 31-4-104, a valid registration plate or plates issued
therefor by the motor vehicle division of the state or county treasurer for the
current registration year, except as otherwise expressly permitted by Wyoming
Statutes 31-4-101 through 31-4-104. (1987 Code § 10.12.030; amd. 2004 Code)
   B.   Improper Use: No person shall lend to another any license or
registration number of plates, special number of plate or permit issued to him
if the person desiring to borrow the same would not be entitled to the use
thereof, nor shall any person knowingly permit the use of any of the same by
one not entitled thereto, nor shall any person display upon a vehicle any
registration number plate, special number plate or permit not issued for such
vehicle, or not lawfully used thereon under this section. (1987 Code §
10.12.030)
6-3-4: DRIVING WHILE LICENSE CANCELED, SUSPENDED OR REVOKED:
   A.   Misdemeanor: Any person who drives a motor vehicle on any public road
in this town at a time when his driver's license, from this or any other
jurisdiction, or nonresident operating privileges are canceled, suspended or
revoked under this act or any other law is guilty of a misdemeanor.
   B.   Additional One Year Suspension: Upon receiving a record of the
conviction of any person upon a charge of driving a vehicle while the license
of the person was suspended, revoked or canceled, the department of motor
vehicles shall suspend, revoke or cancel the license or nonresident operating
privileges for an additional period of one year. (1987 Code § 10.12.040)
6-3-5: OPERATING A MOTOR VEHICLE WITHOUT INSURANCE:
   A.   Requirements: No owner of a motor vehicle required to be registered
shall operate or permit the operation of his motor vehicle without having in
full force and effect a motor vehicle liability policy in amounts provided by
Wyoming Statutes 31-9-405(b) or a bond in amounts provided by Wyoming Statutes
31-9-102(a)(xi).
No person shall operate a motor vehicle that is required to be registered
without having in full force and effect a motor vehicle liability policy in
amounts provided by Wyoming Statutes 31-9-405(b) or a bond in amounts provided
by Wyoming Statutes 31-9-102(a)(xi). (Ord. 7-2004, 9-16-2004)
   B.   Penalty: A violation of this section constitutes a class B misdemeanor
punishable as set forth in subsection
1-4-1A2 of this code. Additionally, in the event of a second or subsequent
violation of this section, the judge may require the defendant to deliver the
registration and license plates of the vehicle involved to the county treasurer
for the county where the citation was issued, and the registration and license
plates shall be held by the county treasurer until such time as the judge
determines that the defendant has met all obligations imposed by law. (Ord.
2012-11, 1-17-2013)
   C.   Defense: Excusable neglect or mistake by another is a defense for any
violation of this section. If evidence of excusable neglect or mistake by
another is presented and the defendant is convicted, the court may consider
this evidence in imposing a penalty under this section. The judge may suspend
part or all of the sentence under this section and place the defendant on
probation subject to conditions imposed by the judge which may include a
condition that the defendant shall deliver the registration and license plates
of the vehicle involved to the county treasurer for the county where the
citation was issued.
   D.   Exemptions: This section does not apply to:
      1.   Self-insurers pursuant to Wyoming Statutes 31-9-414;
      2.   A vehicle owned by the United States government, any state or
political subdivision thereof which is self-insured;
      3.   A vehicle meeting the requirements of Wyoming Statutes 31-9-408 and
31-9-409;
      4.   A commercial vehicle registered or proportionally registered in this
and any other jurisdiction provided the vehicle is covered by a vehicle
insurance policy complying with the laws of any other jurisdiction in which it
is registered;
      5.   A vehicle owned by a nonresident and registered in a state requiring
insurance if a vehicle insurance policy meeting requirements of the laws and
regulations of that state is in effect or unless it otherwise complies with the
laws of that state concerning compulsory financial responsibility. The
department shall report any violation of this section to the motor vehicle
administrator in the state wherein the vehicle is registered. A vehicle owned
by a nonresident and registered in a state not requiring insurance is exempt
from this section. (Ord. 7-2004, 9-16-2004)
6-3-6: OPERATING A MOTOR VEHICLE WITHOUT PROOF OF INSURANCE:
   A.   No operator of a motor vehicle requiring insurance pursuant to section
6-3-5 of this chapter shall operate said vehicle without having proof of said
insurance in his or her possession at the time of the vehicle's operation. If
the operator has an insurance card issued by an insurer licensed in the state
of Wyoming facially in effect at the time of the vehicle stop in his or her
possession and presents said card to the officer at the time of the operator's
stop, this shall create a rebuttable presumption of proof of insurance for
purposes of probable cause.
   B.   If an operator or owner of a vehicle involved in a violation of this
section presents proof to the court clerk or his or her designee that the
vehicle carries insurance as required by section
6-3-5 of this chapter within ten (10) business days after the issuance of a
citation or receipt of a summons pursuant to this section, the case will be
immediately dismissed against the operator.
   C.   The court clerk or his or her designee is hereby authorized to dismiss
any citation pursuant to subsection B of this section by writing on the face of
the citation "dismissed - proof given" and signing and dating that writing.
   D.   This section is deemed to be a lesser included offense of section
6-3-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 2007-6, 3-15-2007)
CHAPTER 4
DRIVING RULES
SECTION:
6-4-1: Care And Prudence Generally
6-4-2: Reckless Driving
6-4-3: Speed Limits
6-4-4: Speed Or Acceleration Contests
6-4-5: Slade Park And Lyman Recreation Complex
6-4-6: Eluding Police Officers
6-4-7: Driving Under Influence
6-4-8: Flatbed Trucks And Trailers
6-4-9: Right Of Way In Crosswalks
6-4-10: Inattentive Driving
6-4-11: Clinging To Moving Vehicles
6-4-12: Off-Road Recreational Vehicles
6-4-13: Incidental Operation
6-4-1: CARE AND PRUDENCE GENERALLY:
Every person operating a vehicle on the streets or highways under the
jurisdiction of the town shall drive the same in a careful and prudent manner,
having regard for the width, grade, curves, corners, traffic and use of these
streets and all other attendant circumstances so as not to endanger the life,
limb or property of any person. (1987 Code § 10.16.010)
6-4-2: RECKLESS DRIVING:
Any person who drives any vehicle in wilful or wanton disregard for the safety
of persons or property is guilty of a class A misdemeanor punishable as set
forth in subsection
1-4-1A1 of this code. (Ord. 2012-11, 1-17-2013)
6-4-3: SPEED LIMITS:
   A.   Basic Rule: No person shall drive a vehicle on a street at a speed
greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions and having regard
to the actual and potential hazards then existing.
   B.   Maximum Lawful Speeds: Except when a special hazard exists that
requires lower speed, the limits posted on any street or highway, including
periodic lower speed limits around school zones, shall be maximum lawful
speeds, and no person shall drive a vehicle on a street at a speed in excess of
such maximum limits. (Ord. 2009-07, 8-20-2009)
6-4-4: SPEED OR ACCELERATION CONTESTS:
No person shall engage in, aid, or abet any motor vehicle speed or acceleration
contest, or exhibition of speed or acceleration, on any street or highway
within the corporate limits of the town without the prior written approval of
the mayor or town council. (1987 Code § 10.16.040)
6-4-5: SLADE PARK AND LYMAN RECREATION COMPLEX:
All motor vehicles, including "motorcycles" and "motor driven cycles", as
defined in this title, shall be driven only upon the designated roadways of
Slade Park and the Lyman Recreation Complex. (1987 Code § 10.16.050)
6-4-6: ELUDING POLICE OFFICERS:
   A.   Prohibited: Any driver of a motor vehicle who wilfully fails or refuses
to bring his vehicle to a stop, or who otherwise flees or attempts to elude a
pursuing police vehicle, when given visual or audible signal to bring the
vehicle to a stop, is guilty of a misdemeanor. The signal by the police officer
may be by hand, voice, emergency light or siren. The officer giving such signal
shall be in uniform, prominently displaying his badge of office, and his
vehicle shall be appropriately marked showing it to be an official police
vehicle.
   B.   Misdemeanor: Whoever knowingly or wilfully fails or refuses to stop or
who otherwise flees or attempts to elude a pursuing police officer when given
an audible or visual signal to stop is guilty of a misdemeanor. (1987 Code §
10.16.060)
   C.   Penalty: A violation of this section constitutes a class A misdemeanor
punishable as set forth in subsection
1-4-1A1 of this code. (Ord. 2012-11, 1-17-2013)
6-4-7: DRIVING UNDER INFLUENCE:
   A.   Definitions: As used in this section, the following words and terms
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
    ALCOHOL CONCENTRATION:
      1.   The number of grams of alcohol per one hundred milliliters (100 ml)
of blood;
      2.   The number of grams of alcohol per two hundred ten liters (210 l) of
breath; or
      3.   The number of grams of alcohol per seventy five milliliters (75 ml)
of urine.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE: A drug, substance, or immediate precursor in Wyoming
Statutes schedules I through V of article III 1 .
   CONVICTION: A final conviction and shall include:
      1.   An unvacated adjudication of guilt or a determination of a violation
in a court of original jurisdiction or an administrative proceeding;
      2.   An unvacated forfeiture of bail or collateral deposited to secure
the person's appearance in court;
      3.   A plea of guilty or nolo contendere accepted by the court;
      4.   The payment of a fine or court cost; or
      5.   Violation of a condition of release without bail, regardless of
whether the penalty is rebated, suspended or probated.
   DRIVER'S LICENSE: As defined in Wyoming Statutes subsection 31-7-102(a)
(viii) and includes nonresident operating privileges as defined in Wyoming
Statutes subsection 31-7-102(a)(xiii).
   OTHER LAW PROHIBITING DRIVING WHILE UNDER THE INFLUENCE: A statute of
another state, the United States or a territory or district of the United
States or an ordinance of a governmental entity of this or another state or of
an Indian tribe which prohibits driving while under the influence of
intoxicating liquor, alcohol, controlled substances or drugs.
   B.   Driving Or Actual Physical Control Prohibited: No person shall drive or
have actual physical control of any vehicle within the town if the person:
(1987 Code § 10.16.070)
      1.   Has an alcohol concentration of eight one-hundredths of one percent
(0.08%) or more; or (Ord. 2-03, 8-15-2003)
      2.   To a degree which renders him incapable of safely driving:
         a.   Is under the influence of alcohol;
         b.   Is under the influence of a controlled substance; or
         c.   Is under the influence of a combination of any of the elements
named in subsections B2a and B2b of this section.
   C.   Presumptions From Chemical Analysis: Upon the trial of any criminal
action or proceeding arising out of the acts alleged to have been committed by
any person while driving or being in actual physical control of a vehicle while
under the influence of alcohol, the amount of alcohol in the person's blood at
the time alleged as shown by chemical analysis of the person's blood, urine,
breath, or other bodily substance shall give rise to the following
presumptions:
      1.   If there was at that time an alcohol concentration of five one-
hundredths of one percent (0.05%) or less, it shall be presumed that the person
was not under the influence of alcohol. (1987 Code § 10.16.070)
      2.   If there was at that time an alcohol concentration of more than five
one-hundredths of one percent (0.05%) and less than eight one-hundredths of one
percent (0.08%), that fact shall not give rise to any presumption that the
person was or was not under the influence of alcohol, but it may be considered
with other competent evidence in determining whether the person was under the
influence of alcohol to a degree which renders him incapable of safely driving
a motor vehicle. (1987 Code § 10.16.070; amd. Ord. 2-03, 8-15-2003)
   D.   Other Competent Evidence: Subsection C of this section shall not be
construed as limiting the introduction of any other competent evidence bearing
upon the question of whether the person was under the influence of alcohol,
including tests obtained more than three (3) hours after the alleged violation.
The fact that any person charged with a violation of subsection B of this
section is or has been entitled to use the controlled substance under the laws
of this state shall not constitute a defense against any charge under
subsection B of this section. (1987 Code § 10.16.070)
   E.   Penalty: Any person convicted under this section shall be punished
pursuant to Wyoming Statutes sections 31-5-233(e) and (f). (Ord. 2016-05, 4-7-
2016)
   F.   License Suspension Or Revocation: Any person convicted under this
section shall, in addition to the penalty imposed, have his driver's license
suspended or revoked pursuant to Wyoming Statutes section 31-7-127 or 31-7-128.
The court shall forward to the Wyoming state department of motor vehicles, a
copy of the record pertaining to disposition of the arrest or citation.
   G.   Release For Employment Or Education: The court may, upon pronouncement
of any jail sentence under subsection E of this section, provide in the
sentence that the defendant may be permitted, if he is employed or enrolled in
school and can continue his employment or education, to continue such
employment or education for not more than the time necessary as certified by
his employer or school administrator, and the remaining day, days or parts of
days shall be spent in jail until the sentence is served. He shall be allowed
out of jail only long enough to complete his actual hours of employment or
education and a reasonable time to travel to and from his place of employment
or school.
   H.   Prosecution: Any person charged under this section shall be prosecuted
under this section and not under a reduced charge or dismissed, unless the
prosecuting attorney, in open court, moves or files a statement to reduce the
charge or dismiss, with supporting facts, stating that there is insufficient
evidence to sustain the charge. (1987 Code § 10.16.070)
   I.   Chemical Analysis: Chemical analysis of a person's blood, breath or
urine to determine alcohol concentration or controlled substance content shall
be performed in accordance with Wyoming Statutes section 31-6-105, including
subsection (d). (Ord. 2013-05, 11-21-2013)
 
Notes
1 1. WS § 35-7-1011 et seq.
6-4-8: FLATBED TRUCKS AND TRAILERS:
No person shall operate a flatbed truck or trailer carrying property on a
street in the town unless the truck or trailer is equipped with sideboards or
walls of such size as to contain a load to prevent spillage, or the load is
fastened to the truck or trailer bed. (1987 Code § 10.16.080)
6-4-9: RIGHT OF WAY IN CROSSWALKS:
   A.   When traffic control signals are not in place or not in operation, the
driver of a vehicle shall yield the right of way by stopping to yield to any
pedestrian within or entering a crosswalk at either edge of the roadway.
   B.   No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and
walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close as to constitute an
immediate hazard.
   C.   Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the
roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not
overtake and pass the stopped vehicle. (Ord. 2007-04, 3-1-2007)
6-4-10: INATTENTIVE DRIVING:
No person shall operate or have physical control of a motor vehicle in a manner
which evidences a lack of that degree of attentiveness required to safely
operate the vehicle under the prevailing conditions. (Ord. 2010-08, 8-19-2010)
6-4-11: CLINGING TO MOVING VEHICLES:
   A.   No person shall attach himself to the exterior of any vehicle,
including fenders and running boards, while being operated upon a roadway, nor
shall any person ride upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, skateboard,
sled, toy vehicle or other device or object attached to a vehicle while being
operated upon a roadway.
   B.   No person shall knowingly or recklessly operate a vehicle on a roadway
while another person has attached himself to the exterior of any vehicle,
including fenders and running boards, nor while another person rides any
bicycle, coaster, roller skates, skateboard, sled, toy vehicle or other device
or object attached to a vehicle.
   C.   This section does not prohibit attaching a bicycle trailer or bicycle
semitrailer to a bicycle if the trailer or semitrailer was designed for the
attachment, nor to a commercial vehicle or a vehicle operated by or for a
political subdivision of this state designed to permit a passenger to ride on a
fender or running board, such as a fire department or trash collection truck.
(Ord. 2016-01, 2-18-2016)
6-4-12: OFF-ROAD RECREATIONAL VEHICLES:
Off-road recreational vehicles may be operated on the streets, roads and travel
routes under the control of the Town of Lyman subject to compliance with the
following requirements:
   A.   The off-road recreational vehicle shall display the current State of
Wyoming off-road recreational vehicle registration decal;
   B.   The operator must have a valid driver's license;
   C.   Crossings of main-travelled roadways by the off-road recreational
vehicle shall be made at right angles to the roadway or as nearly as
practicable, but in any case, yielding the right-of-way to all traffic in the
main-travelled roadway;
   D.   When operating at any time from one-half (1/2) hour after sunset to
one-half (1/2) hour before sunrise, the off-road recreational vehicle shall be
equipped with a use lighted lamp and illuminating devices in accordance with
Wyoming Statues § 31-5-910 through 31-5-940;
   E.    The off-road recreational vehicle shall be equipped with an adequate
braking device that may be operated either by hand or foot; and
   F.    The off-road recreational vehicle shall be equipped with a noise
muffler which produces a propulsion noise level of not more than one hundred
two (102) decibels at twenty (20) inches in a stationary test. (Ord. 2021-03,
5-6-2021)
6-4-13: INCIDENTAL OPERATION:
The occasional incidental operation of off-road recreational vehicles for non-
recreation purposes shall be permitted on town streets subject to requirement
set forth in Town Ordinance
6-4-12, but in addition, wherever practicable, the off-road recreational
vehicle shall be operated off the main-travelled portion of the Town street.
(Ord. 2021-03, 5-6-2021)
CHAPTER 5
PARKING
SECTION:
6-5-1: Prohibited Parking Locations
6-5-2: Obstruction Of Streets And Alleys
6-5-3: Proximity To Intersection
6-5-4: Double Parking
6-5-5: Distance From Fire Apparatus
6-5-6: Crosswalk And Curb Markings
6-5-7: Designated Parking Lines
6-5-8: Loading Zone
6-5-9: Wrong Direction
6-5-10: Permit Parking
6-5-11: Certain Trucks And Trailers Restricted
6-5-12: Parking On Street To Repair
6-5-13: Inoperable Motor Vehicles On Public Streets
6-5-14: Storage Of Vehicles
6-5-15: Keys In Ignition
6-5-16: Parades, Authority To Prohibit Parking
6-5-17: Registered Owner's Responsibility
6-5-18: Parking Tickets
6-5-19: Handicapped Parking
6-5-1: PROHIBITED PARKING LOCATIONS:
   A.   Locations Designated: No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle,
except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance
with law, or the directions of a police officer or traffic control device in
any of the following places:
      1.   On a sidewalk.
      2.   In front of a public or private driveway.
      3.   Within an intersection.
      4.   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure, street or within a
street tunnel.
      5.   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping.
      6.   Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant.
      7.   On Highway U.S. 305 in the town, unless such vehicle is parallel to
the curb or curb line and not more than one foot (1') therefrom and not within
twenty feet (20') of any intersecting streets.
   B.   Moving Into Prohibited Area: No person shall move a vehicle not
lawfully under his control into any such prohibited area, or away from a curb
such distance as is unlawful.
   C.   Authority To Remove Vehicle: Whenever any police officer finds a
vehicle unattended in any such prohibited area, such officer is authorized to
provide for the removal of such vehicle to the nearest garage or other place of
safety at the expense of the owner of the vehicle. (1987 Code § 10.20.010)
6-5-2: OBSTRUCTION OF STREETS AND ALLEYS:
   A.   Prohibited; Responsibility: No person shall park or place in the
streets or alleys any vehicles or other thing obstructing or tending to
obstruct the free use of the streets and alleys, nor shall the owner,
proprietor or occupant of any premises within the town permit or allow the
streets and alleys abutting his property to be obstructed. In case the owner of
any unoccupied premises shall be a nonresident of the town or absent from the
town, any resident agent who shall have charge of such premises shall comply
with the requirements of this section.
   B.   Unattended Vehicle; Exception: It is unlawful for any operator to stop,
stand or park or leave unattended any vehicle in such a manner or under such
conditions as to leave available less than twenty feet (20') of the width of
the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic; except that this provision
shall not apply to a necessary stop and obedience to traffic regulations or
traffic signs or signals of a police officer. (1987 Code § 10.20.020)
6-5-3: PROXIMITY TO INTERSECTION:
No person shall park, or leave standing, any vehicle within fifteen feet (15')
of any street intersection, whether posted or not posted. (Ord. 2015-07, 12-3-
2015)
6-5-4: DOUBLE PARKING:
It is unlawful for any vehicle to double park, that is, park the same between a
car properly parked at the curb and the center of the street whether the driver
physically is or is not in the vehicle. (1987 Code § 10.20.040)
6-5-5: DISTANCE FROM FIRE APPARATUS:
The driver of any vehicle other than one of official business shall not follow
any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than five
hundred feet (500') or drive into or park such vehicle within the block where
fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm. (1987 Code § 10.20.050)
6-5-6: CROSSWALK AND CURB MARKINGS:
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the directions of a
police officer or traffic control device in any of the following places:
   A.   Red Curb: At any place where the curb has been painted red; and
   B.   Pedestrian Crosswalk: Within any area designated in any manner as a
pedestrian crosswalk. (1987 Code § 10.20.060)
6-5-7: DESIGNATED PARKING LINES:
Every vehicle parked within areas set out by designated painted lines shall be
parked within those lines as defined in this chapter. It is unlawful to park
any vehicle contrary to the provisions of this section. (1987 Code § 10.20.090)
6-5-8: LOADING ZONE:
   A.   Private Driveway: It is unlawful for the operator of a vehicle to stop
or park such vehicle in front of a private driveway except temporarily for the
purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers and in
no case shall such vehicle be left, even momentarily, unattended. (1987 Code §
10.20.080; amd. 2004 Code)
   B.   Passenger Zones: It is unlawful for the operator of a vehicle to stop,
stand or park such vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary for
the actual loading or unloading of passengers in any place marked as a
passenger zone.
   C.   Loading Zones: It is unlawful for the operator of a vehicle to stop,
stand or park such vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary for
the actual loading or unloading of passengers or for the loading and delivery
or pick up and loading of materials in any place marked as a loading zone.
   D.   Authority To Determine Zones: The chief of police shall have the
authority to determine the location of passenger zones and loading zones as
described in this section and shall erect and maintain appropriate signs
indicating the same. (1987 Code § 10.20.080)
6-5-9: WRONG DIRECTION:
Except when necessary in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic signs or
signals, the operator of a vehicle shall not stop, stand or park such vehicle
in a roadway other than parallel to the edge of the roadway, headed in the
direction of traffic and with the curb side wheels of the vehicle within twelve
inches (12") of the edge of the roadway and within the area designated by the
markings on the roadway; except, upon those streets which have been marked or
signed for angle parking, vehicles shall be parked at the angle to the curb
indicated by such marks or signs. (1987 Code § 10.20.110)
6-5-10: PERMIT PARKING:
   A.   Authority To Issue Permits: The chief of police is authorized to issue
to any owner of a vehicle used to transport merchandise or materials a special
permit, renewable annually and stating therein the terms and conditions
thereof, allowing the operator of such vehicle the privilege of loading or
unloading while the vehicle is backed against the curb if, in the opinion of
the governing body, such privilege is reasonably necessary in the conduct of
the owner's business and will not seriously interfere with traffic.
   B.   Restrictions On Parking: In places where and at hours when stopping for
the loading or unloading of merchandise or materials is permitted, vehicles
used for the transportation of merchandise or materials may back against the
curb to take on or discharge loads when the owner of such vehicle holds a
permit granting him such special privilege.
   C.   Permits In Possession; Decal: Such permits shall be either in the
possession of the operator, affixed by decal in a conspicuous place on the
vehicle at the time such vehicle is backed against the curb to take on or
discharge a load.
   D.   Violation: It is unlawful for any owner or operator to violate any of
the special terms or conditions of any special permit. (1987 Code § 10.20.100)
6-5-11: CERTAIN TRUCKS AND TRAILERS RESTRICTED:
   A.   Truck-Tractors And Trucks: The following are prohibited from parking in
all residential zoning districts of the town, except off street parking in R-
A zones:
      1.   Truck-tractors;
      2.   Trucks of two (2) ton capacity and larger;
      3.   Trucks having three (3) or more axles; or
      4.   Truck-tractors when connected with trailer and/or semitrailer in
truck trailer combination unit, are used, designed or maintained for
transportation of persons for hire, compensation or profit, or used, designed
or maintained primarily for the transportation of property for gain or profit.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c88e3c09c40f8e274ac0fb4119ee260c089667ef/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1631.jpg]
 
(The diagrams are for illustration purposes only and not intended to be all
inclusive to all makes and models of trucks and truck-tractors and
combinations.)
   B.   Affirmative Defense: It shall be an affirmative defense to subsection A
of this section if the said vehicle (truck-tractor only) is parked on a
driveway or other similarly improved property of the owner or operator, and the
vehicle is not left running or operating to thereby produce noise or emissions
while parked.
   C.   Trailers And Semitrailers: The following are prohibited from parking in
all residential zoning districts in town, except off street parking in R-
A zones:
      1.   Trailers and/or semitrailers exceeding thirty feet (30') in length;
      2.   Trailers and/or semitrailers having three (3) or more axles;
      3.   Trailers and/or semitrailers used, designed or maintained for
transportation of persons for hire, compensation or profit, or used, designed
or maintained primarily for the transportation of property for gain or profit.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c88e3c09c40f8e274ac0fb4119ee260c089667ef/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1633.jpg]
 
(The diagrams are for illustration purposes only and not intended to be all
inclusive to all makes and models of trucks and truck-tractors and
combinations.)
   D.   Exception:
      1.   This section shall not prevent parking for brief periods of time
while the vehicle and/or trailer is attended for the loading and unloading of
goods and materials.
      2.   This section shall not prohibit the parking of said vehicles owned
or operated by the town, public utilities, contractors, or material men or
delivery trucks while making deliveries or while engaged in the repair,
maintenance or construction of streets, street improvements or utilities within
the town. (Ord. 2015-02, 5-21-2015)
6-5-12: PARKING ON STREET TO REPAIR:
It shall be unlawful for any garage, service station, mechanic, repairman or
owner to park any vehicle upon any public street when the vehicle is in
possession and custody of the garage, service station, mechanic, repairman or
owner for the purpose of repairing, improving, restoring or servicing the
vehicle. (Ord. 7-94, 1-19-1995)
6-5-13: INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES ON PUBLIC STREETS 1 :
It shall be unlawful for owner, keeper and/or user of any inoperable motor
vehicle to use, operate or park the same on any public street, alley, highway,
sidewalk or parking area within the Town. (Ord. 2017-02, 2-2-2017)
 
Notes
1 1. See also chapter 8 of this title.
6-5-14: STORAGE OF VEHICLES:
   A.   Five Day Limit: It is unlawful for any person to store or park a travel
trailer, tent trailer, boat, boat trailer, snow vehicle, snow vehicle trailer,
ATV trailer, cycle trailer, utility trailer, horse trailer, pickup camper, or
similar vehicle on a Town street or alleyway for a period exceeding five (5)
consecutive days. Moving such a vehicle from one location to another on a Town
street or alley or from one Town street or alley to another shall not excuse a
violation of this section and shall not toll the five (5) day limit.
   B.   Removal After Notice: Provided, however, a person shall not be in
violation of this section if the person removes the vehicle from the Town
streets within twenty four (24) hours after notice of the violation has been
posted or attached to the vehicle.
   C.   Removal For Street Cleaning Or Snow Removal 1 : Any such vehicle parked
on the Town streets for periods of time long enough to hamper or make
impossible street cleaning or snow removal from said portion of the street
shall be, by notification of the owner by the Police Department, removed by the
owner to a location that will make cleaning and snow removal possible within
twenty four (24) hours of said notice.
   D.   Declared Nuisance: In addition, any vehicle found to be in violation of
this section shall be deemed a public nuisance and the Police Department is
hereby authorized to remove the vehicle to the nearest garage or other place of
safety at the expense of the owner. (Ord. 4-2001, 12-6-2001; amd. 2004 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  8-1-10 of this Code.
6-5-15: KEYS IN IGNITION:
No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand
unattended without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition, removing
the key and effectively setting the brake thereon and, when standing upon any
grade, turning the front wheels to the curb or side of the highway. (1987 Code
§ 10.20.070)
6-5-16: PARADES, AUTHORITY TO PROHIBIT PARKING:
The Chief of Police is authorized to prohibit parking by vehicles in zones and
areas during the time set aside by him for the purpose of parades. (1987 Code §
10.20.140)
6-5-17: REGISTERED OWNER'S RESPONSIBILITY:
Every registered owner of a vehicle shall be responsible for its operation by
every employee and other person using such vehicle with the consent, authority
or acquiescence of the owner. The violation of any part of this section by a
person other than the owner of such vehicle shall be and be deemed to be in
violation of this chapter by the registered owner of such vehicle and it shall
not be a defense to any charge made under this chapter that the owner of the
vehicle is not driving, operating or parking or having parked the same at the
time the violation occurred. (1987 Code § 10.20.120)
6-5-18: PARKING TICKETS:
   A.   Duty To Issue: It shall be the duty of every police officer, upon
finding a vehicle parked in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter,
to forthwith issue and affix to or deposit in such vehicle a parking ticket,
giving notice to the owner or operator of such vehicle of the parking
violation.
   B.   Required Information: Such parking ticket shall contain the following:
      1.   Name of owner or operator, if known, and if not known, notice shall
be directed to the owner or operator.
      2.   Vehicle make and license number of the offending vehicle.
      3.   Description of the violation by reference to the portion of this
chapter alleged to have been violated.
      4.   Date and time of the alleged violation.
      5.   Location of the alleged violation.
      6.   The reason indicated for the violation.
      7.   Summons directing the owner or operator of the offending vehicle to
appear before the municipal judge at the Lyman municipal court upon a date and
time certain to answer the alleged violation and be dealt with according to
law. (1987 Code § 10.20.130)
6-5-19: HANDICAPPED PARKING:
   A.   Prohibited: No person shall wilfully park a vehicle in violation of the
restrictions, regulations and prohibitions stated on signs specified under
Wyoming Statutes 31-5-501 and 31-5-111 unless that person or his/her passenger
has been issued and displays a distinctive handicapped license plate or
transferable handicapped placard by this or another state pursuant to Wyoming
Statutes 31-2-213 or its equivalent from another state.
   B.   Defined: "Park", as prohibited by this section, shall mean the standing
of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, and whether its engine is running or
not.
   C.   Violation: A violation of this section shall be considered a class B
misdemeanor pursuant to subsection
1-4-1A2 of this code. (Ord. 2015-01, 4-7-2015)
CHAPTER 6
SNOWMOBILES
SECTION:
6-6-1: Definition
6-6-2: Compliance Required
6-6-3: Prohibited Types
6-6-4: Roadway And Sidewalk Operation
6-6-5: Operator's License Required
6-6-6: Registration
6-6-7: Towing
6-6-8: Number Of Occupants Restricted
6-6-9: Safety Equipment
6-6-10: Mufflers
6-6-11: Brakes
6-6-12: Inspections
6-6-13: Hours Of Operation
6-6-14: Rules Of The Road
6-6-1: DEFINITION:
"Snowmobile" means any mechanically driven vehicle of a type which utilizes
sleet type runners, or skis or any endless belt tread or combination of these,
designed primarily for operation over snow. (1987 Code § 10.24.010; amd. 2004
Code)
6-6-2: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
No snowmobile shall be operated within the incorporated limits of the town
except upon compliance with this chapter. (1987 Code § 10.24.010; amd. 2004
Code)
6-6-3: PROHIBITED TYPES:
No snowmobile shall be operated within the incorporated limits which are
propeller driven or which have tracks capable of damaging road surfaces. (1987
Code § 10.24.020; amd. 2004 Code)
6-6-4: ROADWAY AND SIDEWALK OPERATION:
Snowmobiles shall operate over designated roadways when the same are snowpacked
only, and such vehicles shall not be permitted to operate on the sidewalks.
(1987 Code § 10.24.030; amd. 2004 Code)
6-6-5: OPERATOR'S LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall operate any snowmobile upon the streets and alleys of the town
unless such person shall first have obtained and have in his possession a motor
vehicle driver's license, a motor vehicle instruction permit or a power cycle
operator's permit. (1987 Code § 10.24.040; amd. 2004 Code)
6-6-6: REGISTRATION:
No snowmobile shall be operated without a proper and valid registration from
the state. It is not the intent of this chapter to in any way limit the state's
control of snowmobiles while operated within the town. (1987 Code § 10.24.050;
amd. 2004 Code)
6-6-7: TOWING:
No snowmobile shall pull any skier, sled, or other combination vehicle by rope,
or flexible coupling. All sleighs or cutters shall be safely and securely
affixed to the snowmobile by direct coupling, solid tongue, or triangular tow
bar not to exceed forty inches (40") in length, being securely affixed to two
(2) points on the sleigh or cutter with one flexible joint at the center of the
snowmobile. (1987 Code § 10.24.060; amd. 2004 Code)
6-6-8: NUMBER OF OCCUPANTS RESTRICTED:
No snowmobile shall be operated within the town while occupied by more than two
(2) persons and if a snowmobile is so operated, each occupant thereof is in
violation of this chapter. (1987 Code § 10.24.070; amd. 2004 Code)
6-6-9: SAFETY EQUIPMENT:
It is a misdemeanor for any person to drive or move, or for the owner to cause
or knowingly permit to be driven or moved, on any roadway, any snowmobile or
combination of vehicles which is in such unsafe condition as to endanger any
persons or property, or which is not at all times equipped with such equipment
in proper condition and adjustment as required by this chapter, or which is
equipped in any manner in violation thereof. (1987 Code § 10.24.080; amd. 2004
Code)
6-6-10: MUFFLERS:
Every snowmobile shall be at all times equipped with a muffler in good working
order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise and
annoying smoke. (1987 Code § 10.24.090; amd. 2004 Code)
6-6-11: BRAKES:
Every snowmobile shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement
of and to stop and hold such vehicle. (1987 Code § 10.24.100; amd. 2004 Code)
6-6-12: INSPECTIONS:
   A.   Authority To Inspect: The chief of police, members of the state highway
patrol, and county law enforcement officers, upon reasonable cause to believe
that a snowmobile is unsafe or not equipped as required by this chapter, or
that its equipment is not in proper adjustment or repair, may require the
driver of such vehicle to stop and submit such vehicle to an inspection and
test.
   B.   Notice Of Defects: If the vehicle is found to be unsafe or improperly
or defectively equipped, notice of such defects shall be given to the driver of
the vehicle. No person shall operate any vehicle after receiving notice of
defects as above provided, except as may be necessary to return such vehicle to
the residence or place of business of the owner or driver or to a garage, until
the vehicle and its equipment have been placed in proper repair and adjustment
and otherwise made to conform to the requirements of this chapter. (1987 Code §
10.24.110; amd. 2004 Code)
6-6-13: HOURS OF OPERATION:
No snowmobile shall be operated within the town between the hours of nine
thirty o'clock (9:30) P.M. and one-half (1/2) hour before sunrise. (1987 Code §
10.24.120; amd. 2004 Code)
6-6-14: RULES OF THE ROAD:
Every operator of a snowmobile shall observe all rules of the road and
ordinances of the town pertaining to the operation of vehicles, to the extent
that they are not in conflict with this chapter. In addition, every operator of
a snowmobile shall observe the following rules in operating the vehicle:
   A.   Yield Right Of Way: All snowmobiles shall yield the right of way to
motor vehicles.
   B.   Stopping: All snowmobiles shall come to a complete stop at each and
every intersection, when emerging from an alley or private property, and before
crossing any street.
   C.   Main Street: Snowmobiles shall not be operated on or along Main Street
except to cross said street at intersections.
   D.   Speed: No operator shall drive a snowmobile at a greater speed than is
reasonable and prudent under the conditions and having regard to the actual and
potential hazards then existing, and under no circumstances shall an operator
drive such vehicle at a speed in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour on or
along any street or alley in the town. (1987 Code § 10.24.130; amd. 2004 Code)
CHAPTER 7
CHILD SAFETY RESTRAINT SYSTEMS
SECTION:
6-7-1: Definitions
6-7-2: Use Required
6-7-3: Penalty
6-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
CHILD SAFETY RESTRAINT SYSTEM: Any device which is designed to protect, hold or
restrain a child in a privately owned, leased or rented noncommercial passenger
car in such a way as to prevent or minimize injury to the child in the event of
a motor vehicle accident or sudden stop and which conforms to the standards
prescribed by 49 CFR 571.213 or to the applicable federal motor vehicle safety
standards in effect at the time of manufacture.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE: Any vehicle or vehicle combination used for the
transportation of persons for hire, compensation or profit, or designed or used
primarily for the transportation of property for gain or profit.
EMERGENCY VEHICLE: Any fire department vehicle, police, sheriff's department or
highway patrol vehicle, civil defense vehicle, ambulance, hearse or other
vehicle used primarily for emergency purposes.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Every vehicle which is self-propelled.
PASSENGER CAR: A motor vehicle designed to carry eleven (11) persons or less
and primarily used to transport persons, excluding emergency vehicles,
motorcycles, motor homes, vans, pickups, church and school buses.
SCHOOL BUS: A motor vehicle that is owned by or leased to or registered to a
public school district or private school or church that is used to transport
children to or from school or church or in connection with school or church
activities and is designed for and capable of carrying twelve (12) or more
passengers.
SEATING POSITION: Any motor vehicle interior space intended by the motor
vehicle manufacturer to provide seating accommodation while the motor vehicle
is in motion. (1987 Code § 10.28.010)
6-7-2: USE REQUIRED:
   A.   Required: Except as otherwise provided in subsection B of this section,
no person shall operate a passenger vehicle in this state unless each child who
is a passenger in that vehicle and who has not reached his or her ninth
birthday is properly secured in a child safety restraint system in a seat of
the vehicle.
   B.   Exceptions: Any child who is within the age requirements specified in
subsection A of this section need not be properly secured in a child safety
restraint system if a licensed physician has determined that the physical or
medical condition of the child requires that the child not be secured in such a
system. The person operating a passenger car transporting such a child shall
carry in the car the physician's signed statement certifying that the child
should not be secured in a child restraint system. (Ord. 2015-08, 12-3-2015)
6-7-3: PENALTY:
   A.   Fine:
      1.   First Violation: Any person who violates this chapter shall be
issued a citation and fined not more than twenty five dollars ($25.00) for the
first offense; provided, that the fine shall be waived by the court upon
receipt of proof by the court that the offender has purchased, leased or
otherwise acquired a child safety restraint system which meets the requirements
of this chapter.
      2.   Second Or Subsequent Violation: For a second or subsequent violation
of this chapter, the offender shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars
($100.00).
   B.   Use Not In Accordance With Manufacturer's Instructions: Any person who
uses a child safety restraint system in a manner other than in accordance with
the manufacturer's instructions is guilty of a violation of this chapter and
shall be fined as provided in subsection A of this section. (1987 Code §
10.28.030)
   C.   Effect Limited: Violation of this chapter does not constitute evidence
of negligence or recklessness and does not constitute a basis for criminal
prosecution except as set forth in this chapter. (1987 Code § 10.28.040)
CHAPTER 8
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES 1
SECTION:
6-8-1: Definitions
6-8-2: Keeping Of Inoperable Vehicles
6-8-3: Keeper Considered Owner
6-8-4: One Inoperable Vehicle Permitted
6-8-5: Two Inoperable Vehicles
6-8-6: Three Or More Inoperable Vehicles
6-8-7: Exemptions
6-8-8: Effective Date; Compliance
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  12-12-5 of this code.
6-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter unless the context otherwise indicates:
ADJACENT PROPERTY OWNERS: The owners of property that are immediately abutting
the subject property, excluding streets and rights of way.
ADMINISTRATIVE PERMIT: Special authorization granted from the chief of police
or his designated representative for the purpose of keeping more than one, but
no more than two (2) inoperable vehicles.
COVERED: The vehicle has securely attached to it some form of material or tarp
so as to hide, shield or otherwise protect the vehicle from view and accidents,
and the covering is maintained in a state of good repair.
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE: A vehicle that is, without alteration, unable to
legally and safely be operated on a public street or highway, including the
possession of applicable current registration and valid proof of insurance.
REAR OR SIDE YARD: That portion of the yard behind the front line of the house
extended to each side property line.
SAFE CONDITION: A motor vehicle kept in such condition including, but not
limited to, the following:
   A.   The vehicle must be removed from jacks or other blocking materials that
would otherwise permit the vehicle to fall.
   B.   The vehicle does not create a condition where a person or animal could
become trapped inside or underneath.
   C.   There be no sharp metal or glass where one may be easily cut, punctured
or otherwise injured. (Ord. 6-97, 1-8-1998; amd. Ord. 2006-11, 7-20-2006; Ord.
2017-02, 2-2-2017)
6-8-2: KEEPING OF INOPERABLE VEHICLES:
The keeping of inoperable vehicles shall be permitted within all zones in the
town on private property in accordance with town ordinances, including this
chapter, chapter 5 of this title and title 4, chapter 1 of this code. (Ord. 6-
97, 1-8-1998)
6-8-3: KEEPER CONSIDERED OWNER:
Any person who shall keep, place or permit any inoperable motor vehicle on or
about his premises shall be considered and held to be the owner of such
inoperable motor vehicle and responsible therefor under the terms of this
chapter. (Ord. 6-97, 1-8-1998)
6-8-4: ONE INOPERABLE VEHICLE PERMITTED:
Any property owner within any zone in the town may keep one inoperable motor
vehicle; provided, that such one vehicle is kept in the rear or side yard and
in a safe condition. (Ord. 6-97, 1-8-1998)
6-8-5: TWO INOPERABLE VEHICLES:
   A.   Administrative Permit Required: Any property owner within any zone in
the town may keep two (2) inoperable motor vehicles; provided, that an
administrative permit is first obtained from the chief of police or his
designated representative. The chief or his representative shall first ensure
that:
      1.   All inoperable vehicles shall be kept in the rear or side yard;
      2.   All inoperable vehicles are kept in a safe condition; and
      3.   All surrounding property owners are notified and do not have
unreasonable objections to the subject property owner keeping two (2)
inoperable motor vehicles.
   B.   Signatures Of Surrounding Property Owners:
      1.   Required: Notification shall be made by the applicant obtaining
signatures from the surrounding property owners on a form prepared by the chief
of police or his designated representative.
      2.   Form: Said form shall include the names and addresses of all
surrounding property owners, a signature line for each property owner to sign
in favor or in opposition, and the details of the request being made, including
any conditions imposed by ordinance or by the chief or his representative. Upon
the applicant obtaining signatures in favor of the permit, the chief shall
issue the administrative permit.
   C.   Additional Conditions: The chief or his representative may also require
any other reasonable conditions that will ensure that keeping the two (2)
inoperable vehicles will not be detrimental to the subject property,
surrounding properties, or the town. Such reasonable conditions may include
time limits, location requirements, coverings, etc.
   D.   Denial; Appeal: If the applicant for an administrative permit is
denied, the applicant may appeal to the planning and zoning commission for a
conditional use permit as specified in title 12, chapter 12 of this code.
   E.   Fee: The fee for an administrative permit to keep two (2) inoperable
vehicles shall be determined by the town council. (Ord. 6-97, 1-8-1998)
6-8-6: THREE OR MORE INOPERABLE VEHICLES:
   A.   Criteria For Requiring Conditional Use Permit: Any one of the following
criteria shall cause the applicant property owner to obtain a conditional use
permit:
      1.   A signature of objection on the notification form for surrounding
property owners applying for an administrative permit for two (2) inoperable
vehicles;
      2.   A denied application for an administrative permit; or
      3.   Failure to comply with any conditions required in section
6-8-4 or
6-8-5 of this chapter.
   B.   Permit Required: Any property owner within any zone in the town may
keep three (3) or more inoperable motor vehicles; provided, that they first
obtain a conditional use permit from the planning and zoning commission. (Ord.
6-97, 1-8-1998)
6-8-7: EXEMPTIONS:
The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to:
   A.   Inoperable vehicles kept in an enclosed garage or storage building; or
   B.   Persons licensed in accordance with Wyoming Statutes section 31-13-114.
(Ord. 6-97, 1-8-1998)
6-8-8: EFFECTIVE DATE; COMPLIANCE:
The provisions of this chapter shall take effect on June 1, 1998. All property
owners in the town will be subject to the provisions of this chapter. There
will be no nonconforming uses regarding keeping inoperable motor vehicles. All
property owners will have until June 1, 1998, to conform with the provisions of
this chapter. (Ord. 6-97, 1-8-1998)
CHAPTER 9
PENALTY
SECTION:
6-9-1: Violation; Penalty
6-9-1: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any violation of the provisions of this title constitutes a class B misdemeanor
punishable as set forth in subsection
1-4-1A2 of this code, except the following which constitute a class A
misdemeanor punishable as set forth in subsection
1-4-1A1 of this code:
   A.   Driving under the influence pursuant to Wyoming Statutes section 31-5-
233 through 234 and/or section
6-4-7 of this title.
   B.   Eluding a police officer pursuant to Wyoming Statutes section 31-5-225
and/or section
6-4-6 of this title.
   C.   Reckless driving pursuant to Wyoming Statutes section 31-5-229 and/or
section
6-4-2 of this title.
   D.   Operating a motor vehicle without a required interlock device pursuant
to Wyoming Statutes section 31-7-404.
   E.   Operating a motor vehicle without insurance pursuant to section
6-3-5 of this title.
   F.   Operating a motor vehicle while a license is canceled, suspended or
revoked pursuant to section
6-3-4 of this title. (Ord. 2017-03, 2-2-2017)
TITLE 7
FIRE REGULATIONS 1
CHAPTER 1
FIRE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
7-1-1: Established
7-1-2: Organization
7-1-3: Officers
7-1-4: Duties
7-1-5: Police Authority
7-1-6: Records; Reports
7-1-7: Loaning Apparatus
7-1-8: Alarms Outside Town Limits
7-1-9: Indebtedness
7-1-10: Interfering With Fire Department
7-1-11: Inspections
7-1-12: Right Of Entry
7-1-13: Water Department Cooperation
7-1-14: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  9-2-5 of this code for adoption of the uniform fire code.
7-1-1: ESTABLISHED:
There is created the fire department of the town, whose duties it shall be to
prevent and extinguish fires, to educate the public in all matters pertaining
to fires and fire prevention, to care for all fire apparatus and other town
property in its charge and perform such other duties as may be assigned to it
by the mayor or town council. (1987 Code § 2.20.010)
7-1-2: ORGANIZATION:
   A.   Fire Companies: The fire department may consist of a hose company, a
ladder company, a salvage company and such additional companies as may be
authorized by vote of a majority of the members of the fire department, subject
to the approval of the town council.
   B.   Bylaws: The fire department shall adopt suitable bylaws for the
government of the department, such as are not in conflict with town ordinances
or state and national laws, subject to the approval of the town council. These
bylaws and all fire prevention ordinances shall be posted and maintained in a
conspicuous place in each fire station and filed with the town clerk, together
with any revisions and additions. (1987 Code § 2.20.020)
7-1-3: OFFICERS:
   A.   Designated: Officers of the fire department may include chief,
assistant chief, secretary, treasurer, and for each organized company, a
captain and a lieutenant, and such other officers as may be provided for in the
bylaws of the fire department. Officers and members shall be selected as
provided for in the bylaws.
   B.   Chief; Assistant Chief: No member shall assume the office of chief or
assistant chief whose entire time, both day and night, is not habitually spent
within the town limits, and who has not been a member of the fire department
for at least two (2) years, except when less than five (5) members are thus
qualified. (1987 Code § 2.20.030)
7-1-4: DUTIES:
   A.   Obey Superiors: It shall be the duty of each officer and member of the
fire department to obey without question the orders of his superior officers at
all times while in the fire station or at or going to or returning from fires.
   B.   Wear Uniform Or Insignia: Each member of the fire department shall wear
at all times when on duty such distinctive uniform or insignia as shall be
prescribed in the bylaws.
   C.   Chief's Duties:
      1.   Discipline, Good Order And Proper Conduct: The chief of the fire
department shall be responsible for the discipline, good order and proper
conduct of the whole fire department, for the enforcement of all ordinances and
regulations pertaining thereto, and for the care and condition of the hoses,
fire apparatus, and all other property of the department or in its charge.
      2.   Command And Control: The chief shall have command and control of all
officers and members of the department, and of all hoses, fire apparatus and
other property of the department or in its charge.
      3.   Summon Able Bodied Persons To Assist: The chief likewise shall have
control of all persons present at fires and shall have power, if need be, to
summon any and all able bodied persons present to aid in extinguishing any
fire, in removing property from any burning and exposed building and in
guarding the same, and any able bodied person refusing to obey such summons
shall be liable to the penalties as provided in section
7-2-5 of this title.
   D.   Absence Of Chief: In the absence of the chief when responding to
alarms, the assistant chief, captain, lieutenant or senior member present, in
order of rank and seniority, shall assume the duties and full authority of the
chief until the arrival of a superior officer.
   E.   Leaving Scene Of Fire: After responding to an alarm, no member shall
leave the scene of the fire or the apparatus until the fire shall have been
extinguished and the apparatus returned to the station and properly cared for,
except by permission of the commanding officer. (1987 Code § 2.20.040)
7-1-5: POLICE AUTHORITY:
   A.   Authority: The fire chief and members acting under his order shall have
full and complete police powers and authority within the fire station, as to
all matters pertaining to the fire department and shall also have authority to
make arrests for violations of all town ordinances, the enforcement of which is
under his jurisdiction. The chief of police and all members of the police
department shall cooperate with him in the enforcement of the above mentioned
ordinances.
   B.   Limits At Fires: The chief of the fire department may prescribe limits
at fires within which no person shall be admitted except by this order. (1987
Code § 2.20.050)
7-1-6: RECORDS; REPORTS:
   A.   Record Of Activities; Report To Council: The fire chief shall keep or
cause to be kept a complete record of the activities of the fire department and
shall make a thorough investigation of each fire and report to the mayor and
town council at least quarterly, giving in detail the following information in
regard to each, if available: cause, location, time, owner, tenant, occupancy,
type of building, insurance carried, insurance paid, building loss, contents
loss, how extinguished, apparatus used, firemen present, adequacy of water
supply and pressure, and any other information of value.
   B.   Inventory Of Property: The fire chief, immediately after assuming
office and annually thereafter, shall make an inventory of all property owned
by the fire department or in its charge, noting the condition of each article,
which shall be submitted to the mayor and town council, together with
recommendations for the purchase of additional equipment needed and any other
recommendations he may desire to submit affecting the fire department.
   C.   Inspection Of Fire Hydrants: The fire chief shall inspect or cause to
be inspected by members of the fire department, at least twice annually and
more often if needed, all fire hydrants and shall list those needing attention
in his next report to the council.
   D.   Membership List: The chief shall also maintain in the office of the
town clerk an accurate list of the members of the fire department and shall
report promptly any additions or withdrawals from the membership.
   E.   Loss Or Damage To Equipment; Accidents: Loss of or damage to equipment
and accidents involving members of the fire department in the performance of
their duties shall be reported immediately to the mayor and council by the fire
chief. (1987 Code § 2.20.060)
7-1-7: LOANING APPARATUS:
Fire apparatus and other town property in charge of the fire department shall
not be loaned or rented except by permission of the fire chief and with the
approval of a majority of the membership of the fire department. (1987 Code §
2.20.070)
7-1-8: ALARMS OUTSIDE TOWN LIMITS:
The fire department shall not respond to alarms outside of the corporate
limits, leaving the town unprotected, except that not more than one-half (1/2)
of the membership may respond to such alarms with reserve equipment, only when
authorized to do so by the fire chief. (1987 Code § 2.20.080)
7-1-9: INDEBTEDNESS:
No member of the fire department or other person shall contract any
indebtedness on behalf of the fire department. (1987 Code § 2.20.090)
7-1-10: INTERFERING WITH FIRE DEPARTMENT:
   A.   Entering Fire Station: No person shall be allowed to enter the fire
station unless accompanied by a member of the fire department.
   B.   Performance Of Duties: No person shall interfere in any way with the
fire department in the performance of its duties.
   C.   Use Of Apparatus: No person not a member of the fire department shall
use any of the fire apparatus at fires or otherwise unless acting under orders
of the commanding officer.
   D.   Drivers Hearing Alarm: Upon hearing an alarm of fire all drivers of
vehicles shall take due warning and upon the approach of fire apparatus shall
move promptly to the right curb and stop in order to leave clear the center of
the street.
   E.   Following Fire Apparatus: Vehicles shall not follow fire apparatus
nearer than one full block and shall not proceed to any point within one full
block of the fire.
   F.   Driving Over Fire Hose: Vehicles shall not be driven over the fire hose
or other apparatus.
   G.   Prohibited Parking: Vehicles shall not be parked within fifteen feet
(15') of any fire hydrant or before the entrance of any theater, hall, or other
building in which large public assemblages are held.
   H.   False Alarm: No person shall knowingly give a false alarm other than
those for test purposes given by the fire chief.
   I.   Interfering With Alarm System: No person shall interfere with any part
of the fire alarm system unless so authorized by the fire chief of the fire
department. (1987 Code § 2.20.100)
   J.   Penalty: A violation of this section constitutes a class A misdemeanor
punishable as set forth in subsection
1-4-1A1 of this code. (Ord. 2012-11, 1-17-2013)
7-1-11: INSPECTIONS:
   A.   Duty To Inspect: It shall be the duty of the fire chief to inspect or
cause to be inspected by the fire department officers or members, as often as
may be necessary, but not less than twice a year in outlying districts and four
(4) times a year in the closely built portions of the town, all buildings,
premises and public thoroughfares, except the interiors of private dwellings,
for the purpose of ascertaining and causing to be corrected any conditions
liable to cause fire, or any violations of the provisions or intent of any
ordinance of the town affecting the fire hazard.
   B.   Order To Remove Or Remedy: Whenever any officer or member shall find in
any building, or upon any premises or other place, combustible or explosive
matter or dangerous accumulation of rubbish or unnecessary accumulation of
waste paper, boxes, shavings or any other highly inflammable materials
especially liable to fire, and which is so situated as to endanger property, or
shall find obstruction to fire escapes, stairs, passageways, doors or windows
liable to interfere with the operations of the fire department, or egress of
occupants, in case of fire, or shall find any other conditions dangerous to
life or property by reason of the fire hazard, he shall order the same to be
removed or remedied, and such order shall forthwith be complied with by the
owner or occupant of such premises or buildings, subject to appeal within
twenty four (24) hours to the mayor, who shall, within ten (10) days, review
such order and file his decision thereon, and unless the order is revoked or
modified, it shall remain in full force and be obeyed by such owner or
occupant.
   C.   Failure To Comply: Any owner or occupant failing to comply with such
order within ten (10) days after said appeal shall have been determined, or if
no appeal is taken, then within ten (10) days after the service of the said
order, shall be liable to a penalty as stated in section
1-4-1 of this code.
   D.   Authority Of Fire Chief: The fire chief shall have authority to order
the immediate discontinuance of the use of any stove, stovepipe, flue, furnace,
electric wiring or other hazardous device, pending the result of the appeal.
(1987 Code § 2.20.110)
7-1-12: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
The fire chief and members acting under his orders shall have authority to
enter any building in the proper performance of their duties. (1987 Code §
2.20.120)
7-1-13: WATER DEPARTMENT COOPERATION:
The water department shall cooperate with the fire department in every way
possible to provide an adequate supply of water at pressures suitable for
firefighting and shall supply the fire department one or more accurate maps of
the distributing system, showing the size and location of all mains, valves and
fire hydrants, which shall be posted and maintained in a conspicuous place in
each fire station, and shall report promptly to the fire department the opening
and closing of all valves in street mains and any other information relative to
the water supply to any and all parts of town, which information shall also be
posted for the information of the firemen and others. (1987 Code § 2.20.130)
7-1-14: PENALTY:
Unless specifically set out in this chapter, any violation of the provisions of
this chapter constitutes a class B misdemeanor punishable as set forth in
subsection
1-4-1A2 of this code. (Ord. 2012-11, 1-17-2013)
CHAPTER 2
FIRE AND EXPLOSION HAZARDS
SECTION:
7-2-1: Burning
7-2-2: Trash, Rags And Ash Accumulations
7-2-3: Explosives
7-2-4: Fireworks
7-2-5: Penalty
7-2-1: BURNING:
   A.   Permission Required: It is unlawful for any person to burn or cause to
be burned any garbage, waste, trash, weeds or other materials, within the
corporate limits of the town, without having first obtained written permission
from the fire chief. The fire chief may grant such permission if, in his
opinion, the burning of the materials described in this section can be
accomplished without danger to adjoining property or undue contamination to the
air or offense to others in the vicinity.
   B.   Liability: The town shall not be held to assume any liability by reason
of having granted permission to burn any of the materials mentioned in this
section if such burning should cause damage to another person's property.
   C.   Term Of Permission: The permission granted shall be valid for only
forty eight (48) hours from the time of issuance. (1987 Code § 8.08.010)
7-2-2: TRASH, RAGS AND ASH ACCUMULATIONS:
   A.   Combustible Materials: No person or persons shall allow to remain
longer than thirty six (36) hours, or overnight, in any alley, or on any
sidewalk or premises, within thirty feet (30') of any building, empty boxes,
wastepaper, rubbish, trash, or other combustible materials.
   B.   Ashes:
      1.   Prohibited: No person or persons shall be allowed to place ashes
within any building in any box or other wooden vessel or upon any wooden vessel
or floor.
      2.   Receptacle; Ash Pit: No ashes shall be kept or deposited in any part
of the town unless the same shall be kept in a secure incombustible container,
and every owner of property where ashes are kept or deposited shall erect upon
the premises a secured incombustible receptacle or ash pit for that purpose, so
located as not to endanger walls, fences and other combustible material.
   C.   Oily Waste; Oily Rags: No person shall keep or permit to be kept on the
premises any oily waste or oily rags, unless at all times when not actually in
use such oily waste and oily rags are kept in a metal can with self-closing
cover and riveted joints, standing on metal legs which raise the bottom of the
container at least five inches (5") above the floor. (1987 Code § 8.08.020)
7-2-3: EXPLOSIVES:
   A.   Prohibited Explosives; Exception: It is unlawful to store or keep any
dynamite, nitroglycerin or other explosives other than gunpowder in any
storeroom or building or on any premises within the town limits. A limit of
five (5) pounds of gunpowder may be stored in sealed metal containers.
   B.   Gunpowder, Permit Required: Any person, firm or corporation who sells
or stores gunpowder shall obtain a permit from the fire chief, who shall
inspect the place where the gunpowder is kept. (1987 Code § 8.08.050)
   C.   Penalty: A violation of this section constitutes a class A misdemeanor
punishable as set forth in subsection
1-4-1A1 of this code. (Ord. 2012-11, 1-17-2013)
7-2-4: FIREWORKS:
   A.   Definition: For purposes of this section, "fireworks" includes any item
which may be sold or offered for sale under federal law as contained within 15
United States Code section 1261; 21 United States Code section 371; and 16 CFR,
commercial practices, part 1507 and/or any article, device or substance
prepared for the primary purpose of producing a visual or auditory sensation by
combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation including, without
limitation, the following articles and devices commonly known and used as
fireworks:
      1.   Toy cannons or toy canes in which explosives are used;
      2.   Blank cartridges;
      3.   Firecrackers;
      4.   Bottle rockets;
      5.   Squibs or other crackers;
      6.   Torpedoes;
      7.   Skyrockets; and
      8.   Roman candles.
   B.   Prohibitions:
      1.   Discharge; Detonation: Unless otherwise authorized by the Town
Council, the discharge or detonation of any fireworks at any time within the
limits of the Town is strictly prohibited.
      2.   Minors: Individuals under the age of majority shall not sell, buy,
detonate or discharge any approved fireworks, unless they are accompanied by an
adult.
      3.   Penalty: Violations of this subsection B shall, upon conviction, be
punished pursuant to subsection
1-4-1A2 of this Code. The detonation or discharge of each firework may
constitute a separate violation.
   C.   Exceptions:
      1.   Power To Ban: The Town Council, Chief of Police, and/or Fire Chief,
at their discretion, may put a ban on the discharge of fireworks at any time,
including the type and/or the approved period by resolution or proclamation.
Any ban of the sale or discharge of fireworks in or adjacent to the Town by an
authorized State, Federal or County official shall constitute a ban within the
Town. (Ord. 2016-09, 9-15-2016)
      2.   Discharge; Detonation Allowed: The detonation or discharge of
fireworks within the Town shall be allowed each year as follows:
         a.   From nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. until twelve o'clock (12:00)
midnight on July 4. (Ord. 2018-07, 8-16-2018)
         b.   From nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. until twelve o'clock (12:00)
midnight on the day (Saturday) of the official Town Pioneer Days celebration.
         c.   From five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on December 31 until two o'clock
(2:00) A.M. on January 1.
      3.   Public Display: The Mayor or Town Council may authorize the public
display of fireworks by properly qualified individuals; provided, that such
display or displays shall be of such character and so located, discharged or
fired, as in the opinion of the Fire Chief, they shall not be hazardous to
surrounding property or endanger any person or persons.
   D.   Licensing:
      1.   Transient Merchant: Any transient merchant desiring to sell
fireworks must also comply with title 3, chapter 4 of this Code.
      2.   Inspection; Approval Required: Prior to the issuance of a business
license, the Fire Chief must inspect and approve sales and storage areas. Said
approval must be in writing and delivered to the Town Clerk prior to the
issuance of a business license.
   E.   Removal: The Fire Chief may, at his own discretion, remove or have
removed, at the owner's expense, all stocks of fireworks, or other combustibles
exposed for sale or held in stock, in violation of this section.
(Ord. 2016-09, 9-15-2016; amd. Ord. 2024-03, 9-4-2024)
7-2-5: PENALTY:
   A.   Penalty: Unless specifically set out in this chapter, any violation of
this chapter constitutes a Class B misdemeanor punishable as set forth in
subsection
1-4-1A2 of this Code. (Ord. 2012-11, 1-17-2013)
   B.   Members Of Fire Department: Members of the Fire Department, when acting
as such, violating this chapter or chapter 1 of this title shall be dealt with
in accordance with the bylaws of the Fire Department.
   C.   Enforced Removal: The application of the penalty set forth in
subsections A and B of this section shall not be held to prevent the enforced
removal of prohibited conditions and the imposition of one penalty for any
violation of this chapter or chapter 1 of this title shall not excuse the
violation, or permit it to continue.
   D.   Required To Correct Or Remedy Violations: All persons convicted thereof
shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a
reasonable time. (1987 Code § 8.08.050)
TITLE 8
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
USE AND CLOSURE GENERALLY
SECTION:
8-1-1: Barricading Of Excavations
8-1-2: Tearing Up Pavement
8-1-3: Damaging Street Signs
8-1-4: Placing Materials On Public Way
8-1-5: Erecting Posts Or Poles
8-1-6: Deposit Of Petroleum Products
8-1-7: Cellar Doors; Subterraneous Openings
8-1-8: Closing Streets
8-1-9: Duty Of The Town Concerning Snow Removal
8-1-10: Removal Of Vehicles For Snowplowing And Removal
8-1-11: Ice And Snow Accumulations
8-1-99: Penalty
8-1-1: BARRICADING OF EXCAVATIONS:
When any street in the Town must be excavated, including any Town property,
extending from any private property line to another property line, the earth
shall be deposited in a manner that will occasion the least inconvenience to
the public and provide for the passage of water along the gutters. No person
shall make any excavations or dig any hole, drain or ditch in any street or
alley within the Town without providing a temporary fence or barricade around
the same in order to prevent persons, animals, or vehicles from falling into
the same. (1987 Code § 12.04.010)
8-1-2: TEARING UP PAVEMENT 1 :
No person shall tear up or injure any pavement including curb or gutter or
sidewalk within the Town without authority, in writing, from the Town. (1987
Code § 12.04.020)
 
Notes
1 1. See also chapter 3 of this title.
8-1-3: DAMAGING STREET SIGNS:
It is unlawful for any person to deface, mar or damage any street signs within
the Town. (1987 Code § 12.04.030)
8-1-4: PLACING MATERIALS ON PUBLIC WAY:
It is unlawful for any person to cause or permit any building materials,
machinery, sand, dirt, or other object to be in or upon the streets, alleys, or
sidewalks of the Municipality without first obtaining a permit from the Town
for such use of streets, alleys, or sidewalks; provided, that whenever a permit
is issued, such permit shall carry the right to place materials, machinery or
other objects upon the streets, alleys, or sidewalks, subject to the conditions
as are deemed necessary for the safety of persons on or about such streets,
alleys or sidewalks and which are set forth in such permit. (1987 Code §
12.04.040)
8-1-5: ERECTING POSTS OR POLES:
No person shall encroach into or upon any of the sidewalks, streets, or alleys
of the Town by erecting or maintaining thereon a pole, post or other structure
used in the transmission of electric current by wire, including electric light,
telegraph or telephone poles, or attach or maintain upon such poles, posts or
other structures any wire for any purpose whatsoever, except in accordance with
the rights conferred by the Governing Body. (1987 Code § 12.04.050)
8-1-6: DEPOSIT OF PETROLEUM PRODUCTS:
No person shall drain or deposit upon any street, sidewalk, alley, park or
public place or into any sump, gutter, catch basin, manhole, conduit, sewer,
lake or waterway in the Municipality any tar, asphaltum, gasoline, lubricating
oil, greases, waste oil from automobile or truck crank cases, or any byproduct
of petroleum. (1987 Code § 12.04.060)
8-1-7: CELLAR DOORS; SUBTERRANEOUS OPENINGS:
No person shall allow any cellar door, pit, vault or other subterraneous
opening on or adjacent to any highway or sidewalk to be left or kept open or in
an unsecured condition so that passersby will be in danger of falling into such
cellar, pit, vault or other subterraneous opening. (1987 Code § 12.04.070)
8-1-8: CLOSING STREETS:
The Chief of Police is authorized to temporarily close any street, alley or
public way or portion thereof, while such street, alley or public way is
undergoing construction, alteration or repair or being involved in special
work. In closing such street, alley or public way, the Chief of Police shall
cause to be erected appropriate barricades, signs and warnings sufficient to
fairly apprise the public thereof. (1987 Code § 12.04.080)
8-1-9: DUTY OF THE TOWN CONCERNING SNOW REMOVAL:
It shall be the duty of the Town to promptly address the clearing of the
roadways in the Town when there is an accumulation of snow, ice and/or other
debris upon a public street, alley, or right-of-way. The Town shall prioritize
health and safety in determining the schedule and manner of the plowing of
streets and removing of snow, as well as clearing sidewalks adjacent to Town
owned properties and keeping melted runoff flowing into storm drains and other
water-clearing channels. The removal of accumulations may be superseded by
other Town emergencies, such as water line breaks or other emergency response,
as well as the employment status and hours worked of Town employees. The Mayor
may approve the temporary emergency hiring of employees, contractors and/or
equipment to address emergencies in extreme situations. Nothing in this section
is intended to, nor is to be read as creating a cause of action for any person
for failure of the Town to remove accumulations to their desired specifications
or schedule. (Ord. 2019-04, 5-2-2019)
8-1-10: REMOVAL OF VEHICLES FOR SNOWPLOWING AND REMOVAL:
It shall be the duty of all persons owning vehicles, trailers or other
apparatus parked upon the streets of the Town, to remove such vehicles,
trailers or other apparatus from the streets from the hours of six o'clock (6:
00) P.M. until nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. on each night between October 31st
until April 30th of the following year. Nothing in this section shall be read
to supersede or interfere with the Town's additional ability to have vehicles
removed pursuant to subsection
6-5-14C of this Code. In addition to the remedies contained within section
8-1-99 of this chapter, the Public Works Director and/or law enforcement may
have any vehicle violating this section towed at the owner's expense. (Ord.
2019-04, 5-2-2019)
8-1-11: ICE AND SNOW ACCUMULATIONS:
No person shall cause or permit snow, ice and/or other debris to be deposited
upon a public street, alley, or right-of-way, except snow removed from street
adjacent sidewalks and gutters may be deposited on top of accumulated snow
placed on the street by the Town and/or its designee or assign. Should any
deposit of snow on top of snow moved or placed by the Town and/or its designee
or assign become a hazard as determined by an official representative of the
Town, the State Department of Transportation and/or law enforcement, the
adjacent land owner may be required to immediately remove or alter said
deposit. Any deposit of snow and/or ice not in conformity to this section shall
be prima facie evidence that it was so placed by the owner, occupant or manager
of the adjacent tenements or grounds. (Ord. 2019-04, 5-2-2019)
8-1-99: PENALTY:
Unless specifically set out in this chapter, any violation of the provisions of
this chapter constitutes a Class B misdemeanor punishable as set forth in
subsection
1-4-1A2 of this Code. (Ord. 2012-11, 1-17-2013; amd. Ord. 2019-04, 5-2-2019)
CHAPTER 2
SIDEWALKS
SECTION:
8-2-1: Duty To Clean
8-2-2: Penalty
8-2-1: DUTY TO CLEAN:
All persons shall keep the sidewalks and gutters in front of and adjacent to
the tenements or ground owned, occupied or managed by them clear of ice, mud,
dirt, rubbish, filth, leaves, plants, tree limbs, roots, vegetation or other
obstructions. All trees, bushes, shrubs, and plants within the Town of Lyman
shall be maintained by the landowners, occupiers or managers in such a manner
as to prevent encroachment into the space above the said sidewalks. All owners,
occupiers and managers shall edge their lawns in such a manner as to prevent
vegetation from encroaching upon adjacent sidewalks. After any fall of snow,
said persons shall cause the snow to be immediately removed from such sidewalks
and gutters. (Ord. 2007-12, 9-6-2007; amd. Ord. 2023-04, 11-2-2023)
8-2-2: PENALTY:
Unless specifically set out in this chapter, any violation of the provisions of
this chapter constitutes a class B misdemeanor punishable as set forth in
subsection
1-4-1A2 of this code. (Ord. 2012-11, 1-17-2013)
CHAPTER 3
CONSTRUCTION, REPAIR AND EXCAVATIONS 1
SECTION:
8-3-1: Excavation License
8-3-2: Driveway And Parking Strip Permit
8-3-3: Breaking Through Pavement
8-3-4: Piling Excavated Materials
8-3-5: Cleanup
8-3-6: Maintaining Gutter Flow
8-3-7: Disposal Of Mud And Runoff
8-3-8: Backfilling
8-3-9: Restoration Of Surface
8-3-10: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  9-3-1 of this code.
8-3-1: EXCAVATION LICENSE:
   A.   Required: A license shall be required prior to any person commencing
work upon any excavation, construction or repair of water and/or sewer lines,
cables, poles, or lines located in or on any street, alleyway and easement of
the town. (1987 Code § 12.12.010)
   B.   Form Of License: The license required in subsection A of this section
shall be in the following form:
   TOWN OF LYMAN, WYOMING
   LICENSE
The Town of Lyman, Wyoming (hereinafter called the "Town"), hereby grants a
license to                                     (hereinafter called the
"Licensee") to install and operate (hereinafter called the "Utility"), upon the
property of the Town of Lyman in the locations and positions shown or printed
on the reverse side, marked Exhibit "A" and in strict accordance with the "Town
of Lyman, Wyoming Standards and Specifications".
The foregoing license is subject to the following conditions:
FIRST: The work of installing the utility shall be commenced by the Licensee
only after the execution of this agreement by the parties hereto. Further, the
Town Clerk shall be notified immediately prior to the time of commencement.
SECOND: The Licensee shall perform all necessary work on the installation of
the utility and the cost of such work shall be borne by the Licensee. The work
to be performed by the Licensee shall include the following:
   (a) Sub-excavation of all unstable material and compaction of all backfill
or special backfill to a density of ninety five percent (95%).
   (b) All backfill shall be placed to the top of the subgrade and the surface
course or courses shall be replaced by materials presently composing the
surface course or courses.
   (c) Furnish, provide, erect and maintain all necessary precautions for the
protection of the work and safety of the public at the installation area.
THIRD: In case settlement or failure occurs after Licensee has completed
backfilling and resurfacing utility cut, the Town will correct such settlement,
or failure, and all labor, material and equipment required to make such
correction will be billed to the Licensee.
(1987 Code § 12.12.020)
8-3-2: DRIVEWAY AND PARKING STRIP PERMIT:
Except where included in a building permit, no person shall commence work on
the construction, alteration, repair or removal of any driveway or the paving
of any parking strip on any street, alley or other public place in the town
without a written permit first having been obtained from the town clerk. (1987
Code § 12.12.030)
8-3-3: BREAKING THROUGH PAVEMENT:
The following provisions shall be applicable where any excavation requires
breaking through pavement:
   A.   Heavy Duty Pavement Breakers: Heavy duty pavement breakers may be
prohibited by the administrative official when the use endangers existing
substructures or other property.
   B.   Saw Cutting: Saw cutting of cement concrete may be required by the
administrative official when the nature of the job or the condition of the
street warrants.
   C.   Cutting Ahead Of Excavation: Approved cutting of bituminous pavement
surface ahead of excavations may be required by the administrative official to
confine pavement damage to the limits of the trench.
   D.   Removal Of Sidewalk Sections: Sections of sidewalks shall be removed to
the nearest score line or saw-cut edge.
   E.   Unstable Pavement: Unstable pavement shall be removed over caveout and
overbreaks and the subgrade shall be treated as the main trench.
   F.   Pavement Edges: Pavement edges shall be trimmed to a vertical face and
nearly aligned with the centerline of the trench.
   G.   Cutouts: Cutouts outside of the trench line must be normal or parallel
to the trench line.
   H.   Boring: Boring or other methods to prevent cutting of new pavement may
be required by the administrative official.
   I.   Preexisting Damage: A permittee under this chapter shall not be
required to repair damage existing prior to excavation done by him unless his
cut results in small floating sections which may be unstable, in which case the
permittee shall remove and pave the area. (1987 Code § 12.12.040)
   J.   Cash Bond Required: Prior to the commencement of excavation under this
chapter, wherein the breaking through of pavement is contemplated by the person
performing the construction, the person shall furnish to the town a cash bond
in the bid amount prior to breaking any pavement located within any street,
sidewalk, curb or gutter. The bond provided herein shall be held by the town
for a period of not more than one year thereafter and shall be returned to the
person placing said bond at the expiration of the one year period if, in the
opinion of the town, the pavement has been satisfactorily replaced. However,
if, in the opinion of the town, the excavated area has not been satisfactorily
replaced, the town, in its discretion, may apply whatever amount of the bond,
in whole or in part, towards restoration of the area to the condition prior to
excavation. Any remaining bond balance shall be refunded to the person placing
the bond. (1987 Code § 12.12.040; amd. 2004 Code)
8-3-4: PILING EXCAVATED MATERIALS:
All material excavated from trenches and piled adjacent to the trench or in any
street shall be piled and maintained in such a manner as not to endanger those
working in the trench, pedestrians or other users of the streets and so that as
little inconvenience as possible is caused to those using streets or adjoining
property. Where the confines of the area being excavated are too narrow to
permit the piling of excavated material beside the trench, the administrative
official shall have the power to require that the permittee under this chapter
haul the excavated material to a storage site and then rehaul it to the trench
site at the time of backfilling. (1987 Code § 12.12.050)
8-3-5: CLEANUP:
   A.   Required: As excavation work progresses, all streets, sidewalks and
alleys shall be thoroughly cleaned of all rubbish, excess earth, rock and other
debris resulting from such work.
   B.   Cost: All cleanup operations at the location of such excavation shall
be accomplished at the expense of the permittee.
   C.   Cleanup After Completion: All cleanup shall be completed to the
satisfaction of the administrative official and immediately after completion of
such work, the permittee shall, at his own expense, clean up and remove all
refuse and unused materials of any kind resulting from such work. (1987 Code §
12.12.060)
8-3-6: MAINTAINING GUTTER FLOW:
A permittee under this chapter shall maintain all gutters free and unobstructed
for the full depth of the adjacent curb and for at least one foot (1') in width
from the base of such curb at the gutter line. (1987 Code § 12.12.070)
8-3-7: DISPOSAL OF MUD AND RUNOFF:
A permittee under this chapter shall make provisions to dispose of all surplus
water, muck, silt, slickings or other runoff pumped from excavations or
resulting from sluicing or other operations and shall be responsible for any
damage resulting from its failure to so provide. (1987 Code § 12.12.080)
8-3-8: BACKFILLING:
Fine materials free from lumps and stone shall be thoroughly compacted around
and above the substructure to the upper level of the substructure. Above the
upper level of the substructure, backfill material shall be placed to the
subgrade of the pavement in lifts consistent with the type of soil involved and
the method of consolidation being used. Broken pavement, large stones, roots
and other debris shall not be used in the backfill. Each lift shall be rolled
or tamped or a combination of these methods shall be used, depending upon the
type of soil involved, to compact the backfill materials. Such backfill shall
be done in a manner that will permit the restoration of the surface to a
condition equivalent to that in which it was prior to excavation. (1987 Code §
12.12.090)
8-3-9: RESTORATION OF SURFACE:
   A.   Resurfacing: Resurfacing of excavation shall be done with such
materials and in such manner as to restore the surface to a condition at least
as good as the surface was prior to the commencement of the excavation.
   B.   Temporary Surfacings: Temporary surfacings may be required by the
administrative official where the backfill is likely to settle. The temporary
surface shall be replaced with permanent resurfacing when the backfill has
ceased to settle.
   C.   Conformance Required: All surfaces and subsurfaces shall conform to the
method of construction of the street, sidewalk or alley in which the excavation
was made.
   D.   Settling: If any trench settles within one year, then in such event,
the contractor shall reexcavate and resurface the affected area. (1987 Code §
12.12.100)
8-3-10: PENALTY:
Unless specifically set out in this chapter, any violation of the provisions of
this chapter constitutes a class B misdemeanor punishable as set forth in
subsection
1-4-1A2 of this code. (Ord. 2012-11, 1-17-2013)
CHAPTER 4
INTERSECTION VIEW OBSTRUCTION
SECTION:
8-4-1: View Obstructing Structures Prohibited
8-4-2: Building Permit Required
8-4-3: Height; Setback
8-4-4: Nuisance
8-4-5: Penalty
8-4-1: VIEW OBSTRUCTING STRUCTURES PROHIBITED:
   A.   Restricted Sight Triangle Defined: A triangular shaped zone, the sides
of which are determined by measuring the distance from the intersection of two
(2) connected street curb lines or the outer adjacent edge of any private
driveway and any street curb line, and the hypotenuse of which is determined by
a connecting line between the said sides. The combined length of the two (2)
sides must be a minimum of forty feet (40'), with no side's length being less
than fifteen feet (15') from the point of the sides' intersection. (Ord. 2008-
9, 5-15-2008)
   B.   Prohibition: No structure, sign, opaque fence, tree, plant, shrubbery,
or other thing shall be permitted to be placed within a restricted sight
triangle if any portion of the said item is more than thirty six inches (36")
above the level of any street adjacent to the restricted sight triangle. All
vegetation within a restricted sight triangle shall be trimmed and maintained
in such a way to ensure that said vegetation complies with this section. (Ord.
2012-11, 1-17-2013)
8-4-2: BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED:
All persons desiring to place or maintain any view obstructing fence,
billboard, other advertising device or structure, or shrubs or trees at or near
any intersection in the town shall first apply for and secure a building
permit. (1987 Code § 12.16.020)
8-4-3: HEIGHT; SETBACK:
No view obstructing fence, billboard, other advertising device or structure, or
shrubs or trees, shall be built or maintained nearer than fifteen feet (15')
from the front line or side line of the lot. Such fences, structures and
devices shall be so constructed as to have either the bottom thereof at least
eight feet (8') above, or the top thereof not more than three and one- half
feet (31/2') above the level of the adjacent streets. They shall conform in all
other respects to the codes and regulations of the town. (1987 Code §
12.16.030)
8-4-4: NUISANCE:
Whenever the building inspector or town council finds that any poster board,
billboard, bulletin board, signboard or other advertising device or structure,
fence, shrub or tree in the town is in an unsafe condition, or in any manner
fails to conform to the provisions of this chapter, the council may declare it
a nuisance which shall be abated according to the provisions set forth in title
4, chapter 1 of this code. (1987 Code § 12.16.040)
8-4-5: PENALTY:
Unless specifically set out in this chapter, any violation of the provisions of
this chapter constitutes a class B misdemeanor punishable as set forth in
subsection
1-4-1A2 of this code. (Ord. 2012-11, 1-17-2013)
CHAPTER 5
PARKS
SECTION:
8-5-1: Closure
8-5-2: Park Use Permit
8-5-3: Posted Signs
8-5-4: Penalty
8-5-1: CLOSURE:
Any park or recreation complex, in whole or in part, may be declared closed to
the public by the administrative official at any time and for any interval of
time, either temporarily or at regular and stated intervals (daily or
otherwise) and either entirely or merely to certain uses as the administrative
official shall find reasonably necessary. (Ord. 2017-12, 8-17-2017)
8-5-2: PARK USE PERMIT:
   A.   Required: Any nonprofit group of more than twenty five (25) individuals
desiring to use parks and related facilities for organized activities shall
make application to the administrative official for a permit at least thirty
(30) days prior to the date and hour for which such permit is desired. (1987
Code § 12.20.020)
   B.   Application: The application shall state:
      1.   The name and address of the applicant.
      2.   The name and address of the person sponsoring the activity, if any.
      3.   The day and hours for which the permit is desired.
      4.   The particular park, complex or portion thereof for which such
permit is desired.
      5.   An estimate of the anticipated attendance.
      6.   Whether or not the applicant wishes to consume alcoholic beverages
during the time specified in the permit application and in the area specified
in such application.
      7.   Whether or not the applicant wishes to authorize concession vendors
during the time specified in the permit application and in the area specified
in such application.
      8.   An affirmative statement by the applicant that he, she or the
applicant organization is in fact a nonprofit organization.
      9.   Any other information which the administrative official shall find
reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should be
issued under this chapter. (1987 Code § 12.20.030)
   C.   Standards For Issuance: The administrative official shall issue a
permit hereunder when he finds that:
      1.   The proposed activity or use, including the proposed consumption of
alcoholic beverages where such is to be engaged in, of the park or complex will
not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general public's enjoyment
of the park or complex; and provided, however, the applicant otherwise complies
with the provisions of section
3-2-3-12 of this Code.
      2.   The proposed activity and use will not unreasonably interfere with
or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare, safety and recreation.
      3.   The proposed activity or use is not reasonably anticipated to incite
violence, crime or disorderly conduct.
      4.   The proposed activity will not entail unusual or extraordinary or
burdensome expense or police operation by the Municipality.
      5.   The facilities desired have not been reserved for other use at the
day and hour requested in the application.
      6.   The proposed activity is consistent with the public park,
recreational, playground, pleasure, educational, historical and amusement
purposes for which parks are dedicated and is not for commercial gain or
profit. (1987 Code § 12.20.040)
   D.   Damage Deposit:
      1.   Amount Required: The administrative official shall collect the
following damage deposits from groups of one hundred (100) persons or more:
         a.   One hundred (100) to two hundred fifty (250) persons, fifty
dollars ($50.00).
         b.   Over two hundred fifty (250) persons, seventy five dollars
($75.00).
         c.   The administrative official shall collect a damage deposit of
seventy five dollars ($75.00) for a group of any size whenever a permit for the
consumption of alcoholic beverages has been granted.
      2.   Inspection For Damage: Within twenty four (24) hours after the event
has concluded, the administrative official shall cause an inspection to be made
of the area used, and shall determine, in his sole and absolute discretion, the
extent of any damage to park property which has occurred as a result of such
use and shall thereafter and forthwith assess and retain that portion of the
deposit necessary to restore the damaged property and return the balance of the
deposit to the person from whom it was acquired.
      3.   Liability Of Permittee: Nothing herein contained shall relieve the
permittee from the liability imposed by subsection F of this section, and any
amounts withheld by the administrative official pursuant to this section shall
be held as an offset against the total liability of the permittee. (1987 Code §
12.20.050)
   E.   Permit Denial; Appeals: Within fifteen (15) days after receipt of an
application, the administrative official shall issue the permit or shall
apprise the applicant, in writing, of his reasons for refusing the permit. Any
aggrieved person shall have the right to appeal, in writing, to the Governing
Body within fifteen (15) days after the date of such refusal, which shall
consider the application under the standards set forth in subsection C of this
section, and sustain or overrule the administrative official's decision within
fifteen (15) days after receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the
Governing Body shall be final. (1987 Code § 12.20.060)
   F.   Liability Of Permittee: The person to whom a permit is issued shall be
liable for any loss, damage or injury sustained by any person whomsoever by
reason of the negligence of the person, his agents or vendors authorized by
said permittee, to whom such permit shall have been issued. Upon being granted
the issuance of a permit, the person to whom the permit is issued, his agents
and concession vendors, shall hold harmless the Town from any accident or
injury, danger or damage to any person during such time such permit remains in
effect. (1987 Code § 12.20.070)
   G.   Revocation: The administrative official shall have the authority to
revoke a permit upon a finding of violation of any rule, ordinance or standard
outlined in subsection C of this section. The Chief of Police or his authorized
representative shall have the authority to revoke a permit upon a finding of
such a violation. (1987 Code § 12.20.080)
8-5-3: POSTED SIGNS:
No person or entity shall willfully, knowingly or recklessly violate or disobey
any sign, written instruction or rule posted by the Town. (Ord. 2017-13, 8-17-
2017)
8-5-4: PENALTY:
Unless specifically set out in this chapter, any violation of the provisions of
this chapter constitutes a Class B misdemeanor punishable as set forth in
subsection
1-4-1A2 of this Code. (Ord. 2017-13, 8-17-2017)
CHAPTER 6
CEMETERY
SECTION:
8-6-1: Fees
8-6-2: Perpetual Care
8-6-3: Donations
8-6-4: Abandonment
8-6-5: Fees Nonrefundable
8-6-1: FEES:
The following fee schedule shall be and is hereby adopted on behalf of the
Lyman cemetery:
   A.   New Gravesite: The purchase of a new gravesite shall be fifty dollars
($50.00) per site.
   B.   Open/Close Gravesite:
      1.   Weekdays: The fee to open/close a casket gravesite on weekdays
(Monday through Friday) shall be one hundred twenty five dollars ($125.00). The
fee for opening and closing for an urn burial shall be fifty dollars ($50.00).
      2.   Weekend; Holiday: The fee to open/close a casket gravesite on
weekends (Saturday or Sunday) or holidays shall be one hundred seventy five
dollars ($175.00). The fee for opening and closing for an urn burial shall be
seventy five dollars ($75.00).
      3.   Maintenance Personnel Employee: Only the town of Lyman maintenance
personnel employees may open or close any burial site.
   C.   Annual Maintenance Fee: The annual maintenance fee for a previously
purchased but unoccupied gravesite shall be ten dollars ($10.00) per gravesite
per year.
   D.   Perpetual Care:
      1.   Occupied Sites: For all previously purchased and occupied gravesites
(prior to January 1, 2000), there shall be a onetime assessment for perpetual
care of fifty dollars ($50.00) per gravesite.
      2.   New Purchases: The onetime perpetual care fee shall be three hundred
dollars ($300.00) per gravesite.
   E.   Urn Burial Sites:
      1.   Two (2) urns may be buried on one gravesite. Each urn burial site
shall be five feet (5') wide by five feet (5') wide by three feet (3') deep and
shall not overlap.
      2.   All sites containing an urn shall have a monument designating the
deceased which is:
         a.   A monument with a flat concrete border of no less than two feet
(2') wide at ground level; or
         b.   A flat headstone at ground level. (Ord. 5-2007, 3-1-2007)
8-6-2: PERPETUAL CARE:
   A.   Fund Established: A perpetual care fund shall be established for the
upkeep and maintenance of the gravesites which may include, but is not limited
to: mowing, weeding, trimming; the payment of utilities such as water and
electric; and snow removal. The town may continue to subsidize the Lyman
cemetery for the purpose of maintenance, utility payments, capital improvements
and other labor costs until such time as the perpetual care fund may be self-
sustaining and/or the governing body determines that such subsidies are no
longer necessary.
   B.   New Purchases: As of January 1, 2000, all persons wishing to purchase a
new gravesite at the Lyman cemetery shall be assessed a onetime fee of three
hundred dollars ($300.00) for the perpetual care of the gravesite at the time
of purchase or may elect to pay the perpetual care fee at a later date, but the
fee (and all monies owed under the annual maintenance program) must be paid
before the gravesite is opened. If the fee for perpetual care is not paid at
the time of purchase, the owner must participate in the annual maintenance
program until the fee is paid. (Ord. 5-2005, 9-15-2005)
8-6-3: DONATIONS:
The Lyman cemetery may accept cash donations as gifts for the perpetual care
fund or the donation of unoccupied gravesites back to the cemetery as a gift or
in lieu of maintenance fees which may be in arrears. (Ord. 7-99, 12-16-1999)
8-6-4: ABANDONMENT:
If any fees associated with a purchased but unoccupied gravesite remain unpaid
for a period of two (2) years or more, the gravesite may be declared abandoned
by the director of public works and available for purchase by another. Notice
of the impending abandonment shall be attempted, by regular U.S. mail, no less
than fifteen (15) days before such a declaration may be made. (Ord. 2010-03, 4-
1-2010)
8-6-5: FEES NONREFUNDABLE:
No fee imposed in this chapter shall be refundable without prior approval of
the director of public works. (Ord. 2010-03, 4-1-2010)
TITLE 9
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING PERMITS
SECTION:
9-1-1: Building Permit Required
9-1-2: Building And Setup Fees
9-1-1: BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   Permit Required: Except as specified in the Building Code, it is
unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other business
entity, to construct, add to, alter, move or demolish any building or structure
within the Town without first obtaining a permit thereof.
   B.   Requirements Prior To Issuance: The permit shall not issue without
first obtaining the following:
      1.   A drawing, plan or sketch showing a site plan which conforms to
existing Town zoning laws;
      2.   A blueprint or plans of the structure with the builder's and/or
owner's certification that the building meets or will comply with the Building
Code; and
      3.   A written application and the appropriate fee.
   C.   Mobile Home, Manufactured Home, Modular Home Or Prefabricated Home Not
Meeting Building Code Standards 1 : Any mobile home, manufactured home, modular
home or other prefabricated home which does not or cannot meet the standards
set forth in the Building Code shall secure a setup permit and shall comply
with the provisions set forth in title 12 of this Code. All other work as
defined above shall require a building permit. (Ord. 16-00, 12-21-2000, eff. 1-
1-2001)
   D.   Term: Any permit obtained under this section shall be valid for a
period of one year from the date of issuance. Permittees who have exceeded the
building permit term may be granted one automatic six (6) month extension if
applied for and pay a fifty dollar ($50.00) extension fee. Any subsequent
extensions must be approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission and ratified
by the Town Council with an additional extension fee and further required
progress benchmarks. Permits which exceed any nonextended time period shall be
considered null and void. A null and void building permit may be renewed only
by the initiation of a new building permit application with all associated fees
and costs, and must comply with any new building standards adopted in this
Code.
   E.   Nuisance: Construction or placement of a building within the Town
without obtaining a building permit or after the expiration of a building
permit, or allowing the continued placement or accumulation of construction
materials on a lot for more than two (2) weeks absent an active building permit
shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by not more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00). Each day or continued placement or accumulation may
constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 2012-02, 5-3-2012)
   F.   Small accessory buildings: Accessory buildings with a footprint less
than 200 square feet and without electricity and/or plumbing are not required
to have a building permit. The exemption herein does not exempt the accessory
building from compliance with all other sections of the Town Code.
   G.   Commercial Remodel: In addition to the requirements above, any
modification of a commercial property and/or transformation of an existing
property to a commercial purpose, requiring construction, removal, or
alteration of the load-bearing walls, plumbing, foundations, and/or electrical
wiring requires approval by the Town Council. In granting such a permit, the
Council may require any lawful contingent condition on the granting of such a
building permit.
   H.   Exemptions: The following structures are exempt from the requirement of
having a building permit before construction and/or remodeling:
      1.   Accessory buildings with a footprint less than five hundred (500)
square feet unless said building has permanent plumbing and/or electricity.
      2.   Greenhouses after submission of a site plan demonstrating intended
compliance with easement and setbacks.
      3.   Unroofed decks less than thirty-six (36) inches off the ground.
      The exemption herein does not exempt the accessory building from
compliance with all other sections of the Town Code. (Ord. 16-00, 12-21-2000,
eff. 1-1-2001; Ord. 2012-02, 5-3-2012; Ord. 2018-06, 7-5-2018; Ord. 2019-07,
10-3-2019; Res. 2020-16, 8-6-2020; Ord. 2022-05, 10-20-2022)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  12-2-1 of this Code for definitions of "mobile home" and "modular home".
9-1-2: BUILDING AND SETUP FEES:
The fee to be charged for any permit, including, but not limited to, building
and setup fees, shall be established by a resolution of the Town Council. These
fees are not refundable and not concurrent with any and all other fees charged
in the construction permitting process. (Ord. 2011-06, 4-7-2011)
CHAPTER 2
REGULATORY CODES
SECTION:
9-2-1: Building Code Adopted
9-2-2: Building Official
9-2-3: Building Inspector
9-2-4: Enforcement
9-2-5: Universal Ordinance Application
9-2-6: Copies On File
9-2-1: BUILDING CODE ADOPTED:
There is adopted by the town for the purpose of prescribing regulations for the
minimum standards to safeguard life, health, property and public welfare, that
certain suggested code known as the International Building Code (IBC), along
with all incorporated codes contained by reference in the IBC being
particularly the most recent edition of the code available to the general
public, and the whole thereof, save and except such portions as are modified,
deleted, added or amended pursuant to resolution by the Town Council. The IBC
and the codes incorporated by reference within the IBC are incorporated in this
section as fully as if set out in length in this section, and the provisions
thereof shall be controlling within the town unless specifically excepted by
Resolution. (Ord. 2010-09, 10-7-2010; amd. Ord. 2019-06, 10-3-2019)
9-2-2: BUILDING OFFICIAL:
The director of public works for the town of Lyman, or his or her designee in
whole or in part, shall act as the building official for the town of Lyman
whenever that term is used within the international building code. (Ord. 2010-
09, 10-7-2010)
9-2-3: BUILDING INSPECTOR:
To the extent that the international building code requires actions by a
licensed building inspector, such requirements are to be met pursuant to
chapter 7 of this title. Additionally, the director of public works may require
that any inspection be conducted pursuant to the international building code by
a neutral licensed building inspector at the builder's or owner's expense.
(Ord. 2010-09, 10-7-2010)
9-2-4: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Any person who violates any provision of the international building
code or this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof
shall be punished according to the provisions set forth in sections
1-4-1 through
1-4-4 of this code.
   B.   In addition to enforcement by officials and officers of the town of
Lyman, members of the Uinta County fire protection and emergency services joint
powers board may enforce any provision of the international fire code, which is
incorporated by reference into the international building code. (Ord. 2010-09,
10-7-2010)
9-2-5: UNIVERSAL ORDINANCE APPLICATION:
Any and all references to a building code adopted by the town of Lyman within
the town code, including any reference to the uniform building code, shall be
read as the international building code. (Ord. 2010-09, 10-7-2010)
9-2-6: COPIES ON FILE:
   A.   Codes: At least one copy of each code adopted in this chapter and any
ordinance and resolution providing for amendments, modifications, additions or
deletions in such codes shall be maintained on file in the office of the town
clerk where they shall be available for public inspection during the normal
office hours of the Town Clerk. In lieu of having a physical copy of each Code,
the office of the Town Clerk may provide information directing the public to
the on-line location of the adopted Codes.
   B.   Amendments; Modifications: One copy of each ordinance and resolution
amending or modifying each code shall be kept with each copy of the code. (1987
Code § 15.08.060; amd. Ord. 2010-09, 10-7-2010; Ord. 2019-06, 10-3-2019)
CHAPTER 3
MISCELLANEOUS SAFETY REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
9-3-1: Protection Of Excavations
9-3-2: Exits In Public Buildings
9-3-1: PROTECTION OF EXCAVATIONS 1 :
It is unlawful for any person to dig or maintain any cellars, pits or other
excavation without providing adequate protection to persons and property in the
form of barricades and warning devices. (1987 Code § 15.12.010)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 8, chapter 3 of this code.
9-3-2: EXITS IN PUBLIC BUILDINGS:
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation owning or having the control
or management of any public building, resorted to or occupied by a considerable
number of persons, to fail to provide the same with sufficient and safe means
of speedy escape in case of accident or fire. All doors and exits of the
buildings used for public assemblage shall during the continuance of the
gathering be kept unlocked, and in a condition to permit the speedy exit of the
audience. (1987 Code § 15.12.020)
CHAPTER 4
SOLAR ACCESS
SECTION:
9-4-1: Statutory Authority
9-4-2: Purpose
9-4-3: Definitions
9-4-4: Shading And Location Of Solar Collectors
9-4-5: Prior Nonconforming Uses
9-4-6: Variances
9-4-7: Solar Permit
9-4-8: Enforcement
9-4-1: STATUTORY AUTHORITY:
Authorization for these regulations is contained in Wyoming Statutes sections
34-22-101 through 34-22-106. (1987 Code § 15.16.010)
9-4-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety, and general
welfare of the town by encouraging the use of solar energy systems. It is the
intent of this chapter to provide a means of protection for the use of solar
collectors without causing undue hardships on the rights of adjacent property
owners and to establish solar collectors as a permitted use in all zoning or
land use districts. (1987 Code § 15.16.020)
9-4-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
SOLAR COLLECTOR: One of the following which is capable of collecting, storing
or transmitting at least twenty five thousand (25,000) BTUs on a clear winter
solstice day:
   A.   A wall, clerestory or skylight window designed to transmit solar energy
into a structure for heating purposes;
   B.   A greenhouse attached to another structure and designed to provide part
or all of the heating load for the structure to which it is attached;
   C.   A trombe wall, drum wall or other wall or roof structural element
designed to collect and transmit solar energy into a structure;
   D.   A photovoltaic collector designed to convert solar energy into electric
energy;
   E.   A plate type collector designed to use solar energy to heat air, water
or other fluids for use in hot water or space heating or other applications;
   F.   A massive structural element designed to collect solar energy and
transmit it to internal spaces for heating; or
   G.   Other devices or combination of devices that rely upon sunshine as an
energy source.
SOLAR RIGHT: A property right to an unobstructed line of sight path from a
solar collector to the sun which permits radiation from the sun to impinge
directly on the solar collector. The extent of the solar right shall be
described by that illumination provided by the path of the sun on the winter
solstice day which is put to a beneficial use or otherwise limited by this
chapter.
WINTER SOLSTICE DAY: The solstice on or about December 21 which marks the
beginning of winter in the northern hemisphere and the time when the sun
reaches its southernmost point. (1987 Code § 15.16.030)
9-4-4: SHADING AND LOCATION OF SOLAR COLLECTORS:
   A.   Shading Prohibited: Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, it is
unlawful for any person to erect a building or other structure, or to allow a
tree, shrub or other vegetation to cast a shadow upon a solar collector which
is greater than the shadow cast by a hypothetical ten foot (10') high wall
located along the property lines, between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M.
and three o'clock (3:00) P.M., MST, on the winter solstice day.
   B.   Location: Solar collectors shall be located on the solar user's
property so as not to unreasonably or unnecessarily restrict the uses of
neighboring property. (1987 Code § 15.16.040)
9-4-5: PRIOR NONCONFORMING USES:
Structures or vegetation which existed prior to the time of installation of the
solar energy collection system or the effective date hereof shall not be
subject to the requirements of section
9-4-4 of this chapter. (1987 Code § 15.16.050)
9-4-6: VARIANCES:
Any person desiring to erect any structure, or increase the height of any
structure, or permit the growth of any tree or other vegetation, or otherwise
use his/her property, not in conformance with this chapter, may apply for a
variance from the planning and zoning commission. A variance shall not be
approved by the commission unless it finds the literal enforcement or
application of these regulations would result in unnecessary hardship. (1987
Code § 15.16.060)
9-4-7: SOLAR PERMIT:
   A.   Required:
      1.   A solar permit shall be granted before a solar right may be
established.
      2.   A solar permit shall be granted for any proposed or existing solar
collector which complies with the requirements of this chapter.
      3.   The solar right vests on the date the solar permit is granted. The
solar collector shall be put to beneficial use within two (2) years, except
additional time may be granted for good cause. The building inspector or other
administrative official shall certify the right and its beneficial use within
two (2) years.
      4.   Existing solar collector users shall apply for permits within five
(5) years after the date hereof.
      5.   A solar right which is not applied to a beneficial use for a period
of five (5) years or more shall be deemed abandoned and without priority. (1987
Code § 15.16.070)
   B.   Application:
      1.   Any person who desires to obtain a solar right shall first make
application to the building inspector or other administrative official for a
solar access permit.
      2.   The application for a permit along with the required fee, shall be
filed on a form furnished for that purpose. Information adequate to determine
compliance with these regulations shall accompany the application.
      3.   The building inspector or other administrative official after review
of the application shall grant a solar access permit for any proposed or
existing solar collector which complies with this chapter. (1987 Code §
15.16.080)
   C.   Recording Or Solar Rights And Permits: A copy of the solar permit shall
be recorded with the county clerk by the person receiving the solar permit. The
solar permit shall include a description of the collector surface, or that
portion of the collector surface to which the permit is granted. The
description shall include the dimensions of the collector surface, the
direction of orientation, the height above ground level, the location of the
collector on the solar user's property and the date the solar permit was
granted. (1987 Code § 15.16.090)
9-4-8: ENFORCEMENT:
The building inspector or other administrative official shall enforce this
chapter and bring to the attention of the town attorney any violations or lack
of compliance. (1987 Code § 15.16.100)
CHAPTER 5
TRAILER AND MOBILE HOME PLUMBING
SECTION:
9-5-1: Definition
9-5-2: Protection From Freezing
9-5-3: Allowing Water To Run
9-5-1: DEFINITION:
For the purpose of this chapter the terms "trailer" and "mobile home" mean a
unit more than eight and one-half feet (81/2') in width which is designed,
constructed and equipped as a dwelling place, living abode or place of business
to which wheels may be attached for movement upon streets and highways, except
a unit used primarily as a mobile laboratory or mobile office. The terms
"trailer" and "mobile home" shall not include the connection of two (2) single
wide, unisectioned mobile home units, not manufactured, constructed and
intended expressly for the purpose of joining single sections together to
provide one continuous living space. (1987 Code § 15.20.010)
9-5-2: PROTECTION FROM FREEZING:
It is unlawful for any person to maintain, use, occupy, or permit to be
occupied any trailer or mobile home within the town without first protecting
the plumbing of the trailer or mobile home from freezing by placing the trailer
or mobile home on a permanent foundation or by installation of suitable
skirting material around the entire perimeter of the trailer or mobile home,
and, in addition, by installation of electrical heating tapes or similar
heating devices along and around any exposed water pipe which is not heated by
the principal heating unit of the trailer or mobile home. (1987 Code §
15.20.020)
9-5-3: ALLOWING WATER TO RUN:
It is unlawful for any person occupying, maintaining, using or permitting the
use of a trailer or mobile home on property owned or controlled by the person,
to prevent the plumbing of the trailer or mobile home from freezing by
permitting or allowing water to run continuously from any tap or faucet in, on
or about the trailer or mobile home. (1987 Code § 15.20.030)
CHAPTER 6
HOUSING REHABILITATION
SECTION:
9-6-1: Applicability
9-6-2: Rehabilitation Site And Neighborhood
9-6-3: Access To Dwelling Units
9-6-4: Structural Soundness
9-6-5: Lead Based Paint
9-6-6: Water Supply
9-6-7: Interior Air Quality
9-6-8: Illumination And Electricity
9-6-9: Heating And Cooling; Insulation And Weatherstripping
9-6-10: Sanitary Facilities
9-6-11: Space And Security
9-6-12: Food Preparation; Refuse Disposal
9-6-13: Sanitary Conditions
9-6-14: Congregate Housing
9-6-1: APPLICABILITY:
   A.   Federal Guidelines Adopted: In order to comply with federal guidelines
for the community development block grant housing rehabilitation project, the
following rehabilitation, construction renovation guidelines for building
sites, neighborhoods and the interior/exterior of dwellings designated for
rehabilitation are adopted and established.
   B.   Limitations: The guidelines set out in this chapter are expressly
limited to neighborhoods, building rehabilitation sites or interior/exterior of
dwellings designated for housing rehabilitation by the town.
   C.   New Construction Codes: This chapter shall not be construed as,
substituted for, or abate or relieve construction requirements promulgated by
the uniform building, plumbing or electrical codes for new construction, as
adopted by the town. (1987 Code § 15.24.010)
9-6-2: REHABILITATION SITE AND NEIGHBORHOOD:
   A.   Unacceptable Environmental Conditions: The rehabilitation site and
surrounding neighborhood shall be, to the extent possible, reasonably free from
disturbing noises, reverberations and other hazards to the health, safety and
general welfare of the occupants, and shall not be subject to serious manmade
or natural adverse environmental conditions such as:
      1.   Dangerous or unstable walkways or steps;
      2.   Flooding, poor drainage, septic tank backflows, sewage hazards or
mud slides;
      3.   Abnormal smoke, dust or air pollution;
      4.   Excessive noise, vibrations or vehicular traffic;
      5.   Excessive trash accumulations;
      6.   Vermin or rodent infestation; or
      7.   Fire hazards.
   B.   Measures To Correct: Measures to correct the conditions described in
subsection A of this section shall include the following:
      1.   All steps and walkways should be level, provided with sufficient
pitch to prevent water accumulation, and be free from dangerous cracks,
crumbling or breakage.
      2.   The lot should have positive drainage away from the dwelling's
foundation to prevent standing water.
      3.   Any material which accumulates on the property should be screened or
arranged in a manner so as to minimize visual impact and not detract from the
appearance of the surrounding neighborhood.
      4.   The rehabilitation site should be kept free from fire hazards such
as storage of highly flammable materials. (1987 Code § 15.24.020)
9-6-3: ACCESS TO DWELLING UNITS:
   A.   Requirements: The dwelling unit shall have adequate entrance and exit
access for the occupants:
      1.   It shall be usable and capable of being maintained without
unauthorized use of other private property.
      2.   The building shall provide alternate means of egress in case of fire
such as fire stairs or egress through windows.
   B.   Measures To Comply: Measures to comply with the conditions described in
subsection A of this section shall include the following: the property should
be adjacent to an access street or road. (1987 Code § 15.24.030)
9-6-4: STRUCTURAL SOUNDNESS:
   A.   Required Conditions: The dwelling unit shall be structurally sound so
as to not pose any threat to the health and safety of the occupants as well as
protect the occupants from their environment.
      1.   Ceilings, Walls And Floors: Ceilings, walls and floors shall be free
from defects such as severe bulging, leaning, large holes, loose surface
materials, severe buckling or noticeable movement under walking stress, missing
parts or other serious damage.
      2.   Roof: The roof structure and roofing shall be firm and weathertight.
      3.   Walls: Exterior wall structures and interior wall surfaces shall not
have any serious defects such as leaning, buckling, sagging, cracks or holes,
loose siding or other serious damage.
      4.   Stairways, Halls, Porches, Walkways, Etc.: The condition and
equipment of interior and exterior stairways, halls, porches, walkways, etc.,
shall be such as not to present a danger of tripping or falling.
      5.   Elevators: Elevators, if present, shall be maintained in a safe
operating condition.
      6.   Anchoring: Mobile or manufactured homes shall be securely anchored
by a tie down device which distributes and transfers the unit's weight to
appropriate ground anchors so as to resist overturning and shifting.
   B.   Measures To Comply: Measures to comply with the conditions described in
subsection A of this section include:
      1.   First Floor Structural Wood Members: In crawl spaces or basements,
all first floor structural wood members including floor joists, plates, piers
and pilings should be inspected for cracked, broken, rotten or otherwise
damaged conditions. Damaged members should be accordingly repaired or replaced.
Exterior walls should be weathertight and prevent heat loss.
      2.   Roof: The roof structure should be firm and all roof framing members
free from cracks and rot. Roof sheathing should be solid and free from sagging,
buckling, etc. If the roof appears well worn, it should be replaced entirely.
If more than two (2) layers of shingles are on the roof, both layers of
shingles should be stripped to the sheathing, and a new covering applied. Any
extensions through the roof, such as chimneys or vents, shall be properly
flashed.
      3.   Foundations, Piers And Pilings; Chimneys: Concrete block or brick
foundations, piers and pilings should be inspected for loose mortar joints. All
empty or cracked mortar joints should be tuck pointed in an acceptable manner
to match the rest of the structure. The chimney should be inspected for loose
mortar joints and proper height. All empty or cracked mortar joints should be
tuck pointed in an acceptable manner and the joints should be recessed.
      4.   Steps, Walkways And Porches; Interior Stairways: All exterior steps,
walkways and porches should be free of tripping hazards. Crumbling, cracked or
uneven conditions should be repaired or replaced as necessary. Interior
stairway conditions should avoid presenting a danger of falling or tripping and
handrails should be installed on all stairways.
      5.   Termites: The property should be inspected for and, if necessary,
treated for termites.
      6.   Other Buildings: All other buildings, such as garages, should be
repaired to a usable condition or removed from the property. The general
appearance of the exterior structure and lot, after rehabilitation, should be
such that the property makes a significant contribution to the general
appearance of the neighborhood. (1987 Code § 15.24.040)
9-6-5: LEAD BASED PAINT:
   A.   Requirements: The dwelling unit shall comply with HUD lead based paint
regulations.
   B.   Measures To Comply: Measures to comply with this requirement shall
include:
      1.   Compliance with 24 CFR part 35, issued pursuant to the lead based
paint poisoning prevention act, 42 United States Code 4801.
      2.   Owner shall provide certification that the dwelling is in accordance
with said HUD regulations.
      3.   If the dwelling was constructed prior to 1950, the family shall be
furnished with a notice required by HUD lead based paint regulations and the
procedures regarding the hazards of lead based paint poisonings, the symptoms
and treatment of lead poisoning and the precautions to be taken against lead
poisoning.
   C.   Actions To Comply: To comply with the lead based paint regulations, the
following actions are required:
      1.   Notification to occupants that the property (if constructed prior to
1950) may contain lead based paints and the hazards, symptoms and treatment of
such poisoning.
      2.   The contracts shall include language prohibiting the use of lead
based paint.
      3.   The inspection for and elimination of "immediate hazards", defined
as chipping, peeling, cracking or loosening of any paint in a structure built
prior to 1950. (1987 Code § 15.24.050)
9-6-6: WATER SUPPLY:
   A.   Requirements: The dwelling's water supply shall be free from
contamination and shall be served by an approved public or private sanitary
water supply.
   B.   Measures To Comply: Measures to comply with the requirements set out in
subsection A of this section shall include:
      1.   Hot Water Heater: The unit should have a hot water heater with a
capacity to serve current and future residents.
      2.   Hot And Cold Running Water: Hot and cold running water should be
supplied to at least the kitchen and bath.
      3.   Protection From Freezing: All water lines should be protected from
freezing. (1987 Code § 15.24.060)
9-6-7: INTERIOR AIR QUALITY:
   A.   Requirements: The dwelling unit shall be free from pollutants in the
air at levels which threaten the health of the occupants. The dwelling unit
shall be free from dangerous levels of air pollution from carbon monoxide,
sewer gas, fuel, gas, dust and other harmful air pollutants. Air circulation
shall be adequate throughout. Bathroom area shall have at least one operable
window or other adequate exhaust ventilation.
   B.   Measures To Correct: Measures to correct the conditions described in
subsection A of this section include:
      1.   Venting: All oil fired or gas fired appliances should have proper
venting to the outside of the dwelling unit for combustion gases.
      2.   Windows: All windows designed to open should be operable and
provided with screens.
      3.   Kitchen Areas: Kitchen areas should also have proper ventilation.
(1987 Code § 15.24.070)
9-6-8: ILLUMINATION AND ELECTRICITY:
   A.   Requirements:
      1.   Illumination: Each room shall have adequate natural or artificial
illumination to permit normal indoor activities and to support the health and
safety of occupants.
      2.   Electrical Sources: Sufficient electrical sources shall be provided
to permit use of essential electrical appliances while assuring safety from
fire.
      3.   Windows: Living and sleeping rooms shall include at least one
window.
      4.   Light Fixture: A ceiling or wall light fixture shall be present and
operable in the kitchen and bathroom.
      5.   Electrical Outlets: At least two (2) electrical outlets, one of
which may be an overhead light, shall be present and operable in the living
area, kitchen and each bedroom.
   B.   Measures To Comply: Measures to comply with the requirements set out in
subsection A of this section shall include:
      1.   Windows: Living rooms and bedrooms shall include at least one
window.
      2.   Light Fixtures: A ceiling or wall light fixture operated by a wall
switch should be present in the kitchen, bathroom and in hallways.
      3.   Outlets: All outlets installed as a result of rehabilitation should
be properly grounded.
      4.   Electrical Service:
         a.   Requirements: Each unit should be provided with at least 100-
ampere service and a sufficient number of circuits to service present and
future use of the dwelling.
            1.   There should be separate circuits for air conditioning,
furnaces, dryers and stoves.
            2.   There should be a separate 20-ampere circuit for the heavy
workload area of the kitchen.
            3.   The main service box should be provided with circuit breakers.
            4.   Connection at the main service to the unit should be in an
acceptable manner.
            5.   Placement of the connection should be out of children's reach.
            6.   Proper anchoring should be used.
            7.   All defective exposed "knob and tube" wiring should be
removed.
         b.   Hazardous Conditions: All hazardous conditions such as broken
switches or outlets, bare wiring or fixtures not properly anchored should be
repaired in an acceptable manner. (1987 Code § 15.24.080)
9-6-9: HEATING AND COOLING; INSULATION AND WEATHERSTRIPPING:
   A.   Requirements: The dwelling unit shall have, and be capable of
maintaining, a thermal environment healthy for the human body. The unit shall
contain safe heating and/or cooling facilities which are in proper operating
condition and provide adequate heat and/or cooling to each room in the dwelling
unit appropriate for the climate. Unvented room heaters which burn gas, oil or
kerosene are unacceptable.
   B.   Measures To Comply: Measures to comply with the requirements set out in
subsection A of this section include:
      1.   Venting System: All parts of the venting system for central units
should be in proper working condition. For example:
         a.   Vent pipes should be free of rust and properly maintained.
         b.   Where vent pipes are connected to a masonry chimney, that chimney
should be properly maintained and all mortar joints tightly sealed.
      2.   Attic: The attic should be insulated to a rating of R-30 with
acceptable insulative material. Where cellulose is used, it should be tested
for fire protection. Cellulose bags should be labelled with acceptable ratings
from a flame spread test.
      3.   Weatherstripping: Weatherstripping should be applied as needed
around all doors and windows.
      4.   Storm Doors And Windows: Storm doors and windows should be used
where reasonable.
      5.   Insulation: Any exterior walls that are opened to the studs during
rehabilitation should be fully insulated with an acceptable insulating
material.
      6.   Joints: All joints in the building envelope should be caulked or
sealed. All brittle or loose caulking should be replaced.
      7.   Supply And Return Ducts: Supply and return heating and air
conditioning ducts should be insulated where they run through unconditioned
spaces. (1987 Code § 15.24.090)
9-6-10: SANITARY FACILITIES:
   A.   Requirements: The dwelling unit shall include its own sanitary
facilities which are in proper operating condition, can be used in privacy and
are adequate for personal cleanliness and waste disposal. A flush toilet in a
separate private room, a fixed basin with hot and cold running water, and a
shower or tub also with hot and cold running water shall be operable, located
within the dwelling unit and the facilities shall be connected to an approved
public or private sewage system.
   B.   Measures To Comply: Measures to comply with the requirements set out in
subsection A of this section shall include:
      1.   The toilet, basin and tub or shower should all be located in one
room.
      2.   Where a public sewage system is not used, documentation shall be
provided showing approval of the sewage system by the appropriate agency. (1987
Code § 15.24.100)
9-6-11: SPACE AND SECURITY:
   A.   Requirements: The dwelling unit shall afford the family adequate living
space and security.
   B.   Measures To Comply: Measures to comply with the requirements of
subsection A of this section shall include:
      1.   Contents: The dwelling shall contain a living room, kitchen area and
bathroom.
      2.   Size: It shall contain at least one sleeping or living room of
appropriate size for each two (2) persons.
      3.   Exterior Doors And Windows: Exterior doors and windows accessible
from the outside shall be capable of being locked from the inside.
      4.   Smoke Detectors: Each dwelling unit shall have smoke detectors,
preferably those which can operate from a combination of electric and battery
power. (1987 Code § 15.24.110)
9-6-12: FOOD PREPARATION; REFUSE DISPOSAL:
   A.   Requirements: The dwelling unit shall contain suitable space and
equipment to store, prepare and serve food in a sanitary manner. There shall be
adequate facilities for the sanitary disposal of food, waste and refuse,
including temporary storage facilities.
   B.   Measures To Comply: Measures to comply with the requirements set out in
subsection A of this section shall include:
      1.   Contents Required: The dwelling unit shall contain a cooking stove
or range and a refrigerator of the size appropriate for the unit and a kitchen
sink with hot and cold running water.
      2.   Connection To Sewage System: Kitchen sink shall connect into an
approved sewage system.
      3.   Food Storage, Preparation And Serving Space: Adequate food storage,
preparation and serving space shall be provided. Food storage space should be
in the form of cabinets/pantry. Food preparation space should be in the form of
counters or horizontal work space.
      4.   Food And Waste Disposal Facilities: Adequate sanitary food and waste
disposal facilities and services, including temporary storage, shall be
provided. (1987 Code § 15.24.120)
9-6-13: SANITARY CONDITIONS:
The unit and equipment shall be in sanitary condition and free from vermin and
rodent infestation. (1987 Code § 15.24.130)
9-6-14: CONGREGATE HOUSING:
With the exception of section
9-6-12 of this chapter, the following standards shall apply:
   A.   Refrigerator: The unit shall contain a refrigerator of appropriate
size.
   B.   Storage, Preparation And Serving Of Food: Central dining facility (and
kitchen, if any) shall contain suitable space and equipment to store, prepare
and serve food in a sanitary manner. There shall be adequate facilities and
services for temporary storage where necessary. (1987 Code § 15.24.140)
CHAPTER 7
OCCUPANCY PERMITS
SECTION:
9-7-1: Occupancy Permit Required
9-7-2: Temporary Occupancy Permits
9-7-1: OCCUPANCY PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   Permit Required: Except as specified in the applicable building code
adopted by the town of Lyman, it is unlawful for any person to inhabit as a
newly erected dwelling place in any structure within the town without first
obtaining an occupancy permit.
   B.   Requirements Prior To Issuance: The permit shall not issue without
first obtaining an inspection of the building by a duly qualified and Wyoming
licensed building inspector at the sole expense of the owner or occupant by an
inspector chosen by the town. The inspector shall guarantee that the building
conforms to all requirements of the applicable building codes necessary for
structural soundness and safety and the requirements of the town of Lyman
ordinances. Applicability of a particular section or requirement of the
international building code shall be at the discretion of the inspector, but
may be appealed to the town council.
   C.   Inspection Requirements; Stick Built And Modular Homes: At a minimum,
in addition to the certificate of occupancy, a building inspector must conduct
the following inspections on stick built or modular homes moved into town,
whether previously occupied or not, constructed or erected in town:
      1.   Foundation/footing inspection with prepour inspections;
      2.   Four (4) way inspection (structural, electrical, mechanical and
plumbing); and
      3.   Final inspection.
   D.   Inspection Requirements; Mobile Homes Required To Be On A Foundation:
At a minimum, in addition to the certificate of occupancy, a building inspector
must conduct the following inspections on mobile homes moved into town onto
lots requiring a permanent foundation:
      1.   Foundation/footing inspection with prepour inspections;
      2.   Final inspection to determine that the mobile home was transported,
connected and placed on the foundation in a safe and structurally sound manner.
   E.   Compliance: Proof of compliance with this section shall be submitted to
the town before any water or sewer service permit shall issue. Occupying a
building or structure in contravention of this section shall also constitute a
nuisance and subject any and all occupants to action as such in the municipal
court.
   F.   Fee: The fee, if any, to be charged for any inspection or occupancy
permit may be established and amended by a resolution of the town council.
   G.   This section is effective January 1, 2011, for all new building permit
applications. (Ord. 2010-10, 10-7-2010)
9-7-2: TEMPORARY OCCUPANCY PERMITS:
   A.   Temporary Permit Authorized: notwithstanding and in addition to the
occupancy permit per Town Ordinance
9-7-1, the Town Engineer, Building Inspector or their designee may issue a
temporary occupancy permit allowing temporary occupancy or use of a building
pending the issuance of a final occupancy permit. It is unlawful for any person
to inhabit any newly erected or remodeled dwelling place or structure within
the town that has been issued a temporary occupancy permit in a manner
inconsistent with such a permit.
   B.   Temporary Occupancy Permit Requirements: The Town Engineer, Building
Inspector or their designee has discretion to place limits on the use of any
building subject to a temporary occupancy permit.
   C.   Mandatory Requirements: In addition to any use limits placed on a
temporary occupancy permit, every temporary occupancy permit must include:
      1.   The length of time the temporary occupancy permit is authorized
before a full occupancy permit must be obtained. Nothing in this chapter shall
prohibit or require the Town Engineer, Building, or their designee, from
extending or modifying a temporary occupancy permit as events ensue.
      2.   A list of the inspections required prior to and in conjunction with
the issuance of the temporary occupancy permit. These inspections may be in
conjunction with or in addition to the inspections required pursuant to Town
Ordinance
9-7-1.
      3.   The fee for the temporary occupancy permit, which shall be set by
the Town Engineer, Building Inspector or their designee to equal the cost of
their services in inspecting and issuing said permit plus an additional twenty
dollars ($20) to compensate the town for the additional work required in
recording, monitoring and maintaining the accompanying records. (Ord. 2021-08,
8-19-2021)
CHAPTER 8
PENALTY
SECTION:
9-8-1: Violations; Penalty
9-8-1: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
Unless specifically set out in this title, any violation of this title
constitutes a class B misdemeanor punishable as set forth in subsection
1-4-1A2 of this code. (Ord. 2012-11, 1-17-2013)
TITLE 10
UTILITIES
CHAPTER 1
WATER
SECTION:
10-1-1: Service Permit
10-1-2: Illegal Use
10-1-3: Building Permit
10-1-4: Water Meters
10-1-5: Billing
10-1-6: Delinquent Accounts
10-1-7: Nonuse Periods
10-1-8: Rates
10-1-9: Security Deposit
10-1-10: Change Of Ownership
10-1-11: Furnishing Water To Another
10-1-12: Multiple Service From One Pipe
10-1-13: Illegal Tap; Interference With System
10-1-14: Maintenance Of Fixtures
10-1-15: Steam Boilers
10-1-16: Irrigation
10-1-17: Right Of Entry
10-1-18: Installing Fixtures Without Permit
10-1-19: Responsibility For Payment
10-1-20: Repair Of Lines And Connections
10-1-21: Cross Connection
10-1-22: Penalty
10-1-1: SERVICE PERMIT:
   A.   Required: It is unlawful for any person, persons, partnership,
association or corporation to take water from the water distribution system of
the town without first having procured a water service permit from the town.
(1987 Code § 13.04.010)
   B.   Application:
      1.   Form; Tapping Fee: Application for a water service permit shall be
made by the owner, his agent, or the occupant of the premises to the town
clerk, in writing. Such application shall be on a form prepared and furnished
by the town and shall state, among other things, for what purpose the water is
required and whether or not a new connection is necessary. The application
shall be accompanied by a tapping charge in the amount of five hundred dollars
($500.00). The town clerk shall not issue a water service permit until the
tapping charge is paid in full by the applicant. (Ord. 4-93, 8-19-1993)
      2.   Water Line; Inspection: The water line from the facility or
facilities to the connection with the town water shall be provided by the
person connecting with said water and shall be done in a good and workmanlike
manner with proper water pipe and to the satisfaction of the town clerk or
other officer designated to inspect such connecting line and the connection
with the town water. Only one residence or building shall be covered by one
permit.
      3.   Misrepresentation: In case of misrepresentation on the part of the
applicant, the use of water for purposes not stated in the water service
permit, or the wilful or negligent waste of water, the water service permit may
be revoked and the supply of water may be stopped until and unless the water
user shall pay to the town the additional charges for the water improperly
used.
      4.   Existing Users: The owner, agent or occupant of premises now
receiving water from the town water distribution system shall not be required
to make an application for a water service permit, but such permit shall be
issued by the town clerk based on the existing water service; provided, that if
the water user is using water other than provided for in the water service
permit so issued, he shall notify the town clerk and have a new water service
permit issued covering such additional use or be subject to the penalties for
wrongful use of water and violation of this chapter. (1987 Code § 13.04.020)
   C.   Issuance: Upon proper application being made, the town clerk shall
issue to the applicant a water service permit which shall contain the name of
the owner of the premises, the type or types of water service allowed under
such permit and the rates to be charged therefor.
   D.   Additional Use: Any person, persons, partnership or corporation holding
such water service permit who shall wish to use water in addition to that
allowed by said permit and which will increase the rates for the premises,
shall first make application, in writing, to the town clerk setting forth the
additional use requested, and the town clerk shall issue a new water service
permit covering such additional use. (1987 Code § 13.04.030)
   E.   Transfer Fee: If any water user transfers his water permit to another
person, persons, partnership or corporation, that transferee must pay a
transfer fee to the town of Lyman in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00).
(Ord. 2007-14, 9-20-2007)
10-1-2: ILLEGAL USE:
It is unlawful for any water user to use any water service not covered by the
water service permit for the premises and for which no water rent is paid. Any
person, persons, partnership or corporation violating this section shall be
required to pay for such additional water service used. (1987 Code § 13.04.040)
10-1-3: BUILDING PERMIT:
   A.   Required: No water hookups for private users on the town water system
will be allowed unless a building permit for construction of a residential
dwelling, permanent trailer home or commercial business building has been
issued.
   B.   Term Of Permit; Revocation: Unless construction upon the residential
dwelling, permanent trailer home or commercial business building is completed
to the point of permanent occupancy within twelve (12) months from the issuance
of a water permit, the permit shall be revoked. Upon revocation of the water
permit, all funds paid for the permit will be refunded to the private user,
less those funds withheld by the town for any and all materials and labor
extended by the town in making the initial hookup. (1987 Code § 13.04.050)
10-1-4: WATER METERS:
   A.   Definitions: As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall
apply: "Meter" means any device used to measure the volume and/or flow rate of
water through that device and shall include use of any and all necessary
accompanying equipment including, but not limited to, meter pits, electronic
data transmitters and connecting hardware.
   B.   Furnished By Town; Reimbursement For Installation And Maintenance: All
water meters shall be furnished by the town and shall remain its property and
be accessible to and subject to its control; provided, however, that it shall
be the consumer's responsibility to reimburse the town for the cost of the
meter upon installation and for the maintenance thereof.
   C.   Furnished By Town; Reimbursement For Installation And Maintenance: All
water meters shall be furnished by the town and shall remain its property and
be accessible to and subject to its control; provided, however, that it shall
be the consumer's responsibility to reimburse the town for the cost of the
meter upon installation, upgrade, replacement and for the maintenance thereof.
   D.   Quantity Recorded Conclusive: When water is furnished by the meter, the
quantity recorded by it shall be conclusive on both the consumer and the town,
except when the meter has been found to be registering inaccurately or has
ceased to register. In the latter case the quantity may be determined by the
average registration of the meter when in order.
   E.   Water Hookups: All hookups to the town water system after January 3,
1978, shall include the costs of a water meter and water meter materials.
   F.   Costs Of Installation; Specifications: All costs of installation of
water meters shall be paid by the party hooking up to the system and such
installation shall be done pursuant to the standards and specifications of the
town. (1987 Code § 13.04.060)
   G.   Meters Located Outside Of Curbside Meter Pits: It is the duty of every
resident of the town who has a water meter located on his/her property outside
of and/or apart from a meter pit located at or near the property owner's
property line to notify the town when a leak is detected on the owner's
property necessitating a line repair. On such occasions, and at the town's
discretion, the owner must relocate any and all associated meters to meter pits
on or near the property line, with meters and pits provided by the town. Said
installation must be made to the town's specifications and inspected by a
representative of the town and/or its representative. Nothing in this
subsection shall prevent the town from requiring the relocation of meters to
meter pits on other occasions.
   H.   The Town Council has authority to establish policies governing the
installation and regulation of meters by Resolution. (Ord. 2017-04, 2-16-2017;
amd. Ord. 2019-11, 11-21-2019)
10-1-5: BILLING:
Water rent charges for water supplied on a flat rate or meter basis shall be
due and payable monthly, on or before the end of each month. The town clerk
shall prepare and mail a statement of the water rent due to each water user.
All charges shall be paid to the town clerk at his office in the town hall.
There shall be no discount allowed. (1987 Code § 13.04.070)
10-1-6: DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS:
   A.   Deemed Delinquent: If the water user fails, refuses or neglects to pay
the water rent charges within thirty (30) days of the mailing of notice of the
due charges, the bill shall become delinquent and may be collected by action or
fine for violation of this chapter in the municipal court, and the water supply
may be immediately shut off.
   B.   Collection Policy: A collection policy for delinquent accounts shall be
adopted by resolution, which prescribes periods and practices for sending late
notices, hanging turnoff notice tags, turning water off, late penalty fees,
etc.
   C.   Restoration Of Service: Before the water shall be turned on again, all
delinquent water rents for the premises must be paid with an additional fee, as
established by policy, for turning on the water.
   D.   Misdemeanor: Failure to pay delinquent water charges, as set out in
subsection A of this section, is a misdemeanor punishable by up to seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) in addition to any and all arrearages. (Ord.
2011-01, 2-17-2011)
10-1-7: NONUSE PERIODS:
   A.   Notice Of Nonuse: No credit shall be allowed any water user for nonuse
of water under any water service permit for any period less than thirty (30)
days, and in no event shall a credit be allowed for such nonuse unless notice
is given to the town clerk within ten (10) days of the beginning of such period
of nonuse.
   B.   Resumption Of Use: It is also required that notice be given to the town
clerk within ten (10) days after the resumption of use or no credit for nonuse
will be allowed and the total amount of any previous credit granted shall
become due and payable as a penalty for failure to report such resumption.
(1987 Code § 13.04.090)
10-1-8: RATES:
   A.   Established: Rates for water service from the town municipal system
shall be established and/or amended by resolution of the town council. Such
water rates set by said resolution(s) may include a flat base rate with a
monthly base water rate and/or graduated usage rates for water usage beyond a
specified base rate.
   B.   Service Outside Town Limits: The town is authorized to enter into water
service agreements with water service customers whose lands lie outside the
corporate limits of the town. Said service agreements, which shall be
memorialized by resolution of the town council, shall specify the rate or rates
charged to the extraterritorial service, which may be up to three (3) times the
rate of in town users. Nothing in this section shall require a single rate to
be established for all extraterritorial users, so long as any variance in such
water rates is not otherwise violative of the law.
   C.   Rates Effective: All rates in effect at the enactment of this section
shall continue until amended by resolution of the town council. (Ord. 2017-05,
2-2-2017)
10-1-9: SECURITY DEPOSIT:
In the event a person not the owner of property receiving water service from
the town shall be the party receiving the billings for the water service, said
party shall pay to the town a security deposit in the amount of one hundred
fifty dollars ($150.00) ($250.00 for accounts previously delinquent and not
paid), which deposit shall be refunded at the time water service is
discontinued to the property, if at the time of discontinuance of service all
amounts due to the town are paid in full. An affidavit from the property owner
must be presented to the town clerk stating the property owner's acceptance of
responsibility for delinquent charges owed the town greater than the amount of
the security deposit. (Ord. 2011-01, 2-17-2011)
10-1-10: CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP:
In the event of a change of ownership or occupancy of any property served by
water service from the town necessitating a change of name on the town records
of the party to be billed for the service, the request for a name change shall
be in writing, and shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount of ten dollars
($10.00), which fee shall be paid into the town treasury. (1987 Code §
13.04.130)
10-1-11: FURNISHING WATER TO ANOTHER:
   A.   Prohibited: No person, persons, partnership or corporation holding a
water service permit shall supply water to other persons or allow other persons
to take water from them for personal use on other premises, or in other places
of business, or for any use whatsoever not covered by the permit.
   B.   Revocation Of Permit; Termination Of Service: The permit of any person,
persons, partnership or corporation violating the provisions of this section
shall be revoked and the supply of water shut off until such time as the water
user pays to the town the additional charges for the water improperly used.
   C.   Prosecution For Violation: In addition, the water user may be
prosecuted for violation of this chapter. (1987 Code § 13.04.140)
10-1-12: MULTIPLE SERVICE FROM ONE PIPE:
In case there are two (2) or more users supplied from the same service pipe,
the water supply in such service pipe may be shut off upon the failure of any
one of them to pay the water rent charges when due. (1987 Code § 13.04.150)
10-1-13: ILLEGAL TAP; INTERFERENCE WITH SYSTEM:
   A.   Tapping Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person other than town
employees or someone working under their direction to excavate in any street to
tap water pipes of the town water distribution system or to molest or interfere
with the system in any way.
   B.   Turning On System Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person except town
employees or someone working under their direction to turn on the water supply
to any premises after the supply has been shut off for failure to pay water
rent charges or for other violations of this chapter. (1987 Code § 13.04.160)
10-1-14: MAINTENANCE OF FIXTURES:
All water users shall keep their own service pipes, faucets, valves and water
using fixtures in good repair at all times and shall protect the same from
freezing at their own expense. No claim shall be made against the town for any
damages resulting from the breaking of any pipes, faucets, valves, water using
fixtures, meters or any other apparatus used in connection therewith. (1987
Code § 13.04.170)
10-1-15: STEAM BOILERS:
Where water is supplied to steam boilers from the town water system, a tank
shall be maintained large enough to contain a supply of water sufficient for
the use of said boiler in case the town water supply should be shut off for ten
(10) hours. (1987 Code § 13.04.180)
10-1-16: IRRIGATION:
   A.   Hours: No water shall be used from the town water supply system for
irrigation between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:
00) A.M. The town council, whenever it deems necessary, may further restrict
the hours during which irrigation will be permitted. Notice of such restriction
is to be given by circulars, printed notices, or by publication in one or more
newspapers of general circulation in the town. (1987 Code § 13.04.190)
   B.   During Fires: It is unlawful for anyone to use water for irrigation or
sprinkling purposes during any period when water is being used by the fire
department for firefighting or prevention purposes. (1987 Code § 13.04.200)
   C.   Scope Of Uses: Permission to use water for irrigation purposes shall
include watering or sprinkling of premises for lawns or gardens and washing of
automobiles or other vehicles, but shall not include the sprinkling of
sidewalks, streets, or any other wasteful use of water. (1987 Code § 13.04.210)
   D.   Nozzle Required: All uses of water for irrigation shall be through a
good and sufficient hose, or similar device, which shall be kept in good repair
and condition. Each hose or other device shall have a nozzle attached thereto.
The total flow of water from said hose and nozzle shall not exceed the flow
from a nozzle having a one-fourth inch (1/4") opening. (1987 Code § 13.04.220)
10-1-17: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
All employees of the town shall have free access at all reasonable hours to
enter the premises where water is used, for the purpose of inspection and
investigation as to whether or not the water user is complying with the
provisions of this chapter. (1987 Code § 13.04.230)
10-1-18: INSTALLING FIXTURES WITHOUT PERMIT:
It is unlawful for any person or entity to uncover, open, use, alter, disturb
or connect to the town's water system with any line or fixture on any premises
unless that person or entity, or their agent, has secured a permit for such
installation and complied with the provisions of this chapter. The town, at its
sole discretion, may require the installation of individually specified
equipment, fixtures, pipe and/or other material, and may dictate the location,
placement and length of the pipes, including the entire length of the subject
property, as a condition of the granting of the permit. All costs of and
incidental to the restoration, installation and connection shall be borne by
the owners or their agent. (1987 Code § 13.04.240; amd. Ord. 2019-09, 12-5-
2019)
10-1-19: RESPONSIBILITY FOR PAYMENT:
All water service permits shall be issued in the name of the owner of the
premises and the owner of the premises shall be primarily responsible for the
payment of all water service charges, notwithstanding any other agreement
between the owner and occupant thereof. All unpaid and delinquent water service
charges shall constitute a lien against the premises and the same may be
collected by civil action against the owners or by foreclosure of the lien
against the premises. (1987 Code § 13.04.250)
10-1-20: REPAIR OF LINES AND CONNECTIONS:
   A.   Responsibility Of Owner: It shall be the responsibility of all property
owners to maintain and repair all water service lines and connections running
from the town's curb valve box to, and onto, their property.
   B.   Notice Of Leak Or Disrepair: The town shall immediately notify owners
of any leak or other disrepair in the water service line as soon as it is
discovered, and the property owner shall commence repair the same as soon as
possible, at their sole expense.
   C.   Permit Required For Repair Work: Any and all repair work done by
private individuals in repairing water mains located within the streets of the
town shall be done only after obtaining a permit to do the same from the town.
   D.   Temporary Shutdown: At the sole discretion of the town of Lyman public
works director, the town may disconnect service to the location requiring
repair at any time until the repair is successfully and lawfully completed to
the satisfaction of the public works director. (Ord. 2009-12, 12-17-2009)
10-1-21: CROSS CONNECTION:
   A.   Definitions: For the purposes of this section, the following words
shall have the following meanings:
    APPROVED: Accepted by the town water department as meeting an applicable
specification stated or cited in this section or as suitable for the proposed
use.
   AUXILIARY WATER SUPPLY: Any water supply on or available to the premises
other than the purveyor's approved public water supply. These auxiliary waters
may include water from another purveyor's public potable water supply or any
natural source(s) such as a well, spring, river, stream, harbor, etc., or used
waters or industrial fluids. These waters may be contaminated or polluted or
they may be objectionable and constitute an unacceptable water source over
which the water purveyor does not have sanitary control.
   BACK PRESSURE: The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances
under pressure into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system
from any source or sources other than the intended source.
   BACK SIPHONAGE: The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances
into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from any source
other than its intended source caused by the sudden reduction of pressure in
the potable water supply system.
   BACKFLOW: The reversal of the normal flow of water caused by either back
pressure or back siphonage.
   BACKFLOW PREVENTOR: A device or means designed to prevent backflow.
    Air Gap: The unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere
between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water to a tank,
plumbing fixture or other device and the flood level rim of the vessel. An
approved air gap shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe
measured vertically, above the top of the overflow rim of the vessel and in no
case less than one inch (1").
    Double Check Valve Assembly: An assembly of two (2) independently operating
approved check valves with tightly closing shutoff valves on each end of the
check valves, plus properly located test cocks for the testing of each check
valve. The entire assembly shall meet the design and performance specifications
as determined by a laboratory and field evaluation program resulting in an
approval by a recognized and approved testing agency for backflow prevention
assemblies. To be approved, these devices must be readily accessible for inline
testing and maintenance.
    Reduced Pressure Principle Device: An assembly of two (2) independently
acting approved check valves together with a hydraulically operating,
mechanically independent pressure relief valve located between the check valves
and at the same time below the first check valve. The unit shall include
properly located test cocks and tightly closing shutoff valves at each end of
the assembly. The entire assembly shall meet the design and performance
specifications as determined by a laboratory and a field evaluation program
resulting in an approval by a recognized and approved testing agency for
backflow prevention assemblies. The assembly shall operate to maintain the
pressure in the zone between the two (2) check valves at an acceptable level
less than the pressure on the public water supply side of the device. At
cessation of normal flow the pressure between the two (2) check valves shall be
less than the pressure on the public water supply side of the device. In case
of leakage of either of the check valves, the differential relief valve shall
operate to maintain the reduced pressure in the zone between the check valves
by discharging to the atmosphere. When the inlet pressure is two (2) pounds per
square inch or less, the relief valve shall open to the atmosphere. To be
approved, these devices must be readily accessible for inline testing and
maintenance and be installed in a location where no part of the device will be
submerged.
   CONTAMINATION: An impairment of the quality of the potable water by sewage,
industrial fluids or waste liquids, compounds or other materials to a degree
which creates an actual or potential hazard to the public health through
poisoning or through the spread of disease.
   CONTROLLED CROSS CONNECTIONS: A connection between a potable water system
and a nonpotable water system with an approved backflow prevention device
properly installed and maintained so that it will continuously afford the
protection commensurate with the degree of hazard.
   CROSS CONNECTION: Any physical connection or arrangement of piping or
fixtures between two (2) otherwise separate piping systems one of which
contains potable water and the other nonpotable water or industrial fluids of
questionable safety, through which, or because of which, backflow may occur
into the potable water system. This would include any temporary connections
such as swing connections, removable section, four- way plug valves, spools,
dummy sections of pipe, swivel or changeover devices or sliding multiport tube.
   CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL OF CONTAINMENT: The installation of an approved
backflow prevention device at the water service connection to any customer's
premises where it is physically and economically infeasible to find and
permanently eliminate or control all actual or potential cross connections
within the customer's water system; or it means the installation of an approved
backflow prevention device on the service line leading to and supplying a
portion of a customer's water system where there are actual or potential cross
connections which cannot be effectively eliminated or controlled at the point
of cross connection.
   HAZARD, DEGREE OF: Derived from an evaluation of the potential risk to
public health and the adverse effect of the hazard upon the potable water
system.
    Health Hazard: Any condition, device or practice in the water supply system
and its operation which could create or, in the judgment of the town water
department, may create a danger to the health and well being of the water
consumer.
    Plumber Hazard: A plumbing type cross connection in a consumer's potable
water system that has not been properly protected by an approved air gap or
approved backflow prevention device.
    Pollutional Hazard: An actual or potential threat to the physical
properties of the water system or to the potability of the public or the
consumer's potable water system by which would constitute a nuisance or be
aesthetically objectionable or could cause damage to the system or its
appurtenances, but would not be dangerous to health.
    System Hazard: An actual or potential threat of severe damage to the
physical properties of the public potable water system or the consumer's
potable water system or of a pollution or contamination which would have a
protracted effect on the quality of the potable water in the system.
   INDUSTRIAL FLUIDS SYSTEM: Any system containing a fluid or solution which
may be chemically, biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form
or concentration such as would constitute a health, system, pollutional or
plumbing hazard if introduced into an approved water supply. This may include,
but not be limited to, polluted or contaminated waters; all types of process
waters and used waters originating from the public potable water system which
may have deteriorated in sanitary quality; chemicals in fluid form; plating
acids and alkalies, circulating cooling waters connected to an open cooling
tower and/or cooling waters that are chemically or biologically treated or
stabilized with toxic substances; contaminated natural waters such as from
wells, springs, streams, rivers, bays, harbors, seas, irrigation canals or
systems, etc.; oils, gases, glycerine, paraffins, caustic and acid solutions
and other liquid and gaseous fluids used in industrial or other purposes or for
firefighting purposes.
   POLLUTION: The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic or
biological) in water which tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute a
hazard or impair the usefulness or quality of the water to a degree which does
not create an actual hazard to the public health and which does not adversely
and unreasonably affect such water for domestic use.
   PUBLIC WORKS SUPERVISOR: An employee of the town designated or approved by
the governing body who is vested with authority for the implementation of an
effective cross connection control program and for the enforcement of the
provisions of this section.
   TOWN WATER DEPARTMENT: That subdivision of the town government designated by
the governing body to carry out the day to day functions of delivery,
maintenance, production, treatment and safeguarding of the town's water
distribution system.
   WATER, NONPOTABLE: Water which is not safe for human consumption or which is
of questionable quality.
   WATER, POTABLE: Water which, according to recognized standards, is safe for
human consumption.
   WATER SERVICE CONNECTION: The terminal end of a service connection from the
public potable water system; i.e., where the water purveyor loses jurisdiction
and sanitary control over the water at its point of delivery to the customer's
water system. If a meter is installed at the end of the service connection,
then the service connection means the downstream end of the meter. There should
be no unprotected takeoffs from the service line ahead of any meter or backflow
prevention device located at the point of delivery to the customer's water
system. Service connection shall also include water service connection from a
fire hydrant and all other temporary or emergency water service connections
from the public potable water system.
   WATER, USED: Any water system after it has passed through the point of
delivery and is no longer under the sanitary control of the water purveyor.
(1987 Code § 13.04.280)
   B.   Authority: The governing body, by delegation of its authority to the
town's water department, shall have authority to protect the public potable
water distribution system from contamination or pollution due to the backflow
of contaminants or pollutants through the water service connection.
   C.   Notice Requiring Installation Of Backflow Prevention Device: If, in the
judgment of the department, an approved backflow prevention device is required
at the customer's water service connection or within the customer's private
water system for the safety of the water system, the town water department,
through its designated agent, shall give notice, in writing, to the customer to
install such an approved backflow prevention device(s) at specific location(s)
on his premises.
   D.   Failure To Comply: The customer shall, within thirty (30) days of
receipt, install such approved device(s) at his own expense; and, failure,
refusal or inability on the part of the customer to install, have tested and
maintain the device(s) shall constitute a grounds for discontinuing water
service to the premises until such requirements have been satisfactorily met.
(1987 Code § 13.04.270)
   E.   Water System Requirements:
      1.   The water system shall be considered as made up of two (2) parts:
the utility system and the customer system.
      2.   Utility system shall consist of the source facilities and the
distribution system; and shall include all those facilities of the water system
under the complete control of the utility, up to the point where the customer's
system begins.
      3.   The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized
in the production, treatment, storage and delivery of water to the distribution
system.
      4.   The distribution system shall include the network of conduits used
for the delivery of water from the source to the customer's system.
      5.   The customer's system shall include those parts of the facilities
beyond the termination of the utility distribution system which are utilized in
conveying utility delivered domestic water to points of use. (1987 Code §
13.04.290)
   F.   Backflow Prevention:
      1.   Protection Required: No water service connection to any premises
shall be installed or maintained by the water purveyor unless the water supply
is protected as required by state laws and regulations, and this section.
Service of water to any premises shall be discontinued by the water purveyor if
a backflow prevention device required by this chapter is not installed, tested
and maintained, or if it is found that a backflow prevention device has been
removed, bypassed, or if an unprotected cross connection exists on the
premises. Service will not be restored until such conditions or defects are
corrected.
      2.   Inspection: The customer's system should be open for inspection at
all reasonable times to authorized representative of the town water department
to determine whether cross connections or other structural or sanitary hazards,
including violations of these regulations, exist. When such a condition becomes
known, the town water department shall deny or immediately discontinue service
to the premises by providing for a physical break in the service line until the
customer has corrected the condition(s) in conformance with state statutes and
town ordinances relating to plumbing and water supplies and the regulations
adopted pursuant thereto.
      3.   Location: An approved backflow prevention device shall also be
installed in each service line to a customer's water system at or near the
property line or immediately inside the building being served; but, in all
cases, before the first branch line leading off the service line wherever the
following conditions exist:
         a.   In the case of premises having an auxiliary water supply which is
not or may not be of safe bacteriological or chemical quality and which is not
acceptable as an additional source by the town water department, the public
water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by
installing an approved backflow prevention device in the service line
appropriate to the degree of hazard.
         b.   In the case of premises on which any industrial fluids or any
other objectionable substance is handled in such a fashion as to create an
actual or potential hazard to the public water system, the public system shall
be protected against backflow from the premises by installing an approved
backflow prevention device in the service line appropriate to the degree of
hazard. This shall include the holding of process waters and waters originating
from the utility system which have been subject to deterioration in quality.
         c.   In the case of premises having: 1) internal cross connections
that cannot be permanently corrected and controlled, or 2) intricate plumbing
and piping arrangements or where entry to all portions of the premises is not
readily accessible for inspection purposes, making it impracticable or
impossible to ascertain whether or not dangerous cross connections exist, the
public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by
installing an approved backflow prevention device in the service line.
      4.   Type Of Device: The type of protective device required under
subsections F3a, b, and c of this section shall depend upon the degree of
hazard which exists as follows:
         a.   In the case of any premises where there is an auxiliary water
supply as stated in subsection F3a of this section and it is not subject to any
of the following rules, the public water system shall be protected by an
approved air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow
prevention device.
         b.   In the case of any premises where there is water or substance
that would be objectionable but not hazardous to health, if introduced into the
public water system, the public water system shall be protected by an approved
double check valve assembly.
         c.   In the case of any premises where there is any material dangerous
to health which is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or
potential hazard to the public water system, the public water system shall be
protected by an approved air gap separation or any approved reduced pressure
principle backflow prevention device. Examples of premises where these
conditions will exist include sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations,
chemical manufacturing plants, hospitals, mortuaries and planting plants.
         d.   In the case of any premises where there are uncontrolled cross
connections, either actual or potential, the public water system shall be
protected by an approved air gap separation or any approved reduced pressure
principle backflow prevention device at the service connection.
         e.   In the case of any premises where, because of security
requirements or other prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or
impractical to make a complete in plant cross connection survey, the public
water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by either an
approved air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow
device on each service to the premises.
      5.   Devices:
         a.   Model And Size: Any backflow prevention device required herein
shall be a model and size approved by the town water department. "Approved
backflow prevention device" means a device that has been manufactured in full
conformance with the standards established by the American waterworks
association entitled: AWWA C506-78 standards for reduced pressure principle and
double check valve backflow prevention devices; and have met completely the
laboratory and field performance specifications of the foundation for cross
connection control and hydraulic research of the University of Southern
California established by: specifications of backflow prevention devices - #69-
2 dated March 1969, or the most current issue.
         b.   Standards And Specifications: The AWWA and FCCC&HR standards and
specifications have been adopted by the town water department. Final approval
shall be evidenced by a certificate of approval issued by an approved testing
laboratory certifying full compliance with the AWWA standards and FCCC&HR
specifications.
         c.   Testing Laboratory: The following testing laboratory has been
determined by the town water department to test and certify backflow
preventors:
   Foundation for Cross Connection Control & Hydraulic Research
   University of Southern California
   University Park
   Los Angeles, California 90007
         d.   Additional Laboratories: Testing laboratories other than the
laboratory listed in subsection F5c of this section will be added to an
approved list as they are qualified by the town water department.
         e.   No Further Testing Required: Backflow preventors which may be
subjected to back pressure or back siphonage that have been fully tested and
have been granted a certificate of approval of the qualified laboratory and are
listed on the laboratory's current list of approved backflow prevention devices
may be used without further test or qualification.
      6.   Certified Inspections; Operational Tests:
         a.   Duty To Perform: It shall be the duty of the customer/user at any
premises where backflow prevention devices are installed to have certified
inspections and operational tests made at least once per year. In those
instances where the town water department deems the hazard to be great enough,
it may require certified inspections at more frequent intervals.
         b.   Cost: These inspections and tests shall be at the expense of the
water user and shall be performed by the device manufacturer's representative,
the town personnel or by a certified tester approved by the town water
department. It shall be the duty of the town water department to see that these
tests are made in a timely manner.
         c.   Advance Notice To Town: The customer/user shall notify the town
water department in advance when the tests are to be undertaken so that he or
his representative may witness the tests if so desired.
         d.   Repair, Overhaul Or Replacement: These devices shall be repaired,
overhauled or replaced at the expense of the customer/user where the devices
are found to be defective. Records of such tests, repairs and overhauls shall
be kept and made available to the town water department.
      7.   Exceptions: All presently installed backflow prevention devices
which do not meet the requirements of this section but were approved devices
for the purposes described herein at the time of installation and which have
been properly maintained, shall, except for the inspection and maintenance
requirements under subsection F6 of this section, be excluded from the
requirements of these rules so long as the town water department is assured
that they will satisfactorily protect the utility system. Whenever the existing
device is moved from the present location or requires more than minimum
maintenance or when the town water department finds that the maintenance
constitutes a hazard to health, the unit shall be replaced by an approved
backflow prevention device meeting the requirements of this section. (1987 Code
§ 13.04.300)
10-1-22: PENALTY:
Any person, persons, partnership, association or corporation violating any
provision of this chapter shall, upon a court finding of violation thereof, pay
a fine not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (1987 Code §
13.04.320; amd. Ord. 2-04, 5-6-2004)
CHAPTER 2
SEWER
SECTION:
10-2-1: Definitions
10-2-2: Use Of Public Sewer Required
10-2-3: Private Wastewater Disposal
10-2-4: Sanitary Sewers, Building Sewers And Connections
10-2-5: Use Of Public Sewers
10-2-6: Dump Station Use; Haulers And Dumping
10-2-7: Inspectors
10-2-8: Damage To Sewer System
10-2-9: Penalty
10-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5)
days at twenty degrees centigrade (20°C), expressed in milligrams per liter.
BUILDING DRAIN: That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system
which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside
the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five
feet (5') (1 m) outside the inner face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal, also called house connection.
CLEAR WATER: Any waters from rain runoff, downspouts, building drains, ground
water or other sources of surface runoff.
COMBINED SEWER: A sewer intended to receive both wastewater and storm or
surface water.
EASEMENT: An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others.
FLOATABLE OIL: Oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is
properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection
system.
GARBAGE: The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking, and serving of foods.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES: The wastewater from industrial processes, trade, or business
as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes (i.e., higher levels of BOD and
TSS than those acceptable for domestic wastes).
NATURAL OUTLET: Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer
overflows, into a watercourse pond, ditch, lake, or other body surface or
ground water.
NORMAL DOMESTIC WASTEWATER: Wastewater that has a BOD concentration of not more
than two hundred milligrams per liter (200 mg/l) and a suspended solids
concentration of not more than two hundred fifty milligrams per liter (250 mg/
l).
MAY: Is permissive. See definition of Shall.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation, or
group.
pH: The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration. The
concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.
Neutral water, for example, has a pH value of 7 and hydrogen ion concentration
of 10-7.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE: The wastes from the preparation, cooking, and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2") (1.27 cm) in any
dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER: A common sewer controlled by a governmental agency or public
utility.
SANITARY SEWER: A sewer that carries liquid and water carried wastes from
residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions together
with minor quantities of ground, storm, and surface waters that are not
admitted intentionally.
SEPTAGE: The liquid and solid material pumped from a septic tank or cesspool
during cleaning.
SEPTIC TANK: A sewage disposal tank in which waste material is collected and
decomposed by anaerobic bacteria.
SEWAGE: The spent water of a community. The preferred term is "wastewater".
SEWER: A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water.
SHALL: Is mandatory. See definition of May.
SLUG: Any discharge of water or wastewater which, in concentration of BOD or
other wastewater constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of
duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average
twenty four (24) hour concentration or flows during normal operation and shall
adversely affect the collection system and/or performance of the wastewater
treatment works.
STORM DRAIN/STORM SEWER: A drain or sewer for conveying water, ground water,
subsurface water, or unpolluted water from any source.
SUPERINTENDENT: The superintendent of wastewater facilities, (and/or of
wastewater treatment works, and/or of water pollution control) of the town of
Lyman or her authorized deputy, agent, or representative.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS: Total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of,
or is in suspension in, water, wastewater, or other liquids, and that is
removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in "Standard Methods For The
Examination Of Water And Wastewater" and referred to as nonfilterable residue.
TOWN: The town of Lyman, Wyoming, an incorporated municipality, and/or its
official representative.
UNPOLLUTED WATER: Is water of quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary
sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
WASTEWATER: The spent water of a community. From the standpoint of source, it
may be a combination of the liquid and water carried wastes from residences,
commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions, together with any
ground water, surface water, and storm water that may be present.
WASTEWATER FACILITIES: The structures, equipment, and processes required to
collect, carry away, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of
the effluent.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS: An arrangement of devices and structures for
treating wastewater, industrial wastes, and sludge. Sometimes used as
synonymous with "waste treatment plant" or "wastewater treatment plant" or
"water pollution control plant".
WATERCOURSE: A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either
continuously or intermittently. (Ord. 10-92, 6-17-1993)
10-2-2: USE OF PUBLIC SEWER REQUIRED:
   A.   Prohibited Deposits: It shall be unlawful for any person to place,
deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or
private property within the town, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said
town, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste.
   B.   Discharge Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural
outlet within the town, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said town, any
sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been
provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.
   C.   Construction Of Privy, Septic Tank, Cesspool: Except as hereinafter
provided, it shall be unlawful, within the town, to construct or maintain any
privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used
for the disposal of wastewater.
   D.   Connection Required: The owners of all houses, buildings, or properties
used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated
within the town and abutting on any street, alley, or right of way in which
there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary or
combined sewer of the town, is hereby required, at the owner's expense, to
install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities
directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter, within thirty (30) days after date of official notice to do so;
provided, that said public sewer is within three hundred feet (300') of the
property line. (Ord. 10-92, 6-17-1993)
10-2-3: PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL:
   A.   Public System Unavailable: Where a public sanitary sewer is not
available under the provisions of subsection
10-2-2D of this chapter, the building sewer shall be connected to a private
wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Permit Required: Before commencement of construction of a private
wastewater disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit
signed by the town public works director. The application for such permit shall
be made in letter form, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans,
specifications, and other information required by the Uinta County planning
department and the Wyoming department of environmental quality. Certification
of compliance with Uinta County small wastewater systems shall be adequate for
town purposes.
   C.   Permit Effective Upon Completion; Inspection: A permit for a private
wastewater disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is
completed to the satisfaction of Uinta County planning department. The town
shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction, and, in any
event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the town when the work is
ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered.
   D.   Specifications: The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private
wastewater disposal system shall comply with all requirements of Uinta County
planning department. No permit shall be issued for any private wastewater
disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area
of the lot is less than one acre (43,560 square feet). No septic tank or
cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet.
   E.   Public System Becomes Available: At such time as a public sewer becomes
available to a property served by a private wastewater disposal system, as
provided in subsection
10-2-2D of this chapter, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer
within sixty (60) days in compliance with this chapter, and any septic tanks,
cesspools, and similar private wastewater disposal facilities shall be cleaned
of sludge and filled with suitable material or removed from the site.
   F.   Operation And Maintenance: The owner shall operate and maintain the
private wastewater disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times at no
expense to the town.
   G.   Additional Requirements: No statement contained in this article shall
be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed
by the town of Lyman, Uinta County, or the Wyoming department of environmental
quality. (Ord. 10-92, 6-17-1993)
10-2-4: SANITARY SEWERS, BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person or entity to uncover, open, use, alter,
disturb or connect to the town's sewer system with any line or fixture on any
premises unless that person or entity, or their agent, has secured a permit for
such installation and complied with the provisions of this chapter. The town,
at its sole discretion, may require the installation of individually specified
equipment, fixtures, pipe and/or other material, and may dictate the location,
placement and length of the pipes, including the entire length of the subject
property, as a condition of the granting of the permit. All costs of and
incidental to the restoration, installation and connection shall be borne by
the owners or their agent.
   B.   Class Of Permit: There shall be one class of building sewer permits:
residential, institutional, religious, and commercial shall all be considered
equally.
   C.   Application: In all cases, the owner or his agent shall make
application in letter form. The permit application shall be supplemented by any
plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the
judgment of the town.
   D.   Fees: A permit and inspection fee shall be considered part of the
connection fee and shall be paid to the town at the time the application is
filed.
   E.   Costs And Expenses: All costs and expense incidental to the
installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owners.
   F.   Indemnification: The owner shall indemnify the town from any loss or
damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the
building sewer.
   G.   Responsibility To Repair And Maintain: It shall be the responsibility
of all property owners to maintain and repair all sewer service lines and
connections running from the town's sewer main to the owner's residence,
building or facility wherein sewage is deposited.
   H.   Separate System Required; Exception: A separate and independent
building sewer shall be provided for every building except where one building
stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is
available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining
alley, court, yard, or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may
be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building
sewer, but the town does not and will not assume any obligation or
responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any such single
connection aforementioned.
   I.   Old Building Sewers: Old building sewers may be used in connection with
new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the town, to
meet all requirements of this chapter.
   J.   Specifications: The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction
of all sanitary sewers including building sewers, and the methods to be used in
excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench,
shall all conform to the requirements of the "Wyoming Department Of
Environmental Quality, Waste Quality Rules And Regulations", chapter XI, as
defined in part B, section 9.
   K.   Elevation: Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to
the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in
which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer,
sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by a town
approved means and discharged to the building sewer.
   L.   Prohibited Connections: No person shall make connection of roof
downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface
runoff or ground water to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is
connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
   M.   Compliance Required: The connection of the building sewer into the
public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing
code or other applicable rules and regulations of the town, and the state of
Wyoming. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight and
verified by proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and
materials must be approved by the town before installation.
   N.   Excavations 1 : All excavations for building sewer installation shall
be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public
from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed
in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the
town. (Ord. 10-92, 6-17-1993; amd. Ord. 2019-09, 12-5-2019)
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 8, chapter 3 of this code.
10-2-5: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS:
   A.   Unpolluted Drainage: No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged any unpolluted waters such as storm water, surface water, ground
water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, or cooling water to any sewer, except
storm water runoff from limited areas, which storm water may be polluted at
times, may be discharged to the sanitary sewer by permission of the town.
   B.   Storm Water: Storm water other than that exempted under subsection A of
this section and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such
sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet
approved by the town and the Wyoming department of environmental quality.
Unpolluted industrial cooling water or process waters may be discharged, on
approval of the town, to a storm sewer.
   C.   Prohibited Discharges:
      1.   No person, including septage haulers dumping at the dump station,
shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described water
or wastes to any public sewers:
         a.   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid, or gas.
         b.   Any waters containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or
other wastes, to contaminate the sludge of any sewage treatment process,
constitute a hazard in or have an adverse effect on the waters receiving any
discharge from the works.
         c.   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5, or higher than
8.5, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard
to structures, equipment, and personnel of the wastewater works.
         d.   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable
of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the wastewater facilities such as, but not limited to,
ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole
or ground by garbage grinders.
      2.   Each user or septage hauler which discharges any toxic pollutants
which cause an increase in the cost of managing the effluent or the sludge of
the Lyman treatment works shall pay for such increased costs.
   D.   Harmful Materials/Substances: The following described substances,
materials, waters or wastes shall be limited in discharges to municipal systems
to concentrations or quantities which will not harm either the sewers, the
sludge of any municipal system, the wastewater treatment process or equipment,
will not have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or will not otherwise
endanger lives, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. The town may
set limitations lower than the limitations established in the regulations of
this subsection if, in its opinion, such more severe limitations are necessary
to meet the above objectives. In forming its opinion as to the acceptability,
the town will give considerations to such factors as the quantity of subject
waste in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of
construction of the sewers, the wastewater treatment plant, and other pertinent
factors. The limitations or restrictions on materials or characteristics of
waste or wastewaters discharged to the sanitary sewer which shall not be
violated without approval of the town are as follows:
      1.   Temperature: Wastewater having a temperature higher than one hundred
fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) (65°C).
      2.   Oil: Wastewater containing more than twenty five milligrams per
liter (25 mg/l) of petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oils, or product of
mineral oil origin.
      3.   Industrial Wastes: Industrial wastes containing floatable oils, fat,
or grease.
      4.   Unproperly Shredded Garbage: Any garbage that has not been properly
shredded (see definition of "garbage" in section
10-2-1 of this chapter). Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers
from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering
establishments, or similar places where garbage originates from the preparation
of food in kitchens for the purpose of consumption on the premises or when
served by caterers.
      5.   Objectionable Substances: Any waters or wastes containing iron,
chromium, copper, zinc and similar objectionable or toxic substances to such
degree that any such material received in the composite wastewater at the
wastewater treatment works exceeds the limits established by the town for such
materials.
      6.   Odor Producing Substances: Any waters or wastes containing odor
producing substances exceeding limits which may be established by the town.
      7.   Radioactive: Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the town in compliance with
applicable state or federal regulations.
      8.   Slug: Quantities of flow, concentrations, or both which constitute a
"slug" as defined in section
10-2-1 of this chapter.
      9.   Substances Not Amenable To Treatment: Waters or wastes containing
substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater
treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree
that the wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of
other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving wasters.
      10.   Interaction Causes Interference Or Deleterious Condition: Any water
or wastes which, by interaction with other water or wastes in the public sewer
system, release obnoxious gases, form suspended solids which interfere with the
collection system, or create a condition deleterious to structures and
treatment.
   E.   Authority To Reject; Require Pretreatment Or Control Quantity: If any
waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public
sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics
enumerated in subsection D of this section, and which in the judgment of the
town, may have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater facilities, processes,
equipment, or receiving water, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or
constitute a public nuisance, the town may:
      1.   Reject the wastes;
      2.   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the
public sewers;
      3.   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
      4.   Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the
wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions in
chapter 3 of this title.
If the director of public works permits the pretreatment or equalization of
waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be
subject to the review and approval of the town.
   F.   Interceptors Required: Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be
provided when, in the opinion of the town, they are necessary for the proper
handling of liquid wastes containing flammable grease in excessive amounts as
specified in subsection D3 of this section, or any flammable wastes, sand or
other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required
for private living quarters or dwelling units. All schools, restaurants, and
churches, or any other place where cooking is done and food prepared for the
public, other than private dwelling units, are required to provide such grease
traps. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the town,
and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection. In the maintaining of these interceptors, the owner shall be
responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the
captivated material and shall maintain records of the dates and means of
disposal which are subject to review by the town.
   G.   Owner's Expense: Where pretreatment or flow equalization facilities are
provided or required for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained
continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his
expense.
   H.   Control Manhole Required: When required by the town, the owner(s) of
any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall
install a suitable structure together with such necessary meters and other
appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and
measurement of the wastes. Such structures, when required, shall be accessibly
and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved
by the town. The structure shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and
shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
   I.   Required Information: The town may require a user of sewer services to
provide information needed to determine compliance with this chapter. These
requirements may include:
      1.   Wastewater's discharge peak rate and volume over a specified time
period.
      2.   Chemical analyses of wastewaters.
      3.   Information on raw materials, processes, and products affecting
wastewater volume and quality.
      4.   Quantity and disposition of specific liquid, sludge, oil, solvent,
or other materials important to sewer use control.
      5.   A plat plan of sewers of the user's property showing sewer and
pretreatment facility location.
      6.   Details of wastewater pretreatment facilities.
      7.   Details of systems to prevent and control the loss of materials
through spills to the municipal sewer.
   J.   Measurements, Tests And Analyses: All measurements, tests, and analyses
of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this
chapter shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard
Methods For The Examination Of Water And Wastewater", published by the American
Public Health Association. Sampling methods, location, times, durations, and
frequencies are to be determined on an individual basis, subject to approval by
the town.
   K.   Special Agreement Or Arrangement: No statement contained in this
chapter shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement
between the town and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of
unusual strength or character may be accepted by the town for treatment.
   L.   Typical Strengths Of Raw Wastewater: Typical strengths of raw
wastewater for biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) and suspended solids (SS) are
two hundred (200) and two hundred fifty (250) ppm, respectively. Concentrations
above these levels are considered to adversely affect the overall performance
of the wastewater facilities. (Ord. 10-92, 6-17-1993)
10-2-6: DUMP STATION USE; HAULERS AND DUMPING:
   A.   Contractors: All contractors using the dump facility shall dump only
raw household or office sewage. Only nonindustrial wastes will be permitted.
   B.   Signed Manifest: All septage haulers/contractors using the dump station
facility shall provide a signed manifest provided by the town with each load
dumped.
   C.   Deleterious Substances: All contractors using the dump station shall be
required to remove from the holding vault at the dump station any deleterious
substance dumped. "Deleterious substances" are defined and described in the
"Lyman Treatment Facility Operations And Maintenance Manual". A list of
applicable deleterious substances shall be provided to the haulers with the
manifests. (Ord. 10-92, 6-17-1993)
10-2-7: INSPECTORS:
   A.   Right Of Entry: The town public works director and other duly
authorized employees of the town bearing proper credentials and identification
shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, and testing pertinent to discharge to the
community system in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Confidential Information: The public works director, or other duly
authorized employees, are authorized to obtain information concerning
industrial processes which have a direct bearing on the kind and source of
discharge to the wastewater collection system. The industry may withhold
information considered confidential. The industry must establish that the
revelation to the public of the information in question might result in an
advantage to competitors. (Ord. 10-92, 6-17-1993)
10-2-8: DAMAGE TO SEWER SYSTEM:
No person shall maliciously, wilfully or negligently break, damage, destroy,
uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which
is part of the wastewater facilities. (Ord. 10-92, 6-17-1993)
10-2-9: PENALTY:
Any person, association, partnership or corporation violating any provision of
this chapter shall be subject to the provisions set forth in title 1, chapter 4
of this code. Each day of continuation of such violation shall be deemed to be
a separate offense. (Ord. 10-92, 6-17-1993)
CHAPTER 3
SEWER RATES AND CHARGES
SECTION:
10-3-1: Purpose
10-3-2: Definitions
10-3-3: Sewer Connections; Permits, Fees
10-3-4: Total Annual Cost Of Operation And Maintenance
10-3-5: Wastewater Contribution
10-3-6: Wastewater Service Charge
10-3-7: Wastewater Facilities Replacement Fund
10-3-8: Billing And Delinquent Accounts
10-3-9: Review Of Service Charge
10-3-10: Notification
10-3-11: Table 1, Total Annual Expenses And Distribution Of Costs
10-3-12: Table 2, Normal Sanitary Sewage Loadings
10-3-13: Table 3, Calculations For User Charge Rates
10-3-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter shall be to establish a process to generate
sufficient revenue to pay all costs for the operation and maintenance of the
complete wastewater system. The costs shall be distributed to all users of the
system in proportion to each user's contribution to the total loading of the
treatment works. Factors such as strength (BOD and TSS), volume, and delivery
flow rate characteristics shall be considered and included as the basis for the
user's contribution to ensure a proportional distribution of operation and
maintenance costs to each user or user class. (Ord. 9-92, 6-17-1993)
10-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation or organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in
five (5) days at twenty degrees centigrade (20°C), expressed in milligrams per
liter.
GOVERNING BODY: The elected legislative body of the town which is the town of
Lyman mayor and town council as defined in section
1-3-2 of this code.
NONRESIDENTIAL USER: Any contributor other than a "residential user" as defined
herein. These would include commercial, industrial, institutional, religious
and governmental users.
NORMAL DOMESTIC WASTEWATER: Wastewater that has a BOD concentration of not more
than two hundred milligrams per liter (200 mg/l) and a suspended solids
concentration of not more than two hundred fifty milligrams per liter (250 mg/
l).
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE: Those functions that result in expenditures during
the useful life of the treatment works for materials, labor, utilities and
other items which are necessary for managing and for which such works were
designed and constructed. The term "operation and maintenance" includes
"replacement" as defined herein.
REPLACEMENT: Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories
or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the treatment
works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works were
designed and constructed.
RESIDENTIAL USER: Any contributor to the town's treatment works whose lot,
parcel or real estate, or building is used for domestic dwelling purposes only.
SEPTAGE: The liquid and solid material pumped from a septic tank or cesspool
during cleaning.
SEPTIC TANK: A sewage disposal tank in which waste material is collected and
decomposed by anaerobic bacteria.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS): Solids that either float on the surface of or are in
suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.
TREATMENT WORKS: Any devices and systems for the storage, treatment, recycling
and reclamation of municipal sewage, domestic sewage or liquid industrial
wastes. These include intercepting sewers, outfall sewers, sewage collection
systems, pumping, power, and other equipment and their appurtenances;
extensions improvement, remodeling, additions and alterations thereof; elements
essential to provide a reliable recycled supply such as standby treatment units
and clear well facilities; and any works, including site acquisition of the
land that will be an integral part of the treatment process or is used for
ultimate disposal of residues resulting from such treatment (including land for
composting sludge, temporary storage of such compost and land used for the
storage of treated wastewater in land treatment systems before land
applications); or any other method or system for preventing, abating, reducing,
storing, treating, separating or disposing of municipal waste or industrial
waste, including waste in combined storm water and sanitary sewer systems.
USER CHARGE: That portion of the total wastewater service charge which is
levied in a proportional and adequate manner for the cost of operation,
maintenance and replacement of the wastewater treatment works.
WATER METER: A water volume measuring and recording device, furnished and/or
installed by a user or the town of Lyman and approved by the town of Lyman.
(Ord. 9-92, 6-17-1993; amd. Ord. 2006-9, 7-20-2006)
10-3-3: SEWER CONNECTIONS; PERMITS, FEES:
   A.   Permit Required: Any person desiring to connect to the sewer system
owned by the town shall apply to the town clerk for a permit. Only one
residence or building shall be covered by each permit.
   B.   Fee: The fee for issuance of a permit to connect to town sewer is five
hundred dollars ($500.00). The permit fee shall also include the cost for the
inspections.
   C.   Sewer Line: The sewer line from the facility to the connection with the
town sewer shall be provided by the person connecting with the sewer and shall
be done in a good and workmanlike manner with proper sewer pipe and to the
satisfaction of the town public works director or other officer designated to
inspect such connecting in and the connection with the town sewer. (Ord. 9-92,
6-17-1993)
10-3-4: TOTAL ANNUAL COST OF OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE:
The town shall determine the total annual costs of capital, operation and
maintenance of the wastewater system which are necessary to maintain the
capacity and performance, during the service life of the treatment works, for
which such works were designed and constructed. The total annual cost of
operation and maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, capital
replacement, labor, repairs, equipment and replacement, maintenance, necessary
modifications, power, sampling, laboratory tests, and a reasonable contingency
fund. (See section
10-3-11 of this chapter.) (Ord. 9-92, 6-17-1993)
10-3-5: WASTEWATER CONTRIBUTION:
   A.   Residential User Calculation: The town of Lyman shall determine for
each residential user or user class the average monthly volume of wastewater
discharged to the wastewater system, by using winter water consumption volumes
determined by reading meters for October through April and then dividing total
winter volume by seven (7) months.
   B.   New Services: New services without a prior year's volume to base rates
will be charged according to average residential or nonresidential rates. (Ord.
2006-9, 7-20-2006)
10-3-6: WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGE:
   A.   Basis For Monthly User Charge: For residential users, monthly user
charges will be based on actual winter water usage. If a user has a consumptive
use of water or in some other manner uses water which is not discharged into
the wastewater collection system, the user charge for that contributor may be
based on readings of wastewater meter(s) or separate water meter(s) installed
and maintained at the user's expense. For nonresidential users, monthly user
charges will be based on actual monthly water usage throughout the year.
   B.   Classification As Residential: The governing body may classify
institutional, religious, industrial, commercial, and other nonresidential
establishments as a residential user; provided, that the wastes from these
establishments are equivalent to the wastes from the average residential user
with respect to volume, strength, and delivery flow rate characteristics (see
section
10-3-13 of this chapter).
   C.   Rates Established: Rates for wastewater service from the town municipal
system shall be established and/or amended by resolution of the town council.
Said rates set by said resolution(s) may include a flat base rate with monthly
base rates and/or graduated usage rates for wastewater usage beyond a specified
base rate. The town may also set, by resolution, additional rates and/or fees
for residential and nonresidential users whose wastewater has a greater
strength than normal domestic sewage, which surcharge is in addition to the
normal user charge that will be collected.
   D.   Septage Waste Haulers: Each septage waste hauler shall be assessed a
user charge rate to be set by resolution of the town council, including an
additional rate for septage of greater strength than is typically charged.
Nothing in this section shall require the town to accept septage into the
town's wastewater system.
   E.   Toxic Pollutants: Any user which discharges any toxic pollutants (see
chapter 2 of this title) which cause an increase in the cost of managing the
treatment works, or any user which discharges any substance which singly or by
interaction with other substances causes identifiable increases in the cost of
operation, maintenance or replacement of the treatment works, shall pay for
such increased costs. The charge to each such user shall be as determined by
the appropriate financial personnel and approved by the town governing body.
   F.   Rates: All rates in effect at the enactment of this section shall
continue until amended by resolution of the town council. (Ord. 2017-05, 2-2-
2017)
10-3-7: WASTEWATER FACILITIES REPLACEMENT FUND:
A reserve fund called the wastewater facilities replacement fund is hereby
established within the wastewater utility fund for the purpose of providing
sufficient funds to be expended for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories and appurtenances during the useful life (20 years) of the
wastewater treatment facilities necessary to maintain the capacity and
performance for which such facilities were designed and constructed. This fund
shall also be sufficient at the end of the useful life of the treatment
facility to replace facilities as necessary. Such an annual cost shall be
determined as outlined under "equipment replacement" in section
10-3-11 of this chapter. (Ord. 9-92, 6-17-1993)
10-3-8: BILLING AND DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS:
   A.   Billing: Wastewater service charges for use of the town of Lyman
wastewater system shall be due and payable monthly, on or before the end of
each month. The town clerk shall prepare and mail a statement of the wastewater
service charge to each user. This statement may be combined with the water rent
charges pursuant to section
10-1-5 of this title. All charges shall be paid to the town clerk at his office
in the town hall. There shall be no discount allowed. (Ord. 2007-01, 2-15-2007)
   B.   Deemed Delinquent: If the sewer user fails, refuses or neglects to pay
the wastewater charges within thirty (30) days of the mailing of notice of the
due charges, the bill shall become delinquent and may be collected by action or
fine for violation of this chapter in the municipal court, and the sewer access
may be immediately shut off.
   C.   Collection Policy: A collection policy for delinquent accounts shall be
adopted by resolution, which prescribes periods and practices for sending late
notices, hanging turnoff notice tags, turning off wastewater access, late
penalty fees, etc. (Ord. 2011-12, 9-1-2011)
   D.   Restoration Of Service: Before the wastewater service shall be
restored, all delinquent charges for the premises must be paid with an
additional fee, as established by policy, for restoring the service. (Ord.
2007-01, 2-15-2007)
   E.   Misdemeanor: Failure to pay delinquent water charges, as set out in
subsection A of this section, shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by up
to seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) in addition to any and all arrearages,
if, after no less than thirty (30) days, and after a minimum of fifteen (15)
days after written notice. Notice shall be considered sufficient if said notice
is attached to the residence. (Ord. 2011-12, 9-1-2011)
10-3-9: REVIEW OF SERVICE CHARGE:
   A.   Annual Review: The town shall review the total annual cost of operation
and maintenance as well as each user's wastewater contribution not less often
than every year and will revise the system as necessary to assure equity of the
service charge system established herein and to assure that sufficient funds
are obtained to adequately operate and maintain the wastewater treatment works.
   B.   Excess Revenues: After two (2) consecutive years of collecting excess
revenues, the town shall apply those revenues to the costs of operation and
maintenance for the next year and adjust the rates accordingly. If a
significant user, such as a business, has completed in house modifications
which would change that user's wastewater contribution, the user can present to
the town staff such factual information and the town shall then determine if
the user's wastewater contribution is to be changed.
   C.   Request For Review: Any user who feels his user charge is unjust and
inequitable may make written application to the town requesting a review of his
user charge.
   D.   Review Of Request: Review of the request shall be made by the town as
soon as is reasonable, and, if substantiated, the user charges for that user
shall be recomputed based upon the revised flow and/or strength data and the
new charges shall be applicable to the next billing cycle/period.
   E.   Fiscal Year End Balances: Fiscal year end balances in the operation,
maintenance, and replacement fund shall be used for no other purposes than
those designated. Monies which have been transferred from other sources to meet
temporary shortages in the operation, maintenance and replacement fund shall be
returned to their respective accounts upon appropriate adjustment of the user
charge rates for operation, maintenance, and replacement. The user charge rate
(s) shall be adjusted such that the transferred monies will be returned to
their respective accounts within six (6) months of the fiscal year in which the
monies were borrowed. (Ord. 9-92, 6-17-1993)
10-3-10: NOTIFICATION:
Each user will be notified, at least annually, in conjunction with a regular
bill, of the rate and that portion of the user charges which are attributable
to wastewater treatment services. (Ord. 9-92, 6-17-1993)
10-3-11:TABLE 1, TOTAL ANNUAL EXPENSES AND DISTRIBUTION OF COSTS:
Category Totals Sewer Related Volume BOD SS Base Costs
  Percent Amount Percent Amount Percent Amount Percent Amount Percent Amount
Category Totals Sewer Related Volume BOD SS Base Costs
                         Percent Amount     Percent Amount    Percent Amount    Percent Amount    Percent Amount
Staff (wage
and                                                                                              
benefits)
Clerical          28,3    2    7,10                                                   10    7,100
Administrative    46,3    5    2,30                                                   10    2,300
PW director       38,0    2    7,60    3   2,28                                    7    5,320
Operator          42,7    5   21,40    4    8,5   30    6,4   30   6,42        
Laborer           28,3    2    7,10   10   7,10                                        
Vehicles                                                                                         
Backhoe           No                                                                           
               charge
Pickup (PW)        3,5    2    900     5    450                                    5    450
Pickup             3,5    2    900     4    350    3    275   30    275        
(operator)
Car (Admin.)       3,5    5    175                                                    10    175
Maint./upkeep      3,0    2    700     2    180   25    180   25    180    2    180
Contractual                                                                                      
Services
Legal/profes-      3,0   10   3,000                                                   10   3,000
sional
Licen. insp./      5,0   10   5,000   10   5,00                                        
cleaning
Audit              2,0   10   2,000                                                   10   2,000
Debt Service                                                                                     
FLB loan          33,8   10   33,80    3   10,1    3   10,1    5   1,69    3   11,830
Reserve fund       5,0   10    5,00    7    3,5   10    500   10    500    1    500
Other                                                                                            
Uniforms           400    2    100                                                    10    100
Postage            800   10    800                                                    10    800
Travel/            1,0   10    1,00                                                   10   1,000
training
Utilities         10,0   10   10,00                   80    8,0   20   2,00        
Office             300   10    300                                                    10    300
supplies
Operating          9,0   10    9,00    2    2,2   50    4,5   25   2,25        
supplies
Advertising        500   10    500                                                    10    500
Laboratory         3,6   10    3,60                   10    3,6                        
tests
Equipment          5,0   10    5,00    4    2,0    3    1,5   30    1,5     
replacement
TOTALS                            127,2          42,4          35,6          14,9          34,335
 
(Ord. 9-92, 6-7-1993)
10-3-12:TABLE 2, NORMAL SANITARY SEWAGE LOADINGS:
   Descripti   Hydraul   B   SS
   Descripti   Hydraulic             BOD                  SS
Residential                                                    
625            Aver gal/mo x            0.20 lb*/person/day     0.18lb*/person/day
connections    connections x 12 mo
1950 persons   7000x625x12=52500000gal/ 0.20x1950x365=142350lb/ 0.18x1950x365=128115lb/
               yr                       yr                      yr
Nonresidential                                                 
25 connections Aver gal/mo x            0.06lb*/person/day      0.05lb*/person/day
               connections x 12 mo
              48000x25x12=14400000     0.06x1156*x365=25316lb/ 0.05x1156*x365=21097lb/
                                        yr                      yr
Septic Waste                                                   
60 loads/mo    loads/mo x gal x mo      58lb*/1000gal           125lb*/1000gal
2500 gal/load  60x2500x12=1800000gal/yr 58x1800=104400lb/yr     125x1800-225000lb/yr
Totals         68700 K gal/yr           272066 lb/yr            374212 lb/yr
 
* Figures taken from table 4.1, town of Lyman - facility plan, March 1991
(Ord. 9-92, 6-7-1993)
10-3-13: TABLE 3, CALCULATIONS FOR USER CHARGE RATES:
SERVICE CHARGE
    Distributed Cost    34325    = $4.26/month/connection or load
Services + dumps/yr   12x650+(2500/7000)60x12
HYDRAULIC LOADING
(Volume)
   Distributed Cost   42400    = $0.62/1000 gal/month
System gal/yr   68700 K gal/yr
BOD
   Distributed Costs   35615    = $0.13/lb.
System lbs/yr   272066 lb/yr
SS
    Distributed Costs   14915   = $0.04/lb.
System lbs/yr   374212 lb/yr   
USER CHARGES PER MONTH
                       Residential And Nonresidential    Septic Wastes
USER
CHARGES
PER
MONTH
        Residential
        And               Septic Wastes
        Nonresidential
                      
        320mg/l(1000
        gal)8.34*
BOD     =2.67 lb/1000  (58-2.71**)lbs/K gal x $0.13/lb = $7.19/K gal
        gal x $0.13 =
        $0.35/K gal
        1000000 Gal
                      
        290mg/l(1000
        gal)8.34*=2.42
SS      lb/1000 gal x  (125-2.44**)lb/K gal x $0.01/lb = $4.90/K gal
        $0.04/
        lb=$0.10/K gal
        1000000 Gal
                      
VOLUME  = $0.62/K gal  = $0.62/K gal
TOTALS (Volume Charge)    $1.07/K gal $13.16/K gal                                     
TOTAL MONTHLY/LOAD FEES
Base Service - Month/Load    $4.26/Month $4.26/Load
                                                                                       
Volume Charge    $7.49(7000 Gal Min) $32.90 (2500 Gal)
 
* Conversion factor used to convert mg/l to lbs/gal(1000 gal)
** Average residential loading for BOD and SS being subtracted from septage
loading to compensate for BOD and SS loadings
   calculated in the volume charge of $1.07/K gal.
lbs/yr - mo/yr=lbs/mo - K gal/mo/connection=lbs/K gal/connection - number of
connections=lbs/K gal
BOD 142350 - 12 = 11862.5 - 7 = 1694.64 - 625 = 2.71 lbs/K gal
SS 128115 - 12 = 10676.25 - 7 = 1525.18 - 625 = 244 lbs/K gal
(Ord. 9-92, 6-17-1993)
CHAPTER 4
RELOCATION OF UTILITY FIXTURES
SECTION:
10-4-1: Notice To Relocate
10-4-2: Cost Responsibility
10-4-3: Assurance Of Subexcavation And Backfill
10-4-4: Maintaining Public Safety Precautions
10-4-5: Failure To Comply
10-4-6: Suspension Of License
10-4-1: NOTICE TO RELOCATE:
Upon actual written notice by the town, transmitted by any reasonable means of
communication to the business address of any licensed utility company providing
utility services in the town, including, but not limited to, the Bridger Valley
Electric Association, Mountain Fuel Supply Company, Union Telephone Company and
Western Wyoming Cablevision Corporation, such utility company shall thence
forthwith and within twenty (20) days of receiving written notice commence to
effectively remove and relocate cables, lines, poles, pipes and/or other of its
fixtures as the town directs and deems reasonably necessary, and when in the
opinion of the town, the public's use of streets, roads, alleys and sidewalks
requires the reasonable protection of the health and safety of the public for
and during periods of repair, reconstruction, replacement of any street, road,
alley or sidewalk within the town limits, subsequent to written notice as
aforesaid by the town to each respective licensed utility company affected, and
each such licensed utility company shall replace said cables, lines, poles,
pipes and other of its fixtures upon the express direction by the town. In
cases of emergency, the town shall be relieved of giving the twenty (20) day
written notice requirement when an immediate threat presents itself to the
health or safety of the public. In such event, immediate actual notice shall be
provided the licensed utility company by the town. (1987 Code § 13.12.010)
10-4-2: COST RESPONSIBILITY:
Each licensed utility affected herein shall perform all work identified to each
project episode in the construction, removal, repair, reconstruction and
replacement of the cables, lines, poles, pipes and fixtures involved and assume
all costs incident thereto. (1987 Code § 13.12.020)
10-4-3: ASSURANCE OF SUBEXCAVATION AND BACKFILL:
Each licensed utility, upon direction of the town, may be required, upon demand
by the town, to assure subexcavation and backfill work commensurate with
current licensing standards of the town. (1987 Code § 13.12.030)
10-4-4: MAINTAINING PUBLIC SAFETY PRECAUTIONS:
During times and places of repair, reconstruction or replacement, each licensed
utility affected in this chapter shall furnish, provide, erect and maintain all
ordinary and necessary construction precautions for the protection of the work
and safety of the public. (1987 Code § 13.12.040)
10-4-5: FAILURE TO COMPLY:
In the event any licensed utility affected by any of the provisions or
directives of this chapter shall fail to comply with this chapter, the town may
take whatever corrective action deemed reasonably necessary and bill for
collection the respective utility company or association involved for any and
all costs incurred. (1987 Code § 13.12.050)
10-4-6: SUSPENSION OF LICENSE:
Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter by any utility company,
corporation or association affected by this chapter may be considered by the
town as the basis of just cause for the suspension of any license granted the
affected company, corporation or association as provided by ordinance or law.
(1987 Code § 13.12.060)
CHAPTER 5
PENALTY
SECTION:
10-5-1: Violations; Penalty
10-5-1: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
Unless specifically set out in this title, any violation of this title
constitutes a class B misdemeanor punishable as set forth in subsection
1-4-1A2 of this code. (Ord. 2012-11, 1-17-2013)
TITLE 11
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
11-1-1: Purpose
11-1-2: Conformance With Provisions
11-1-3: Applicability
11-1-4: Street Access Required
11-1-5: Costs
11-1-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   Design: This title is designed to promote the public health, safety,
morals and general welfare in the incorporated areas of the town by:
      1.   Providing for the orderly subdivision of property into lots, sites
or tracts that are established by standards including minimum width and depth;
      2.   Encouraging proper arrangements of streets, roads, alleys, rights of
way and easements in relation to existing or planned public access patterns;
      3.   Ensuring that subdivision developments conform to the comprehensive
plan for area control and development;
      4.   Protecting the environment;
      5.   Providing for adequate and convenient open spaces;
      6.   Providing for community use facilities; and
      7.   Regulating such other matters as the planning and zoning commission
and town council deem necessary in order to protect the best interests of the
public.
   B.   Purposes: This title, by its nature, will also serve the following
specific purposes:
      1.   Each subdivider will know in advance what general subdivision design
is expected, will be able to use established principles of development for his
subdivision and will know what improvements will be necessary.
      2.   Adjoining landowners should have assurance that at a later date
their property can be subdivided without conflict with present plats and should
be protected against poor practices which would destroy values along their
property boundaries.
      3.   Future property owners should be able to purchase sites in newly
subdivided areas with the knowledge that legal descriptions are accurate and
that desirable features have been used in the subdivisions.
      4.   All taxpayers should save money by coordinated, logical street right
of way and utility extensions, and by assurance that improvements are made to
specified standards, and should be able to secure necessary land for public
purposes in advance of high values. (1987 Code § 16.04.010)
11-1-2: CONFORMANCE WITH PROVISIONS:
Under the authority vested in the town council and the planning and zoning
commission to protect the public health, safety and welfare, no final plat of
land subdivision shall be approved and accepted unless it conforms to the
provisions of this title. No annexation shall occur for more than one
previously or contemporaneously divided parcels unless the standards set forth
in this title have been or are contemporaneously applied in a manner which
allows the annexed parcel to be incorporated into town as a subdivision. (Ord.
2012-03, 3-1-2012)
11-1-3: APPLICABILITY:
   A.   Division Into Three Lots, Plats, Etc.: The division of a lot, tract or
parcel of land into three (3) or more lots, plats, sites or other divisions of
land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building
development, shall make the transaction subject to the provisions of this title
whether a plat is recorded or not.
   B.   Filed And Recorded After Review And Approval: All plats of a
subdivision of land within the town shall be filed and recorded only after
having been reviewed and approved by the planning and zoning commission and
accepted and signed by the town council.
   C.   Incorporated Land Within Town: This title is applicable to the
incorporated land within the town. (1987 Code § 16.04.030)
11-1-4: STREET ACCESS REQUIRED:
No building shall be erected on any lot nor shall a building permit be issued
for a building unless the street giving access to the lot upon which such
building is proposed to be placed has been approved by the planning and zoning
commission and accepted by the town council as a part of an official
subdivision where the land is subject to section
11-1-1 of this chapter. Dead end streets which are terminated due to natural or
preexisting manmade barriers or which form a continuous loop without any
intersecting street, private or public, may be retained in private ownership,
however a building permit shall only be issued if approved by the Planning and
Zoning Commission and a recordable document is created or produced absolving
the town from maintaining, improving, or upgrading the street. (1987 Code §
16.04.040; amd. Ord. 2020-01, 6-4-2020)
11-1-5: COSTS:
Unless otherwise explicitly agreed by resolution of the town council, all costs
and fees associated with or stemming from the processes governed by this title
shall be borne by the land owner or subdivider, including required amended
plats and engineering services. (Ord. 2016-04, 2-18-2016)
CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
11-2-1: General Definitions
11-2-1: GENERAL DEFINITIONS: The definitions set out in this chapter apply in
this title:
ALLEY: A public or private way at the rear or side of property permanently
reserved as a means of secondary vehicular access to the abutting property,
generally having less width than a street.
BLOCK: An area of land within a subdivision which area is entirely bounded by
streets or highways, or the exterior boundary or boundaries of the subdivision.
COLLECTOR STREET: A thoroughfare ultimately designed for the movement of one or
more lanes of traffic in each direction, and designated as a secondary street
by the comprehensive plan.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The plan which may be prepared and adopted by the planning
and zoning commission for future growth, protection and development.
CUL-DE-SAC: A dead end street which permanently terminates at a point where a
vehicular turnaround point is provided.
EASEMENT: A right to use a specified space on a lot or parcel of land for
specified purposes such as for public utilities or other public uses.
FRONT LOT: The narrowest lot boundary abutting a street.
FRONTAGE: The line where a lot abuts a dedicated street or highway right of
way. Frontage is expressed in linear feet and is measured along the right of
way.
HALF STREET: A street normally parallel and contiguous to a property line and
of lesser right of way than ultimately required.
IMPROVEMENT: Such work to occur and utilities, paving, traffic controls,
landscaping or other betterments to be installed where agreed to be installed
by the subdivider on the land dedicated or to be dedicated for streets,
highways, public ways and easements or on existing public streets bordering on
the land of the subdivider or on nonpublic lands within or near the subdivision
as are necessary for general use of the lot or subdivision.
LOCAL STREET: A street intended wholly or principally for local neighborhood
traffic.
LOT:
   A.   A parcel of real property with a separate and distinct number or other
designation shown on a plat recorded in the office of the county recorder; or
B. A parcel of real property containing not less lot area than required by the
zone in which it is located, abutting at least one public street, and held
under separate ownership from adjacent property prior to the effective date of
the Lyman zoning ordinance.
LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS: A change or series of changes to the lot line or lines of
an existing subdivision that do not constitute a division of an existing parcel
or parcels into three (3) or more parcels, lots or building sites.
MAJOR ARTERIAL STREET: A thoroughfare ultimately designed for the movement of
two (2) or more lanes of traffic moving in each direction, and designated as a
major street by the comprehensive plan.
MINOR SUBDIVISION: Any real property, improved or unimproved, or a portion
thereof, shown on the last preceding tax roll as a unit or as contiguous units,
which is divided and/or the lot lines thereof are altered and has the following
features:
   A.   All resulting lots in the minor subdivision have existing access to the
town water and wastewater systems without further construction and/or addition
by the town;
   B.   All resulting lots have frontage on a public street or highway;
   C.   All resulting lots comply with Town Ordinances regarding size,
setbacks, length of frontage and other applicable ordinances;
   D.   The minor subdivision is not created by or in conjunction with an
annexation into town; and
   E.   The minor subdivision results in the creation of three (3) or fewer
lots.
Nothing in this definition shall prevent the Town Planning and Zoning
Commission from declaring a proposed minor subdivision as too complicated and/
or problematic, and therefore requiring the minor subdivision to be processed
as if it is a subdivision.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE: Any security which may be accepted by the town council
in lieu of a requirement that certain improvements be made by the subdivider
before the plat is approved, including performance bonds, escrow agreements and
other similar collateral or surety agreements.
PERMANENT MONUMENT: Any structure of masonry, steel or metal permanently placed
on or in the ground, including those expressly placed for surveying.
SERVICE ROAD: A street paralleling and abutting major streets or limited access
highways to provide access to abutting properties.
STREET: Any public right of way dedicated for the purpose of moving vehicular
traffic.
STUB STREET: A street which temporarily terminates at a boundary of the
subdivision with no permanent vehicular turnaround area.
SUBDIVIDER: Refers to a person, firm, corporation, partnership or association
who causes land to be divided into a subdivision for himself or for others.
SUBDIVISION: Any real property, improved or unimproved, or a portion thereof,
shown on the last preceding tax roll as a unit or as contiguous units, which is
divided into four (4) or more parcels, lots or building sites and which does
not qualify under the definition of a minor subdivision herein. Any use of the
word "Subdivision" that does not conflict with Chapter 5 of this Title shall
include Minor Subdivision in their interpretation and application.
THROUGH LOT: Those lots which have street frontage on two (2) opposite ends of
the lot. (1987 Code, chapter 16.08; amd. 2004 Code; Ord. 2011-03, 2-17-2011;
Ord. 2012-03, 3-1-2012; Ord. 2020-01, 6-4-2020)
CHAPTER 3
PRELIMINARY PLAT
SECTION:
11-3-1: Basic Considerations
11-3-2: Procedural Outline
11-3-3: Preliminary Sketch
11-3-4: Contents And Filing Of Plat
11-3-5: Supporting Data
11-3-6: Distribution
11-3-7: Review
11-3-8: Hearing
11-3-9: Conditions On Approval
11-3-10: Expiration; Approval
11-3-1: BASIC CONSIDERATIONS:
   A.   Good Counsel Essential: A successful subdivision involves coordination
and understanding of many factors related to law, engineering, marketing,
financing and planning. Because of the need for thorough analysis, an
individual considering the platting of a parcel of land is advised to contact
his attorney, an engineer or surveyor, a real estate or marketing firm, a
financial lending institution and a land planning specialist. While certain
shortcuts may be possible, good counsel on all phases of a proposed subdivision
is essential at an early stage. Through this review, the subdivider may be able
to save time, avoid unnecessary mistakes and make the most of his
opportunities.
   B.   Questions To Be Considered: Some of the questions which should be
considered by both the subdivider and the planning and zoning commission at the
onset are as follows:
      1.   Is there a need for additional residential sites in the area?
      2.   What type and price homes are likely to be built?
      3.   What lot sizes would be most appropriate? (Lot sizes should conform
to zoning ordinance.)
      4.   Should areas be reserved for business or industrial use?
      5.   Does the tract include special scenic locations or areas of
historical importance which need to be reserved?
      6.   Will school and/or playground sites be required?
      7.   If the plat abuts a major street or expressway, will additional
right of way or limited access features be necessary?
      8.   Are portions of the area subject to flooding?
      9.   Are soil conditions favorable for construction purposes?
      10.   How can water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, electrical and gas
utility services be provided?
      11.   Can the subdivision be designed as part of an existing
neighborhood?
      12.   Should the planned unit development concept be considered?
      13.   Can any of the land adjacent to the site be included?
      14.   Will the site be adversely affected by its surrounding environment
or will the proposed usage adversely affect the environment?
      15.   What legal or tax problems are likely to be encountered?
      16.   Does the proposed usage meet the requirements of the comprehensive
plan and zoning regulations? (1987 Code § 16.12.010)
11-3-2: PROCEDURAL OUTLINE:
The following outline is included as a guide for the subdivider to use in
obtaining systematic review and approval or disapproval of a proposed
subdivision. The planning and zoning commission may delegate the initial
contact and review responsibilities to an authorized representative:
   A.   Obtain Lyman subdivision and zoning information.
   B.   Analyze proposed development concepts for conformity.
   C.   Prepare preliminary sketch (optional).
   D.   Prepare preliminary plat with a vicinity map (unless the subdivision is
a minor subdivision.
   E.   Submit preliminary plat to planning and zoning commission no less than
fourteen (14) days before the next scheduled planning and zoning meeting.
   F.   Meet with Town Public Works Supervisor or designee to determine
placement of utilities, including the possible installation the entire length
of the subdivision or lots.
   G.   Prepare final plat.
   H.   Obtain required specifications, dedications, etc.
   I.   Submit final plat to planning and zoning commission.
   J.   Submit final plat to town council.
   K.   Record approved and signed final plat with accompanying Resolution of
the Town Council.
(1987 Code § 16.12.020; amd. Ord. 2020-01, 6-4-2020)
11-3-3: PRELIMINARY SKETCH:
If the subdivider chooses, he may submit a sketch map to the planning and
zoning commission (or their designated representative) for their review and
comments prior to making application for planning and zoning commission review
of the preliminary plat. The sketch map should be prepared in a manner which
generally defines the layout of the streets, lots and location of any public
uses, such as schools and parks. It is the purpose of the sketch map to resolve
any major points of disagreement with the planning and zoning commission before
the subdivider goes to the expense of designing and drawing the preliminary
plat. No action is required of the planning and zoning commission other than to
review the sketch plan and offer comments appropriate to the subdivider. (1987
Code § 16.12.030)
11-3-4: CONTENTS AND FILING OF PLAT:
   A.   Filing Of Preliminary Plat:
      1.   Filing With Planning And Zoning Commission: The first official step
which must be taken by a subdivider in order to obtain approval of any proposed
subdivision is the filing of a preliminary plat with the planning and zoning
commission or designated representative.
      2.   Number Of Copies Required: Each subdivider shall file with the
planning and zoning commission a minimum of ten (10) prints. The planning and
zoning commission may require more if necessary for distribution.
      3.   Time Of Filing: The preliminary plat shall be filed no later than
fourteen (14) days prior to the commission's next regular meeting for staff or
agency review. If properly submitted, as required in this section, the matter
shall be placed on the agenda of the next regular meeting following the
fourteen (14) day review period.
   B.   Specifications; Required Information: The preliminary plat shall be
clearly and legibly drawn and shall have the following information. The scale
of the map shall not be smaller than one inch equals one hundred feet (1" =
100') for subdivisions less than one hundred sixty (160) acres, and one inch
equals two hundred feet (1" = 200') for areas more than one hundred sixty (160)
acres. The following information shall be contained on the preliminary plat:
      1.   The name of the tract.
      2.   Name and address of record owner or owners.
      3.   Name and address of the subdivider.
      4.   Name and business address of the designer of the subdivision.
      5.   The location, names and existing widths of existing streets,
highways, easements and recorded section lines.
      6.   The locations, names and existing widths of existing and proposed
streets, highways and easements.
      7.   Approximate lot layout and approximate dimensions of each lot.
      8.   Approximate boundaries of areas subject to the inundation of storm
water overflow.
      9.   Existing contours at two foot (2') intervals for predominant ground
slopes within the tract between level and five percent (5%) grade and five foot
(5') contours for predominant ground slopes within the tract over five percent
(5%) grade.
      10.   State of improvements and public utilities to be made or installed,
including the location of designated street lighting poles, wires and lights.
      11.   Approximate location of all tree clusters, natural features or
permanent significant manmade structures standing within the boundaries of the
proposed subdivision.
      12.   Total acreage of the subdivision.
      13.   Approximate boundary of subdivision.
      14.   The date, north arrow and scale of the map.
      15.   The vicinity or key map (smaller scale) which indicates all
existing subdivisions, streets and boundary lines, or other tracts within one-
eighth (1/8) mile in each direction of the proposed preliminary plat.
      16.   Existing and/or proposed zoning classifications of the land
proposed for subdivision and zoning of the land adjacent to the proposed
subdivision.
      17.   Legal description by township, range and section.
      18.   Adjacent property owners.
   C.   All plats, both preliminary and final, submitted to the Planning and
Zoning Commission shall be filed with the Town no less than fourteen (14) days
before the Planning and Zoning Commission meeting considering the submission to
allow time for review. (1987 Code § 16.12.040; amd. Ord. 2020-01, 6-4-2020)
11-3-5: SUPPORTING DATA:
In addition to the preliminary plat, the following data, if applicable, shall
be submitted with the application:
   A.   Water: Method of providing water and estimated gallons per day of water
requirements if a distribution system is proposed.
   B.   Sewage: Estimated total number of gallons per day of sewage to be
treated and added to the town system.
   C.   Storm Drainage: An analysis of preliminary storm drainage problems and
methods for caring for storm runoffs.
   D.   Utility Companies: A letter from all utility companies involved
addressed to the planning and zoning commission setting forth any comments they
may have concerning the design of the plat as it affects their utility service.
   E.   Soils, Geologic And Ground Water Analysis: A soils, geologic and ground
water analysis is desirable, but is optional at this stage unless specifically
requested by the planning and zoning commission or town council. (1987 Code §
16.12.050)
11-3-6: DISTRIBUTION:
   A.   Distribution By Commission: The planning and zoning commission or its
authorized representatives shall, upon receipt and acceptance of a complete
preliminary plat application, distribute copies of prints of the plat provided
by the subdivider as follows:
      1.   To the appropriate school district.
      2.   To other agencies as may be deemed desirable by the planning and
zoning commission.
   B.   Response: The agencies listed in subsection A of this section shall
respond to the planning and zoning commission prior to or at the hearing upon
the proposed subdivision. Failure to respond at that time shall constitute a
waiver of any agency's right to make recommendations. (1987 Code § 16.12.060)
11-3-7: REVIEW:
The planning and zoning commission shall approve or disapprove the preliminary
plat within thirty one (31) days after their initial review of the request at a
regular meeting. Otherwise, such plat shall be deemed to have been approved,
and a certificate to that effect shall be issued by the planning and zoning
commission by demand. The applicant may, however, agree to waive this thirty
one (31) day requirement with the consent of the planning and zoning
commission, and extend it to such a date mutually agreed upon by both parties.
If the preliminary plat is disapproved, the planning and zoning commission
shall state the reasons for such denial. (1987 Code § 16.12.070)
11-3-8: HEARING:
   A.   Required: No plat shall be acted on the by planning and zoning
commission without first reviewing the matter at a regularly established
meeting of the commission.
   B.   Notice: Notice shall be sent to the address of the subdivider by first
class mail stating the time and place of such meeting. Similar notice shall be
mailed to the owners of the land immediately adjoining the platted land as
their names and addresses appear on the tax records of the county. The names
and addresses shall be provided by the applicant with the certification that
they are correct to the best of the applicant's knowledge.
   C.   Conditional Approval: If the plat is approved conditionally or subject
to modifications, the nature of the required modifications shall be stated in
the records of the planning and zoning commission and a letter defining them
mailed to the applicant. (1987 Code § 16.12.080)
11-3-9: CONDITIONS ON APPROVAL:
The planning and zoning commission shall have the power to agree with the
applicant upon the use, height, area or bulk requirements or restrictions
governing buildings and premises within the subdivision, provided such
requirements or restrictions do not authorize the violation of the then
effective zoning ordinance of the town. Zoning variances may only occur when
the subdivision is filed as a planned unit development. Such requirements or
restrictions shall be stated upon the plat prior to the approval and recording
of the plat and shall have the same force by law and be enforceable in the same
manner and with the same sanctions and penalties and subject to the same powers
of amendment or repeal as though set out as a part of the zoning ordinance or
map of the town. No action under this section shall be binding for any purpose
until the action has been approved by the town council. (1987 Code § 16.12.090)
11-3-10: EXPIRATION; APPROVAL:
   A.   Time Limitation: Within eighteen (18) months after the date of approval
or conditional approval of the preliminary plat by the planning and zoning
commission, the subdivider shall cause the subdivision to be accurately
surveyed and the final map thereof to be prepared in accordance with the
preliminary plat for at least the first phase, with any and all alterations and
changes required thereto. In the event this eighteen (18) month time limit
expires prior to submission of the final plat, the original approval is deemed
void.
   B.   Request For Extension: Prior to the date on which the preliminary plat
becomes void, the subdivider may request the planning and zoning commission to
extend the time limit not to exceed one additional year. (1987 Code § 1.12.100)
CHAPTER 4
FINAL PLAT
SECTION:
11-4-1: Contents
11-4-2: Supporting Documents
11-4-3: Planning And Zoning Commission Action
11-4-4: Town Council Action; Recording
11-4-5: Street Dedications And Permits
11-4-6: Changes After Approval
11-4-7: Copy Of Plat As Recorded
11-4-8: As Built Improvement Drawings
11-4-1: CONTENTS:
Prior to the expiration of the preliminary plat, the final plat shall be
submitted to the planning and zoning commission. The following is required of
and on the final plat:
   A.   Specifications: The final plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn in
black, waterproof India ink or produced by photographic process upon tracing
cloth or other acceptable, stable based material. Affidavits, certificates and
acknowledgements may be legibly stamped, printed or photographed upon the map
in opaque ink. Signatures shall be in opaque black ink. The size of each sheet
to be recorded shall conform to Wyoming Statutes. The scale of the plat shall
be large enough to show all details clearly and enough sheets shall be used to
accomplish this end. The scale shall not be smaller than one inch equals one
hundred feet (1" = 100'), except that when all of the lots are one acre or
larger, the scale may be not smaller than one inch equals two hundred feet (1"
= 200'). The particular number of the sheet and the total number of the sheets
comprising the plat shall be stated on each of the sheets, and the relation of
each adjoining sheet shall be clearly shown by key maps and match lines.
   B.   Preparation And Certification By Surveyor: The plat shall be prepared
and certification made as to its accuracy by a registered land surveyor
licensed to do such work according to the state. A workmanlike execution of the
plat shall be made in every detail. The accuracy of the field survey and of the
plat dimensions and closures shall be one in five thousand (1:5,000).
   C.   Point Of Beginning: The point of beginning shall be indicated, and
proper reference to the monumented perimeter survey shall be delineated on the
drawing.
   D.   Bearings And Distances: All bearings and distances of the boundary
shall be indicated outside the boundary line, not inside with the lot
dimensions.
   E.   Blocks; Lots: All blocks, and all lots within each block, shall be
consecutively numbered.
   F.   Curved Boundaries: On curved boundaries and all curves on the plat,
sufficient data should be given to enable the reestablishment of the curves.
This curve data should include the following:
      1.   Points of curvature.
      2.   Points of tangency.
      3.   Radius of curve.
      4.   Arc length, chord length and bearing.
      5.   Central angle.
   G.   Streets, Walkways, Easements And Alleys: All streets, walkways,
easements and alleys shall be designated as such and named. Bearings and
dimensions shall be given.
   H.   Irregularly Shaped Lots: All dimensions of irregularly shaped lots
shall be indicated in each lot.
   I.   Lot Lines: Bearings shall be given for all lot lines except that
bearings need not be given for each lot in a series that are similar. In this
instance, only the end lots shall be so designated with bearings.
   J.   Uncontiguous Parcels; Multiple Plats: Parcels not contiguous shall not
be included in one plat nor shall more than one plat be made on the same sheet.
   K.   Other Information: Other information required on the plat is as
follows:
      1.   Name of subdivision, true north point, and date.
      2.   Name and address of owner or owners of record.
      3.   Total acreage of tract and number of lots.
      4.   Township, range, section and quarter section, block and lot numbers.
      5.   Graphic scale.
      6.   Certification of title showing that the applicant is the landowner.
      7.   Legal description of the property included within the subdivision
contained in a statement by the owner dedicating streets, rights of way and any
sites for public use. The description and statement shall be in the form
prescribed by Wyoming Statutes.
      8.   Certification showing approval by town engineer.
      9.   Certification showing approval by the planning and zoning
commission.
      10.   Under the title of each plat, the following words: "In the Town of
Lyman, County of Uinta, State of Wyoming".
      11.   Mayor's certification showing acceptance of the plat by the town
council. The certificate shall show the ordinance number and date of
acceptance. (1987 Code § 16.16.010)
11-4-2: SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS:
   A.   Drawings: The following documents shall be submitted with the final
plat drawing and be considered a part of the final plat submission. Drawings
showing layout of the following:
      1.   Utilities: All utilities, including the location of street lighting
poles, wires and lights, plus statements from utility companies (water, sewer,
electric, gas, telephone, etc.) as applicable, that service will be provided to
the development, and that the utility company or subdivider will provide
necessary on site and off site improvements.
      2.   Roads And Bridges: Profile and typical cross section drawings of
roads and bridges.
      3.   Grading And Drainage Plan: The proposed grading plan shall be
indicated by dashed line contours superimposed on solid line contours of
existing topography for the area of the final plat. Such contours shall be at
one foot (1') intervals for predominant ground slopes within the tract between
level and five percent (5%) grade and two foot (2') contours for predominant
ground slopes within the tract over five percent (5%) grade.
   B.   Utility And Street Drawings: All utility and street drawings shall meet
the requirements contained in the "Town Of Lyman, Wyoming, Standards And
Specifications". These drawings shall be prepared by a registered land
surveyor, as required by the laws of the state, who is licensed to do such work
in the state. An exact copy of a certificate of a reputable title insurance or
abstract company or attorney which shall set forth the names of all owners of
property shall be included on the plat. This shall also include a list of all
mortgages, judgments, liens, easements, contracts and agreements of record in
the county, which shall affect the property covered by such plats. If the
opinion of title discloses any of the above, the holders or owners of such
mortgages, judgments, liens, easements, contracts or agreements shall be
required to join in and approve the application before the plat shall be acted
upon by the town council.
   C.   Public Improvements: The subdivider shall be required to submit
construction drawings and details for all public improvements proposed or
required by the planning and zoning commission or this title, including cost
estimated for the installation and construction of these improvements. The
planning and zoning commission and town council may review these plans or have
them reviewed by the town engineer to check compliance with local standards.
(1987 Code § 16.16.020)
11-4-3: PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION ACTION:
   A.   Submittal; Placement On Agenda: The subdivider shall submit five (5)
copies of the final plat and utility drawings to the town engineer at least
fourteen (14) days prior to the meeting at which such plat is to be considered.
If properly submitted in full compliance with these regulations, the matter
shall be placed on the agenda of the next regular meeting of the planning and
zoning commission after the fourteen (14) day review period. (1987 Code §
16.16.030; amd. 2004 Code)
   B.   Commission Action: Within thirty one (31) days after the review of the
final plat, at a regular meeting, the planning and zoning commission shall
approve, disapprove or approve subject to modifications, the final plat. Such
action shall be recorded in the records of the planning and zoning commission.
   C.   Basis For Rejection: The only basis for rejection of a plat shall be
its nonconformance to adopted rules, regulations and ordinances concurrently in
force and affecting the land and its development in the town, and its lack of
conformance with the approved preliminary plat. (1987 Code § 16.16.030)
11-4-4: TOWN COUNCIL ACTION; RECORDING:
   A.   Submittal; Performance Guarantee: After the approval of the final plat
by the planning and zoning commission, the original and one copy of the plat
shall be presented to the town council for its review and approval and
acceptance of all dedications which may be provided on the final plat for
public use. Approval of the final plat is granted only when public improvements
have been installed in accordance with the plans, or if a performance guarantee
in the form of surety bonds or other suitable means (in a form acceptable to
the town's legal advisor) has been secured with the subdivider for those
improvements not yet installed. The amount of the performance guarantee shall
be established by the town council.
   B.   Recording; Term: A soon as possible after approval of the map and
dedications, the final plat shall be recorded by the county clerk, unless the
subdivider requests a delay. If the final plat has not been recorded within
ninety (90) days after the approval of the town council, the approving actions
shall be deemed void. (1987 Code § 16.16.040)
11-4-5: STREET DEDICATIONS AND PERMITS:
   A.   Proof Of Dedication: Where a portion of an existing easement is
contiguous to a proposed easement or right of way within the subdivision, proof
of the dedication of the existing easement or right of way acceptable to the
town council must be submitted when requested.
   B.   State Highway Permit: When a new street will intersect with a state
highway, a copy of the state highway permit shall be submitted. (1987 Code §
16.16.050)
11-4-6: CHANGES AFTER APPROVAL:
In no case shall additions, corrections or modifications of any kind be made to
the final plat other than signatures required after the final plat has been
approved by the town council. (1987 Code § 16.16.060)
11-4-7: COPY OF PLAT AS RECORDED:
After recording of the final plat, the subdivider shall furnish the town
engineer (or other authority designated by the planning and zoning commission)
with one reproducible map and one print of the final plat, as officially
recorded. (1987 Code § 16.16.070)
11-4-8: AS BUILT IMPROVEMENT DRAWINGS:
After all public utilities and improvements are in place, as built construction
drawings and details shall be filed with the town engineer or other
representative designated by the town council. (1987 Code § 16.16.080)
CHAPTER 5
RESUBDIVISIONS AND LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS
SECTION:
11-5-1: Resubdivision Procedure
11-5-1: RESUBDIVISION PROCEDURE:
Minor subdivisions shall follow all procedures of a subdivision as outlined
above, except that a minor subdivision shall not be required to:
   A.   Prepare or submit a preliminary sketch;
   B.   Prepare or submit a preliminary plat with a vicinity map; or
   C.   Submit a preliminary plat to the planning and zoning commission.
(Ord. 2017-14, 9-21-2017; amd. Ord. 2020-01, 6-4-2020)
CHAPTER 6
MOUNTAIN SUBDIVISIONS
SECTION:
11-6-1: Permitted Deviations; Redesign Or Denial
11-6-2: Determination Of Mountainous Character
11-6-3: Special Problems
11-6-1: PERMITTED DEVIATIONS; REDESIGN OR DENIAL:
   A.   Permitted Deviations: If, in the opinion of the planning and zoning
commission, the topography of a proposed subdivision has sufficient slope to be
considered mountainous, minor deviations may be made from the standards of this
title, if, in the opinion of the planning and zoning commission, such
deviations will not materially affect the general health, safety or welfare of
future or adjacent residents.
   B.   Redesign Or Denial: If significant deviations are necessary to make the
project feasible, it may be determined that the topography simply is not
conducive to residential purposes. In this instance, the project may require
redesign or denial. (1987 Code § 16.24.010)
11-6-2: DETERMINATION OF MOUNTAINOUS CHARACTER:
For the purpose of determining if the area is considered mountainous, the
applicant should submit plans for a preliminary review by the planning and
zoning commission. General agreement as to basic design principles could occur
at that time. The planning and zoning commission, however, is under no
obligation to commit themselves until all of the submittal requirements of the
preliminary plat are filed. (1987 Code § 16.24.020)
11-6-3: SPECIAL PROBLEMS:
In addition to normal subdivision problems, the planning and zoning commission
will be concerned with geologic hazards, grades of proposed streets, method of
handling slash materials and other problems created by mountainous development.
(1987 Code § 16.24.030)
CHAPTER 7
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
SECTION:
11-7-1: Purpose
11-7-2: Application And Procedure
11-7-1: PURPOSE:
The planned unit development concept is being used to encourage more creative
and flexible use of land and to provide greater flexibility in land
development. This type of development can occur by relaxing the minimum and
maximum requirements of zoning/subdivision regulations and by permitting the
combination of a variety of housing types with open space, recreation
facilities and community facilities with the ultimate result being better
living environments. (1987 Code § 16.28.010)
11-7-2: APPLICATION AND PROCEDURE:
If a planned unit development is proposed, variances to the requirements of
this title may be authorized. The procedures for application shall meet all of
the requirements of submittal, review and approval as defined in title 12 of
this code. Preliminary and final plats would be submitted at their appropriate
times with the PUD application items for concurrent review as required for
subdivision. (1987 Code § 16.28.020)
CHAPTER 8
DESIGN STANDARDS
SECTION:
11-8-1: Generally
11-8-2: Preservation Of Natural Features
11-8-3: Streets
11-8-4: Easements
11-8-5: Blocks
11-8-6: Lots
11-8-7: Dedications For Public Purposes (Rep. by Ord. 2019-02, 3-21-2019)
11-8-8: Required Improvements
11-8-9: Official Standards
11-8-1: GENERALLY:
The general location and alignment of streets and lot size shall conform to the
comprehensive plan and zoning requirements for the Town. Efforts should be made
to encourage good design practices, incorporating new ideas, improving planning
techniques which vary from the typical grid street pattern now commonly found
in many older subdivisions. The topography and other natural features of the
site should be taken into consideration and plans developed in such a manner
that these natural features benefit the total development. This may be done by
a curvilinear pattern, open spaces for recreation or pedestrian movements, or
it may be accomplished by increasing cluster or townhouse developments which
permit greater use of open space and greater preservation of natural
topographic and environmental features. The design standards set out in this
chapter shall apply to all subdivisions. (1987 Code § 16.32.010)
11-8-2: PRESERVATION OF NATURAL FEATURES:
The design and development of subdivisions shall preserve, insofar as possible,
the natural terrain, natural drainage, existing topsoil and trees. (1987 Code §
16.32.020)
11-8-3: STREETS:
   A.   Local Streets: Local streets shall be designed in such a manner that
through traffic within the subdivision will be discouraged.
   B.   Intersections: Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly
as possible at right angles.
   C.   Cul-De-Sacs: A system of cul-de-sac streets is encouraged; however, the
maximum length of the cul-de-sac shall not exceed six hundred feet (600'),
unless the lots adjoining such streets are one acre or larger and special
permission is granted by the Planning and Zoning Commission to have the street
extended an additional length. The turnaround area shall have a minimum radius
of fifty feet (50') of right-of-way and a curb or pavement edge radius of forty
two feet (42'), or some other suitable turning area approved by the Town
Council.
   D.   Minimum Width: The minimum width of streets shall be as shown in the
"Town of Lyman, Wyoming, Standards and Specifications".
   E.   Names: Street names shall not duplicate an existing street name unless
the street is an extension of the existing street. Street names shall be
subject to the approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
   F.   Centerline Curve Radius: The minimum centerline curve radius permitted
on streets shall be as follows:
      1.   Major arterial street: One thousand feet (1,000').
      2.   Collector street: Six hundred feet (600').
      3.   Local street: One hundred fifty feet (150').
   G.   Alleys: Alleys shall be provided only if required by the Planning and
Zoning Commission. The minimum width of the alley shall be sixteen feet (16').
Dead end alleys shall be avoided whenever possible. If unavoidable, a
turnaround area shall be provided at the end of the alley.
   H.   Conformance With Comprehensive Plan: All streets shall conform to the
location as may be defined by the Lyman comprehensive plan when the plan is
adopted.
   I.   Stub Streets: Stub streets may be used as a means to allow for future
connections. Stub streets of over two hundred feet (200') in length shall
provide a temporary turnaround area.
   J.   Intersections With Major Streets: Intersections of local streets with
major streets shall be kept at minimum.
   K.   Half Streets: Half streets shall not be permitted except to complete a
half street already in existence.
   L.   Streets Intersecting From Opposite Sides: Two (2) streets intersecting
from opposite sides shall intersect at the extension of their centerline, or
their centerlines shall be offset at least one hundred fifty feet (150').
   M.   Sight Distance: To ensure adequate sight distances, when street roadway
lines deflect more than one degree (1°), connection shall be made by horizontal
curves.
   N.   Vertical Curves: Vertical curves shall be used at changes of grade
exceeding one percent (1%) and shall be designed to provide, at a minimum, a
sight distance of two hundred feet (200') for local streets and three hundred
feet (300') for all other streets (arterial and collector streets shall be
determined by the current specifications of the American Association of State
Highway Officials and as may be required by the Town Engineer).
   O.   Service Roads: Service roads or other design solutions to limited
access may be required when the subdivision abuts a major street, highway or
freeway.
   P.   Driveways: Driveways shall not be permitted to have direct access to
major streets. (1987 Code § 16.32.030)
11-8-4: EASEMENTS:
Easements shall be provided for all utilities, drainageways, channels or
streams which traverse across or serve the subdivision. (1987 Code § 16.32.040)
11-8-5: BLOCKS:
The length, width and shapes of blocks shall be determined by the type of use,
zoning requirements, needs for convenient access, circulation and safety of
street traffic and limitations and opportunities of topography. Unless unusual
circumstances exist, block length will not exceed one thousand two hundred feet
(1,200') or be less than three hundred feet (300'). (1987 Code § 16.32.050)
11-8-6: LOTS:
   A.   Minimum Width: The minimum width of lots shall conform to the
applicable zoning standards.
      1.   On cul-de-sac streets or curved streets, the lot width required
shall, at a minimum, apply at the building setback line as defined by the zone
in which the property is located.
      2.   Through lots with frontage at opposite ends should be generally
avoided, except where it is essential to provide a separation of residential
development from major arterial highways.
   B.   Side Lot Lines: Side lot lines shall be at substantially right angles
or radial to street lines.
   C.   Street Frontage: All residential lots in a subdivision shall front on a
public street. (1987 Code § 16.32.060)
11-8-7: DEDICATIONS FOR PUBLIC PURPOSES:
(Rep. by Ord. 2019-02, 3-21-2019)
11-8-8: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS:
Improvements which the subdivider shall make or agree to make at the cost of
the subdivider prior to acceptance and approval for the final plat by the Town
Council shall be:
   A.   Grading, Curbs And Gutters: Grading, concrete curbs and gutters, cross
gutters, drainage and drainage structures necessary to the proper use, safety
and drainage of streets and highways.
   B.   Pavement: Pavement material and thickness (including base) as
determined by a soils test and approved by the Town Engineer, the test to be
performed by a qualified soils engineer.
   C.   Sidewalks: Concrete sidewalks shall be provided not less than four feet
(4') wide. Wider sidewalks may be required along major and collector highways
or for streets abutting Commercial or Industrially zoned land. In areas where
lots are consistently wider than ninety feet (90'), sidewalks may be waived by
the Town Council.
   D.   Trees: (Rep. by Ord. 2019-01, 3-21-2019)
   E.   Water Mains; Fire Hydrants: Water mains and fire hydrants of a size,
type and at a location designated by the Town Engineer.
   F.   Sanitary Sewer Facilities: Sanitary sewer facilities and connections
for each lot shall be provided. Stubs from public utilities where provided and
from sanitary sewers shall be made available for each lot in such manner as
will obviate the necessity for disturbing the street pavement, gutter, culvert
and curb when sewer line connections are made.
   G.   Street Name Signs: Street name signs shall be installed at all street
intersections. The subdivider shall bear the total expense in the purchasing
and installation of all required street name signs.
   H.   Traffic Islands: Traffic islands shall be provided where they are
required to control the movement of traffic.
   I.   Barricades And Reflectors: Barricades and reflectors shall be provided
along the ends of all dead end or without turnaround streets, and at the ends
of culverts and other dangerous areas.
   J.   Subdivider To Perform Work: The subdivider shall perform all work
required by the Town Engineer in connection with the demolition, moving,
altering or converting of any structure or facility, including underground
facilities, either wholly or partially within the subdivision or affected
thereby.
   K.   Survey Monuments: Permanent survey monuments as described in chapter 9
of this title shall be set at all subdivision boundary corners.
   L.   Other Improvements: The subdivider shall make such other improvements
as needed when deemed necessary by the Town Council to preserve the public
health, safety or welfare.
   M.   Sewer And Water Line Extensions: If sewer and water facilities are not
available adjacent to the proposed subdivision, it shall be the responsibility
of the subdivider to extend such lines in a manner satisfactory to the Town
Council. Where such lines may benefit existing developments, the Town Council
can make such a determination and, if deemed necessary, partially finance or
make other arrangements as needed to assist in such construction.
   N.   Lights: The subdivider shall install light poles and luminaries of the
same size and brand as other poles and luminaries in the area and as approved
by the engineer. The pole and luminaire shall be supplied with electricity and
the luminaire shall be attached so as to illuminate and not obscure the area of
intended illumination. Such light poles and luminaries shall be installed at
each intersection and/or at minimum intervals equal to the interval of and
corresponding with the number and placement of fire hydrants in the
subdivision. (1987 Code § 16.32.080; amd. Ord. 2019-01, 3-21-2019; Ord. 2021-
05, 6-3-2021)
11-8-9: OFFICIAL STANDARDS:
The "Town of Lyman, Wyoming, Standards and Specifications" shall be the
"Official Development Standards", as an appendix to the ordinance codified in
this title. These standards shall be used as an administrative guide for the
Town Engineer as he deals with public improvements relating to subdivisions.
(1987 Code § 16.32.090)
CHAPTER 9
MONUMENTATION
SECTION:
11-9-1: Boundary Control
11-9-2: Required Monumentation
11-9-3: Monument Construction
11-9-4: Markings
11-9-1: BOUNDARY CONTROL:
   A.   Section Lines Or Section Subdivision Lines Form Boundaries: Where
section lines or section subdivision lines form part of the boundaries of a
subdivision, these lines should be legally established and monumented as per
the 1947 bureau of land management "Manual Of Instruction For The Survey Of
Public Lands Of The United States", and the pertinent detailed information
should be shown on the plat.
   B.   Perimeter Subdivision Lines: Perimeter subdivision lines should be
accurately related by distance and bearing to established street lines, block
corners and other recognized permanent monuments and surveys.
   C.   Boundary Control Points: Boundary control points should be
appropriately named on both the plat and the monument, and angle points shall
be numbered.
   D.   Planimetric Features: Planimetric features such as rivers, lakes,
canals, cliffs, etc., that become a part of the boundaries of the exterior or
the interior of the subdivision should be shown and monumented with sufficient
detail so that the intent of the subdivider will be clear; and so that the
points and boundaries can be reestablished economically.
   E.   Witness Corners: Witness corners should be set or accessory ties made
to block and boundary corners that are apt to be destroyed or become
inaccessible. Both offset monuments and witness corners, when set on the
original surveys, should be so noted on the monument and on the plat.
   F.   PC And PT On Curves: The PC and PT on all curves should be monumented
in the field.
   G.   Property Corners: All property corners shall be surveyed, monumented
and identified.
   H.   Distances And Bearings: Distances and bearings shall be shown
sufficiently to ensure closure and prevent any possibility of wrong
interpretation.
   I.   Differences Between Distances And Bearings: Any difference between
bearings and distances on this survey and recorded distances and bearings of
other adjoining surveys should be noted.
   J.   Monument Descriptions: Descriptions of all monuments set should be
noted.
   K.   Recovered Monuments: The descriptions of existing recovered monuments
should be given.
   L.   Perimeter To Be Surveyed: The entire perimeter of the subdivision
should be surveyed and balanced to ensure accuracy of survey and to provide a
basis for restoration of lost corners.
   M.   Elevations: Elevations shall be referred to as USGS datum and at least
one bench mark established on each subdivision. (1987 Code § 16.36.010)
11-9-2: REQUIRED MONUMENTATION:
   A.   Outside Angle Points: All outside angle points should be monumented
with stamped and marked brass caps that are set either in concrete or on pipe
of sufficient length to allow permanency. If the original outside boundary
monumentation is in a location likely to be obliterated, i.e., street, alley,
etc., it should then be adequately witnessed with the above mentioned
monuments.
   B.   Other Points On Map: All points other than outside perimeter points
which are shown on the map should be monumented with a monument which can be
marked and identified without question. (1987 Code § 16.36.020)
11-9-3: MONUMENT CONSTRUCTION:
   A.   Perimeter And Block Monuments:
      1.   Firm Soil: Two and one-half inches (21/2") nominal iron pipe or
equivalent thirty inches (30") long with metal cap at least one and three-
eighths inches (13/8") in diameter or metal tags.
      2.   Solid Rock: One and three-eighths inch (13/8") diameter metal tablet
with a one and one-half inch (11/2") long shank countersunk in rock and grouted
with "Por-Rok," epoxy cement or equal.
      3.   Loose Soil, Sand, Marsh, Etc.: Monuments shall not be set, but shall
be witnessed.
      4.   Monuments Within Streets Or Roads:
         a.   Three-fourths inch (3/4") nominal iron pipe or no. 5 rebar twenty
four inches (24") long with metal cap at least one and three-eighths inches
(13/8") in diameter. Monuments set within roadway areas shall be placed so that
their tops are six (6) to eight inches (8") below the final road surface.
         b.   Perimeter or block monuments which shall have to be moved for
road or street construction shall be referenced and shall be reset from these
reference marks as soon as practicable after road or street earthwork is
completed and preferably before paving.
   B.   Lot Markers And Reference Marks:
      1.   Firm Soil: No. 5 steel rebar eighteen (18) to twenty four inches
(24") long with metal caps or tags identifying the corner.
      2.   Concrete Walks Or Curbs: Three-fourths inch (3/4") diameter blind
rivet with one-fourth inch (1/4") diameter shank one-half inch (1/2") long.
      3.   Solid Rock: Blind rivet as in subsection B2 of this section, or one-
fourth inch (1/4") diameter by three inch (3") long iron bar grouted in drilled
hole two inches (2") deep.
   C.   Bench Marks: Upon completion of construction, bench marks shall be
established on fire hydrants or other permanent items agreeable to the town
engineer.
   D.   Minimum Construction Standards: Construction standards given in this
section are minimum. More massive and durable monuments are, of course,
permitted. (1987 Code § 16.36.030)
11-9-4: MARKINGS:
   A.   Surveyor's Registration Number: All monuments, markers and bench marks
shall have affixed securely to the top thereof the registration number of the
land surveyor responsible for the establishment of such monument, marker or
bench mark.
   B.   Aliquot Corners: Aliquot corners within the public land survey system
shall be marked with the bureau of land management designation pursuant to
chapter IV of the "Manual Of Instructions For The Survey Of The Public Lands Of
The United States", 1947, except that the date may be omitted.
   C.   Bench Marks: Bench marks shall be stamped with the letters "B.M." and
the elevation. (1987 Code § 16.36.040)
CHAPTER 10
LAND RESERVATION
SECTION:
11-10-1: School Sites
11-10-1: SCHOOL SITES:
Prior to approval of the preliminary plat, the subdivider shall inform the
school district of his intentions to subdivide and, if deemed necessary by the
district, reserve land suitable for future school usage. (1987 Code §
16.40.010)
CHAPTER 11
SAMPLE CERTIFICATES
SECTION:
11-11-1: Certificate Of Dedication And Title
11-11-2: Surveyor's Certificate
11-11-3: Certificate Of Town Engineer
11-11-4: Planning And Zoning Commission Certificate
11-11-5: Town Council's Certificate
11-11-6: Clerk And Recorder's Certificate
11-11-1: CERTIFICATE OF DEDICATION AND TITLE:
Know all men by these presents that    
do hereby certify that the foregoing  (Title)   
Uinta County, Wyoming, is located in the    
of the 6th P.M. and is more particularly described as follows:
   (Subdivision Description)
Said tract containing               acres, more or less. And that the survey
and staking thereof into lots, blocks and streets as appears on this plat is
with the free consent and according to the desires of the undersigned owners
and proprietors; that they are the owner in fee simple thereof; that the
foregoing is a correct plat of said subdivision as surveyed and staked into
lots, blocks and streets and that the dimensions of lots and blocks and width
of streets are correctly shown on said plat by figures representing feet and
decimals of a foot and the courses of the streets are correctly shown on said
plat by figures representing feet and decimals of a foot, and that
                      , hereby dedicate to the public all the streets and
public ways within the boundaries of said subdivision as shown on the foregoing
plat. The dedication is made subject to any existing easements and rights-of-
way or mining or mineral reservations of record.
   Witness our hands this        day of          , A.D., 20    
Owner(s)                                                       
STATE OF WYOMING   )
         ) ss.
COUNTY OF UINTA   )
The foregoing dedication was acknowledged before me this                day of
        , A.D., 20        , by                   . Witness my hand and official
seal.
My Commission Expires:
                                         
                  Notary Public
(1987 Code § 16.44.010)
11-11-2: SURVEYOR'S CERTIFICATE:
I,                              , do hereby certify that I am a registered land
surveyor licensed under the laws of the State of Wyoming, that this plat is a
true, correct and complete plat of the                           as laid out,
platted, dedicated, and shown hereon, that such plat was made from an accurate
survey of said property by me and under my supervision and correctly shows the
location and dimensions of the lots, easements and streets of said subdivision
as the same are staked upon the ground to a control accuracy of 1 in 5,000.
In witness whereof I have set my hand and seal this      day of         , A.D.,
20      .
                                                                                                      Wyoming
Registered Land
            Surveyor No.                       
STATE OF WYOMING   )
         ) ss.
COUNTY OF UINTA   )
The foregoing instrument was acknowledged before me this       day of
         , A.D., 20      .
Witness my hand and official seal.
My Commission Expires:
                                                                                                                          Notary
Public
(1987 Code § 16.44.020)
11-11-3: CERTIFICATE OF TOWN ENGINEER:
Approved this         day of               , 20     , by the Town Engineer of
the Town of Lyman, Wyoming.
                                                                                                      Town
Engineer
(1987 Code § 16.44.030)
11-11-4: PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION CERTIFICATE:
This plat approved by the Lyman Planning and Zoning Commission this          
day of                  , A.D., 20      .
                                                                                                      Chairman
(1987 Code § 16.44.040)
11-11-5: TOWN COUNCIL'S CERTIFICATE:
This plat approved by the Town Council of Lyman, Wyoming, by Ordinance No.
        , this          day of            , A.D., 20    , for filing with the
Clerk and Recorder of Uinta County and for conveyance to the Town of the public
dedications shown hereon; subject to the provision that approval in no way
obligates the Town of Lyman for financing or constructing of improvements on
lands, streets or easements dedicated to the public except as specifically
agreed to by the Town Council and further that said approval shall in no way
obligate the Town of Lyman for maintenance of streets which are not dedicated
to the public nor until all improvements shall have been completed to the
satisfaction of the Town Council and accepted by proper resolution.
Dated this           day of                , A.D., 20     .
                                                                                       
                    Mayor
Witness my hand and seal of the Town of Lyman this           day of
                      , A.D., 20       
            ATTEST:
                                                                                   
Town Clerk
(1987 Code § 16.44.050)
11-11-6: CLERK AND RECORDER'S CERTIFICATE:
Clerk uses his own stamp. Leave space for this near edge of plat. (1987 Code §
16.44.060)
CHAPTER 12
ADMINISTRATION
SECTION:
11-12-1: Interpretation
11-12-2: Variances
11-12-3: Filing Fee
11-12-4: Repealed
11-12-5: Amendment
11-12-1: INTERPRETATION:
In the interpretation and application of the provisions of this title, the
following regulations shall govern:
   A.   Provisions And Minimum Requirements: In their interpretation and
application, the provisions of this title shall be regarded as the minimum
requirements for the protection of the public health, safety, comfort,
convenience, prosperity and welfare of the inhabitants of Lyman. This title
shall therefore be regarded as remedial, and shall be liberally construed to
further its underlying purposes.
   B.   Application Of Overlapping Regulations: Whenever both provisions of
this title or any provision in any other law, ordinance, resolution, rule or
regulation of any kind contain any restrictions covering any of the same
subject matter, whichever restrictions are more restrictive or impose higher
standards or requirements shall govern.
   C.   Existing Permits And Private Agreements: This title is not intended to
abrogate or annul:
      1.   Any permits issued before the effective date of this chapter; or
      2.   Any easement, covenant or any other private agreement. (1987 Code §
16.48.010)
11-12-2: VARIANCES:
The town council may authorize variances from this title in cases where, due to
exceptional topographical conditions or other conditions peculiar to the site,
an unnecessary hardship is placed on the subdivider. Such variance shall not be
granted if it would be detrimental to the public good or impair the intent and
purpose of this chapter. The conditions of any variance authorized shall be
stated in writing in the minutes of the planning and zoning commission with the
justifications set forth. (1987 Code § 16.48.020)
11-12-3: FILING FEE:
A filing fee for review and processing of the preliminary and final plat or PUD
shall be paid to the town clerk in accordance with the latest fee schedule
established by resolution of the town council. The fee is in addition to the
county filing fee and shall cover the cost of checking the plats, drawings and
inspection. (1987 Code § 16.48.030)
11-12-4: REPEALED:
(Repealed by Ord. 2020-01, 6-4-2020)
11-12-5: AMENDMENT:
From time to time, the town council may amend this title. Any such amendment
shall not be made or become effective unless the same has been either proposed
by or submitted to the planning and zoning commission for approval, disapproval
or recommendations. If such amendment is disapproved by the planning and zoning
commission within thirty (30) days after submission, the amendment, to become
effective, must receive the favorable vote of not less than a majority of the
entire membership of the town council. Before finally adopting any such
amendment, the town council shall hold a public hearing thereon, and at least
thirty (30) days notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given by
at least one publication in a newspaper of general circulation in Uinta County.
(1987 Code § 16.48.050)
CHAPTER 13
ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
11-13-1: Enforcement Authority
11-13-2: Unapproved Subdivisions
11-13-3: Penalty
11-13-1: ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY:
Town law enforcement officers, the town attorney and other duly authorized
enforcement officials are empowered to enforce the provisions of this title.
(1987 Code § 16.52.010)
11-13-2: UNAPPROVED SUBDIVISIONS:
   A.   Sale Or Transfer Of Lots: Any owner or agent of an owner who sells,
transfers, agrees to sell or negotiates to sell land in an unapproved
subdivision shall be punished according to the provisions set forth in section
1-4-1 of this code for each lot so sold, transferred or agreed or negotiated to
be sold.
   B.   Metes And Bounds Description: Description of the lots in the unapproved
subdivision by metes and bounds in the transfer shall not exempt the owner from
being punished.
   C.   Injunction: The town may enjoin any transfer or sale of such land by
injunction and may recover the penalty in a civil action in a court of
competent jurisdiction. (1987 Code § 16.52.020)
11-13-3: PENALTY:
Unless specifically set out in this title, any violation of this title
constitutes a class B misdemeanor punishable as set forth in subsection
1-4-1A2 of this code. A violation shall not be construed to include a
subdivision in existence before January 1, 1977. (Ord. 2012-11, 1-17-2013)
TITLE 12
ZONING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
12-1-1: Purpose
12-1-2: Interpretation
12-1-1: PURPOSE:
This title is adopted to promote the public health, safety, comfort, morals and
general welfare of the town by:
   A.   Encouraging and facilitating orderly growth and development in
accordance with standards deemed beneficial to the interest and general welfare
of the people.
   B.   Establishing population densities to reduce congestion and to secure
economy in the cost of providing water supply and sewage systems, streets and
highways, fire and police protection, schools, parks and recreation facilities.
   C.   Securing safety from fire, floods and other dangers.
   D.   Preventing overcrowding of land or buildings, avoiding undue
concentrations of population, and fostering industry and agriculture in
appropriate locations.
   E.   Conserving the value of buildings and enhancing the value of land
throughout the town. (1987 Code § 17.04.010)
12-1-2: INTERPRETATION:
The provisions of this title shall be held to be minimum requirements. Where
this title imposes a greater restriction than is imposed by the state or by
other provisions, the provisions of this title shall prevail. (1987 Code §
17.04.020)
CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
12-2-1: General Definitions
12-2-1: GENERAL DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this title, certain words, terms and phrases are defined to
have the same meaning as set forth in this chapter:
ACCESSORY USE OR BUILDING: A use or building customarily incidental to, and
located on the same lot occupied by, the main use or building. "Accessory
building" may include a private garage, garden shed or barn, a private
playhouse, private greenhouse, and a swimming pool in accordance with the
provisions of this title.
APARTMENT: A room or suite of two (2) or more rooms in a multiple dwelling,
occupied or suitable for occupancy as a residence of one family. Kitchens and
baths shall not be considered rooms for the purpose of this definition.
APARTMENT HOUSE: A building or portion thereof designed or used for three (3)
or more dwelling units and six (6) or more guestrooms or suites of rooms.
BASEMENT: A space wholly or partly underground and having more than one-half
(1/2) of its height, measuring from its floor to its ceiling, below the average
adjoining grade; if the finished floor level directly above a basement is more
than six feet (6') above grade at any point, such basement shall be considered
a story.
BUILDING: A structure designed, built or occupied as a shelter or roofed
enclosure for persons, animals or property, including tents, lunch wagons,
dining cars, camp cars, mobile homes, and other roofed structures on wheels or
other supports used for residential, business, mercantile, storage, commercial,
industrial, institutional, assembly, educational, or recreational purposes. For
the purposes of this definition, "roof" includes an awning or other similar
covering, whether or not permanent in nature.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance measured from the average level of the
highest and lowest point of that portion of the lot covered by the building to
the highest point of the building.
BUILDING PERMIT: A written warrant or license granting a landowner approval,
for proposed construction, reconstruction or alteration of buildings or
structures.
CAMPER UNITS: All dependent or independent recreational trailers not otherwise
defined as a "mobile home" in this title, and truck campers, tent trailers,
tents, etc.
CAMPGROUND: An area of land used to temporarily accommodate two (2) or more
camping parties or camping units.
CHURCH: A permanently located building commonly used for religious worship
fully enclosed with walls (including windows and doors) and having a roof
(canvas and fabric excluded) and conforming to applicable legal requirements
affecting design and construction.
CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT: A permit which may permit those uses as described in
this title under special conditions granted after review by the planning and
zoning commission. Those conditions attached to the use must have a reasonable
and valid relationship to the use and compatibility of surrounding property.
CORNER LOT: A lot located at the junction of two (2) intersecting streets.
Frontage and side setbacks of primary and accessory buildings closest to the
street are to be uniform for both frontage streets.
CROP AND GARDEN USES: Land which shall be used for agriculture, horticulture,
grazing or cropland within the town limits.
DAYCARE CENTER: A facility established to provide care for children from
families during normal working hours of the day to enable the parent or parents
to pursue employment.
DEPENDENT TRAVEL TRAILER OR TRUCK CAMPER: A travel trailer, converted bus, or
truck camper which does not have a flush toilet, bath or shower.
DRIVEWAY: An accessory to a required off street parking facility, which shall
be open and unencumbered to a height of not less than eight feet (8'). It shall
be safe and usable.
DUPLEX: A building designed to contain two (2) separate residences without
common areas with separate and individual entrances and exits.
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS:
   A.   Includes: Public, parochial and other nonprofit institutions conducting
regular academic instruction at kindergarten, elementary, secondary and
collegiate levels and including graduate schools, universities and nonprofit
research institutions. Such institutions must either:
      1.   Offer general academic instruction equivalent to the standards
prescribed by the state board of education; or
      2.   Confer degrees such as college or university graduate or
undergraduate standing; or
      3.   Conduct research.
   B.   Does not include: Schools, academies or institutes, incorporated or
otherwise, which operate for a profit, nor does it include commercial or trade
schools.
FENCE: Any device forming a physical barrier between two (2) areas. This
includes wire mesh, steel mesh, chainlink, louver, stake, masonry, and lumber
and other similar materials. A fence is considered a structure.
FLOOR AREA: The total horizontal living area of a building, measured on the
outside walls of each story.
FRONT YARD: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a building situated
between the nearest roofed portion of the building and the front lot line of
the lot and extending from side lot line to side lot line.
FRONT YARD SETBACK LINE: The line which defines the depth of the required front
yard. The setback line is parallel with the sidewalk line which is the furthest
distance from the street or, when established by the master plan of streets and
highways, with the highway right of way line, or by the provisions of this
title, removed therefrom by the perpendicular distance prescribed for the front
yard in the zone.
FRONTAGE: The narrowest dimension of the lot which abuts on a dedicated street
or highway right of way line. Frontage is expressed in linear feet and is
measured along the right of way line. Where a future street or highway right of
way line has been established on the general or master plan or other official
plan, frontage shall be measured along that line.
GAMING: Risking any property for gain contingent in whole or in part upon lot,
chance, the operation of a gaming device, or the happening or outcome of an
event, including a sporting event, over which the person taking the risk has no
control.
GAMING DEVICE: Any device, machine, paraphernalia or equipment used in the act
of gaming.
GAMING ESTABLISHMENT: Any building, room, enclosure, vehicle, vessel or other
place, whether open or enclosed, used or intended to be used for gambling
having one or more gaming devices.
HEIGHT OF A STRUCTURE: The vertical distance derived from the average finished
grade at the foundation corners of the building or structure, to the highest
point of the building or structure, excluding a chimney or other similar
structures.
HOME OCCUPATION OR SMALL HOME BUSINESS: Limited industry, light manufacturing,
or selling of goods or services which may be conducted from a family residence
or out of buildings occupying the same general area or premises as a family
residence.
HOME PROFESSIONAL OFFICE: Any business or home occupation in which not more
than two (2) persons are employed who are not members of the family, and in
which the office shall be in the main building and shall not occupy more than
the equivalent of one-half (1/2) of the floor area of the building. The home
professional office of a physician shall not include a biological or other
medical testing laboratory. The home in which such home professional office is
located shall maintain a residential character and quality.
HOSPITAL: A building used for the diagnosis, treatment or other care of human
ailments, unless otherwise specified. "Hospital" includes a sanitarium,
sanatorium, clinic, convalescent home, nursing home, rest home or other
building with an equivalent appellation. A hospital shall not include care and
treatment of mental patients, liquor or drug addicts, except incidentally.
IMPROVED LOT: A lot that is connected to a public water system, sewer system
or, in the absence of such a system, other sanitary methods which meet with the
approval of the planning and zoning commission.
INDUSTRIAL PARK: A group of nonnuisance industrial plants on a single parcel of
land, or on separate parcels contiguously arranged so as to form a planned
development of industrial sites, building or buildings.
INDUSTRY: The manufacture, fabrication, processing, reduction or destruction of
any article, substance or commodity, or any other treatment thereof in such a
manner as to change the form, character or appearance thereof, and including
storage elevators, truck storage yards, warehouses, wholesale storage and other
similar types of enterprise.
LOT AREA: The total horizontal area included within lot lines.
LOT WIDTH: The mean dimension measured at substantially right angles to the
depth of the lot.
MAIN BUILDING: A building in which is conducted a principal use of the lot or
parcel of land upon which it is situated. Where a permissible use involves more
than one building designed or used for a primary purpose, each such building on
the building site shall be defined as a main building.
MANUFACTURED HOME: See definition of Mobile Home.
MINERAL EXPLORATION: The search for coal, minerals or ore by:
   A.   Geological surveys;
   B.   Geophysical prospecting;
   C.   Bore holes and trial pits; and
   D.   Surface or underground headings, drifts or tunnels.
MINING: The process of obtaining useful minerals from the earth's crust,
including both underground excavations and surface workings.
MOBILE HOME: A transportable structure built on a chassis and designed to be
used with or without a permanent foundation as a dwelling unit when connected
to public utility facilities and which is built in a factory in accordance with
specifications set forth by the U.S. department of housing and urban
development. Motorized homes, trailers or other camping or recreational
vehicles are not considered mobile homes.
MOBILE HOME PARK: An area specifically designed for and occupied by six (6) or
more mobile homes. A development consisting of individual ownership of
individual lots is not considered to be a mobile home park. Land that has a
mobile home situated upon it and that is owned by the resident of that mobile
home is not considered to be a mobile home park.
MODULAR HOME: A transportable structure designed to be used with a permanent
foundation to be used for residential, commercial, educational or industrial
purposes when connected to public utility facilities and which is built in a
factory in accordance with all requirements of the uniform building code.
MOTEL: A building containing more than seventy five percent (75%) of the
lodging rooms are for rent to transient persons for a continuous period of less
than thirty (30) days.
MULTIPLE DWELLING: A building arranged, intended or designed to be occupied by
three (3) or more families living independently of each other as separate
housekeeping units.
NATIONAL BUILDING CODE: A national code prescribing regulations governing the
construction, alteration and demolition of buildings and structures (uniform
building code).
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE: A structure lawfully existing as of the effective date
hereof or any amendment hereto affecting such structure, which does not conform
to the building regulations of this title for the district in which it is
situated, irrespective of the use to which such structure is put.
NONCONFORMING USE: Any use of a building, structure, lot or land, or part
thereof, lawfully existing at the effective date hereof or any amendment hereto
affecting such use, which does not conform to the use regulations of this title
for the district in which it is situated.
OPEN SPACE: Unoccupied space within the incorporated limits set aside for
recreational use.
PARKING SPACE: One off street space available for parking of one motor vehicle
and having an area of not less than two hundred (200) square feet, exclusive of
passageways and driveways, giving access thereto and having direct access to a
street or alley.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: A land area which:
   A.   Consists of two (2) or more principal structures or uses on a single
parcel of land; and
   B.   Is designed and organized to be capable of satisfactory use and
operation as a separate neighborhood or community unit without necessarily
having the participation of other building sites or other common property; the
ownership of the common property may be either public or private.
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION: The planning commission and/or planning and
zoning commission as appointed by the governing body or the town council.
PRIVATE GARAGE: A detached accessory building or portion of a main building on
the same lot as a dwelling, used for housing vehicles of the occupants of the
dwelling, having a roof and enclosed on not less than four (4) sides. Any such
structure enclosed on three (3) sides or less shall be considered a carport.
PUBLIC FACILITIES AND UTILITIES: Those facilities and utilities necessary to
serve the people with electricity, water, sewage treatment, and other necessary
facilities for which a franchise is granted by the town.
PUBLIC GARAGE: Any premises used exclusively for the storage of vehicles.
PUBLIC NOTICE: Notice of the time and place of a hearing, meeting or proceeding
printed in the official newspaper of the town as required by law.
PUBLIC PARKING AREA: An open area, other than a street, used for parking or
automotive vehicles which is open to the public at large.
REAR YARD: A space on the same lot with a building situated between the nearest
roofed portion of the building and the rear lot line of the lot, and extending
from side lot line to side lot line.
RESIDENCE: A building used, designed or intended to be used as a home or
dwelling.
RESTAURANT: A place which is used for the serving of meals to guests for
compensation and which has suitable kitchen facilities connected therewith,
containing conveniences for cooking an assortment of food which may be required
for ordinary meals. "Meals" means the usual assortment of foods commonly
ordered at various times of the day. The service of such foods and victuals
only as sandwiches or salads does not constitute a "restaurant".
ROOM: An unsubdivided portion of the interior of a building, excluding
bathrooms, closets, hallways, kitchens and service porches.
SANITARY LANDFILL: Land specified by the town council for disposal of garbage,
trash, refuse or waste material of any kind.
SERVICE STATION: A business which services motor vehicles, including tube and
tire repairs, battery charging, storage of merchandise and supplies related to
the servicing of motor vehicles, sale of gasoline and lubricants, automobile
washing (not including mechanical car wash), grease racks, and automobile
repairs.
SIDE YARD: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a building situated
between the nearest roofed portion of the building or of any accessory building
and the side lot line of the lot.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING: An individual home designed and used exclusively for
residential occupancy by one family on a lot.
SINGLEWIDE MOBILE HOME: A mobile home that comes as a single section or is less
than twenty feet (20') wide.
SPECIAL USE PERMIT: A use specified in one or more districts, for which the
planning and zoning commission may grant a permit, pursuant to the provisions
of this title (see definition of Conditional Use Permit).
STREET: Any road, highway, avenue, street, parkway, lane or other way, public
or private, set aside and commonly used by the public for street purposes, and
shown upon the town map or upon a filed plat.
STRUCTURE 1 : Anything constructed or built over the height of three feet (3'),
any edifice, building or fence of any kind, or any piece of work artificially
built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner, which
requires location on the ground or is attached to something having a location
on the ground, excepting outdoor areas such as uncovered patios, paved areas,
walks, tennis courts, and similar recreation areas.
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING: A building designed and used exclusively for residential
occupancy by two (2) families, including, but not limited to, duplexes.
VARIANCE: A modification of the regulations of this title granted on grounds of
impractical difficulties or unnecessary hardship, not self-imposed, pursuant to
the provisions of this title and the laws of the state.
WALL: Any structure or device forming a physical barrier which is so
constructed that fifty percent (50%) or more of the vertical surface is closed
and prevents the passage of light, air and vision through the surface in a
horizontal plane. This includes concrete, concrete block, wood or other
materials that are solids and are so assembled as to form a solid barrier.
YARD: Any open space, other than a court, on the same lot with a building or
dwelling group, which space is generally open from the ground to the sky. (1987
Code §§ 17.08.010 - 17.08.670; amd. Ord. 6-94, 10-20-1994; Ord. 7-95, 7-20-
1995; Ord. 8-98, 8-20-1998; Ord. 04-00, 4-20-2000; Ord. 16-00, 12-21-2000, eff.
1-1-2001; 2004 Code; Ord. 2006-01, 3-2-2006; Ord. 2007-7, 4-5-2007; Ord. 2008-
8, 4-3-2008; Ord. 2015-06, 12-3-2015)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  9-1-1 of this code for building permit requirements for all structures.
CHAPTER 3
MAP
SECTION:
12-3-1: Adoption
12-3-2: Delineation Of Districts
12-3-3: Uncertainty Of District Boundaries
12-3-1: ADOPTION:
The boundaries of each district or zone are established as shown on the
official zoning map of the town, which accompanies the ordinance codified in
this title and is declared a part of this title. (1987 Code § 17.12.010)
12-3-2: DELINEATION OF DISTRICTS:
The zones established pursuant to this title shall be delineated on the zoning
map of the town. (1987 Code § 17.12.020)
12-3-3: UNCERTAINTY OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any district as shown on any
zoning map or part thereof, the following rules shall apply:
   A.   Follow Street, Alley Or Lot Lines: Where such boundaries are indicated
as approximately following street lines, alley lines, or lot lines, such lines
shall be construed to be such boundaries.
   B.   Unsubdivided Property; Zone Divides Lot: In the case of unsubdivided
property and where a zone boundary divides a lot, the locations of such
boundaries, unless the same are indicated by dimensions, shall be determined by
the use of a scale appearing on such zoning map.
   C.   Vacation Of Street Or Alley: Where a public street or alley is
officially vacated, the zoning regulations applicable to abutting property on
each side of the centerline shall apply up to the centerline of such vacated
street or alley on each respective side thereof.
   D.   Unclassified Streets Or Alleys: Areas of dedicated streets or alleys
other than those designated on the zoning map as being classified in one of the
districts provided in this title shall be deemed unclassified. (1987 Code §
17.12.030)
CHAPTER 4
ZONING DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. R-0 ZONE
SECTION:
12-4A-1: Purpose
12-4A-2: Permitted Uses
12-4A-3: Conditional Uses
12-4A-4: Minimum Floor Area, Garages And Accessory Buildings
12-4A-5: Minimum Lot Size
12-4A-6: Height Limits
12-4A-7: Setbacks
12-4A-8: Fences And Walls
12-4A-9: Off Street Parking, Drives And Walks
12-4A-10: Signs
12-4A-11: Utilities
12-4A-12: Animals
12-4A-1: PURPOSE:
This zone is intended as a low density residential area with lots having a
minimum area of one-half (1/2) acre, with no more than one residential dwelling
per lot. (Ord. 05-2001, 12-20-2001)
12-4A-2: PERMITTED USES:
Only the following buildings, structures and uses are permitted in the R-
0 zone. No buildings or structures shall be erected, structurally altered or
enlarged, or land used except for the following purposes:
Public parks, playgrounds, and athletic fields.
Single-family dwellings (only 1 per lot). (Ord. 05-2001, 12-20-2001)
12-4A-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Uses which may be permitted in the R-0 zone subject to the conditional use
permits are as follows: (Ord. 10-2004, 10-7-2004)
Churches.
Golf courses. (Ord. 05-2001, 12-20-2001)
12-4A-4: MINIMUM FLOOR AREA, GARAGES AND ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
   A.   Minimum Floor Area: The ground floor of single-story homes in the R-
0 zone, exclusive of porches, decks, and garages, shall be no less than two
thousand (2,000) square feet, and no less than one thousand six hundred (1,600)
square feet for two-story dwellings. The second floor of a two-story dwelling
shall be at least one-half (1/2) the square footage of the first floor. (Ord.
05-2001, 12-20-2001)
   B.   Accessory Buildings; Garages: Garages may be attached or detached,
however a detached garage shall be considered an accessory building. All
accessory buildings which are not a part of the main building shall be
separated from the main building by at least three feet (3'). (Ord. 2014-01, 4-
3-2014)
   C.   Exterior: All structures shall have a minimum of one-third (1/3) of the
exterior siding material composed of brick, stone, or stucco. No metal or
aluminum siding is permitted unless it is of residential grade and design.
   D.   Greenhouses: Greenhouse structures must be premanufactured glass units
and may be attached to either the dwelling or accessory building, however, a
detached greenhouse shall be considered an accessory building. (Ord. 05-2001,
12-20-2001)
12-4A-5: MINIMUM LOT SIZE:
The minimum lot area in the R-0 zone shall be one-half (1/2) acre and the lot
dimensions shall be sufficient to accommodate the minimum setback and yard
requirements set forth in section
12-4A-7 of this article. The building site for any use in the R-0 zone shall be
on an improved lot and connected to town water and sewer systems. (Ord. 05-
2001, 12-20-2001)
12-4A-6: HEIGHT LIMITS:
The maximum building height for the dwelling structure (including attached
garage) shall be thirty five feet (35'). The maximum building height for an
accessory building shall be no more than twenty two feet (22'). Building height
is measured from the lowest point of the floor of the structure. The roof pitch
of all buildings over three hundred (300) square feet shall be no less than a
four inch (4") rise to a twelve inch (12") run. The dwelling structure,
including garage, shall be site built. Modular, mobile, and off site built
structures, including outbuildings, are prohibited. (Ord. 2009-10, 10-15-2009)
12-4A-7: SETBACKS:
Setback requirements in the R-0 zone are as follows: There shall be a minimum
setback of thirty feet (30') along the front of each lot, and twenty feet (20')
along the sides of each lot, and twenty feet (20') along the rear of each lot.
Except for drives and walks, there shall be no structures or buildings located
within the setbacks. Any accessory building shall be located on the one-half
(1/2) of the property located farthest from the street, or if on a corner lot,
the accessory building must be on the farthest back one-fourth (1/4) of the
property. (Ord. 05-2001, 12-20-2001)
12-4A-8: FENCES AND WALLS:
   A.   Maximum Height: Fences and walls are permitted but not required. Such
fences and walls shall not exceed six feet four inches (6'4") in height, the
height of the flat vertical plane of which shall not exceed six feet (6'), and
where any portion of the same is located within the front yard setback, said
portion shall not exceed forty inches (40"), the height of the flat vertical
plane of which shall not exceed thirty six inches (36"), if said portion is
opaque, and fifty two inches (52"), the height of the flat vertical plane of
which shall not exceed forty eight inches (48"), if said fence is not opaque.
   B.   Barbed Wire; Chainlink: Fences shall not be made of barbed wire, unless
the fence borders an agricultural zone established by the town or county.
However, when special conditions warrant, and when approved by the planning and
zoning commission, security fences may be constructed of chainlink with not
more than three (3) strands of barbed wire on the top of the chainlink. In no
case will barbed wire be lower than six feet (6') above the ground.
   C.   Electric Fences: Electric fences are prohibited.
   D.   Finished Side: Fences having a finished side must be oriented with the
finished side to the street and adjacent lots. If two (2) property owners
jointly construct a fence, the owners may jointly determine on which side to
orient the finished side. (Ord. 2008-17, 8-21-2008)
12-4A-9: OFF STREET PARKING, DRIVES AND WALKS:
   A.   Off Street Parking: Off street parking requirements for the R-0 zone
shall be those set forth in chapter 8 of this title.
   B.   Drives And Walks: Drives and walks shall be required to all garages,
dwelling entries, and accessory buildings. All drives and walks shall be
concrete, asphalt, stone, or brick. No dirt or graveled drives are permitted.
(Ord. 05-2001, 12-20-2001)
12-4A-10: SIGNS:
Sign requirements for the R-0 zone shall be those set forth in chapter 9 of
this title. (Ord. 05-2001, 12-20-2001)
12-4A-11: UTILITIES:
All utility lines including, but not limited to, electrical, telephone, cable
television, and telecommunications lines and cables shall be underground.
Except for sewer and water valves, meters, and access covers, all junction,
switching, and access boxes shall be located on the rear one-half (1/2) of each
lot where reasonably possible. (Ord. 05-2001, 12-20-2001)
12-4A-12: ANIMALS:
Outdoor animals shall be limited to one animal per one-half (1/2) acre and
shall be limited to cats and dogs. No animal shall exceed thirty six inches
(36") in height at the shoulder. Animal dwellings shall be maintained, fenced,
and inconspicuous to neighbors. Indoor animals may be maintained at the owner's
discretion. (Ord. 05-2001, 12-20-2001)
ARTICLE B. R-1 ZONE
SECTION:
12-4B-1: Purpose
12-4B-2: Permitted Uses
12-4B-3: Conditional Uses
12-4B-4: Building Code Certification; Foundations
12-4B-5: Minimum Floor Area
12-4B-6: Lot Requirements
12-4B-7: Height Limit
12-4B-8: Setbacks
12-4B-9: Fences And Walls
12-4B-10: Off Street Parking
12-4B-11: Signs
12-4B-1: PURPOSE:
This zone is intended as a low density residential area with lots having a
minimum area of seven thousand (7,000) square feet with not more than one
dwelling on one lot. (1987 Code § 17.16.010)
12-4B-2: PERMITTED USES:
Only the following buildings, structures and uses are permitted in the R-
1 zone. No buildings or structures shall be erected, structurally altered or
enlarged, or land used, except for the following purposes:
Educational institutions.
Public parks, playgrounds and athletic fields.
Single-family dwellings (only 1 per lot). (1987 Code § 17.16.020)
12-4B-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Uses which may be permitted in the R-1 zone subject to conditional use permits
are as follows: (Ord. 10-2004, 10-7-2004)
Churches.
Daycare centers.
Golf courses.
Planned unit developments, provided such development complies with article L of
this chapter.
Rest and convalescent homes. (1987 Code § 17.16.030)
12-4B-4: BUILDING CODE CERTIFICATION; FOUNDATIONS:
   A.   Building Code Certification Required: Any person desiring to use a lot
for a permitted or conditionally permitted use must acquire a building permit
for any and all buildings or improvements to the land. All applicants for
building permits for the R-1 zone must certify, under oath, that the building,
structure or improvement will conform to the town building code as adopted. An
improvement which does not comply with the town adopted building code will not
be permitted.
   B.   Foundations: All residential structures which are to be located in the
R-1 zone must be placed on, and permanently attached to, a permanent foundation
on which all of the weight or load is borne primarily by the perimeter
foundation and secondarily by permanent interior foundation support, but not on
jacks or other nonfoundation structure. All foundations must meet town adopted
building code standards.
   C.   New Buildings: Any building moved into the R-1 zone, to be placed on
any lot or space, and to be used with a permanent foundation, shall be new.
Such building may not have been set up for anticipated use, with or without a
foundation, before. (Ord. 2006-01, 3-2-2006)
   D.   Homes Permitted: Only stick built homes or component homes or modular
homes are permitted in the R-1 zone. Component and modular homes are permitted
in an R-1 zone if the home is structurally sound and the joists of that home
are not intended to be supported, in whole or in part, by a metal joist frame,
and the entire structure is intended to be primarily supported by a permanent
foundation under the exterior perimeter of the home. (Ord. 2008-1, 3-20-2008)
12-4B-5: MINIMUM FLOOR AREA:
The ground floor area of the main structure in the R-1 zone, exclusive of one-
story open porches and garages, shall not be less than one thousand two hundred
(1,200) square feet for one dwelling, nor less than one thousand (1,000) square
feet for a dwelling of more than one story. (Ord. 2006-01, 3-2-2006)
12-4B-6: LOT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Lot Area: The minimum lot area in the R-1 zone shall be seven thousand
(7,000) square feet.
   B.   Lot Dimensions: The minimum lot width in the R-1 zone is seventy feet
(70') for interior lots. Corner lots must be large enough to accommodate
setback and side yard requirements.
   C.   Building Site: The building site for any use in the R-1 zone shall be
on an improved lot. (1987 Code § 17.16.050)
12-4B-7: HEIGHT LIMIT:
The maximum building height for the dwelling structure (including attached
garage) shall be thirty five feet (35'). The maximum building height for an
accessory building shall be no more than twenty two feet (22'). Building height
is measured from the lowest point of the floor of the structure. The roof pitch
of all buildings over three hundred (300) square feet shall be no less than a
four inch (4") rise to a twelve inch (12") run. (Ord. 2009-10, 10-15-2009)
12-4B-8: SETBACKS:
Setback requirements in the R-1 zone are as follows:
   A.   Main Structure:
      1.   Front Yard: Each lot in the R-1 zone shall have a front yard
extending across the full width of the subject property, a depth of not less
than twenty feet (20'). Except for drives and walks, there shall be no
structures located in a required front yard or in a required side yard abutting
a street (corner lot). It shall not be permitted to dismantle, repair or keep
any inoperative vehicle in this front yard nor side yard abutting a street or
driveway.
      2.   Side Yard: There shall be a side yard on each side of the lot
extending from the front yard of not less than ten feet (10') on both sides of
an interior lot. A corner lot shall have a side yard abutting a street of not
less than twelve feet (12') and not less than ten feet (10') on the opposite
side yard.
      3.   Rear Yard: Each lot shall have a rear yard the full width of the lot
of a depth not less than ten feet (10'). (1987 Code § 17.16.070)
   B.   Accessory Buildings: Accessory buildings and uses shall be permitted
only to the extent necessary and normal to the limited types of uses permitted
in this zone. Accessory buildings are not used for residential purposes. All
accessory buildings which are not a part of the main building shall be
separated from the main building by at least three feet (3').
         ACCESSORY BUILDING SETBACK REQUIREMENTS IN FEET
 
Portable Accessory Buildings (Easily Moved By Sliding)
Building Square Feet Front Side Yard Side Yard Corner Lot Rear Yard
0 - 120              201   1         12                   1
121 - 250            201   3         12                   3
Permanent Accessory Buildings
With Foundation Or Concrete Floor
0 - 1,200            201   10        12                   10
 
Note:
      1.    No accessory building may encroach into the front yard beyond the
main structure.
Yard intrusions as provided in section
12-7-5 of this title shall not be considered to apply to accessory buildings of
two hundred (200) square feet or less and portable in nature in residential
zones. (Ord. 2014-01, 4-3-2014)
12-4B-9: FENCES AND WALLS:
   A.   Maximum Height: Fences and walls are permitted but not required. Such
fences and walls shall not exceed six feet four inches (6'4") in height, the
height of the flat vertical plane of which shall not exceed six feet (6'), and
where any portion of the same is located within the front yard setback, said
portion shall not exceed forty inches (40"), the height of the flat vertical
plane of which shall not exceed thirty six inches (36"), if said portion is
opaque, and fifty two inches (52"), the height of the flat vertical plane of
which shall not exceed forty eight inches (48"), if said fence is not opaque.
   B.   Barbed Wire; Chainlink: Fences shall not be made of barbed wire, unless
the fence borders an agricultural zone established by the town or county.
However, when special conditions warrant, and when approved by the planning and
zoning commission, security fences may be constructed of chainlink with not
more than three (3) strands of barbed wire on the top of the chainlink. In no
case will barbed wire be lower than six feet (6') above the ground.
   C.   Electric Fences: Electric fences are prohibited.
   D.   Finished Side: Fences having a finished side must be oriented with the
finished side to the street and adjacent lots. If two (2) property owners
jointly construct a fence, the owners may jointly determine on which side to
orient the finished side. (Ord. 2008-17, 8-21-2008)
12-4B-10: OFF STREET PARKING:
For off street parking requirements in the R-1 zone, see chapter 8 of this
title. (1987 Code § 17.16.090)
12-4B-11: SIGNS:
For sign requirements in the R-1 zone, see chapter 9 of this title. (1987 Code
§ 17.16.100)
ARTICLE C. R-1-A ZONE
SECTION:
12-4C-1: Purpose
12-4C-2: Permitted Uses
12-4C-3: Conditional Uses
12-4C-4: Prohibited Uses
12-4C-5: Building Code Certification; Foundations
12-4C-6: Minimum Floor Area
12-4C-7: Lot Requirements
12-4C-8: Height Limit
12-4C-9: Setbacks
12-4C-10: Fences And Walls
12-4C-11: Off Street Parking
12-4C-12: Signs
12-4C-13: Keeping Of Domestic Animals
12-4C-14: Sanitation
12-4C-15: Reserved
12-4C-16: Qualifications For Zone
12-4C-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this zone is to provide low density, residential development
where animals may be kept for pleasure. Because the main purpose of the zoning
is residential development, no animals shall be kept on any lot unless the
single-family dwelling is built and occupied. (1987 Code § 17.18.010)
12-4C-2: PERMITTED USES:
Only the following buildings, structures and uses are permitted in the R-1-
A Zone. No buildings or structures shall be erected, structurally altered or
enlarged, or land used, except for the following purposes:
Accessory buildings.
Animals for pleasure.
Gardens for personal use.
Public parks, playgrounds and athletic fields.
Single-family dwellings (only 1 per lot). (1987 Code § 17.18.020)
12-4C-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Uses which may be permitted in the R-1-A Zone subject to conditional use
permits are as follows:
Churches.
Golf courses and playing fields.
Hospitals and clinics.
Planned unit developments.
Public and private elementary and secondary schools.
Public facilities. (1987 Code § 17.18.030; amd. Ord. 10-2004, 10-7-2004)
12-4C-4: PROHIBITED USES:
Uses which are not permitted in the R-1-A Zone are as follows:
Commercial feedlots.
Storage of commercial goods or materials. (1987 Code § 17.18.040)
12-4C-5: BUILDING CODE CERTIFICATION; FOUNDATIONS:
   A.   Building Code Certification Required: Any person desiring to use a lot
for a permitted or conditionally permitted use must acquire a building permit
for any and all buildings or improvements to the land. All applicants for
building permits for the R-1-A Zone must certify, under oath, that the
building, structure or improvement will conform to the Building Code as
adopted. An improvement which does not comply with the Building Code will not
be permitted.
   B.   Foundations: All residential structures which are to be located in the
R-1-A zone must be placed on a permanent foundation on which the weight or load
bearing is around the outer perimeter of the building and not on jacks or in
the center of the structure. All foundations must meet building code standards.
(Ord. 16-00, 12-21-2000, eff. 1-1-2001)
12-4C-6: MINIMUM FLOOR AREA:
The ground floor area of the main structure in the R-1-A zone, exclusive of
one-story open porches and garages shall not be less than one thousand two
hundred (1,200) square feet nor less than one thousand (1,000) square feet for
a dwelling of more than one story. (1987 Code § 17.18.050)
12-4C-7: LOT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Minimum Lot Area: The minimum lot area in the R-1-A zone shall be
twenty one thousand five hundred (21,500) square feet.
   B.   Minimum Lot Width: The minimum lot width in the R-1-A zone shall be one
hundred feet (100') for interior lots. Corner lots must be at least one hundred
feet (100') wide or larger to accommodate setback and side yard requirements.
   C.   Building Site: All lots shall be improved lots, and shall be connected
to town water and sewer systems. Animal wastes (excretions) will not be allowed
in the town sewer system. (1987 Code § 17.18.060)
12-4C-8: HEIGHT LIMIT:
The maximum building height for the dwelling structure (including attached
garage) shall be thirty five feet (35'). The maximum building height for an
accessory building shall be no more than twenty two feet (22'). Building height
is measured from the lowest point of the floor of the structure. The roof pitch
of all buildings over three hundred (300) square feet shall be no less than a
four inch (4") rise to a twelve inch (12") run. (Ord. 2009-10, 10-15-2009)
12-4C-9: SETBACKS:
Setback requirements in the R-1-A zone are as follows:
   A.   Main Structure:
      1.   Front Yard: Each lot in the R-1-A zone shall have a front yard
extending across the full width of the subject property, a depth of not less
than twenty five feet (25') nor more than fifty feet (50'). Except for drives
and walks, there shall be no structures located in a required front yard or in
a required side yard abutting a street (corner lot). It shall not be permitted
to dismantle, repair or keep any inoperative vehicle in this front yard nor
side yard abutting a street or driveway. No animals as defined in section
12-4C-13 of this article shall be allowed or kept in the required front yard or
in required side yard abutting a street.
      2.   Side Yard: There shall be a side yard on each side of the lot
extending from the front yard of not less than ten feet (10') on both sides of
an interior lot. A corner lot shall have a side yard abutting a street of not
less than fifteen feet (15') and not less than ten feet (10') on the opposite
side yard. Animals shall not be kept in a required side yard.
      3.   Rear Yard: Each lot shall have a rear yard the full width of the lot
of a depth not less than ten feet (10'). (1987 Code § 17.18.080)
   B.   Accessory Buildings: Accessory buildings and uses shall be permitted
only to the extent necessary and normal to the limited types of uses permitted
in this zone. Accessory buildings are not used for residential purposes. All
accessory buildings which are not a part of the main building shall be
separated from the main building by at least three feet (3').
      ACCESSORY BUILDING SETBACK REQUIREMENTS IN FEET
Portable Accessory Buildings (Easily Moved By Sliding)
Building Square Feet Front Side Yard Side Yard Corner Lot Rear Yard
Portable Accessory Buildings (Easily Moved By Sliding)
Building Square Feet Front Side Yard Side Yard Corner Lot Rear Yard
0 - 120              251   3         15                   3
121 - 250            251   5         15                   5
Permanent Accessory Buildings
With Foundation Or Concrete Floor
Building Square Feet Front Side Yard Side Yard Corner Lot Rear Yard
0 or more            251   10        15                   10
 
Note:
      1.    No accessory building may encroach into the front yard beyond the
main structure.
   (Ord. 2014-01, 4-3-2014)
   C.   Structures To House Animals: Structures intended to house or protect
animals may be considered additional to the allowed accessory buildings. They
will, however, be subject to the height and setback requirements for accessory
buildings established in this article. Such structures shall be constructed of
a similar material and finished to be aesthetically similar to the main
dwelling. Any exceptions shall be approved by the planning and zoning
commission. The size of buildings to house or protect animals shall not exceed
three hundred (300) square feet per allowed animal unit as defined herein.
(1987 Code § 17.18.080)
12-4C-10: FENCES AND WALLS:
   A.   Maximum Height: Fences and walls are permitted but not required. Such
fences and walls shall not exceed six feet four inches (6'4") in height, the
height of the flat vertical plane of which shall not exceed six feet (6'), and
where any portion of the same is located within the front yard setback, said
portion shall not exceed forty inches (40"), the height of the flat vertical
plane of which shall not exceed thirty six inches (36"), if said portion is
opaque, and fifty two inches (52"), the height of the flat vertical plane of
which shall not exceed forty eight inches (48"), if said fence is not opaque.
   B.   Barbed Wire; Chainlink: Fences shall not be made of barbed wire, unless
the fence borders an agricultural zone established by the town or county.
However, when special conditions warrant, and when approved by the planning and
zoning commission, security fences may be constructed of chainlink with not
more than three (3) strands of barbed wire on the top of the chainlink. In no
case will barbed wire be lower than six feet (6') above the ground.
   C.   Electric Fences: Electric fences are prohibited.
   D.   Finished Side: Fences having a finished side must be oriented with the
finished side to the street and adjacent lots. If two (2) property owners
jointly construct a fence, the owners may jointly determine on which side to
orient the finished side. (Ord. 2008-17, 8-21-2008)
12-4C-11: OFF STREET PARKING:
For off street parking requirements in the R-1-A zone, see chapter 8 of this
title. (1987 Code § 17.18.100)
12-4C-12: SIGNS:
For sign requirements in the R-1-A zone, see chapter 9 of this title. (1987
Code § 17.18.110)
12-4C-13: KEEPING OF DOMESTIC ANIMALS:
The keeping and maintenance of animals and fowl permitted in the R-1-A zone
shall be limited to the following animal units:
   A.   Unit 1; Horse, Mule, Pony Or Cattle: There shall be no more than one
such animal per twenty one thousand five hundred (21,500) square feet of land;
or
   B.   Unit 2; Llamas, Sheep And Goats: There shall be no more than two (2)
animals per twenty one thousand five hundred (21,500) square feet of land; or
   C.   Unit 3; Poultry, Rabbits, Chinchillas: There shall be no more than ten
(10) such animals per twenty one thousand five hundred (21,500) square feet of
land. These poultry, rabbits or chinchillas shall be penned and shall not be
allowed to run free.
   D.   Types Of Animals Restricted: Any animals not specifically mentioned in
subsection A, B or C of this section shall be deemed excluded. Any exceptions
shall be specifically approved by the planning and zoning commission. The
keeping of swine is prohibited.
   E.   Combinations And Tradeoffs: In lieu of one llama, sheep or goat in
animal unit 2 of subsection B of this section, five (5) animals from unit 3 of
subsection C of this section may be kept per twenty one thousand five hundred
(21,500) square feet of land.
   F.   Wild Animals: Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as authorizing
the keeping of wild animals or animals capable of inflicting harm or
endangering the health and safety of any person or property.
   G.   Distance From Main Structure: Animals as specified in this section
shall not be kept closer than ten feet (10') from the main structure. (1987
Code § 17.18.120)
12-4C-14: SANITATION:
   A.   Drainage: Lots shall be graded and adequately drained to alleviate any
potential health or safety problem.
   B.   Insect And Rodent Control: In order to provide adequate insect and
rodent control, lots shall be kept free of rubbish and maintained in sanitary
condition at all times. All harborage for insects and rodents shall be
eliminated and prevented. Flies and mosquitoes shall be controlled.
   C.   Manure; Animal Refuse: Manure and other animal refuse shall not be
allowed to accumulate nor will such material be stockpiled or accumulated for
future use.
   D.   Nuisance: Animals shall be kept in such a manner as not to constitute a
nuisance (title 4, chapter 1 of this Code) with respect to neighboring
properties. (1987 Code § 17.18.130)
12-4C-15: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2017-08, 5-4-2017)
12-4C-16: QUALIFICATIONS FOR ZONE:
In order for property to be considered for R-1-A zoning, it must meet the
following criteria:
   A.   Must be currently zoned A, L-I, H-I or adjacent property outside the
incorporated limits of the Town; and
   B.   Must have adjacent properties on two (2) sides currently zoned A, L-I,
H-I or property outside the incorporated limits of the Town; and
   C.   Must not have more than three (3) developed residential properties
(with residences) within sixty feet (60') from the property (lot) boundary in
any direction. (1987 Code § 17.18.140)
ARTICLE D. R-A ZONE
SECTION:
12-4D-1: Purpose
12-4D-2: Permitted Uses
12-4D-3: Conditional Uses
12-4D-4: Prohibited Uses
12-4D-5: Building Code Certification; Foundations
12-4D-6: Minimum Floor Area
12-4D-7: Lot Requirements
12-4D-8: Height Limit
12-4D-9: Setbacks
12-4D-10: Fences And Walls
12-4D-11: Off Street Parking
12-4D-12: Signs
12-4D-13: Keeping Of Domestic Animals
12-4D-14: Sanitation
12-4D-15: Qualifications For Zone
12-4D-16: Variance
12-4D-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this zone is to provide low density, residential development
where a higher density of animals may be kept for pleasure. (Ord. 5-99, 11-18-
1999)
12-4D-2: PERMITTED USES:
Only the following buildings, structures and uses are permitted in the R-
A zone. No buildings or structures shall be erected, structurally altered or
enlarged, or land used, except for the following purposes:
Accessory buildings.
Animals for pleasure.
Gardens for personal use.
Public parks, playgrounds and athletic fields.
Single-family dwellings (only 1 per lot). (Ord. 5-99, 11-18-1999)
12-4D-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Uses which may be permitted in the R-A zone subject to conditional use permits
are as follows:
Churches.
Golf courses and playing fields.
Hospitals and clinics.
Planned unit developments.
Public and private elementary and secondary schools.
Public facilities. (Ord. 5-99, 11-18-1999; amd. Ord. 10-2004, 10-7-2004)
12-4D-4: PROHIBITED USES:
Uses which are not permitted in the R-A zone are as follows:
Commercial feedlots.
Storage of commercial goods or materials. (Ord. 5-99, 11-18-1999)
12-4D-5: BUILDING CODE CERTIFICATION; FOUNDATIONS:
   A.   Uniform Building Code Certification Required: Any person desiring to
use a lot for a permitted or conditionally permitted use must acquire a
building permit for any and all buildings or improvements to the land. All
applicants for building permits for the R-A zone must certify, under oath, that
the building, structure or improvement will conform to the uniform building
code, as adopted. An improvement which does not comply with the uniform
building code will not be permitted.
   B.   Foundations: All residential structures which are to be located in the
R-A zone must be placed on a permanent foundation on which the weight or load
bearing is around the outer perimeter of the building and not on jacks or in
the center of the structure. All foundations must meet uniform building code
standards. (Ord. 16-00, 12-21-2000, eff. 1-1-2001)
12-4D-6: MINIMUM FLOOR AREA:
The ground area of the main structure in the R-A zone, exclusive of one-story
open porches and garages, shall not be less than one thousand two hundred
(1,200) square feet nor less than one thousand (1,000) square feet for a
dwelling of more than one story. (Ord. 5-99, 11-18-1999)
12-4D-7: LOT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Minimum Lot Area: The minimum lot area in the R-A zone shall be forty
three thousand five hundred (43,500) square feet.
   B.   Minimum Lot Width: The minimum lot width in the R-A zone shall be one
hundred feet (100') for interior lots. Corner lots must be at least one hundred
twenty feet (120') wide or larger to accommodate setback and side yard
requirements.
   C.   Building Site: All lots shall be improved lots, and shall be connected
to town water and sewer systems. Animal wastes (excretions) will not be allowed
in the town sewer system. (Ord. 5-99, 11-18-1999)
12-4D-8: HEIGHT LIMIT:
The maximum building height for the dwelling structure (including attached
garage) shall be thirty five feet (35'). The maximum building height for an
accessory building shall be no more than twenty two feet (22'). Building height
is measured from the lowest point of the floor of the structure. The roof pitch
of all buildings over three hundred (300) square feet shall be no less than a
four inch (4") rise to a twelve inch (12") run. (Ord. 2009-10, 10-15-2009)
12-4D-9: SETBACKS:
Setback requirements in the R-A zone are as follows:
   A.   Main Structure:
      1.   Front Yard: Each lot in the R-A zone shall have a front yard
extending across the full width of the subject property, a depth of not less
than twenty five feet (25'), nor more than fifty feet (50'). Except for drives
and walks, there shall be no structures located in a required front yard or in
a required side yard abutting a street (corner lot). It shall not be permitted
to dismantle, repair or keep any inoperative vehicles in the front yard nor
side yard abutting a street or driveway. No "animals" as defined in section
12-4D-13 of this article shall be allowed or kept in the required front yard or
in a required side yard abutting a street.
      2.   Side Yard: There shall be a side yard on each side of the lot
extending from the front yard of not less than ten feet (10') on both sides of
an interior lot. A corner lot shall have a side yard abutting a street of not
less than fifteen feet (15') and not less than ten feet (10') on the opposite
side yard. Animals shall not be kept in the side yard.
      3.   Rear Yard: Each lot shall have a rear yard the full width of the lot
of a depth not less than ten feet (10'). (Ord. 5-99, 11-18-1999)
   B.   Accessory Buildings:
      1.   Accessory buildings and uses shall be permitted only to the extent
necessary and normal to the limited types of uses permitted in this zone.
Accessory buildings are not used for residential purposes. All accessory
buildings which are not a part of the main building shall be separated from the
main building by at least three feet (3').
      ACCESSORY BUILDING SETBACK REQUIREMENTS IN FEET
 
Building Square Feet Front Side Yard Side Yard Corner Lot Rear Yard
0 - 120              251   3         5                    3
121 - 250            251   5         10                   5
251 or more2         251   10        15                   10
 
   Notes:
      1.   No accessory building may encroach into the front yard beyond the
main structure.
      2.   Allowed only on permanent accessory buildings with foundation or
concrete floor.
   C.   Structure To House Animals: Structures intended to house or protect
animals may be considered additional to the allowed accessory buildings. They
will, however, be subject to the height and setback requirements for accessory
buildings established in this article. Such structures shall be constructed of
a similar material and shall be finished to be aesthetically similar to the
main dwelling. Any exceptions shall be approved by the planning and zoning
commission. (Ord. 2014-01, 4-3-2014)
12-4D-10: FENCES AND WALLS:
   A.   Maximum Height: Fences and walls are permitted but not required. Such
fences and walls shall not exceed six feet four inches (6'4") in height, the
height of the flat vertical plane of which shall not exceed six feet (6'), and
where any portion of the same is located within the front yard setback, said
portion shall not exceed forty inches (40"), the height of the flat vertical
plane of which shall not exceed thirty six inches (36"), if said portion is
opaque, and fifty two inches (52"), the height of the flat vertical plane of
which shall not exceed forty eight inches (48"), if said fence is not opaque.
   B.   Finished Side: Fences having a finished side must be oriented with the
finished side to the street and adjacent lots. If two (2) property owners
jointly construct a fence, the owners may jointly determine on which side to
orient the finished side. (Ord. 2008-17, 8-21-2008)
12-4D-11: OFF STREET PARKING:
For off street parking requirements in the R-A zone, see chapter 8 of this
title. (Ord. 5-99, 11-18-1999)
12-4D-12: SIGNS:
For sign requirements in the R-A zone, see chapter 9 of this title. (Ord. 5-99,
11-18-1999)
12-4D-13: KEEPING OF DOMESTIC ANIMALS:
The keeping and maintenance of animals and fowl permitted in the R-A zone shall
be limited to the following animal units:
   A.   Unit 1; Horse, Mule, Pony Or Cattle: There shall be no more than one
such animal per ten thousand (10,000) square feet of land; or
   B.   Unit 2; Llamas, Sheep And Goats: There shall be no more than two (2)
animals per ten thousand (10,000) square feet of land; or
   C.   Unit 3; Poultry, Rabbits, Chinchillas: There shall be no more than ten
(10) such animals per ten thousand (10,000) square feet of land. These poultry,
rabbits or chinchillas shall be penned and shall not be allowed to run free.
   D.   Types Of Animals Restricted: Any animals not specifically mentioned in
subsection A, B or C of this section shall be deemed excluded. Any exceptions
shall be specifically approved by the planning and zoning commission. The
keeping of swine is allowed by special permit of the planning and zoning
commission only during a 4-H project season (approximately February through
August of any year). Each swine kept during such time shall be considered one
animal unit (1 swine per 10,000 square feet).
   E.   Combinations And Tradeoffs: In lieu of one llama, sheep or goat in
animal unit 2 of subsection B of this section, five (5) animals from unit 3 of
subsection C of this section may be kept per ten thousand (10,000) square feet
of land.
   F.   Wild Animals: Nothing herein shall be construed as authorizing the
keeping of wild animals or animals capable of inflicting harm or endangering
the health and safety of any person or property.
   G.   Distance From Main Structure: Animals specified in this section shall
not be kept closer than ten feet (10') from the main structure. (Ord. 5-99, 11-
18-1999)
12-4D-14: SANITATION:
   A.   Drainage: Lots shall be graded and adequately drained to alleviate any
potential health or safety problem.
   B.   Insect And Rodent Control: In order to provide adequate insect and
rodent control, lots shall be kept free of rubbish and maintained in a sanitary
condition at all times. All harborage for insects and rodents shall be
eliminated and prevented. Flies and mosquitos shall be controlled.
   C.   Manure; Animal Refuse: Manure and other animal refuse shall not be
allowed to accumulate nor will such material be stockpiled or accumulated for
future use.
   D.   Nuisance: Animals shall be kept in such a manner as not to constitute a
nuisance (title 4, chapter 1 of this code) with respect to neighboring
properties. (Ord. 5-99, 11-18-1999)
12-4D-15: QUALIFICATIONS FOR ZONE:
In order for property to be considered for R-A zoning it must meet the
following criteria:
   A.   The property must be currently zoned as A, L-I, H-I, or as adjacent
property outside the incorporated limits of the town; and
   B.   The property must have adjacent properties on at least two (2) sides
which are currently zoned as A, L-I, H-I, R-A, or as property outside the
incorporated limits of the town; and
   C.   The property must not have more than two (2) developed residential
properties (with residences) within one hundred feet (100') from the property
(lot) boundary in any direction. (Ord. 5-99, 11-18-1999)
12-4D-16: VARIANCE:
Properties which do not qualify for the R-A zone, but which none the less wish
to be considered for the R-A zone, may petition the planning and zoning
commission for the zone designation. If the planning and zoning commission
determines that the petitioning property is currently surrounded by an existing
R-A zone and that there will be no detrimental effect to the area or the
health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants, the planning and zoning
commission may, at their discretion, grant the variance. (Ord. 5-99, 11-18-
1999)
ARTICLE E. R-2 ZONE
SECTION:
12-4E-1: Purpose
12-4E-2: Permitted Uses
12-4E-3: Conditional Uses
12-4E-4: Building Code Certification; Foundations
12-4E-5: Minimum Floor Area
12-4E-6: Lot Requirements
12-4E-7: Height Limit And Construction
12-4E-8: Setbacks
12-4E-9: Fences And Walls
12-4E-10: Off Street Parking
12-4E-11: Signs
12-4E-1: PURPOSE:
This zone is intended as a medium density residential area with lots having
minimum area of seven thousand (7,000) square feet with not more than one
dwelling on one lot. (1987 Code § 17.20.010)
12-4E-2: PERMITTED USES:
Only the following buildings, structures and uses are permitted in the R-
2 zone. No buildings or structures shall be erected, structurally altered, or
enlarged, or land used, except for the following purposes:
Educational institutions.
Public parks, playgrounds and athletic fields.
Single-family dwellings.
Two-family dwellings. (1987 Code § 17.20.020)
12-4E-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Uses which may be permitted in the R-2 zone subject to conditional use permits
are as follows:
Apartment buildings, but no more than two (2) dwelling units per seven thousand
(7,000) square feet of lot area.
Churches.
Daycare centers.
Funeral homes.
Planned unit developments, provided such development complies with article L of
this chapter. (Ord. 2013-02, 9-19-2013)
12-4E-4: BUILDING CODE CERTIFICATION; FOUNDATIONS:
   A.   Building Code Certification Required: Any person desiring to use a lot
for a permitted or conditionally permitted use must acquire a building permit
for any and all buildings or improvements to the land. All applicants for
building permits for the R-2 zone must certify, under oath, that the building,
structure or improvement will conform to the town building code as adopted. An
improvement which does not comply with the town adopted building code will not
be permitted.
   B.   Foundations: All residential structures which are to be located in the
R-2 zone must be placed on, and permanently attached to, a permanent foundation
on which all of the weight or load is borne primarily by the perimeter
foundation and secondarily by permanent interior foundation support, but not on
jacks or other nonfoundation structure. All foundations must meet town adopted
building code standards.
   C.   New Buildings: Any building moved into the R-2 zone, to be placed on
any lot or space, and to be used with a permanent foundation, shall be new.
Such building may not have been set up for anticipated use, with or without a
foundation, before.
   D.   Singlewide Manufactured Homes Prohibited: No singlewide manufactured
homes shall be allowed in the R-2 zone. (Ord. 2006-01, 3-2-2006)
12-4E-5: MINIMUM FLOOR AREA:
The ground floor area of the main structure in the R-2 zone, exclusive of one-
story open porches and garages shall not be less than one thousand two hundred
(1,200) square feet for one dwelling, nor less than one thousand (1,000) square
feet for a dwelling of more than one story. Multi-family units shall have a
minimum area of eight hundred (800) square feet per unit. (Ord. 2006-01, 3-2-
2006)
12-4E-6: LOT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Lot Area: The minimum lot area in the R-2 zone shall be seven thousand
(7,000) square feet.
   B.   Lot Dimensions: The minimum lot width in the R-2 zone shall be sixty
feet (60') for interior lots. Corner lots must be large enough to accommodate
setback and side yard requirements.
   C.   Building Site: The building site for any use in the R-2 zone shall be
on an improved lot. (1987 Code § 17.20.050)
12-4E-7: HEIGHT LIMIT AND CONSTRUCTION:
The maximum building height for the dwelling structure (including attached
garage) shall be thirty five feet (35'). The maximum building height for an
accessory building shall be no more than twenty two feet (22'). Building height
is measured from the lowest point of the floor of the structure. The roof pitch
of all buildings over three hundred (300) square feet shall be no less than a
four inch (4") rise to a twelve inch (12") run. (Ord. 2009-10, 10-15-2009)
12-4E-8: SETBACKS:
Setback requirements in the R-2 zone are as follows:
   A.   Main Structure:
      1.   Front Yard: Each lot in the R-2 zone shall have a front yard
extending across the full width of the subject property, a depth of not less
than twenty feet (20'). Except for drives and walks, there shall be no
structures located in a required front yard or in a required side yard abutting
a street (corner lot). It shall not be permitted to dismantle, repair or keep
any inoperative vehicle in this front yard nor side yard abutting a street or
driveway.
      2.   Side Yard: There shall be a side yard on each side of the lot
extending from the front yard of not less than ten feet (10') on both sides of
an interior lot. A corner lot shall have a side yard abutting a street of not
less than twelve feet (12') and not less than ten feet (10') on the opposite
side yard.
      3.   Rear Yard: Each lot shall have a rear yard the full width of the lot
of a depth of not less than ten feet (10'). (1987 Code § 17.20.070)
   B.   Accessory Buildings: Accessory buildings and uses shall be permitted
only to the extent necessary and normal to the limited types of uses permitted
in this zone. Accessory buildings are not used for residential purposes. All
accessory buildings which are not a part of the main building shall be
separated from the main building by at least three feet (3').
      ACCESSORY BUILDING SETBACK REQUIREMENTS IN FEET
Portable Accessory Buildings (Easily Moved By Sliding)
Building Square Feet Front Side Yard Side Yard Corner Lot Rear Yard
Portable Accessory Buildings (Easily Moved By Sliding)
Building Square Feet Front Side Yard Side Yard Corner Lot Rear Yard
0 - 120              201   1         12                   1
121 - 250            201   3         12                   3
Permanent Accessory Buildings
With Foundation Or Concrete Floor
Building Square Feet Front Side Yard Side Yard Corner Lot Rear Yard
   0 - 1,200      201   10        12                   10
 
Note:
      1.    No accessory building may encroach into the front yard beyond the
main structure.
Yard intrusions as provided in section
12-7-5 of this title shall not be considered to apply to accessory buildings of
two hundred (200) square feet or less and portable in nature in residential
zones. (Ord. 2014-01, 4-3-2014)
12-4E-9: FENCES AND WALLS:
   A.   Maximum Height: Fences and walls are permitted but not required. Such
fences and walls shall not exceed six feet four inches (6'4") in height, the
height of the flat vertical plane of which shall not exceed six feet (6'), and
where any portion of the same is located within the front yard setback, said
portion shall not exceed forty inches (40"), the height of the flat vertical
plane of which shall not exceed thirty six inches (36"), if said portion is
opaque, and fifty two inches (52"), the height of the flat vertical plane of
which shall not exceed forty eight inches (48"), if said fence is not opaque.
   B.   Barbed Wire; Chainlink: Fences shall not be made of barbed wire, unless
the fence borders an agricultural zone established by the town or county.
However, when special conditions warrant, and when approved by the planning and
zoning commission, security fences may be constructed of chainlink with not
more than three (3) strands of barbed wire on the top of the chainlink. In no
case will barbed wire be lower than six feet (6') above the ground.
   C.   Electric Fences: Electric fences are prohibited.
   D.   Finished Side: Fences having a finished side must be oriented with the
finished side to the street and adjacent lots. If two (2) property owners
jointly construct a fence, the owners may jointly determine on which side to
orient the finished side. (Ord. 2008-17, 8-21-2008)
12-4E-10: OFF STREET PARKING:
For off street parking requirements in the R-2 zone, see chapter 8 of this
title. (1987 Code § 17.20.090)
12-4E-11: SIGNS:
For sign requirements in the R-2 zone, see chapter 9 of this title. (1987 Code
§ 17.20.100)
ARTICLE F. R-3 ZONE
SECTION:
12-4F-1: Purpose
12-4F-2: Permitted Uses
12-4F-3: Conditional Uses
12-4F-4: Exemptions; Restrictions
12-4F-5: Minimum Floor Area
12-4F-6: Lot Requirements
12-4F-7: Height Limit And Construction
12-4F-8: Setbacks
12-4F-9: Fences And Walls
12-4F-10: Off Street Parking
12-4F-11: Signs
12-4F-1: PURPOSE:
This zone is intended as a high density residential area with lots having a
minimum area of six thousand (6,000) square feet with not more than one
dwelling on one lot. (1987 Code § 17.24.010)
12-4F-2: PERMITTED USES:
Only the following buildings, structures and uses are permitted in the R-
3 zone. No buildings or structures shall be erected, structurally altered, or
enlarged, or land used, except for the following purposes:
Educational institutions.
Public parks, playgrounds and athletic fields.
Single-family dwellings.
Two-family dwellings. (1987 Code § 17.24.020)
12-4F-3: CONDITIONAL USES 1 :
Uses which may be permitted in the R-3 zone subject to conditional use permits
are as follows:
Churches.
Daycare centers.
Funeral homes.
Multi-family dwellings, but no more than four (4) dwelling units per six
thousand (6,000) square feet of lot area.
Planned unit developments, provided such development complies with article L of
this chapter. (1987 Code § 17.24.030; amd. Ord. 10-2004, 10-7-2004)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection 12-4K-2B of this chapter.
12-4F-4: EXEMPTIONS; RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Exemptions: All residential buildings located within the R-3 zone shall
be exempt from the provisions of this code that requires uniform building code
requirements, except as may be required by the department of housing and urban
development.
   B.   Restrictions: All buildings which shall be built, placed or moved into
the R-3 zone after January 1, 2001, shall be certified by the manufacturer and
the owners that they are in compliance with all standards set forth by the
department of housing and urban development. No permit shall be issued by the
town of Lyman without said certifications. (Ord. 15-2004, 11-18-2004)
12-4F-5: MINIMUM FLOOR AREA:
Each dwelling unit in the R-3 zone shall have a minimum size of seven hundred
(700) square feet, exclusive of one-story open porches and garages. (1987 Code
§ 17.24.040)
12-4F-6: LOT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Lot Area: The minimum lot area in the R-3 zone shall be six thousand
(6,000) square feet.
   B.   Lot Dimensions: The minimum lot width in the R-3 zone shall be sixty
feet (60') for interior lots. Corner lots must be large enough to accommodate
setback and yard requirements.
   C.   Building Site: The building site for any use in the R-3 zone shall be
on an improved lot. (1987 Code § 17.24.050)
12-4F-7: HEIGHT LIMIT AND CONSTRUCTION:
The maximum building height for the dwelling structure (including attached
garage) shall be thirty five feet (35'). The maximum building height for an
accessory building shall be no more than the height of the dwelling structure
actually on the lot. Building height is measured from the highest point on the
lot. If the dwelling structure is less than twenty feet (20') in height, any
accessory building designed primarily to be storage for a vehicle shall not be
required to be less than twenty feet (20') in height. The roof pitch of all
buildings over three hundred (300) square feet shall be no less than a four
inch (4") rise to a twelve inch (12") run. (Ord. 2009-10, 10-15-2009)
12-4F-8: SETBACKS:
Setback requirements in the R-3 zone are as follows:
   A.   Main Structure:
      1.   Front Yard: Each lot in the R-3 zone shall have a front yard
extending across the full width of the subject property, a depth of not less
than twenty feet (20'). Except for drives and walks, there shall be no
structures located in a required front yard or in a required side yard abutting
a street (corner lot). It shall not be permitted to dismantle, repair, or keep
any inoperative vehicle in this front yard nor side yard abutting a street or
driveway.
      2.   Side Yard: There shall be a side yard on each side of the lot,
extending from the front yard, of not less than ten feet (10') on both sides of
an interior lot. A corner lot shall have a side yard abutting a street of not
less than twelve feet (12') and not less than ten feet (10') on the opposite
side yard.
      3.   Rear Yard: Each lot shall have a rear yard the full width of the lot
of a depth not less than ten feet (10'). (1987 Code § 17.24.070)
   B.   Accessory Buildings: Accessory buildings and uses shall be permitted
only to the extent necessary and normal to the limited types of uses permitted
in this zone. Accessory buildings are not used for residential purposes. All
accessory buildings which are not a part of the main building shall be
separated from the main building by at least three feet (3').
      ACCESSORY BUILDING SETBACK REQUIREMENTS IN FEET
Portable Accessory Buildings (Easily Moved By Sliding)
Building Square Feet Front Side Yard Side Yard Corner Lot Rear Yard
Portable Accessory Buildings (Easily Moved By Sliding)
Building Square Feet Front Side Yard Side Yard Corner Lot Rear Yard
0 - 120              201   1         12                   1
121 - 250            201   3         12                   3
Permanent Accessory Buildings
With Foundation Or Concrete Floor
Building Square Feet Front Side Yard Side Yard Corner Lot Rear Yard
0 - 1,200            201   10        12                   10
 
   Note:
      1.    No accessory building may encroach into the front yard beyond the
main structure.
Yard intrusions as provided in section
12-7-5 of this title shall not be considered to apply to accessory buildings of
two hundred (200) square feet or less and portable in nature in residential
zones. (Ord. 2014-01, 4-3-2014)
12-4F-9: FENCES AND WALLS:
   A.   Maximum Height: Fences and walls are permitted but not required. Such
fences and walls shall not exceed six feet four inches (6'4") in height, the
height of the flat vertical plane of which shall not exceed six feet (6'), and
where any portion of the same is located within the front yard setback, said
portion shall not exceed forty inches (40"), the height of the flat vertical
plane of which shall not exceed thirty six inches (36"), if said portion is
opaque, and fifty two inches (52"), the height of the flat vertical plane of
which shall not exceed forty eight inches (48"), if said fence is not opaque.
   B.   Barbed Wire; Chainlink: Fences shall not be made of barbed wire, unless
the fence borders an agricultural zone established by the town or county.
However, when special conditions warrant, and when approved by the planning and
zoning commission, security fences may be constructed of chainlink with not
more than three (3) strands of barbed wire on the top of the chainlink. In no
case will barbed wire be lower than six feet (6') above the ground.
   C.   Electric Fences: Electric fences are prohibited.
   D.   Finished Side: Fences having a finished side must be oriented with the
finished side to the street and adjacent lots. If two (2) property owners
jointly construct a fence, the owners may jointly determine on which side to
orient the finished side. (Ord. 2008-17, 8-21-2008)
12-4F-10: OFF STREET PARKING:
For off street parking requirements in the R-3 zone, see chapter 8 of this
title. (1987 Code § 17.24.090)
12-4F-11: SIGNS:
For sign requirements in the R-3 zone, see chapter 9 of this title. (1987 Code
§ 17.24.100)
ARTICLE G. C ZONE
SECTION:
12-4G-1: Purpose
12-4G-2: Permitted Uses
12-4G-3: Conditional Uses
12-4G-4: Building Code Certification; Foundations
12-4G-5: Lot Requirements
12-4G-6: Height Limit
12-4G-7: Setbacks
12-4G-8: Fences And Walls
12-4G-9: Off Street Parking
12-4G-10: Signs
12-4G-1: PURPOSE:
This zone is intended to provide for commercial locations within the town,
convenient to residential areas, agricultural areas and the general public for
the purpose of buying, selling and trading goods and services, and allowing for
pedestrian as well as automotive traffic. (1987 Code § 17.28.010)
12-4G-2: PERMITTED USES:
The primary objective of this zone is to provide locations for people
collectively or individually to conduct a wide variety of retail or wholesale
business ventures and entrepreneurship conducive to free enterprise and a free
market system. Buildings and structures erected, altered or enlarged and land
used for any business transactions shall comply with codes, permits,
allowances, restrictions, etc., as provided by the laws and ordinances of the
town code. Examples of permitted uses are as follows:
Agricultural implements and sales.
Antique shops and stores.
Apparel and accessory stores.
Automobile accessory and supply stores.
Automobile and truck sales and service.
Automobile parking lots.
Bakery and pastry shops.
Banks and financial institutions.
Barbershops and beauty shops.
Bars and cocktail lounges.
Book and stationery stores.
Bowling alleys.
Bus passenger stations.
Car washes.
Churches.
Commercial enterprises.
Convenience food markets.
Department stores and shopping centers.
Drive-in or walk-in eating places.
Drugstores and prescription shops.
Dry cleaning and laundry establishments.
Dry goods and notions stores.
Dwellings on floors other than the ground floor.
Electric and telephone substations.
Fix it shops (radios, televisions and small household appliances).
Florist and gift shops.
Furniture and home furnishings stores.
Government and public buildings:
Fire stations, police stations, jails, public administration buildings.
Libraries and museums (public).
Parks, playgrounds and community buildings owned and operated by a public
agency.
Postal terminals.
Grocery, fruit, vegetable and meat stores.
Hardware, glass and paint stores.
Hotels.
Household and appliance stores.
Jewelry and craft stores and shops.
Laundry and launderettes.
Mail order catalog stores.
Medical, dental and health clinics.
Membership clubs and recreation centers.
Mobile home sales and service.
Music stores and studios.
Offices and office buildings.
Opticians, and optometrists' shops.
Package liquor stores.
Pet shops.
Photo shops.
Print shops.
Restaurants.
Shoe stores and shoe repair.
Sporting and athletic goods stores.
Stores and shops similar to the uses listed in this section.
Taverns and bars.
Theaters (indoor only).
Utility company offices.
Variety stores. (1987 Code § 17.28.020)
12-4G-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Uses which may be permitted in the commercial zone subject to conditional use
permits are as follows:
Convenience stores that dispense gasoline.
Gaming establishments.
Mini-storage units.
Repair garages for automobiles, motorcycles, and boats. (Ord. 6-94, 10-20-1994;
amd. Ord. 10-2004, 10-7-2004; Ord. 12-2004, 10-7-2004)
12-4G-4: BUILDING CODE CERTIFICATION; FOUNDATIONS:
   A.   Prohibited Businesses And Uses: Businesses and uses that should be
located in an industrial zone as provided for in article H of this chapter may
not permitted in a C zone.
   B.   Uniform Building Code Certification Required: Any person desiring to
use a lot for a permitted or conditionally permitted use must acquire a
building permit for any and all buildings or improvements to the land. All
applicants for building permits for the C zone must certify, under oath, that
the building, structure or improvement will conform to the uniform building
code as adopted. An improvement which does not comply with the uniform building
code will not be permitted.
   C.   Foundations: All residential structures which are to be located in a C
zone must be placed on a permanent foundation on which the weight or load
bearing is around the outer perimeter of the building and not on jacks or in
the center of the structure. All foundations must meet uniform building code
standards. (Ord. 16-00, 12-21-2000, eff. 1-1-2001)
12-4G-5: LOT REQUIREMENTS:
Lots of record on the effective date hereof whose area or dimensions are less
than those required in this zone, may be occupied by uses permitted, subject to
all other property development standards of the C zone.
   A.   Lot Area: The minimum lot area shall be five thousand (5,000) square
feet.
   B.   Lot Dimensions: The minimum lot dimensions shall be: Minimum lot width,
fifty feet (50'). (1987 Code § 17.28.040)
12-4G-6: HEIGHT LIMIT:
The maximum building or structural height in the C zone shall be thirty five
feet (35'); provided, that a greater height may be allowed on obtaining a
conditional use permit; and provided, that when the zone abuts a residential
zone, then the maximum building or structural height shall not be greater than
thirty five feet (35') for a distance of fifty feet (50') from the zone
boundary abutting the residential zone. (1987 Code § 17.28.050)
12-4G-7: SETBACKS:
Setback requirements in the C zone are as follows:
   A.   Front Yard: Structures may be constructed on the front property line.
However, no structure may be constructed closer than forty feet (40') from the
centerline of the street.
   B.   Side Yard:
      1.   No side yard is required between commercial structures.
      2.   When abutting a residential zone, there shall be a side yard of not
less than ten feet (10') in width on that side of the property abutting the
residential zone.
   C.   Rear Yard:
      1.   No rear yard is required when property abuts property in a
commercial zone.
      2.   When abutting a residential zone, the required rear yard shall be
ten feet (10'). (1987 Code § 17.28.060)
12-4G-8: FENCES AND WALLS:
   A.   Maximum Height: Fences and walls are permitted but not required. Such
fences and walls shall not exceed six feet four inches (6'4") in height, the
height of the flat vertical plane of which shall not exceed six feet (6'), and
where any portion of the same is located within the front yard setback, said
portion shall not exceed forty inches (40"), the height of the flat vertical
plane of which shall not exceed thirty six inches (36"), if said portion is
opaque, and fifty two inches (52"), the height of the flat vertical plane of
which shall not exceed forty eight inches (48"), if said fence is not opaque.
   B.   Barbed Wire; Chainlink: Fences shall not be made of barbed wire, unless
the fence borders an agricultural zone established by the town or county.
However, when special conditions warrant, and when approved by the planning and
zoning commission, security fences may be constructed of chainlink with not
more than three (3) strands of barbed wire on the top of the chainlink. In no
case will barbed wire be lower than six feet (6') above the ground.
   C.   Electric Fences: Electric fences are prohibited.
   D.   Finished Side: Fences having a finished side must be oriented with the
finished side to the street and adjacent lots. If two (2) property owners
jointly construct a fence, the owners may jointly determine on which side to
orient the finished side. (Ord. 2008-17, 8-21-2008)
12-4G-9: OFF STREET PARKING:
For off street parking requirements in the C zone, see chapter 8 of this title.
(1987 Code § 17.28.080)
12-4G-10: SIGNS:
For sign requirements in the C zone, see chapter 9 of this title. (1987 Code §
17.28.090)
ARTICLE H. L-I AND H-I ZONES
SECTION:
12-4H-1: L-I Zone
12-4H-2: H-I Zone
12-4H-3: Administratively Permitted Uses
12-4H-4: Building Code Certification; Foundations
12-4H-5: Lot Requirements
12-4H-6: Height Limit
12-4H-7: Setbacks
12-4H-8: Fences And Walls
12-4H-9: Off Street Parking
12-4H-10: Signs
12-4H-1: L-I ZONE:
   A.   Established; Purpose: A light industrial (L-I) zone is created to
provide for an area where light industry, as enumerated in this section, may be
established. (1987 Code § 17.32.010)
   B.   Permitted And Conditional Uses: Only the following buildings,
structures and uses conducted either singly or in combination, as provided for
in this section, are permitted in the L-I zone. No building or structure shall
be erected, structurally altered or land used except for the following
purposes:
      1.   Permitted Uses:
Commercial:
Commercial uses customarily incidental and directly related to the services or
operations of the permitted industrial uses:
Administrative offices.
Restaurants and cafes.
Lumberyards (open storage area permitted).
Maintenance services.
Repair garages for automobiles, motorcycles and boats.
Utilities:
Distribution plants and substations.
Service yards.
Wholesaling and warehousing, including miniwarehouses.
Other:
Automobile service stations.
Drugs.
Pest control services.
Printing and publishing.
Research and development.
      2.   Uses Subject To Conditional Use Permit:
Fabrication:
Assembly of electric and electronic equipment.
Fabrication of products from finished rubber.
Metals.
Wood and wood products.
Helicopter landing areas.
Oil and gas wells. (1987 Code § 17.32.020)
12-4H-2: H-I ZONE:
   A.   Established; Purpose: A heavy industrial (H-I) zone is created to
provide for an area where heavy industry, as enumerated in this section, may be
established. (1987 Code § 17.12.030)
   B.   Permitted And Conditional Uses: Only the following buildings,
structures and uses, conducted either singly or in combination, as provided for
under this section, are permitted in the H-I zone. No building or structure
shall be erected, structurally altered or land used except for the following
purposes:
      1.   Permitted Uses:
Commercial:
Commercial uses customarily incidental and directly related to the services or
operations of the permitted industrial uses: administrative offices.
Lumberyards (open storage area permitted).
Maintenance service.
Fabrication:
Assembly of electric and electronic equipment.
Fabrication of products from finished rubber.
Metals.
Wood and wood products.
Manufacturing:
Manufacturing, compounding, assembly or treatment of articles from the
following prepared materials:
Canvas.
Cellophane.
Cloth.
Cork.
Feathers.
Felt and fiber.
Glass.
Metals.
Paper.
Plaster.
Plastics or synthetics.
Putty.
Shells.
Tobacco.
Wax and/or wood.
Novelties manufacture.
Repair garages for automobiles, motorcycles and boats.
Utilities:
Distribution plants and substations.
Service yards.
Wholesaling and warehousing.
Other:
Pest control service.
Railroad services, maintenance and storage.
Research and development.
Trucks, heavy equipment service and storage.
      2.   Uses Subject To Conditional Use Permit:
Helicopter landing areas.
Junkyards.
Miniwarehouses.
Oil and gas refineries and processing plants.
Oil and gas wells.
Sexually oriented businesses. (1987 Code § 17.32.040; amd. Ord. 9-99, 1-5-2000)
12-4H-3: ADMINISTRATIVELY PERMITTED USES:
Other buildings and uses for either the L-I zone or the H-I zone may be
permitted as an administrative act of the planning and zoning commission,
provided a public hearing is held, and the planning commission determines and
finds as a fact that such buildings and uses are similar to those listed in the
sections preceding; and provided further, that such other uses shall not have
any different or detrimental effect upon the adjoining neighborhood area or
zones than such specifically permitted uses and shall not increase the traffic
and noises in the neighborhood or otherwise be more objectionable or obnoxious
than those uses specifically permitted. (1987 Code § 17.32.050)
12-4H-4: BUILDING CODE CERTIFICATION; FOUNDATIONS:
   A.   Uniform Building Code Certification Required: Any person desiring to
use a lot for a permitted or conditionally permitted use must acquire a
building permit for any and all buildings or improvements to the land. All
applicants for building permits for the L-I and H-I zones must certify, under
oath, that the building, structure or improvement will conform to the uniform
building code as adopted. An improvement which does not comply with the uniform
building code will not be permitted.
   B.   Foundations: All residential structures which are to be located in the
L-I and H-I zones must be placed on a permanent foundation on which the weight
or load bearing is around the outer perimeter of the building and not on jacks
or in the center of the structure. All foundations must meet uniform building
code standards. (Ord. 16-00, 12-21-2000, eff. 1-1-2001)
12-4H-5: LOT REQUIREMENTS:
The minimum lot area in either industrial zone shall be five thousand (5,000)
square feet and the minimum lot width shall be fifty feet (50'). (1987 Code §
17.32.060)
12-4H-6: HEIGHT LIMIT:
The maximum building or structural height in either industrial zone shall be
six (6) stories, or seventy feet (70'), whichever is the lesser. (1987 Code §
17.32.070)
12-4H-7: SETBACKS:
Setback requirements in the L-I and H-I zones are as follows:
   A.   Front Yard: No building shall be erected closer than twenty feet (20')
to the property line fronting on a street or highway.
   B.   Side Yard: When property abuts upon a lot in a residential zone, the
required side yard shall be thirty feet (30'). Otherwise, no side yard is
required.
   C.   Rear Yard: When property abuts any lot in a residential zone, the
required rear yard shall be thirty feet (30'). Otherwise, no rear yard is
required. (1987 Code § 17.32.080)
12-4H-8: FENCES AND WALLS:
   A.   Maximum Height: Fences and walls are permitted but not required in the
L-I and H-I zones. Such fences and walls shall not exceed twelve feet (12') in
height.
   B.   Barbed Wire; Chainlink: Fences in L-I and H-I zones may be constructed
of chainlink and may have not more than three (3) strands of barbed wire on the
top of the chainlink. (1987 Code § 17.32.090)
12-4H-9: OFF STREET PARKING:
For off street parking requirements in the H-I and L-I zones, see chapter 8 of
this title. (1987 Code § 17.32.100)
12-4H-10: SIGNS:
For sign requirements in the H-I and L-I zones, see chapter 9 of this title.
(1987 Code § 17.32.110)
ARTICLE I. A ZONE
SECTION:
12-4I-1: Purpose
12-4I-2: Permitted Uses
12-4I-3: Conditional Uses
12-4I-4: Accessory Buildings And Uses
12-4I-5: Certification; Exemptions
12-4I-6: Setbacks
12-4I-7: Lot Requirements
12-4I-8: Off Street Parking
12-4I-9: Signs
12-4I-1: PURPOSE:
This zone is intended to provide an area for large farm and ranch operations
with such residential uses as are necessary and subordinate to the primary
purpose of farming and ranching. (1987 Code § 17.36.010)
12-4I-2: PERMITTED USES:
Only the following buildings, structures and uses are permitted in the A zone.
No buildings and structures shall be erected, structurally altered or enlarged,
or land used, except for the following purposes:
Agriculture and ranching in general, excluding feedlots.
Cemeteries.
Golf courses.
Living quarters used only for housing of persons employed on the premises and
their immediate families (a mobile home may be used); provided, that all living
units meet or exceed state standards for water supply and sewage disposal.
Small animal breeding and raising, including commercial kennels.
Stables and riding academies. (1987 Code § 17.36.020)
12-4I-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Uses which may be permitted in A zones subject to conditional use permits are
as follows:
Campgrounds.
Carnivals, circuses, temporary rodeos, auto and/or motorcycle raceways, and
similar types of outdoor commercial entertainment.
Dairying.
Guest ranches, hunting lodges and commercial recreational facilities.
Helicopter landing areas.
Membership clubs.
Mining and quarrying.
Oil and gas wells.
Rest and convalescent homes, hospitals and clinics.
Sanitary landfills.
Sewage treatment facilities. (1987 Code § 17.36.030; amd. Ord. 10-2004, 10-7-
2004)
12-4I-4: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND USES:
Accessory buildings and uses shall be permitted only to the extent necessary
and incidental to the types of uses permitted in this zone. (1987 Code §
17.36.040)
12-4I-5: CERTIFICATION; EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   Exemptions: All residential buildings located in the A zone shall be
exempt from the provisions of title 9, chapter 2 of this code except as may be
required by the department of housing and urban development.
   B.   Restrictions: All buildings which shall be built, placed or moved into
the A zone after January 1, 2000, shall be certified by the manufacturer and
the owner that they are in compliance with all standards set forth by the
department of housing and urban development. No permit shall issued by the town
without said certifications. (Ord. 16-00, 12-21-2000, eff. 1-1-2001)
12-4I-6: SETBACKS:
Setback requirements in the A zone are as follows:
   A.   Front Yard: No building fronting on a street or highway shall be
erected closer that fifty feet (50') from the property line.
   B.   Side Yard: No building shall be erected closer than twenty feet (20')
to any side property line.
   C.   Rear Yard: No building shall be erected closer than fifty feet (50') to
the rear property line. (1987 Code § 17.36.050)
12-4I-7: LOT REQUIREMENTS:
The minimum lot area in the A zone shall be fifteen (15) acres. (1987 Code §
17.36.060)
12-4I-8: OFF STREET PARKING:
For off street parking requirements in the A zone, see chapter 8 of this title.
(1987 Code § 17.36.070)
12-4I-9: SIGNS:
For sign requirements in the A zone, see chapter 9 of this title. (1987 Code §
17.36.080)
ARTICLE J. O ZONE
SECTION:
12-4J-1: Purpose
12-4J-2: Permitted Uses
12-4J-3: Conditional Uses
12-4J-4: Accessory Buildings And Uses
12-4J-5: Building Code Certification; Foundations
12-4J-1: PURPOSE:
This zone is intended as an area of open space within the community which may
be used for outdoor recreational purposes. (1987 Code § 17.40.010)
12-4J-2: PERMITTED USES:
Only the following buildings, structures and uses are permitted in O zones. No
buildings or structures shall be erected, structurally altered or land used
except for the following purposes:
Campgrounds.
Fairgrounds.
Outdoor sports arenas, including roping and rodeo.
Parks and playgrounds. (1987 Code § 17.40.020)
12-4J-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Uses which may be permitted in O zones subject to conditional use permits are
as follows:
Overnight trailer parks.
Power substations or public utility operations facilities.
Recreational services, not service stations, motels or hotels. (1987 Code §
17.40.030; amd. Ord. 10-2004, 10-7-2004)
12-4J-4: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND USES:
Accessory buildings and uses shall be permitted only to the extent necessary
and normal to the limited types of uses permitted in this zone. Accessory
buildings may only be used for residential purposes for those persons necessary
for the operation of uses permitted in this zone. All residences must have town
approved services. (1987 Code § 17.40.040)
12-4J-5: BUILDING CODE CERTIFICATION; FOUNDATIONS:
   A.   Uniform Building Code Certification Required: Any person desiring to
use a lot for a permitted or conditionally permitted use must acquire a
building permit for any and all buildings or improvements to the land. All
applicants for building permits for the O zone must certify, under oath, that
the building, structure or improvement will conform to the uniform building
code as adopted. An improvement which does not comply with the uniform building
code will not be permitted.
   B.   Foundations: All residential structures which are to be located in the
O zone must be placed on a permanent foundation on which the weight or load
bearing is around the outer perimeter of the building and not on jacks or in
the center of the structure. All foundations must meet uniform building code
standards. (Ord. 16-00, 12-21-2000, eff. 1-1-2001)
ARTICLE K. M ZONE
SECTION:
12-4K-1: Purpose
12-4K-2: Location Of Mobile Homes
12-4K-3: Compliance With Article
12-4K-4: Certification; Exemptions
12-4K-5: Density; Setbacks
12-4K-6: Access
12-4K-7: Water Supply
12-4K-8: Sewage Disposal
12-4K-9: Lighting
12-4K-10: Utilities; Fire Protection
12-4K-11: Sanitation
12-4K-12: Skirting And Additions
12-4K-13: Mobile Home Maintenance
12-4K-14: Mobile Home Park
12-4K-15: Mobile Homes Outside Mobile Home Parks; Standards
12-4K-16: Camper Parks; Special Standards
12-4K-17: Age Overlay
12-4K-18: Conflicts Between Ordinance And Rules
12-4K-19: License Transfer Or Suspension; Reapplication
12-4K-20: Fences And Walls
12-4K-21: Height Limit
12-4K-22: Permitted Uses
12-4K-1: PURPOSE:
A mobile home park (M) zone is created to provide for an area where mobile
homes can be situated for year round living. Mobile home parks shall be
permitted in the M zone and may be established in R-3 zones with a conditional
use permit; provided, that they comply with all subdivision and zoning
requirements as provided by law. (1987 Code § 17.44.010)
12-4K-2: LOCATION OF MOBILE HOMES:
   A.   Prohibited: Mobile home units are not permitted in C, L-I, or H-
I zones.
   B.   Mobile Home Parks: Mobile home parks are allowed in M zones or in R-
3 zones with a conditional use permit. (Ord. 2006-01, 3-2-2006)
   C.   Singlewide And Doublewide Mobile Homes: Singlewide mobile homes and
doublewide mobile homes on private lots are allowed in R-3 and A zones.
Doublewide mobile homes on private lots are allowed in R-2 zones, singlewide
mobile homes are not allowed in R-1 and R-2 zones. Placement of a mobile home
must comply with all relevant zoning regulations set forth in this code. The
connection of two (2) or more unisectioned mobile home units, not manufactured,
constructed and intended expressly for the purpose of joining single sections
together to provide one continuous living space are strictly prohibited. (Ord.
2008-1, 3-20-2008)
12-4K-3: COMPLIANCE WITH ARTICLE:
   A.   Required: All new and existing mobile home parks and camper parks will
be required to meet all applicable standards as set forth in this article prior
to receiving the town's approval and a business license to operate.
   B.   Existing Mobile Home Parks And Camper Parks: All existing mobile home
parks and camper parks must be licensed within sixty (60) days of the enactment
or revision of this article. Conditions which exist as of the revision of this
article which are contrary to portions hereof will be allowed to remain until
the mobile home unit or camper unit causing the contrary condition is moved.
Any mobile home unit or camper unit then parked or set shall comply to all
conditions herein.
   C.   New Mobile Home Parks And Camper Parks: All new mobile home parks and
camper parks must meet all standards prior to being granted a business license
to operate. (1987 Code § 17.44.030)
12-4K-4: CERTIFICATION; EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   Exemptions: All residential buildings located within the M zone shall
be exempt from the provisions of title 9, chapter 2 of this code except as may
be required by the department of housing and urban development.
   B.   Restrictions: All buildings which shall be built, placed or moved into
the M zone after January 1, 2001, shall be certified by the manufacturer and
the owner that they are in compliance with all standards set forth by the
department of housing and urban development. No permit shall issue by the town
without said certifications. (Ord. 16-00, 12-21-2000, eff. 1-1-2001)
12-4K-5: DENSITY; SETBACKS:
   A.   Density:
      1.   Maximum Number Of Spaces: No mobile home park shall have a density
of more than seven (7) spaces per acre.
      2.   Minimum Area Of Each Space: Each space shall have a minimum area of
three thousand two hundred (3,200) square feet and shall not be less than forty
feet (40') in width at the unit's location.
      3.   Unit Boundaries: The boundaries of each unit shall be clearly
defined.
      4.   Occupied Space: The mobile home shall not occupy more than seventy
five percent (75%) of any space.
      5.   Camper Park Spaces: Each camper park unit shall be a minimum of
twenty five feet (25') in width and each unit space shall have a minimum area
of nine hundred (900) square feet. (1987 Code § 17.44.040)
      6.   Number Of Residences Per Lot: No more than one residence shall be
contained on a single lot. (Ord. 2009-06, 7-16-2009)
   B.   Common Areas: Not less than five percent (5%) of the gross site area
shall be designated as common areas.
   C.   Direct Access To Public Streets: For mobile home park spaces having
direct access to public streets, no part of any mobile home or camper unit,
including parts used for towing shall be closer than twenty feet (20') from the
park boundary line abutting the public street or highway. All mobile home and
camper units shall be located at least fifteen feet (15') from any park
boundary abutting upon a public street or highway but not having direct access
to the street or highway. All mobile home and camper units shall be located at
least ten feet (10') from other park boundary lines.
   D.   Distance Between Units: There shall be a minimum distance of fifteen
feet (15') between the mobile home unit or camper unit and abutting park
street.
   E.   Structures On Adjoining Lots: Structures on adjoining lots shall be no
closer than twenty feet (20') apart. Unless attached to another structure on
the same space, all structures on the same lot shall be at least ten feet (10')
apart.
   F.   Distance From Service Buildings: There shall be a minimum of twenty
feet (20') between a mobile home or camper unit and any service building(s).
   G.   Address Display; Space Designation: For mobile home park spaces having
direct access to public streets, each space shall display a street address as
assigned by the town. Each address display shall be readily discernible from
the public street. All mobile home park spaces having direct access to roads
within the park shall discernably display a space number or designation. Such
space designation shall be logically assigned to allow easy location. (1987
Code § 17.44.040)
12-4K-6: ACCESS:
   A.   Roads: All roads in the park shall be a minimum of twenty four feet
(24') in width. All roads shall be improved and brought up to an acceptable
standard to adequately handle the proposed traffic load of the mobile home
court.
   B.   Walkways: All weather walkways of three feet (3') minimum width shall
be provided for each mobile home space. These walkways shall be of a permanent
nature, constructed of concrete or asphalt or some other material acceptable to
the planning and zoning commission. No walkways are required in a camper park.
(1987 Code § 17.44.050)
12-4K-7: WATER SUPPLY:
Water supply for mobile home parks must comply with town and state standards.
(1987 Code § 17.44.060)
12-4K-8: SEWAGE DISPOSAL:
The sewage disposal system for mobile home parks must comply with town and
state standards. (1987 Code § 17.44.070)
12-4K-9: LIGHTING:
Adequate lighting shall be provided for all portions of the mobile home park
and camper park. (1987 Code § 17.44.080)
12-4K-10: UTILITIES; FIRE PROTECTION:
   A.   Standards: All utilities shall meet state and local requirements.
   B.   Fire Protection:
      1.   Required: All mobile home parks shall meet the minimum standards for
fire protection in mobile home parks as set forth by the state department of
fire protection and electrical safety and Wyoming mobile home park and
campground regulations.
      2.   Approved Plan: An approved plan for providing adequate fire
protection to the park shall be presented. Approval shall be by the town fire
department. (1987 Code § 17.44.090)
12-4K-11: SANITATION:
   A.   Drainage: The mobile home court and camper park shall be graded and
adequately drained to alleviate any potential health or safety problems.
   B.   Garbage Disposal: Each mobile home court and camper park shall set
forth a plan on how garbage disposal is to be handled. Each mobile home space,
either individually or as a group, shall be provided or required to provide
adequate garbage containers having tightfitting lids. Refuse shall be collected
and disposed of at least once per week.
   C.   Insect And Rodent Control: In order to provide adequate insect and
rodent control, every mobile home park and camper park shall be kept free of
rubbish and maintained in a sanitary condition at all times. All harborages for
insects and rodents shall be eliminated and prevented. Flies and mosquitoes
shall be controlled. (1987 Code § 17.44.100)
12-4K-12: SKIRTING AND ADDITIONS:
   A.   Skirting: Skirting of all mobile homes shall be required within thirty
(30) days after occupying a space in the mobile home park 1 .
   B.   Additions: Additions to mobile homes such as covered porches,
additions, etc., with the exception of open steps of less than forty (40)
square feet per landing, shall be prohibited, unless they are provided for in
the approved plan of the mobile home park. The connection of two (2) single
wide, unisectioned mobile home units, not manufactured, constructed, and
intended expressly for the purpose of joining single sections together to
provide one continuous living space shall be strictly prohibited in mobile home
parks. (1987 Code § 17.44.110)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  12-6-5 of this title.
12-4K-13: MOBILE HOME MAINTENANCE:
   A.   The integrity of each mobile home occupying a space in a mobile home
park shall be maintained. That is, doors shall be capable of being locked and
shall be secured at all times when unoccupied, glass windows shall be intact
and any broken glass shall be replaced at once, any exterior surface or siding
shall be maintained and kept in place and the general appearance of the mobile
home shall be maintained at all times.
   B.   Any mobile home or motor home occupying a space in a mobile home park
that is not used as a residence or is otherwise unoccupied for a period of four
(4) months or more must be removed by the owner of said mobile home park.
   C.   Failure to comply with the provisions of this section constitutes a
misdemeanor punishable by not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00)
in fines. Each day of continuing violation may constitute a separate offense.
Either the owner of the mobile or motor home may be charged, or the mobile home
park owner or both. A misdemeanor herein shall not bar any other remedy by the
town under law or equity, including the initiation of abatement proceedings.
(Ord. 2012-10, 12-20-2012)
12-4K-14: MOBILE HOME PARK:
   A.   Business License Requirements:
      1.   Application: Each mobile home park owner or camper park owner shall
make application with the town for a mobile home park business license.
      2.   Plans, Drawings And Specifications: Each application for a new
mobile home park or camper park business license shall be accompanied by the
necessary plans, drawings and specifications to show that the proposed park
will meet all of the necessary standards as set forth in this chapter.
      3.   Transmittal To State Agencies: Sufficient copies of drawings and
specifications must be provided along with letters of transmittal to the
necessary state agencies for approval, or copies of letters of transmittal to
the necessary state agencies requesting their review and requesting copies of
their review be forwarded to the town.
      4.   Fee: Initial applications for new mobile home parks or camper parks
shall be accompanied by a fee as determined by the town council.
      5.   Review: All new applications for a mobile home park and camper park
business licenses shall be reviewed by the planning and zoning commission and
town council. Review comments and recommendations shall be forwarded to the
applicant within thirty five (35) days after receipt of the original
application.
      6.   Construction: After receipt of approval for construction from the
town council, the applicant may proceed with construction. It is unlawful to
begin any construction on a mobile home park or camper park in the absence of
this approval.
      7.   Inspection: During the time of construction and the completion of
construction, the town shall provide for inspectors to inspect construction as
per specifics set forth in the letter of construction approval. Upon final
completion of the mobile home park or camper park, notice shall be made to the
designated inspector to make final inspection and to file his inspection report
with the commission.
      8.   Granting Of Mobile Home Park Business License: Upon receiving the
final inspection report, the planning and zoning commission shall recommend
granting or denial to the town council. The council shall grant the final
permit and license and shall sign such license and direct its transmittal to
the applicant upon the payment of any inspection fees as may be necessary.
      9.   Appeal: Applicants shall have the right to appeal any ruling or ask
for a variance from any standards as set forth in this article according to the
variance procedure as set forth in chapter 11 of this title.
      10.   Penalty: Failure to obtain approval prior to construction and the
operation of a mobile home park or camper park without a town license shall be
punishable by a fine of not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for
each offense. Each day's continuance shall be deemed a separate offense. (1987
Code § 17.44.140)
   B.   License Renewal: Each mobile home park or camper park shall be required
to renew the mobile home park or camper park business license on January 1 of
each year.
      1.   Existing Parks: Mobile home parks or camper parks existing at the
time of adoption hereof will be required to apply for a mobile home park or
camper park business license under this subsection.
      2.   Temporary Suspension: Mobile home park business licenses may be
temporarily suspended by the inspector upon violation by the holder of any of
the terms of these town standards or revoked after an opportunity for a hearing
by the town council upon serious or repeated violation. (1987 Code § 17.44.150)
   C.   Changes To Park; Approval Before Licensing: Any changes which have been
made in the mobile home park or camper park during the past year shall have
been approved under new construction. The date of approval shall be noted on
the application for renewal.
      1.   Inspection; Report: Inspection shall be made of the mobile home park
or camper park and reports shall be filed with the planning and zoning
commission.
      2.   Recommendations To Town Council: The planning and zoning commission
shall make recommendations to the town council concerning the granting of
licenses. They may recommend, based upon the inspector's report, that the
license be granted with the provision that certain things be brought up to
standards within sixty (60) days of granting of license.
      3.   Grant Of License: The town council shall, upon recommendation of the
planning and zoning commission, grant a license to the mobile home park or
camper park. (1987 Code § 17.44.160)
   D.   Inspection: Inspection may be made at any time by the town to determine
adherence to standards and recommendations. Such reports may be used in lieu of
the inspection reports in subsection C of this section at the time of
application, if they are considered by the commission to be current and
applicable. All mobile home park or camper park owners and operators shall
grant reasonable access to designated inspectors. (1987 Code § 17.44.170)
   E.   Register Required: Every mobile home park owner or operator shall
maintain a register containing a record of all mobile homes, travel trailers,
truck campers, tent trailers and tents using the mobile home park or camper
park. The register shall be current. (Ord. 16-00, 12-21-2000, eff. 1-1-2001)
12-4K-15: MOBILE HOMES OUTSIDE MOBILE HOME PARKS; STANDARDS:
When the number of mobile home spaces either planned or to be installed will be
less than six (6) spaces, the regulations of the underlying zone shall fully
apply, provided, however:
   A.   Building Permit; Variance: A building permit and a variance from the
planning and zoning commission must be secured prior to setting up the mobile
home on the lot.
   B.   Foundations: Foundations are to be reinforced concrete at least six
inches (6") thick, or equal, and to be continued without interruption around
and under the structure. (1987 Code § 17.44.180)
   C.   Skirting: Skirting on the mobile home shall be continued without
interruption around and under the structure. Skirting shall be completed within
thirty (30) days of placement of the mobile home and shall be constructed of
the same material as the mobile home siding or a previously approved acceptable
substitute approved by planning and zoning at the time of variance. (Ord. 13-
92, 12-17-1992)
   D.   Minimum Width: The mobile home must have a minimum width of twenty feet
(20'). The connection of two (2) single wide, unisectioned mobile home units,
not manufactured, constructed and intended expressly for the purpose of joining
single sections together to provide one continuous living space are strictly
prohibited.
   E.   Sewer Connections: Sewer connections must be of a positive type and the
water hookup must be of an approved type.
   F.   Additions; Alterations; New Structures: Any additions or alterations or
new structures such as accessory buildings shall require a building permit.
   G.   Electrical Service: Electrical service from the maker loop to the
mobile home shall comply with existing national and state electrical codes.
   H.   Siding: Siding shall be house type siding.
   I.   Walls: Walls to be made of at least two inches by four inches (2" x 4")
thickness with firebreaks installed to meet state fire code specifications and
to be sheeted with sheetrock, drywall or equivalent.
   J.   Roofing Material: All roofing material must meet or exceed the
requirements of the Wyoming state fire code, latest edition. (1987 Code §
17.44.180)
   K.   Roof Overhangs: For all other mobile or manufactured homes, the roof
overhangs shall not be less than six inches (6") measured from the vertical
side of the building. (Ord. 11-00, 8-17-2000; amd. Ord. 17-2002, 10-17-2002)
   L.   Finished Floor Height: The finished floor height of the closest to
ground level shall be no more than thirty inches (30") higher than the finished
lot grade measured at the sidewalk next to the street closest to the mobile or
manufactured home. (Ord. 10-98, 2-18-1999)
12-4K-16: CAMPER PARKS; SPECIAL STANDARDS:
   A.   Variance From General Provisions: The following variances from the
general provisions are made only for camper parks or parts of mobile home parks
catering to overnight campers providing facilities for truck campers, travel
trailers, tents and tent trailers:
      1.   Unit Size: Each designated unit space providing for a truck camper,
travel trailer, tent or tent trailer shall contain a minimum of nine hundred
(900) square feet.
      2.   Table; Solid Waste Disposal Facilities: Each designated unit space
provided for tenting units shall be provided with a table and easy access to
both liquid and solid waste disposal facilities.
      3.   Kitchen Or Sink Wastewater: Provisions shall be made for the
approved disposal of kitchen or sink wastewater at each designated unit space
for camper units in a manner approved by the state health department.
      4.   Distance From Service Building: No unit space serving a dependent
travel trailer, truck camper or tent or tenting unit shall be located further
than three hundred feet (300') radially from the service building. Unit spaces
further than this distance must be designated for and used by independent units
only.
   B.   Water Supply: The water supply shall be approved by the state health
department and the water quality division of the department of environmental
quality, where applicable, as per specifications stated in prior sections of
this article.
   C.   Sewage Disposal: Sewage disposal shall be handled in a manner meeting
the requirements of the state health department and the state department of
environmental quality as provided for in prior sections of this article.
   D.   Service Building: Each park which permits dependent "mobile homes" and
dependent "travel trailers", dependent "truck campers" or "tenting units" as
defined in the definitions and each camper park shall provide a service
building equipped and meeting the specifications of the state health
department, with a minimum of one per twenty five (25) spaces. (1987 Code §
17.44.190)
12-4K-17: AGE OVERLAY:
   A.   Designation For Age Overlay: The opportunity for an age overlay
designation in the M zone is hereby created and provided, wherein mobile homes
constructed prior to twenty five (25) years before the date they are moved into
town may be placed for year round residential living. This section does not
prohibit mobile homes constructed more recently than twenty five (25) years
before the date it is moved into town from also being placed in this designated
overlay. (Ord. 2012-09, 12-20-2012)
   B.   Owner To Provide Overlay Map: The owner of the mobile home park
desiring an age overlay must submit a map to the town designating the portions,
lots, spaces or area of the mobile home park proposed for the age overlay, to
be reviewed by the planning and zoning commission and approved by the governing
body by ordinance.
   C.   Conditions For Age Overlay: The following conditions shall apply when
considering any age overlay proposal in the M zone:
      1.   The proposed lots, spaces, portions or areas of the mobile home park
shall be contiguous, excepting roads. The age overlay shall be in one clustered
area.
      2.   The proposed lots, spaces, portions or areas of the mobile home park
shall consist of no more than fifteen percent (15%) of the available space or
area in the mobile home park, excepting roads.
      3.   The proposed lots, spaces, portions or areas of the mobile home park
shall be the available area farthest removed (isolated) from public streets and
rights of way and other residential use areas within and outside the mobile
home park. (Ord. 2-99, 4-8-1999)
      4.   The mobile home park shall consist of no less than seven (7) lots
suitable for placement of individual singlewide mobile homes. (Ord. 2008-16, 8-
21-2008)
12-4K-18: CONFLICTS BETWEEN ORDINANCE AND RULES:
In the event any conflict shall exist between any section of this article and
administrative rules promulgated by the Wyoming department of health and social
services, that ordinance, section or rule requiring the stricter standard shall
apply. (1987 Code § 17.44.210)
12-4K-19: LICENSE TRANSFER OR SUSPENSION; REAPPLICATION:
   A.   Transferability: Business licenses shall not be transferable from one
person to another person or to a different location than originally issued.
(1987 Code § 17.44.250)
   B.   Suspension; Revocation: Town business licenses may be temporarily
suspended by the inspector upon violation by the holder of any of the terms of
these town standards or revoked after an opportunity for a hearing by the town
council upon serious or repeated violations.
   C.   Reapplication: Any mobile home park, the business license of which has
been suspended or revoked, may, at any time, make reapplication for the
reinstatement of the business license. (1987 Code § 17.44.240)
12-4K-20: FENCES AND WALLS:
   A.   Maximum Height: Fences and walls are permitted but not required. Such
fences and walls shall not exceed six feet four inches (6'4") in height, the
height of the flat vertical plane of which shall not exceed six feet (6'), and
where any portion of the same is located within the front yard setback, said
portion shall not exceed forty inches (40"), the height of the flat vertical
plane of which shall not exceed thirty six inches (36"), if said portion is
opaque, and fifty two inches (52"), the height of the flat vertical plane of
which shall not exceed forty eight inches (48"), if said fence is not opaque.
   B.   Barbed Wire; Chainlink: Fences shall not be made of barbed wire, unless
the fence borders an agricultural zone established by the town or county.
However, when special conditions warrant, and when approved by the planning and
zoning commission, security fences may be constructed of chainlink with not
more than three (3) strands of barbed wire on the top of the chainlink. In no
case will barbed wire be lower than six feet (6') above the ground.
   C.   Electric Fences: Electric fences are prohibited.
   D.   Finished Side: Fences having a finished side must be oriented with the
finished side to the street and adjacent lots. If two (2) property owners
jointly construct a fence, the owners may jointly determine on which side to
orient the finished side. (Ord. 2008-17, 8-21-2008)
12-4K-21: HEIGHT LIMIT:
The maximum building height for the dwelling structure (including attached
garage) shall be thirty five feet (35'). The maximum building height for an
accessory building shall be no more than twenty two feet (22'). Building height
is measured from the lowest point of the floor of the structure. The roof pitch
of all buildings over three hundred (300) square feet shall be no less than a
four inch (4") rise to a twelve inch (12") run. (Ord. 2009-10, 10-15-2009)
12-4K-22: PERMITTED USES:
Only the following buildings, structures and uses are permitted in the M zone.
No buildings or structures shall be erected, structurally altered or enlarged,
or land used, except for the following purposes:
Educational institutions.
Public parks, playgrounds and athletic fields.
Single-family dwellings (only 1 per lot). (Ord. 2015-05, 12-3-2015)
ARTICLE L. PUD ZONE
SECTION:
12-4L-1: Purpose
12-4L-2: Permitted Uses
12-4L-3: Area
12-4L-4: Boundary Amenities; Open Space; Setbacks
12-4L-5: Only Planned Uses Permitted
12-4L-6: Residential District Screening
12-4L-7: Application; Conditions And Modifications
12-4L-1: PURPOSE:
This zone is intended to encourage better and more flexible land use
development by allowing such development to be based upon a comprehensive,
integrated and detailed plan rather than upon specific constraints as
applicable to uniform lot by lot development while carrying out the intent and
purpose of the zoning regulations. (1987 Code § 17.48.010)
12-4L-2: PERMITTED USES:
Any use listed as a permitted or conditional use in the R, R-0, R-1, R-1-A, R-
2, R-3, R-4, RS, RS-1, C-1 or C-2 zones may be approved in any planned unit
development if such use, by location, characteristic or design, is deemed
compatible with the character of the planned unit development, and the area in
which the development is proposed, with the following exceptions: (1987 Code §
17.48.020; amd. 2004 Code)
   A.   In areas already zoned RS, RS-1, R or R-1, only those listed as
permitted or special uses in R, R-1, R-2, RS, RS-1 or C-2 may be approved in
any such planned unit development, if such use, by location, characteristic or
design, is deemed compatible with the character of the development, the zone in
which the proposed development exists, and the area in which the development is
proposed.
      1.   In an R, R-1, RS or RS-1 district, no planned unit development shall
have more than a ten percent (10%) increase in total density in the R-1 zone.
      2.   The concessions and retail services provided for the occupants of
the planned unit development in an R or R-1 district shall be located in a
separate building.
   B.   No planned unit development shall have more than a twenty percent (20%)
increase in total density allowed in the zone in which the development is
proposed. (1987 Code § 17.48.020)
12-4L-3: AREA:
The minimum area which may be considered for a planned unit development zone
shall be five (5) acres of contiguous land, unless the town council finds a
district of less than five (5) acres suitable as a planned unit development
district by virtue of its unique character. (1987 Code § 17.48.030)
12-4L-4: BOUNDARY AMENITIES; OPEN SPACE; SETBACKS:
   A.   Boundaries: Around the boundaries of the development, building height,
architecture and coverage shall be arranged to enhance the livability and
attractiveness of adjacent land uses. The yard and height requirements of the
adjacent zone may be required on the immediate periphery.
   B.   Open Area: Not more than eighty percent (80%) of the planned unit
development site shall be devoted to the construction of parking facilities,
streets, buildings, and accessory buildings. The remaining twenty percent (20%)
shall remain open.
   C.   Setbacks, Yard And Area Requirements: All setback, yard and area
requirements shall be determined by the planning and zoning commission. (1987
Code § 17.48.040)
12-4L-5: ONLY PLANNED USES PERMITTED:
All uses shall be restricted to those structures approved for said use in the
final development plan. (1987 Code § 17.48.050)
12-4L-6: RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT SCREENING:
Where a planned unit development adjoins any lot in any residential district,
there may be required along such property lines a fence and/or planting strip
as determined by the planning and zoning commission. (1987 Code § 17.48.060)
12-4L-7: APPLICATION; CONDITIONS AND MODIFICATIONS:
   A.   Amendments; Changes Of District Boundaries: The procedure for
amendments and changes of district boundaries as set forth in chapter 13 of
this title shall apply to the submission and approval of the preliminary
development plan for planned unit development.
   B.   Application; Preliminary Development Plan: The application to the
planning and zoning commission shall consist of a preliminary development plan
for the area showing unified and organized arrangements of buildings and
structures, their proposed uses, provisions for off street parking, internal
and external traffic circulation and service facilities, etc., and schematic
architectural drawings, landscape plans and sketches demonstrating the design
and character of the proposed development.
   C.   Criteria For Approval: No application shall be approved unless the
planning and zoning commission finds that the application:
      1.   Complies with all requirements imposed by this article and the
planning and zoning commission;
      2.   Is consistent with the objectives and purposes of this title;
      3.   Is designed to be compatible with surrounding land uses; and
      4.   Is designed to be compatible with the physical features of the site
upon which the development is proposed.
   D.   Modifications Or Conditions: In considering an application for planned
unit development, the planning and zoning commission may impose modifications
or conditions concerning the following development features to the extent that
such modifications or conditions are necessary to ensure compliance with
criteria in the preceding subsection:
      1.   Size and location of site.
      2.   Street and road capacities in the area.
      3.   Ingress and egress to adjoining public streets.
      4.   Location and amount of off street parking.
      5.   Internal traffic circulation system.
      6.   Fencing, screening and landscaped separations.
      7.   Building bulk, height and location.
      8.   Usable open space.
      9.   Signs and lighting.
      10.   Noise, vibration, air pollution and other environmental influences.
      11.   Setback, yard and area requirements.
   E.   Ability Of Developer To Complete Project: The developer shall submit
all evidence deemed necessary by the planning and zoning commission of his
ability to undertake and complete the proposed project.
   F.   Security: The town council shall also require a reasonable amount to be
provided by the developer, by cash deposit, bond, mortgage, letter of credit,
or other security as approved by the town council on the property to ensure the
completion of the landscaping for the entire plan or phase thereof.
   G.   Changes Or Amendments: No changes or amendments shall be made in the
preliminary development plan after approval of the plan without first
submitting the changes or amendments to the planning and zoning commission and
obtaining their approval. No public hearing shall be required prior to approval
or disapproval of the changes or amendments.
   H.   Final Development Plan, Approval And Building Permit Issuance:
      1.   Issuance Of Building Permits: After the planned unit development has
received a preliminary approval, no building permits shall be issued until
approval of the final development plan.
      2.   Final Development Plan Requirements: A final development plan shall
set forth in detail the following:
         a.   The proposed name of the area and the name and address of the
applicant or applicants.
         b.   Total acreage and the location of the land proposed to be
developed.
         c.   The applicant's interest in the land (the development for sale,
rental, etc.).
         d.   The density of land use allocated to the various parts of the
development.
         e.   The location and size of land, if any, to be retained as common
open space with proposed landscaping plans.
         f.   The form of organization proposed to own and maintain the common
open space.
         g.   The use, dimensions, schematic drawings, and locations of
buildings or other structures.
         h.   Provisions for disposition of storm water or surface runoff.
         i.   The substance of any covenants, grants, easements or any other
restrictions proposed to be imposed upon the land or building(s), including
assessment for public utilities.
         j.   The proposed provision for parking locations and widths of
streets and ways, modifications from the existing ordinances governing streets
and ways or land use being requested.
         k.   Projected schedule for development (construction schedule).
         l.   Existing and proposed contours at five foot (5') intervals.
         m.   Percent of residential and commercial (business) development in
the planned unit development.
      3.   Restrictive Covenants: The council shall require such restrictive
covenants by the developer to be placed or recorded in the office of the county
clerk as are necessary to assure compliance with the approved final development
plan.
      4.   Approval Required For Changes Or Amendments: No changes or
amendments shall be made in the final development plan after approval of the
plan without first obtaining the written approval of the planning and zoning
commission. Copies of the approved final plan shall be kept on file in the
office of the planning and zoning commission. (1987 Code § 17.48.070)
ARTICLE M. RECREATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ZONE
SECTION:
12-4M-1: Purpose
12-4M-2: Permitted Uses
12-4M-3: Area
12-4M-4: Boundary Amenities; Open Space; Setbacks
12-4M-5: Only Planned Uses Permitted
12-4M-6: Application; Conditions And Modifications
12-4M-1: PURPOSE:
This zone is intended to facilitate and encourage the development and operation
of related and supporting businesses in the recreation and tourism industries
within the town of Lyman. The town of Lyman recognizes that many businesses
that support these related industries may not legally exist within the same
defined zone within the town of Lyman. By allowing development of a plan, that
utilizes interrelated and supporting businesses, and is based on specific,
comprehensive and detailed development, a better use of land and more desirable
economic development will result, while carrying out the intent and purpose of
the zoning regulations. (Ord. 14-2004, 10-21-2004)
12-4M-2: PERMITTED USES:
   A.   Any use that can demonstrate a benefit to development of recreational
and/or tourism within the town of Lyman may be permitted, which includes, but
is not limited to, a list of uses that will be supplied by the clerk upon
request.
Any use must be one of a combination of uses allowed under this article. (Ord.
14-2004, 10-21-2004)
12-4M-3: AREA:
   A.   The minimum area allowed to be designated as an RCD is two (2) lots.
(Ord. 14-2004, 10-21-2004)
12-4M-4: BOUNDARY AMENITIES; OPEN SPACE; SETBACKS:
   A.   Boundaries: Around the boundaries of the development, building height,
architecture and coverage shall be arranged to enhance the livability and
attractiveness of adjacent land uses. The yard and height requirements of the
adjacent zone may be required on the immediate periphery.
   B.   Open Area: Not more than eighty percent (80%) of the planned unit
development site shall be devoted to the construction of parking facilities,
streets, buildings, and accessory buildings. The remaining twenty percent (20%)
shall remain open.
   C.   Setbacks, Yard And Area Requirements: All setback, yard and area
requirements shall be determined by the planning and zoning commission, after
submission of comprehensive plan. (Ord. 14-2004, 10-21-2004)
12-4M-5: ONLY PLANNED USES PERMITTED:
All uses shall be restricted to those structures approved for said use in the
final development plan. (Ord. 14-2004, 10-21-2004)
12-4M-6: APPLICATION; CONDITIONS AND MODIFICATIONS:
   A.   Amendments; Changes Of District Boundaries: The procedure for
amendments and changes of district boundaries as set forth in this title shall
apply to the submission and approval of the preliminary development plan for
planned unit development.
   B.   Application; Preliminary Development Plan: The application to the
planning and zoning commission shall consist of:
      1.   A preliminary development plan for the area showing unified and
organized arrangements of buildings and structures and their proposed uses;
      2.   Provisions for off street parking, internal and external traffic
circulation and service facilities;
      3.   If the buildings are not currently in existence, schematic
architectural drawings;
      4.   A written explanation of how each proposed use will support the
other uses and overall goal of the development;
      5.   Landscape plans and sketches demonstrating the design and character
of the proposed development;
      6.   An explanation of how such a development would enhance and benefit
the recreational or tourism industries in and around the town of Lyman.
   C.   Criteria For Approval: No application shall be approved unless the
planning and zoning commission finds that the application:
      1.   Complies with all requirements imposed by this article and the
planning and zoning commission;
      2.   Is consistent with the objectives and purposes of this title;
      3.   Is designed to be compatible with surrounding land uses; and
      4.   Is designed to be compatible with the physical features of the site
upon which the development is proposed.
   D.   Modifications Or Conditions: In considering an application for
recreational development zone, the planning and zoning commission may impose
modifications or conditions concerning the following development features to
the extent that such modifications or conditions are necessary to ensure
compliance with criteria in the preceding subsection:
      1.   Size and location of site.
      2.   Street and road capacities in the area.
      3.   Ingress and egress to adjoining public streets.
      4.   Location and amount of off street parking.
      5.   Internal traffic circulation system.
      6.   Fencing, screening and landscaped separations.
      7.   Building bulk, height and location.
      8.   Usable open space.
      9.   Signs and lighting.
      10.   Noise, vibration, air pollution and other environmental influences.
      11.   Setback, yard and area requirements.
      12.   If a camping area is part of the plan, conditions of size of
spaces, number of spaces (density), required amenities, and any required
facilities shall be specified.
   E.   Ability Of Developer To Complete Project: The developer shall submit
all evidence deemed necessary by the planning and zoning commission of his
ability to undertake and complete the proposed project.
   F.   Security: If the proposed RDZ needs to be fully developed, all
applicable planning and zoning regulations shall apply, including the town
council shall also require a reasonable amount to be provided by the developer,
by cash deposit, bond, mortgage, letter of credit, or other security as
approved by the town council on the property to ensure the completion of the
landscaping for the entire plan or phase thereof.
   G.   Changes Or Amendments:
      1.   No changes or amendments shall be made in the preliminary
development plan after approval of the plan without first submitting the
changes or amendments to the planning and zoning commission and obtaining their
approval. No public hearing shall be required prior to approval or disapproval
of the changes or amendments.
      2.   If one or more businesses fail after completion of the plan, any new
business or use of the building failed business occupied, shall be the same
type of business allowed by recreational development or have a recreational
development modification granted in a way that would comply with the
recreational development rules on changes.
   H.   Final Development Plan, Approval And Building Permit Issuance:
      1.   Issuance Of Building Permits: After the recreational development
zone has received a preliminary approval, final approval may be pursued, but,
no building permits shall be issued until approval of the final development
plan.
      2.   Final Development Plan Requirements: A final development plan shall
set forth in detail the following:
         a.   The proposed name of the area and the name and address of the
applicant or applicants.
         b.   Total acreage, number and sizes of lots and the location of the
land proposed to be developed.
         c.   The applicant's interest in the land (the development for sale,
rental, etc.).
         d.   The density of land use allocated to the various parts of the
development.
         e.   The location and size of land, if any, to be retained as common
open space with proposed landscaping plans.
         f.   The form of organization proposed to own and maintain the common
open space.
         g.   The use, dimensions, schematic drawings, and locations of
buildings or other structures.
         h.   Provisions for disposition of storm water or surface runoff.
         i.   The substance of any covenants, grants, easements or any other
restrictions proposed to be imposed upon the land or building(s), including
assessment for public utilities.
         j.   The proposed provision for parking locations and widths of
streets and ways, modifications from the existing ordinances governing streets
and ways or land use being requested.
         k.   Projected schedule for development (construction schedule).
         l.   Existing and proposed contours at five foot (5') intervals.
      3.   Approval Required For Changes Or Amendments: No changes or
amendments shall be made in the final development plan after approval of the
plan without first obtaining the written approval of the planning and zoning
commission. Copies of the approved final plan shall be kept on file in the
office of the planning and zoning commission. (Ord. 14-2004, 10-21-2004)
ARTICLE N. R-4 ZONE
SECTION:
12-4N-1: Purpose
12-4N-2: Permitted Uses
12-4N-3: Building Code Certification; Foundations
12-4N-4: Minimum Floor Area
12-4N-5: Lot Requirements
12-4N-6: Height Limit And Construction
12-4N-7: Setbacks
12-4N-8: Fences And Walls
12-4N-9: Off Street Parking
12-4N-10: Signs
12-4N-1: PURPOSE:
This zone is intended as a high density residential area with lots having a
minimum area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet with one or more buildings on
one lot. (Ord. 2-2005, 6-2-2005)
12-4N-2: PERMITTED USES:
Only the following buildings, structures and uses are permitted in the R-
4 zone. No buildings or structures shall be erected, structurally altered, or
enlarged, or land used, except for the following purposes:
Multi-dwelling (4 unit or greater) residential structures.
Planned unit developments, provided such development complies with article L of
this chapter. (Ord. 2-2005, 6-2-2005)
12-4N-3: BUILDING CODE CERTIFICATION; FOUNDATIONS:
   A.   Uniform Building Code Certification Required: Any person desiring to
use a lot for a permitted or conditionally permitted use must acquire a
building permit for any and all buildings or improvements to the land. All
applicants for building permits for the R-4 zone must certify, under oath, that
the building, structure or improvement will conform to the uniform building
code as adopted. An improvement which does not comply with the uniform building
code will not be permitted.
   B.   Foundations: All residential structures which are to be located in the
R-4 zone must be placed on a permanent foundation on which the weight or load
bearing is around the outer perimeter of the building and not on jacks or in
the center of the structure. All foundations must meet uniform building code
standards. (Ord. 2-2005, 6-2-2005)
12-4N-4: MINIMUM FLOOR AREA:
Each dwelling unit in the R-4 zone shall have a minimum size of seven hundred
(700) square feet, exclusive of one-story open porches and garages. (Ord. 2-
2005, 6-2-2005)
12-4N-5: LOT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Lot Area: The minimum lot area in the R-4 zone shall be ten thousand
(10,000) square feet. An additional one thousand (1,000) square feet shall be
added to the minimum lot size for every dwelling unit above four (4) dwelling
units, located on the lot.
   B.   Lot Dimensions: The minimum lot width in the R-4 zone shall be sixty
feet (60') for interior lots. Corner lots must be large enough to accommodate
setback and yard requirements.
   C.   Building Site: The building site for any use in the R-4 zone shall be
on an adequately improved lot. (Ord. 2-2005, 6-2-2005)
12-4N-6: HEIGHT LIMIT AND CONSTRUCTION:
The maximum building height for the dwelling structure (including attached
garage) shall be thirty five feet (35'). The maximum building height for an
accessory building shall be no more than twenty two feet (22'). Building height
is measured from the lowest point of the floor of the structure. The roof pitch
of all buildings over three hundred (300) square feet shall be no less than a
four inch (4") rise to a twelve inch (12") run. (Ord. 2009-10, 10-15-2009)
12-4N-7: SETBACKS:
Setback requirements in the R-4 zone are as follows:
   A.   Main Structure:
      1.   Front Yard: Each lot in the R-4 zone shall have a front yard
extending across the full width of the subject property, a depth of not less
than twenty feet (20'). Except for drives and walks, there shall be no
structures located in a required front yard or in a required side yard abutting
a street (corner lot). It shall not be permitted to dismantle, repair, or keep
any inoperative vehicle in this front yard nor side yard abutting a street or
driveway.
      2.   Side Yard: There shall be a side yard on each side of the lot,
extending from the front yard, of not less than ten feet (10') on both sides of
an interior lot. A corner lot shall have a side yard abutting a street of not
less than twelve feet (12') and not less than ten feet (10') on the opposite
side yard.
      3.   Rear Yard: Each lot shall have a rear yard the full width of the lot
of a depth not less than ten feet (10').
      4.   Multiple Dwelling Buildings: When multiple dwelling buildings are on
one lot, at least ten feet (10') shall be between each building. (Ord. 2-2005,
6-2-2005)
   B.   Accessory Buildings: Accessory buildings and uses shall be permitted
only to the extent necessary and normal to the limited types of uses permitted
in this zone. Accessory buildings are not to be used for residential purposes.
All accessory buildings which are not a part of the main building shall be
separated from the main building by at least three feet (3').
      ACCESSORY BUILDING SETBACK REQUIREMENTS IN FEET
Portable Accessory Buildings (Easily Moved By Sliding)
Building    Front Side Yard Side Yard  Rear Yard
Square Feet                 Corner Lot
Portable Accessory Buildings (Easily Moved By Sliding)
Building    Front Side Yard Side Yard  Rear Yard
Square Feet                 Corner Lot
0 - 120     201   1         12         1
121 - 250   201   3         12         3
Permanent Accessory Buildings
With Foundation Or Concrete Floor
Building    Front Side Yard Side Yard  Rear Yard
Square Feet                 Corner Lot
0 - 120     201   10        12         10
 
   Note:
      1.    No accessory building may encroach into the front yard beyond the
main structure.
Yard intrusions as provided in section
12-7-5 of this title shall not be considered to apply to accessory buildings of
two hundred (200) square feet or less and portable in nature in residential
zones. (Ord. 2014-01, 4-3-2014)
12-4N-8: FENCES AND WALLS:
   A.   Maximum Height: Fences and walls are permitted but not required. Such
fences and walls shall not exceed six feet four inches (6'4") in height, the
height of the flat vertical plane of which shall not exceed six feet (6'), and
where any portion of the same is located within the front yard setback, said
portion shall not exceed forty inches (40"), the height of the flat vertical
plane of which shall not exceed thirty six inches (36"), if said portion is
opaque, and fifty two inches (52"), the height of the flat vertical plane of
which shall not exceed forty eight inches (48"), if said fence is not opaque.
   B.   Barbed Wire; Chainlink: Fences shall not be made of barbed wire, unless
the fence borders an agricultural zone established by the town or county.
However, when special conditions warrant, and when approved by the planning and
zoning commission, security fences may be constructed of chainlink with not
more than three (3) strands of barbed wire on the top of the chainlink. In no
case will barbed wire be lower than six feet (6') above the ground.
   C.   Electric Fences: Electric fences are prohibited.
   D.   Finished Side: Fences having a finished side must be oriented with the
finished side to the street and adjacent lots. If two (2) property owners
jointly construct a fence, the owners may jointly determine on which side to
orient the finished side. (Ord. 2008-17, 8-21-2008)
12-4N-9: OFF STREET PARKING:
For off street parking requirements in the R-4 zone, see chapter 8 of this
title. (Ord. 2-2005, 6-2-2005)
12-4N-10: SIGNS:
For sign requirements in the R-4 zone, see chapter 9 of this title. (Ord. 2-
2005, 6-2-2005)
ARTICLE O. D ZONE
SECTION:
12-4O-1: Purpose
12-4O-2: Permitted Uses
12-4O-3: Building Code Certification; Foundations
12-4O-4: Minimum Floor Area
12-4O-5: Lot Requirements
12-4O-6: Height Limit And Construction
12-4O-7: Setbacks
12-4O-8: Fences And Walls
12-4O-1: PURPOSE:
This zone is intended as a high density residential area with duplexes,
townhouses and other multiple dwellings, without common areas, within one
building. (Ord. 2007-16, 10-4-2007)
12-4O-2: PERMITTED USES:
Only the following buildings, structures and uses are permitted in the D zone.
No buildings or structures shall be erected, structurally altered, or enlarged
or land used except for the following purposes:
Accessory buildings.
Gardens for personal use.
Multiple residences contained within one building without common areas with
separate and individual entrances and exits. (Ord. 2007-16, 10-4-2007)
12-4O-3: BUILDING CODE CERTIFICATION; FOUNDATIONS:
   A.   International Building Code Certification Required: Any person desiring
to use a lot for a permitted or conditionally permitted use must acquire a
building permit for any and all buildings or improvements to the land. All
applicants for building permits for the D zone must certify, under oath, that
the building, structure or improvement will conform to the international
building code as adopted. An improvement that does not comply with the
international building code will not be permitted.
   B.   Foundations: All residential structures that are to be located in the D
zone must be placed on a permanent foundation on which the weight or load
bearing is around the outer perimeter of the building or at the outer perimeter
of each individual dwelling and not on jacks or in any other place within the
building. All foundations must meet international building code standards.
(Ord. 2007-16, 10-4-2007)
12-4O-4: MINIMUM FLOOR AREA:
Each dwelling unit in the D zone shall have a minimum size of five hundred
seventy five (575) square feet exclusive of one-story open porches and garages.
(Ord. 2007-16, 10-4-2007)
12-4O-5: LOT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Lot Area: The minimum lot area in the D zone shall be one thousand two
hundred feet (1,200').
   B.   Building Site: The building site for any use in the D zone shall be on
an adequately improved lot. (Ord. 2007-16, 10-4-2007)
12-4O-6: HEIGHT LIMIT AND CONSTRUCTION:
The maximum building height for the dwelling structure (including attached
garage) shall be thirty five feet (35'). The maximum building height for an
accessory building shall be no more than twenty two feet (22'). Building height
is measured from the lowest point of the floor of the structure. The roof pitch
of all buildings over three hundred (300) square feet shall be no less than a
four inch (4") rise to a twelve inch (12") run. (Ord. 2009-10, 10-15-2009)
12-4O-7: SETBACKS:
Setback requirements in the D zone are as follows:
   A.   Main Structure:
      1.   Front Yard: Each lot in the D zone shall have a front yard extending
across the full width of the subject property, a depth of not less than twenty
feet (20'). Except for drives and walks, there shall be no structures located
in the required front yard or in a required side yard abutting a street (corner
lot). It shall not be permitted to keep any inoperative vehicle in the front
yard or side yard abutting a street or driveway.
      2.   Side Yard: When multiple dwellings are contained within one
building, there shall be no required side yard between dwellings. Each
building, however, shall have a side yard on each side of the building
extending from the front yard of not less than ten feet (10') on both sides. If
the building is on a corner wherein two (2) streets meet, the lot adjacent to
the meeting streets shall have a side yard abutting the street of not less than
twelve feet (12').
      3.   Rear Yard: Each lot shall have a rear yard the full width of the lot
of a depth not less than ten feet (10').
      4.   Multiple Dwelling With One Owner: Each dwelling shall be contained
on a separate lot, even if an individual owner has ownership of multiple
dwellings.
   B.   Accessory Buildings: Accessory buildings shall be regulated pursuant to
subsection 12-4N-7B of this chapter. (Ord. 2007-16, 10-4-2007)
12-4O-8: FENCES AND WALLS:
   A.   Maximum Height: Fences and walls are permitted but not required. Such
fences and walls shall not exceed six feet four inches (6'4") in height, the
height of the flat vertical plane of which shall not exceed six feet (6'), and
where any portion of the same is located within the front yard setback, said
portion shall not exceed forty inches (40"), the height of the flat vertical
plane of which shall not exceed thirty six inches (36"), if said portion is
opaque, and fifty two inches (52"), the height of the flat vertical plane of
which shall not exceed forty eight inches (48"), if said fence is not opaque.
   B.   Barbed Wire; Chainlink: Fences shall not be made of barbed wire, unless
the fence borders an agricultural zone established by the town or county.
However, when special conditions warrant, and when approved by the planning and
zoning commission, security fences may be constructed of chainlink with not
more than three (3) strands of barbed wire on the top of the chainlink. In no
case will barbed wire be lower than six feet (6') above the ground.
   C.   Electric Fences: Electric fences are prohibited.
   D.   Finished Side: Fences having a finished side must be oriented with the
finished side to the street and adjacent lots. If two (2) property owners
jointly construct a fence, the owners may jointly determine on which side to
orient the finished side. (Ord. 2008-17, 8-21-2008)
ARTICLE P. R-S ZONE
SECTION:
12-4P-1: Purpose
12-4P-2: Permitted Uses
12-4P-3: Building Code Certification; Foundations
12-4P-4: Minimum Floor Area
12-4P-5: Lot Requirements
12-4P-6: Height Limit
12-4P-7: Setbacks
12-4P-8: Fences And Walls
12-4P-1: PURPOSE:
This zone is intended as a residential area with stick built single-family
dwellings. (Ord. 2008-14, 6-19-2008)
12-4P-2: PERMITTED USES:
Only the following buildings, structures and uses are permitted in the R-
S zone. No buildings or structures shall be erected, structurally altered, or
enlarged or land used except for the following purposes:
   Accessory buildings.
   Churches.
   Educational institutions.
   Gardens for personal use.
   Golf courses.
   Public parks, playgrounds and athletic fields.
   Rest and convalescent homes.
Single-family residences wholly constructed in place. (Ord. 2008-14, 6-19-2008)
12-4P-3: BUILDING CODE CERTIFICATION; FOUNDATIONS:
   A.   Building Code Certification Required: Any person desiring to use a lot
for a permitted or conditionally permitted use must acquire a building permit
for any and all buildings or improvements to the land. All applicants for
building permits for the R-S zone must certify, under oath, that the building,
structure or improvement will conform to the building code currently adopted by
the town of Lyman. An improvement that does not comply with the said building
code will not be permitted.
   B.   Foundations: All residential structures that are to be located in the
R-S zone must be placed on a permanent foundation on which the weight or load
bearing is around the outer perimeter of the building or at the outer perimeter
of each individual dwelling and not on jacks or in any other place within the
building. All foundations must meet said building code standards.
   C.   Stick Built Only: All residential structures that are to be located in
the R-S zone must be new and fully constructed on site. No manufactured,
component or modular home may be placed in an R-S zone. (Ord. 2008-14, 6-19-
2008)
12-4P-4: MINIMUM FLOOR AREA:
The ground floor area of the main structure in the R-S zone, exclusive of one-
story open porches and garages, shall not be less than one thousand two hundred
(1,200) square feet for one dwelling, nor less than one thousand (1,000) square
feet for a dwelling of more than one story. (Ord. 2008-14, 6-19-2008)
12-4P-5: LOT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Lot Area: The minimum lot area in the R-S zone shall be seven thousand
(7,000) square feet.
   B.   Lot Dimensions: The minimum lot width in the R-S zone is seventy feet
(70') for interior lots. Corner lots must be large enough to accommodate
setback and side yard requirements.
   C.   Building Site: The building site for any use in the R-S zone shall be
on an adequately improved lot. (Ord. 2008-14, 6-19-2008)
12-4P-6: HEIGHT LIMIT:
The maximum building or structural height of the main buildings in the R-S zone
shall be two and one-half (21/2) stories, or thirty five feet (35'). The
maximum building or structural height of accessory buildings shall be one story
or eighteen feet (18'). (Ord. 2008-14, 6-19-2008)
12-4P-7: SETBACKS:
Setback requirements in the R-S zone are as follows:
   A.   Main Structure:
      1.   Front Yard: Each lot in the R-S zone shall have a front yard
extending across the full width of the subject property, a depth of not less
than twenty feet (20'). Except for drives and walks, there shall be no
structures located in the required front yard or in a required side yard
abutting a street (corner lot). It shall not be permitted to keep any
inoperative vehicle in this front yard nor side yard abutting a street or
driveway.
      2.   Side Yard: When multiple dwellings are contained within one
building, there shall be no required side yard between dwellings. Each
building, however, shall have a side yard on each side of the building
extending from the front yard of not less than ten feet (10') on both sides. If
the building is on a corner wherein two (2) streets meet, the lot adjacent to
the meeting streets shall have a side yard abutting the street of not less than
twelve feet (12').
      3.   Rear Yard: Each lot shall have a rear yard the full width of the lot
of a depth not less than ten feet (10').
      4.   Multiple Dwellings With One Owner: Each dwelling shall be contained
on a separate lot, even if an individual owner has ownership of multiple
dwellings.
   B.   Accessory Buildings: Accessory buildings shall be regulated pursuant to
subsection 12-4B-8B of this chapter. (Ord. 2008-14, 6-19-2008)
12-4P-8: FENCES AND WALLS:
   A.   Maximum Height: Fences and walls are permitted but not required. Such
fences and walls shall not exceed six feet (6') in height and where the same is
located in the required front yard or side yard abutting a street, the same
shall not exceed forty eight inches (48") in height or less if necessary to
provide an unobstructed view of oncoming traffic.
   B.   Barbed Wire; Chainlink: Fences shall not be made of barbed wire.
However, when special conditions warrant, and when approved by the planning and
zoning commission, security fences may be constructed of chainlink with not
more than three (3) strands of barbed wire on the top of the chainlink. In no
case will barbed wire be closer than six feet (6') above the ground. (Ord.
2008-14, 6-19-2008)
CHAPTER 5
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
SECTION:
12-5-1: Purpose; Intent
12-5-2: Definitions
12-5-3: Classification
12-5-4: Zoning; Spacing
12-5-5: Operation Standards
12-5-6: Viewing Room Restrictions
12-5-7: Nude Model Studios
12-5-8: Public Nudity
12-5-9: Adult Theaters And Adult Cabarets
12-5-10: Minors
12-5-11: Hours Of Operation
12-5-12: Affirmative Defense
12-5-13: Advertising
12-5-14: Territorial Jurisdiction
12-5-15: Penalty
12-5-1: PURPOSE; INTENT:
   A.   Purpose: It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually
oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, morals, and general
welfare of the citizens of the town, and to establish reasonable and uniform
regulations to prevent the deleterious location and concentration of sexually
oriented businesses within the town.
   B.   Intent: The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor
effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any
communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it
is not the intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by
adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the first amendment, or to
deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented
entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of
this chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material.
(Ord. 9-99, 1-5-2000)
12-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
ADULT ARCADE: Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein
coin operated, slug operated or for any form of consideration, electronically,
electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines,
projectors, video or laser disc players, or other image producing devices are
maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one
time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by
the depicting or describing of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE OR ADULT VIDEO STORE:
   A.   A commercial establishment which devotes a significant or substantial
portion of its stock in trade or interior floor space to, or devotes a
significant or substantial portion of its advertising expenditures to, the
promotion of the sale, rental or viewing, for any form of consideration any one
or more of the following:
      1.   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes or video reproductions,
slides, or other visual representations which are characterized by the
depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas; or
      2.   Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in
connection with specified sexual activities.
   B.   A commercial establishment may have other principal business purposes
that do not involve the offering for sale or rental or material depicting or
describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and still
be categorized as adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video store.
Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such commercial
establishments from being categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty
store, or adult video store so long as the provisions of this definition are
otherwise met.
ADULT CABARET: A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features:
   A.   Persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminude; or
   B.   Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified
anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or
   C.   Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT MOTEL: A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which:
   A.   Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration,
provides patrons with closed circuit television transmissions, films, motion
pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are
characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas; and has a sign visible from the public right of way
which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic
reproductions; or
   B.   Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for
a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: A commercial establishment where, for any form of
consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar
photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the
depiction of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT THEATER: A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity
or seminude, or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities.
EMPLOYEE: A person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually
oriented business on a full time, part time or contract basis, whether or not
the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent or
otherwise and whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage or other
compensation by the operator of said business. Employee does not include a
person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises,
or for the delivery of goods to the premises.
ESCORT: A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a
companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to
privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another
person.
ESCORT AGENCY: A person or business association who furnishes, offers to
furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business
purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration.
ESTABLISHMENT: Means and includes any of the following:
   A.   The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new
business;
   B.   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually
oriented business, to any sexually oriented business;
   C.   The additions of any sexually oriented business to any other existing
sexually oriented business; or
   D.   The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
MASSAGE PARLOR: Any place where, for any form of consideration or gratuity,
massage, alcohol rub, administration of fomentations or any other treatment or
manipulation of the human body which occurs as a part of or in connection with
specified sexual activities, or where any person providing such treatment,
manipulation, or service related thereto, exposes their specified anatomical
areas.
NUDE MODEL STUDIO: Any place where a person who appears seminude, in a state of
nudity, or who displays specified anatomical areas and is provided to be
observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly
depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration. Nude
model studio shall not include a proprietary school licensed by the state of
Wyoming or a college, junior college or university supported entirely or in
part by public taxation; a private college or university which maintains and
operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college,
junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or in a
structure:
   A.   That has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no
other advertising that indicates a nude or seminude person is available for
viewing; and
   B.   Where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least
three (3) days in advance of the class; and
   C.   Where no more than one nude or seminude model is on the premises at any
one time.
NUDITY OR STATE OF NUDITY: The showing of the human male or female genitals,
pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less than a fully opaque
covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque
covering of any part of the areola or nipple, or the showing of the covered
male genitals in a discernible turgid state.
PERSON: An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, limited
liability company, association, or other legal entity.
SEMINUDE OR IN SEMINUDE CONDITION: A state of dress in which clothing covers no
more than the genitals, pubic region and areolae of the female breast, as well
as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices.
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER: A business or commercial enterprise that, as one of
its principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration:
   A.   Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons
of the opposite sex; or
   B.   Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same
sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or seminude.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty
store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture
theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, or sexual encounter
center.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: A. The human male genitals in a discernable turgid
state, even if completely and opaquely covered; or
   B.   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks or a female breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areolas.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: Any of the following:
   A.   The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus, or female breasts;
   B.   Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, fellatio, cunnilingus, anilingus, masturbation, bestiality, or
sodomy; or
   C.   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in subsections A and B of this definition. (Ord. 9-99, 1-
5-2000)
12-5-3: CLASSIFICATION:
Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows:
   A.   Adult arcades;
   B.   Adult bookstores, adult novelty stores, or adult video stores;
   C.   Adult cabarets;
   D.   Adult motels;
   E.   Adult motion picture theaters;
   F.   Adult theaters;
   G.   Escort agencies;
   H.   Massage parlor;
   I.   Nude model studios; and
   J.   Sexual encounter centers. (Ord. 9-99, 1-5-2000)
12-5-4: ZONING; SPACING:
   A.   Limited To Heavy Industrial Zone: A person commits a misdemeanor if
that person operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business in
any zoning district other than "heavy industrial" established zoning district,
as defined and described in sections
12-4H-2 through
12-4H-10 of this title.
   B.   Distance From Church Or School: A person commits an offense if the
person operated or caused to be operated a sexually oriented business within
five hundred feet (500') of:
      1.   A church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building which is used
primarily for religious worship and related religious activities.
      2.   A public or private educational facility including, but not limited
to, nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools, private
schools, intermediate schools, junior high schools, middle schools, high
schools, vocational schools, junior colleges, and universities; school includes
the school grounds, but does not include facilities used primarily for another
purpose and only incidentally as a school.
      3.   A boundary of a residential district as described in this title.
      4.   A boundary of a public district as described in this title or a
public library.
      5.   The property line of a lot devoted to a residential use, without the
express written consent of the property owner and/or resident.
   C.   Distance From Another Sexually Oriented Business: A person commits a
misdemeanor if that person causes or permits the operation, establishment,
substantial enlargement, or transfer of ownership or control of a sexually
oriented business within five hundred feet (500') of another sexually oriented
business.
   D.   More Than One Business In Same Building: A person commits a misdemeanor
if that person causes or permits the operation, establishment, or maintenance
of more than one sexually oriented business in the same building, structure, or
portion thereof, or the increase of floor area of any sexually oriented
business in any building, structure, or portion thereof containing another
sexually oriented business.
   E.   Measurement Of Distance:
      1.   For the purpose of subsection B of this section, measurement shall
be made in a straight line, without regard to the intervening structures or
objects, from the property line of the lot or parcel containing the premises
where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line
of the lot or parcel of the premises of a use listed in subsection B of this
section. Presence of a town, county, or other political subdivision boundary
shall be irrelevant for purposes of calculating and applying the distance
requirements of this section.
      2.   For purposes of subsection C of this section, the distance between
any two (2) sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line,
without regard to the intervening structures or objects or political
boundaries, from the property line of the lot or parcel in which each business
is located.
   F.   Existing Businesses: Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating
at the time of the enactment of this chapter shall not be required to comply
with subsections A through E of this section. (Ord. 9-99, 1-5-2000)
12-5-5: OPERATION STANDARDS:
   A.   Windows, Doors And Apertures: All windows, doors and other apertures
shall be architecturally screened or otherwise obscured so as to prevent the
viewing of the interior of the adult oriented entertainment business from
without.
   B.   Advertisement Displays; Merchandise: No advertisement displays or
merchandise available for sale or rent that includes or depicts specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas shall be visible from any
public right of way.
   C.   Security Personnel: All adult oriented businesses shall provide
security personnel to control behavior of both indoor and outdoor patrons so
they do not violate any laws. The security personnel shall be provided at a
ratio of one per ten (10) parking spaces.
   D.   Loitering; Consumption Of Alcohol: No loitering or consumption of
alcoholic beverages shall be allowed in a sexually oriented business parking
lot. Parking lots shall contain signage stating that loitering and consumption
of alcoholic beverages are prohibited in parking lots.
   E.   Wall Sign Area: Total wall sign area shall not exceed twenty (20)
square feet. No signage associated with the business shall be visible from a
state highway or county road. All other signage requirements under chapter 9 of
this title, shall be in full force and effect.
   F.   Parking: Parking shall be provided at a ratio of one space per two (2)
seats and/or one space per one hundred (100) square feet or gross foot area as
determined by the planning and zoning commission. The planning and zoning
commission determination shall be based on the extent to which the adult
oriented business provides seating for patrons. (Ord. 9-99, 1-5-2000)
12-5-6: VIEWING ROOM RESTRICTIONS:
A misdemeanor is committed by a person who operates or causes to be operated a
sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the
premises in a viewing room or booth of less than one hundred fifty (150) square
feet of floor space, a film, videocassette, live entertainment, or other video
reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas, if the person fails to comply with the following regulations:
   A.   Interior Configuration: The interior of the premises shall be
configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's
or employee's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is
permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not
contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two (2) or more
manager's or employee's stations designated, then the interior of the premises
shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each
area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose
from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required in this
subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's or employee's
station.
   B.   Employee On Duty: At least one employee shall be on duty at all times
that any patron is present inside the premises.
   C.   Viewing Rooms To Remain Unobstructed: All viewing rooms and booths
shall remain unobstructed by any doors, curtains, partitions, walls,
merchandise, display racks or other materials and, at all times, no patron
shall be permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated
as an area in which patrons will not be permitted.
   D.   Occupation By One Person: No viewing room may be occupied by more than
one person at any time.
   E.   Lighting Fixtures: The premises shall be equipped with overhead
lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which
patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than five (5) foot-
candles as measured at the floor level. The illumination described above shall
be maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises.
   F.   Openings Between Viewing Rooms Or Booths: No openings of any kind shall
be allowed to exist between viewing rooms or booths.
   G.   Public Indecency: No employee shall knowingly, or with reasonable cause
to know, permit or allow a patron to commit on the premises an act of "public
indecency" as set forth in Wyoming Statutes 6-4-201. (Ord. 9-99, 1-5-2000)
12-5-7: NUDE MODEL STUDIOS:
   A.   Persons Under Eighteen: A person under the age of eighteen (18) years
commits an offense if the person appears seminude or in a state of nudity in or
on the premises of a nude model studio. It is a defense to prosecution under
this subsection if the person under eighteen (18) years was in a restroom not
open to public view or visible to any other person.
   B.   Viewed From Public Right Of Way: A person commits an offense if the
person appears in a state of nudity or knowingly allows another to appear in a
state of nudity in an area of a nude model studio premises which can be viewed
from the public right of way.
   C.   Bed, Sofa Or Mattress Prohibited: A nude model studio shall not place
or permit a bed, sofa, or mattress in any room on the premises, except that a
sofa may be placed in a reception room open to the public. (Ord. 9-99, 1-5-
2000)
12-5-8: PUBLIC NUDITY:
Public nudity is prohibited within the town, including in any sexually oriented
business. (Ord. 9-99, 1-5-2000)
12-5-9: ADULT THEATERS AND ADULT CABARETS:
   A.   Distance From Patrons: It shall be a misdemeanor for a person who
knowingly or intentionally appears, entertains or performs in a seminude
condition in an adult theater or adult cabaret unless the person is an employee
who, while seminude, shall be at least ten feet (10') from any patron or
customer and on a stage elevated at least two feet (2') from the floor.
   B.   Gratuity To Employees: It shall be a misdemeanor for a patron or
customer to pay or give directly any gratuity to any employee, before, during
or after an employee has performed or entertained in an adult theater or
cabaret. A patron who wishes to pay or give a gratuity to a performer shall
place the gratuity in a container that is at all times located separately from
the performer.
   C.   Physical Contact: It shall be a misdemeanor for an employee, while
seminude, to have physical contact with a customer or patron while on the
premises. It shall be a misdemeanor for a customer to have physical contact
with any employee while said employee is seminude in a sexually oriented
business.
   D.   Exception: Subsection A of this section shall not apply to an employee
of a sexually oriented business, who, while acting in the scope of their
employment as a waiter, waitress, host, hostess, or bartender, comes within ten
feet (10') of a patron. (Ord. 9-99, 1-5-2000)
12-5-10: MINORS:
A person commits a misdemeanor if the person knowingly or with reasonable cause
to know, permits or allows:
   A.   Admittance: A person under the age of eighteen (18) years to be
admitted or remain on the premises of a sexually oriented business unless
accompanied by a parent or guardian.
   B.   Purchase Goods Or Services: A person under the age of eighteen (18)
years to purchase goods or services at the business premises without the
specific consent of a parent or guardian.
   C.   Employee: A person under the age of eighteen (18) years to work at the
business as an employee. (Ord. 9-99, 1-5-2000)
12-5-11: HOURS OF OPERATION:
A person commits a misdemeanor if the person operates or causes to be operated
a sexually oriented business, except for an adult motel, and allows such
business to remain open for business at any time between the hours of two
o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of any particular day. (Ord. 9-
99, 1-5-2000)
12-5-12: AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE:
It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under section
12-5-7 of this chapter that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a
modeling class operated:
   A.   Proprietary School: By a proprietary school, licensed by the state of
Wyoming; a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly
by taxation;
   B.   Private College Or University: By a private college or university which
maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable
to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by
taxation; or
   C.   Structure: In a structure:
      1.   Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no
other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing; and
      2.   Where, in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at
least three (3) days in advance of the class; and
      3.   Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one
time. (Ord. 9-99, 1-5-2000)
12-5-13: ADVERTISING:
   A.   Depict Or Exhibit Prohibited Activity: A person commits a misdemeanor
if the person operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business
and advertises the presentation of or depicts or exhibits any activity
prohibited by any applicable state statute or local ordinance.
   B.   Exhibit Of Materials Or Goods: A person commits a misdemeanor if the
person operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, and
displays or otherwise exhibits the materials or goods of such sexually oriented
business in advertising which is visible outside the premises. This prohibition
shall not extend to advertising of the existence or location of sexually
oriented business.
   C.   Additional Requirements: Nothing contained in this section shall
relieve a sexually oriented business from complying with the requirements of
other zoning or business licensing requirements in this code. (Ord. 9-99, 1-5-
2000)
12-5-14: TERRITORIAL JURISDICTION:
The territorial jurisdiction of the regulations found in this chapter shall
include all of the incorporated lands located within the town, and, pursuant
Wyoming Statutes section 15-3-202, such other territory peripheral to the city
which is located within one-half (1/2) mile of the corporate limits. (Ord. 9-
99, 1-5-2000)
12-5-15: PENALTY:
Unless specifically set out in this chapter, any violation of the provisions of
this chapter constitutes a class B misdemeanor punishable as set forth in
subsection
1-4-1A2 of this code. Additionally, any business in violation of this chapter
is subject to a suit for injunction. (Ord. 2012-11, 1-17-2013)
CHAPTER 6
STANDARDS FOR BUILDINGS MOVED INTO TOWN
SECTION:
12-6-1: Applicability
12-6-2: Building Size
12-6-3: Building Age
12-6-4: Building Materials And Construction Requirements
12-6-5: Skirting Of Mobile Or Manufactured Homes
12-6-6: Setbacks
12-6-7: Exemptions For Accessory Buildings
12-6-8: Temporary Setup Permits (Rep. by Ord. 2012-09, 12-20-2012)
12-6-9: Conditional Use Permits
12-6-10: Exemptions For M Zone
12-6-11: Age Requirement For M Zone
12-6-1: APPLICABILITY:
The regulations set out in this title pertaining to several zones are subject
to the general provisions, conditions and limitations provided in this chapter.
The purpose of this chapter is to address buildings moved into the town from
another location (not constructed on site), whether new or used previously, for
residential, storage, business, educational, institutional, or industrial
purposes. (Ord. 8-98, 8-20-1998)
12-6-2: BUILDING SIZE:
Any building moved into the town shall be a minimum of twelve feet (12') along
the widest part of the structure's shortest axis and shall have a minimum of
seven hundred twenty (720) square feet of livable floor space on one level.
Measurements are those used commonly by the manufactured housing industry and
may not reflect exact dimensions (i.e., a typical 12' x 60' building may
actually measure 11'10" x 56', but would still be considered a 12' x 60'
building with 720 square feet). (Ord. 8-98, 8-20-1998)
12-6-3: BUILDING AGE:
Any building moved into the town to be placed on any lot or space, to be used
with or without a permanent foundation, shall be no more than twenty (20) years
of age at the time of application. Construction or manufactured date of the
building must be twenty (20) years or less from time of application for
placement in the town. Proof of construction or manufactured date must be
provided at time of application. (Ord. 8-98, 8-20-1998)
12-6-4: BUILDING MATERIALS AND CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS:
The following are requirements for construction and materials of residential
buildings moved into the town from another location or built on site:
   A.   Pitched Roof; Slope: The structure shall have a pitched roof, with a
slope of not less than a nominal three inch (3") vertical rise for each twelve
inches (12") of horizontal run; provided, however, that singlewide mobile homes
are exempted so long as all other applicable HUD building requirements are met;
and (Ord. 17-2002, 10-17-2002)
   B.   Roofing Material: Roof material shall consist of nonreflective material
customarily used for conventional dwelling including, but not limited to,
asbestos shingles, fiberglass shingles, shake shingles, wood shingles,
composition shingles, or tile materials. Roof material shall not include flat
or corrugated sheet metal, except for manufactured metal roof panels; and
   C.   Siding: Have siding material consisting of wood or wood products,
stucco, brick, rock, horizontal lap steel or aluminum or horizontal lap vinyl;
or
   D.   Other Materials Or Methods: Utilize other conventionally constructed
dwelling materials or methods not meeting the above listed conditions but
approved by the town's designated representative. (Ord. 10-98, 2-18-1999)
12-6-5: SKIRTING OF MOBILE OR MANUFACTURED HOMES 1 :
Skirting of any mobile home or manufactured home not placed on a permanent
foundation shall be required within thirty (30) days after occupying a space or
lot intended for its placement as a dwelling unit. Material for skirting shall
consist of nonreflective materials customarily used for conventional dwelling
and matching the siding of the structure in type and design including, but not
limited to, wood or wood products, stucco, brick, rock, horizontal lap steel,
or aluminum or horizontal lap vinyl. (Ord. 8-98, 8-20-1998)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection 12-4K-12A of this title.
12-6-6: SETBACKS:
Any mobile home placed or moved into town shall be at least twenty feet (20')
from any other mobile home or structure on another lot or space; shall be at
least ten feet (10') from any structure on the same lot or space; shall have a
twenty foot (20') front setback from any public or private street or right of
way; shall have a ten foot (10') rear setback. Any other building (other than a
mobile home) moved into town shall comply with the setback and separation
requirements of the zone in which the building is to be located. (Ord. 8-98, 8-
20-1998)
12-6-7: EXEMPTIONS FOR ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
Accessory buildings of less than two hundred fifty (250) square feet and
portable (easily moved by sliding) placed for the express purpose of storage
are exempt from the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 8-98, 8-20-1998)
12-6-8: TEMPORARY SETUP PERMITS:
(Rep. by Ord. 2012-09, 12-20-2012)
12-6-9: CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS:
   A.   Conditions For Issuance: A conditional use permit, as provided in
chapter 12 of this title, may be considered when buildings desired for location
within the town do not meet the provisions of this chapter. Such consideration
may be appropriate under the following circumstances to be determined by the
planning and zoning commission:
      1.   Historical building of community significance.
      2.   Building to serve educational or institutional purposes.
      3.   Building older or smaller than required by this chapter but that has
been inspected and certified for occupancy by a certified/licensed electrician.
   B.   Building Materials And Construction: The provisions of section
12-6-4 of this chapter regarding building materials and construction
requirements shall remain in effect for residential buildings granted a
conditional use permit under this section unless a conditional use permit is
granted specifically for one or more of the conditions set forth in section
12-6-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 10-98, 2-18-1999)
12-6-10: EXEMPTIONS FOR M ZONE:
"Mobile homes" and "manufactured homes" as defined in section
12-2-1 of this title are exempt from the standards required in sections
12-6-2 through
12-6-5 of this chapter. Exemption for skirting is for materials used (skirting
still required within 30 days as specified in section
12-4K-12 of this title) when appropriately located within a licensed mobile
home park in the M zone. (Ord. 10-98, 2-18-1999)
12-6-11: AGE REQUIREMENT FOR M ZONE:
Any building moved into the M zone to be placed on any lot or space, to be used
with or without a foundation, shall be constructed no earlier than twenty five
(25) years before that building was moved into town. (Ord. 2012-09, 12-20-2012)
CHAPTER 7
GENERAL USE REGULATIONS
SECTION:
12-7-1: Applicability
12-7-2: Height Of Roof Structures
12-7-3: Yards And Open Space Generally
12-7-4: Yards With Multiple Main Buildings
12-7-5: Yard Intrusions
12-7-6: Substandard Existing Lots
12-7-7: Unzoned Areas
12-7-8: Frontage
12-7-9: Animal Grazing Permits
12-7-10: Keeping Of Animals
12-7-11: House Numbers
12-7-1: APPLICABILITY:
The regulations set out in this title pertaining to the several zones are
subject to the general provisions, conditions and limitations contained in this
chapter. (1987 Code § 17.52.010)
12-7-2: HEIGHT OF ROOF STRUCTURES:
Roof structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating
fans, or similar equipment required to operate and maintain a building, fire or
parapet walls, skylights, windmills, barns, wireless masts, and similar
structures may be erected above the height limits prescribed in this title, but
no roof structure or other space above the height limit prescribed for the zone
in which the building is located shall be allowed for the purpose of providing
additional floor space. (1987 Code § 17.52.020)
12-7-3: YARDS AND OPEN SPACE GENERALLY:
Except as provided in this chapter, every required yard shall be open and
unobstructed. No yard or open space provided around any building for the
purpose of complying with the provisions of this title shall be considered as
providing a yard or open space for any other building, and no yard or open
space on an adjoining property shall be considered as providing a yard or open
space on a building site whereon a building is to be erected. (1987 Code §
17.52.030)
12-7-4: YARDS WITH MULTIPLE MAIN BUILDINGS:
Where two (2) or more buildings are, by definition of this title, considered
main buildings, then the front yard requirements shall apply only to the
building closest to the front line, but all other buildings shall conform to
the requirements concerning the placement of buildings as contained in the zone
in which the property is located. (1987 Code § 17.52.040)
12-7-5: YARD INTRUSIONS 1 :
The following intrusions may project into any required yards, but in no case
shall such intrusions extend more than four feet (4') into the required front
yard and shall not extend more than thirty inches (30") into the required side
yard: cornices, eaves, belt courses, sills, buttresses, or other architectural
features. (1987 Code § 17.52.050)
 
Notes
1 1. Regarding intrusions for accessory zones, see subsections 12-4B-8B, 12-4E-
  8B and 12-4F-8B of this title.
12-7-6: SUBSTANDARD EXISTING LOTS:
When a lot has less than the minimum required area or width as set forth in any
of the zones contained in this title, and was a lot of record on the effective
date hereof, such lot shall be deemed to have complied with the minimum
required lot area or width as set forth in any such zone. (1987 Code §
17.52.060)
12-7-7: UNZONED AREAS:
No building is permitted in unzoned areas of the town. (1987 Code § 17.52.070)
12-7-8: FRONTAGE:
Each lot shall abut on a public street or highway right of way. In addition,
each dwelling unit must have a minimum access route or fire lane of a minimum
width of thirty feet (30') for fire protection. (Ord. 2008-11, 5-15-2008; amd.
Ord. 2020-01, 6-4-2020)
12-7-9: ANIMAL GRAZING PERMITS:
   A.   Power To Issue: The planning and zoning commission may issue a
conditional land use permit to landowners for the express purpose of grazing
domestic animals upon land located within the limits of the town during the
period commencing May 1 through September 30, inclusive, each and every year.
The issuance of such conditional land use permit may be granted only in
instances wherein the planning and zoning commission is satisfied that the
integrity or character of the zone, or any adjoining zone for which a permit is
granted shall not be impaired.
   B.   Required Conditions: The conditional land use permit may be granted
only when it is determined by the planning and zoning commission that the size,
extent and space of the specific parcel of land for which the permit may be
granted is capable of accommodating the specific use for which the permit is
issued. (1987 Code § 17.52.090)
   C.   Water And Feed: Any applicant seeking a conditional land use permit
under this title shall expressly indicate that water in sufficient quantity and
proper quality, as well as adequate natural grazing vegetation without
providing supplemental feed as the primary feed source, will be provided at the
applicant's own expense, with no infringement or inconvenience to neighboring
landowners. (Ord. 4-94, 7-7-1994)
   D.   Penalty: Any person who permits domestic animals to graze upon land
within town limits, in a zone designated other than agricultural, without first
obtaining a conditional land use permit in any given year, or any landowner who
allows other persons to graze domestic animals on the landowner's property in
violation of the provisions of this section, may be punished by a fine of not
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. Each day of
continuation of such violation is a separate offense. The correction period
shall be in effect for thirty (30) days subsequent to the issuance of written
notice. (1987 Code § 17.52.090)
12-7-10: KEEPING OF ANIMALS:
   A.   Limited: Except as otherwise specifically permitted in this code, the
keeping and maintaining of animals within the town shall be limited to common
house and yard pets; provided, however, that no such animals shall be
maintained for commercial purposes such as breeding, sale or kenneling. Nothing
in this chapter shall be construed to authorize the keeping of domestic farm
animals, wild animals or animals capable of inflicting harm or endangering the
health and safety of any person or property including, but not limited to,
raptors, poisonous snakes, skunks, wolves, or wolf hybrids. Any exceptions may
be permitted only by approval of a conditional use permit.
   B.   Compliance Required: The keeping of pets described in subsection A of
this section shall be in compliance with all provisions contained within title
5, chapter 3 of this code. (Ord. 7-2002, 5-2-2002)
12-7-11: HOUSE NUMBERS:
   A.   House Numbers Required: All residential dwelling units and commercial
business structures shall have a house or building number, in legible arabic
numerals with a minimum height of four inches (4"), which shall be visible from
the street with a color that contrasts from the building or structure color.
   B.   Effective Date: All residential dwelling units and commercial business
structures in existence at the time of adoption hereof shall be in compliance
within ninety (90) days of adopted date.
   C.   Compliance: Failure to have or maintain such building numbers shall
constitute a misdemeanor punishable by not more than twenty five dollars
($25.00), with each day of continuing noncompliance constituting an additional
offense. (Ord. 2011-11, 8-4-2011)
CHAPTER 8
OFF STREET PARKING
SECTION:
12-8-1: Purpose
12-8-2: Location
12-8-3: Number Of Spaces
12-8-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to set forth the off street parking requirements
for the various land uses. (1987 Code § 17.56.010)
12-8-2: LOCATION:
All off street parking spaces, whether in a garage or open area, shall be so
located as to be accessible and usable for parking of motor vehicles without
encroachment on public thoroughfares. Common parking facilities may be provided
in lieu of individual requirements, provided the common parking facilities have
a total number of parking spaces not less than the total number of individual
requirements of the zone in which they are located. (1987 Code § 17.56.020)
12-8-3: NUMBER OF SPACES:
A.   Minimum requirements for parking spaces are indicated in the following
table:
Building Type Requirement
Building Type     Requirement
Boarding house or
lodging house,    2 per guest bedroom plus 1 per resident or manager
tourist home
Business
development,      1 per 350 square feet of gross floor area
retail store,
shop, bank
Medical or dental 1 per 200 square feet of gross
office
Offices and       1 per 350 square feet of gross floor space
office buildings
Professional
office in a       1 per 200 square feet of gross floor space used for such
residential       office
building
Public library    1 per 350 square feet of gross floor space
Restaurants,      1 per 3.5 seats or 1 per 100 feet of gross floor space -
bars, cafes, deli excluding kitchens and storage, whichever is greater
Group care        1 per 2 bedrooms plus 1 per employee per shift, or 2 per 3
facility          employees per shift, whichever is greater
Child care center 1 per on-duty staff per shift and 1 per 6 children
Hotel, minor and  1 per room or suite, and 1 space for per 200 square feet of
major             separately leasable commercial space
Automobile sale/  1 per vehicle plus one space per employee
rentals
Retail and
service, auto     5 per 1,000 square feet of net leasable floor area
related and gas
stations
Light industrial  1 per every 2 employees in the largest shift plus 1 space for
and wholesale     each vehicle used in conducting the business and wholesale,
establishments    storage uses at 1 per 1,000 square feet of floor area and
                  light manufacturing at 2.5 per 1,00 square feet of floor area
Indoor            1 per 4 seats or 5 spaces per 1,000 square feet area
entertainment,    depending on the type of facility
theater
Church            1 per 3.5 fixed seats or 1 per each 7 feet of linear pew,
                  whichever is greater
Duplex or triplex 2 per dwelling unit
dwelling
                  Not greater than 1,000 square feet - 1 per dwelling
Multi-unit        Greater than 1,000 square feet, less than 2,000 square feet -
dwelling          1.5 per dwelling unit
                  2,000 square feet and over 2 per dwelling unit
Elementary and    1 per ½ classroom (in addition to parking space required for
junior high       auditorium)
school
Senior high       1 per 1/4 classroom (in addition to parking spaces required
school            for auditorium)
 
   B.   Americans With Disabilities Act Compliance. All off-street parking
areas must comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act Accessible Parking
Spaces regulations. Each parking area must have a minimum of one marked
accessible ADA compliant space for every twenty-five (25) parking spaces, with
a minimum of one such space. These spaces must be located on the shortest
accessible route to the accessible entrance. An accessible route is the path a
person with a disability takes to enter and move through a building or
facility. Accessible parking spaces must have access aisles. Access aisles
provide a designated area for people who use wheelchairs or other mobility
devices to get in and out of their car or van.
(1987 Code § 17.56.030; amd. Ord. 2025-01, 4-7-2025)
CHAPTER 9
SIGNS
SECTION:
12-9-1: Purpose
12-9-2: Definitions
12-9-3: Exemptions
12-9-4: Exterior Sign Permit; Fee
12-9-5: Height Generally
12-9-6: Portable Or Temporary Signs
12-9-7: Sign Interference With Traffic
12-9-8: Flashing, Blinking Or Animated Signs
12-9-9: Projection Of Signs
12-9-10: Abandoned, Dilapidated And Unsafe Signs
12-9-11: Residential Zones
12-9-12: Agricultural, Commercial And Industrial Zones
12-9-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a reasonable system for control of
signs:
   A.   To encourage signs which are well designed and pleasing in appearance.
   B.   To provide a reasonable system of control of signs and to integrate
within the comprehensive zoning plan.
   C.   To attract and direct persons to various activities and enterprises in
order to provide for maximum public convenience.
   D.   To encourage signs which are compatible with adjacent land uses. (1987
Code § 17.60.010)
12-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
ABANDONED SIGN: One which has apparently served its purpose and has no apparent
use or value to its originator or owner.
AREA OF SIGN: Means, and shall be computed as, the entire area within the
exterior boundary of the structure, the perimeter of which shall not be in
excess of eight (8) straight lines. A sign designed with more than one exterior
surface shall have its area computed as including only the maximum single
display surface which is visible from any ground position. The supports,
uprights or structures on which any sign is supported shall not be included in
determining the sign area, unless such supports, uprights or structures are so
designed to form an integral background of the display.
DILAPIDATED SIGN: One which creates an eyesore, needing maintenance, repair or
paint.
FLASHING, ANIMATED OR MOVING SIGN: A sign that intermittently emits or reflects
artificial or natural light, a sign which has movement of any illumination such
as intermittent flashing or varied intensity, or a sign that has any visible
portion in motion.
FREESTANDING OR POLE SIGN: A sign supported by one or more uprights, poles or
braces in or upon the ground, with a clear space of not less than ten feet
(10') between the bottom of the sign and the natural terrain above which the
sign is located. This definition shall not include portable signs.
FRONTAGE: That portion of the property facing and running more or less parallel
to and along a public street or highway right of way.
GROUND SIGN: A sign supported by uprights, poles or braces anchored in the
ground and not attached to any building, with a clearance space of more than
ten feet (10') between the bottom of the face of the sign and the natural
ground level. This definition shall not include portable signs.
OFF PREMISES SIGN: A sign which is located on property separate and apart from
the property on which the advertised activity is carried out.
ON PREMISES SIGN: A sign which is located on the property for the purpose of
advertising its sale or lease, or for advertising an activity conducted on the
property or for advertising a product sold on the property.
OUTDOOR ADVERTISING STRUCTURE: Any outdoor sign, display, light, device,
figure, painting, drawing, message, plaque, poster, billboard or any other
thing which is designed, intended or used to advertise or inform.
PORTABLE TEMPORARY SIGN: A sign, without independent structural support, in
connection with political, school, civic, noncommercial, health, safety, and
welfare campaigns or events provided that in all districts such posters shall
be removed within fifteen (15) days following the conclusion of the campaign or
event.
REAL ESTATE SIGN: A sign placed upon a property advertising that property for
sale, for rent, or for lease.
REAL ESTATE SUBDIVISION SIGN: A sign placed on the premises of a subdivision or
other real estate development.
ROOF SIGN: A sign erected upon the roof of a building or structure.
SIGN: Shall be construed as synonymous with "outdoor advertising structure" as
defined herein.
UNSAFE SIGN AND SUPPORTING STRUCTURE: One which, by reason of the elements,
wear and tear, or having been damaged by a vehicle, projectile or other moving
thing or object, has loose metal or wood parts, or steel structure, loose neon
tubing or lamps, dangling electrical or guy wire, or which obviously needs
repair.
WALL SIGN: A sign attached to or painted on, or erected against a wall of a
building or structure with the exposed face of the sign in a plane
approximately parallel to the plane of the wall. (1987 Code § 17.60.020; amd.
Ord. 2020-01, 6-4-2020)
12-9-3: EXEMPTIONS:
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the erection, construction and
maintenance of the following types of signs:
   A.   Official traffic, fire and police signs, signals, devices and markings
of the state highway department, the county, and other competent public
authorities, nor the posting of notices required by law or signs required by a
public utility for purposes of identification or safety.
   B.   Temporary signs, including political and election issue signs, of no
more than twelve (12) square feet on the property of the person or entity
placing the sign, or on the sidewalk and/or greenspace immediately adjacent to
the property, so long as such signs do not interfere with pedestrian or
vehicular traffic.
   C.   Political and/or election issue signs, up to and including forty-eight
square feet, for one hundred and eighty (180) days prior to the subject
election so long as said signs:
      1.   Are not in a Residential Zone of the Town;
      2.   Are placed with the express consent of the property owner;
      3.   Do not interfere with traffic sight lines or are otherwise
constructed or placed in a way as to present a danger to the community's
safety;
      4.   Such signs shall be removed within fourteen (14) days after the
conclusion of the election for which the candidate or issue was decided.
   D.   Event promotion signs for one hundred and eighty (180) days prior to
the advertised event so long as said signs:
      1.   Are not in a Residential Zone of the Town;
      2.   Are placed with the express consent of the property owner;
      3.   Do not interfere with traffic sight lines or are otherwise
constructed or placed in a way as to present a danger to the community's
safety;
      4.   Such signs shall be removed within fourteen (14) days after the
conclusion of the advertised event. (1987 Code § 17.60.030; amd. Ord. 2021-01,
5-6-2021)
12-9-4: EXTERIOR SIGN PERMIT; FEE:
No exterior sign shall be erected, attached or displayed until a written
application has been made to the planning and zoning commission, and a permit
duly issued. The fee for such permit shall be as set by resolution of the town
council. (1987 Code § 17.60.040)
12-9-5: HEIGHT GENERALLY:
No sign shall be permitted to exceed thirty five feet (35') in height, except
where a conditional use permit is granted. (1987 Code § 17.60.050)
12-9-6: PORTABLE OR TEMPORARY SIGNS:
Persons or organizations desiring to place such signs in any district in the
town, other than those exempted under Ordinance
12-9-3, herein shall first, before such placement commences, apply for a permit
to do so, and may be required to post a bond in addition to the permit fee, to
ensure complete removal of such temporary sign within a period of fifteen (15)
days following the conclusion of the campaign or event. (1987 Code § 17.60.060;
amd. Ord. 2021-01, 5-6-2021)
12-9-7: SIGN INTERFERENCE WITH TRAFFIC:
   A.   No sign may encroach on or hang over the highway right of way.
   B.   No sign may be lighted so it impairs the vision of any motor vehicle
driver.
   C.   No sign may obstruct the view of any road to the extent it makes it
dangerous to use the road.
   D.   No sign may obscure or physically interfere with an official traffic
control sign, signal or device. (1987 Code § 17.60.070; amd. Ord. 2021-01, 5-6-
2021)
12-9-8: FLASHING, BLINKING OR ANIMATED SIGNS:
No sign shall contain components which alternately flash, blink, or rotate in a
rapid manner so as to be similar, both as to color and motion, to any emergency
vehicle, traffic control device or signal. Rotating signs shall be limited to
eight (8) revolutions per minute. (1987 Code § 17.60.080)
12-9-9: PROJECTION OF SIGNS:
   A.   Location; Specifications: No projecting sign shall substantially hide
or obscure another sign as viewed from the least favorable lane of traffic. A
sign so projecting shall not be less than eight feet (8') above the sidewalk
and may project not more than ten feet (10') from the front of the building,
and not closer than two feet (2') to the curb or intended curb line.
   B.   Single Faced Or Flat Signs: Single faced or flat signs or wall signs
may extend over a public sidewalk not more than twelve inches (12").
   C.   Nonconforming Signs: Signs not meeting the provisions of this title in
place on the effective date hereof shall be considered nonconforming. It is the
intent of this chapter to eliminate sign eyesores and to restrict the
proliferation of projecting signs in dense commercial areas.
   D.   Spacing Formula: The planning and zoning commission and the town
council reserve the right to institute a spacing formula for such commercial
areas requiring projecting signs to be placed no closer than forty feet (40')
or fifty feet (50') or whatever spacing best serves the public interest. (1987
Code § 17.60.090)
12-9-10: ABANDONED, DILAPIDATED AND UNSAFE SIGNS:
Abandoned, dilapidated or unsafe signs and supporting structures are to be
removed if not corrected within thirty (30) days after written notice from the
town to the owner of the property on which the sign is installed. Costs of
removal will become a lien against the property if not paid within thirty (30)
days. (1987 Code § 17.60.100)
12-9-11: RESIDENTIAL ZONES:
No sign in a residential zone shall exceed twelve (12) square feet in area
without a conditional use permit. (Ord. 2011-15, 1-5-2012)
12-9-12: AGRICULTURAL, COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL ZONES:
In agricultural, commercial and industrial zones:
   A.   Off Site Advertising Signs: Off site advertising signs shall be placed
or erected not less than five hundred feet (500') apart and shall not be
erected adjacent to and parallel with another sign.
   B.   On Site Business Signs: On site business signs for any one building
shall not exceed one-third (1/3) of the total square footage of the building
front, including fascia and wall.
   C.   Roof Signs: No roof sign or supporting structure shall extend above the
roofline or fascia more than thirty three and one-third percent (331/3%) of the
height of the building which supports it, and shall not exceed one hundred
(100) square feet per one hundred feet (100').
   D.   Trade Construction Signs: Trade construction signs shall not exceed
thirty two (32) square feet in area, shall not be installed prior to start of
construction, and shall be removed prior to occupancy of the building. (1987
Code § 17.60.120; amd. Ord. 2020-01, 6-4-2020)
CHAPTER 10
NONCONFORMING LOTS, BUILDINGS AND USES
SECTION:
12-10-1: Uses
12-10-2: Repairs And Maintenance
12-10-3: Buildings And Structures
12-10-4: Use Removal
12-10-5: Signs And Billboards
12-10-6: Fences, Hedges And Walls
12-10-7: Mobile Home Park Improvements
12-10-1: USES:
If the use of a building, structure or land exists on the effective date
hereof, and such a use is not allowed in the district under the terms of this
title, the use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject
to the following provisions:
   A.   Enlarged, Extended, Constructed, Reconstructed: Unless a conditional
use permit is granted, no existing building or structure devoted to a use not
permitted in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended,
constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in changing
the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is
located. (Ord. 2007-8, 5-1-2007)
   B.   Reconstruction: An existing residential building or structure in a
commercial (C), light industrial (L-I) or heavy industrial (H-I) zone shall be
allowed to be rebuilt at the same location so long as the reconstructed
building or structure receives proper building permits and conforms to all
other requirements of this code. Such reconstructed residential building shall
conform with all standards, including setbacks, inspections and codes as if
said residence was constructed in an R-1 zone. (Ord. 2013-06, 1-16-2014)
   C.   Extension Outside Building: Any nonconforming use may be extended
through any part of a building which was arranged or designed for such use at
the time of adoption or amendment of this title, but no such use shall be
extended to occupy any land outside such building.
   D.   Changed To Another Nonconforming Use: A nonconforming use may not be
changed to another nonconforming use.
   E.   Superseded By Permitted Use: Any building, structure or land use, in or
on which a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter
conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located and the
nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed.
   F.   Discontinued Or Abandoned: When a nonconforming use is discontinued or
abandoned for ninety (90) consecutive calendar days, the building, structure or
land shall thereafter only be used in conformance with the regulations of the
district in which it is located. (Ord. 2007-8, 5-1-2007)
12-10-2: REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE:
   A.   Strengthening Or Restoring To Safe Condition: Nothing in this chapter
shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition
of any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by an official charged
with protecting the public safety, but in no event shall such repair or
maintenance prolong the time within which the nonconforming use thereof must
terminate.
   B.   Ordinary Repairs; Extent Of Repairs: On any building devoted in whole
or in part to any nonconforming use, work may be done in any period of twelve
(12) consecutive months on ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of
nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing, to an extent not exceeding
fifty percent (50%) of the replacement value of the building or structure;
provided, that the cubic content of the building or structure is not increased
from the size which existed on the effective date hereof. (1987 Code §
17.64.020)
12-10-3: BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES:
   A.   Removed Or Destroyed: Except as provided for in subsections B and C of
this section, if any nonconforming building or structure in any district
established by this chapter is removed or destroyed voluntarily or
involuntarily, every building, structure or use occupying the premises thereof
shall conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located.
   B.   Damage In Excess Of Sixty Percent: Whenever, in any district, a
nonconforming building or structure is damaged or destroyed by fire or a
calamity other than natural deterioration in excess of sixty percent (60%) of
the replacement value of the building or structure, the building, structure or
use which existed at the time of the destruction may be restored to its
original condition; provided, however, that the restoration must be commenced
within a period of six (6) months from the date of such damage or destruction
and be diligently prosecuted to completion. The planning and zoning commission
may, upon a written request of the applicant, extend the period six (6) months,
but not in excess of twelve (12) months from the date of the damage or
destruction.
   C.   Damage Under Sixty Percent: In the event of such damage or destruction,
by any means, of sixty percent (60%) or less of the replacement value of the
building or structure, only the building structure or use which existed at the
time of partial destruction may be restored and continued; provided, however,
if such restoration is started within a period of six (6) months from the date
of such damage or destruction and is diligently prosecuted to completion. The
planning and zoning commission may, upon a written request of the applicant,
extend the period of six (6) months, but not in excess of twelve (12) months
from the date of damage or destruction. (1987 Code § 17.64.030)
12-10-4: USE REMOVAL:
If the planning and zoning commission determines that the continuance of a
nonconforming use is detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the
neighborhood, such nonconforming use shall be completely removed or converted
to a conforming use within the time prescribed by the town council. The
planning and zoning commission shall conduct public hearings on the
nonconforming use and set forth an amortization period for its continuance of
not less than six (6) months nor more than one year, depending on the impact of
the use on the neighborhood. The town council shall approve or deny the
amortization period. The planning commission shall then grant a conditional use
permit subject to the procedures set forth in chapter 12 of this title. (1987
Code § 17.64.040)
12-10-5: SIGNS AND BILLBOARDS:
   A.   Existing Signs Or Billboards: On an off site business, signs or
billboards which do not conform to this title, but which lawfully existed and
were properly maintained and kept in good repair on the effective date hereof
shall be permitted to remain as nonconforming signs until such time as:
      1.   The sign becomes dilapidated and run down, creating an eyesore.
      2.   A business name change occurs.
      3.   Extensive remodeling of the sign or structure in excess of seventy
five percent (75%) of the original estimated value of the sign or structure.
   B.   Attention Getting Devices: Attention getting devices which, in the
opinion of the planning and zoning commission, are not in keeping with the
spirit of this title, and all signs with certain components which alternately
flash, blink or rotate in a rapid manner, so as to be similar as to color and
motion to flashing, blinking or rotating of any lights on an emergency vehicle
or traffic control device or signal shall be made to conform within one year of
the effective date hereof. (1987 Code § 17.64.050)
12-10-6: FENCES, HEDGES AND WALLS:
In instances where fences, hedges and walls which do not conform to the corner
cutback provisions of this title exist, the landowner, lessee or tenant shall
be allowed thirty (30) days from the date of delivery of written notice to
remove the nonconformance. (1987 Code § 17.64.060)
12-10-7: MOBILE HOME PARK IMPROVEMENTS:
An owner of a mobile home park in a nonconforming zone may make improvements,
repairs, replacements, additions, enlargements and modifications to the mobile
home park, including utility services which improve the overall appearance and/
or life of the park. (Ord. 6-93, 10-7-1993)
CHAPTER 11
VARIANCES
SECTION:
12-11-1: Purpose; Authority Of Planning And Zoning Commission
12-11-2: Application; Fee
12-11-3: Hearing; Requirements
12-11-4: Conditions
12-11-5: Appeal
12-11-6: Revocation Or Modification
12-11-1: PURPOSE; AUTHORITY OF PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION:
When practical difficulties, unnecessary hardships or results inconsistent with
the general intent and purpose of this title occur through the strict
application of the provisions of this title to the parcel or group of parcels
affected by a common problem, the planning and zoning commission shall have the
power to grant, upon such terms and conditions as it deems necessary and proper
as may be in harmony with its general intent and purpose, so that the spirit of
the title is observed, public safety and general welfare secured, and
substantial justice done, variances as to the use provisions of this title.
(1987 Code § 17.68.010)
12-11-2: APPLICATION; FEE:
   A.   Application:
      1.   Form: Application for variances shall be filed by the owner or his
authorized agent upon forms provided by the planning and zoning commission.
      2.   Required Information: The application shall set forth and state
fully the reasons and grounds for the variance and shall contain such
information as the planning and zoning commission shall prescribe. Accompanying
the application shall be the following:
         a.   A map showing the property described in the application and
adjoining properties and public streets and ways within a radius of three
hundred feet (300') of the exterior boundaries.
         b.   A list of all property owners whose names and addresses appear on
the latest adopted tax roll as owning property within a distance of three
hundred feet (300') of the exterior boundaries.
         c.   Photographs, drawings and other supporting documents as may be
required by the planning and zoning commission.
   B.   Filing Fee: Before accepting an application for a variance, the
planning and zoning commission shall charge and collect a filing fee. Such fee
shall be established by a resolution of the town council. (1987 Code §
17.68.020)
12-11-3: HEARING; REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Notice Of Hearing: The planning and zoning commission shall hold a
public hearing upon the application for a variance. Written notices concerning
hearings on applications for variances shall be mailed to the owners of
property and occupants of the property within a distance of three hundred feet
(300') of the exterior boundaries not less than seven (7) days before the date
of the public hearing. A public notice shall be printed in the official
newspaper at least three (3) days prior to the hearing. The notice shall set
forth the person requesting the variance, the legal description of the
property, the street address, if applicable, any other pertinent information,
and the date, time and place of the public hearing.
   B.   Criteria For Approval: Before it may grant a variance, the following
qualifications must be shown relative to the property or properties involved in
the application for such variance, and the planning commission's approval in
connection with any such application shall contain written findings of fact
showing wherein the following conditions exist, that:
      1.   Because of the special circumstances or unusual hardships applicable
to the subject property, including size, shape, topography, location or
surroundings, the strict application of this title is found to deprive the
subject property of privileges enjoyed by other properties in the vicinity and
under identical zone classifications.
      2.   Publication: A public notice shall be printed in the official town
newspaper at least three (3) days prior to the hearing.
      3.   The granting of the variance will not be materially detrimental to
the public welfare or injurious to property and improvements in the zone and
vicinity in which the property is located.
      4.   The granting of the variance will not adversely affect the
comprehensive general plan.
      5.   An on site inspection shall have been made by the commission or its
authorized representative.
   C.   Grant/Denial: From the facts presented with the application at the
public hearing, the planning and zoning commission may grant the requested
variance in whole or in part. If the findings cannot be made, such application
shall be denied.
   D.   Vote Required: Every action or decision of the planning and zoning
commission authorizing a variance from the regulations established in this
title shall be adopted by an affirmative vote of not less than a majority of
the members attending and voting at a meeting of the planning and zoning
commission at which there is a quorum present, setting forth the written
findings of fact required by subsection B of this section. (1987 Code §
17.68.030; amd. Ord. 2019-12, 12-19-2019)
12-11-4: CONDITIONS:
   A.   Terms And Conditions: The planning and zoning commission, in approving
a variance, may set forth in its decision reasonable terms and conditions which
it deems necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the community
and to assure the intent and purpose of this title. It may also require that
such terms and conditions are being or will be complied with.
   B.   Term Of Variance: Every variance from the provisions of this title
granted by the planning and zoning commission as authorized by this chapter
shall contain a condition thereof, as follows:
The variance hereby allowed is conditioned upon the privileges herein being
utilized within one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date hereof,
and should the privileges authorized hereby fail to be executed or utilized or
where some form of construction has not actually commenced within such one
hundred eighty (180) days, and is not diligently prosecuted to completion, this
authority shall become null and void and any privilege or variance granted
hereby shall lapse unless such variance has not been utilized within such one
hundred eighty (180) day period by reason of delays caused by approval of
plans, in which event the planning and zoning commission may, in its discretion
and with the consent or upon the request of the applicant, for any cause, grant
a reasonable extension of time to the one hundred eighty (180) day time limit
noted above.
   (1987 Code § 17.68.040)
12-11-5: APPEAL:
   A.   Right To Appeal: Written appeals may be reviewed by the town council
for the applicant for the variance or for any person owning property within
three hundred feet (300') of the exterior boundaries of the variance
applicant's property aggrieved by any determination for variance, or upon
failure of the planning and zoning commission to make its determination on any
application by or at the next regular monthly planning and zoning commission
meeting.
   B.   Hearing: The town council shall hold a public hearing as required by
Wyoming Statutes.
   C.   Board Of Adjustment: The town council shall perform all duties formerly
allocated to the board of adjustment under this code. (1987 Code § 17.68.050)
12-11-6: REVOCATION OR MODIFICATION:
   A.   Grounds For Revocation Or Modification: A variance may be revoked or
modified by the town council, after a public hearing, on any one or more of the
following grounds:
      1.   Approval was obtained by fraud.
      2.   The use for which such approval was granted is not being exercised
within the time specified in such permit.
      3.   The use for which such approval was granted has ceased to exist or
has been suspended for one year or more.
      4.   The permit granted is being, or recently has been, exercised
contrary to the terms or conditions of such approval, or in violation of any
statute, resolution, law or regulation.
      5.   The use for which such approval was granted has been so exercised as
to be detrimental to the public health or safety, or so as to constitute a
nuisance.
   B.   Notice Of Intent To Revoke: Written notices of intention to revoke
shall be mailed to the owners of the property and the occupants of property not
less than fifteen (15) days before the date of the public hearing.
   C.   Appeal: In the event of the revocation by the town council, the
applicant may appeal in the same manner as an appeal from a denial of a
variance in the first instance. (1987 Code § 17.68.060)
CHAPTER 12
CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
SECTION:
12-12-1: Generally
12-12-2: When Required
12-12-3: Home Occupations
12-12-4: Multiple Animal Permits
12-12-5: Inoperable Motor Vehicles
12-12-6: Gaming
12-12-7: Application; Fee
12-12-8: Hearing
12-12-9: Findings For Approval
12-12-10: Appeals
12-12-11: Revocation Or Modification
12-12-12: Modification Of Approved Structures
12-12-1: GENERALLY:
   A.   Generally: Uses permitted subject to conditional use permits are those
uses necessary for the development of the community, but which uses must be
located, planned and used in such manner as not to be detrimental to the
property abutting such uses and to the community as a whole. In considering a
conditional use permit, the planning and zoning commission shall determine
whether the use is suitable in the area and, if the grant is made, shall
require safeguards necessary to protect the health, safety, morals, order,
convenience and general welfare. In approving such uses, the planning and
zoning commission shall set forth the manner in which the use is to be
conducted, approve the design or plan of the structures, including their
locations and the yards around them, and consider the adequacy of facilities to
serve them. In granting a conditional use permit, the planning and zoning
commission may grant deviations or relief from the yard, fence, sign, height,
parking, loading and open space regulations of this title. (1987 Code §
17.72.010)
   B.   Petition For Zone Change Or Newly Annexed Territory: In the event a
conditional use is proposed in connection with a petition for a zone change or
newly annexed territory, the application for the conditional use shall
accompany the petition. In the event the petition for the zone change or
annexation is required to be considered by the planning and zoning commission
prior to council consideration, the commission may recommend reasonable
conditions be attached to any recommended approval. The commission and council
shall consider the same criteria and make the findings required in the same
manner as those set forth in this chapter.
   C.   Term: In any case in which a conditional use permit has not been
exercised within one year from the date of issuance, such permit shall be void
and have no further force or effect. "Exercise" as used in this section, shall
mean that the holder of the permit has: 1) obtained all necessary building
permits; and 2) executed a binding contract for the construction of the
principal building or other improvement or, in the absence of contracts, that
the principal building or other improvement is under construction to a
substantial degree. When construction is not a part of the conditional use
permit, "exercise" shall mean that the use is operating in compliance with
conditions as designated in the permit. (Ord. 6-94, 10-24-1994)
12-12-2: WHEN REQUIRED:
Uses requiring special use permits are set forth in this title, except that
wherever not specifically referred to, public service uses, including radio or
television transmitters, structures necessary for public utilities, cemeteries
and airports may be located in each zone with a conditional use permit. (1987
Code § 17.72.020)
12-12-3: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
   A.   Permits Required: "Home occupations" or small "home businesses", as
defined in section
12-2-1 of this title, are permitted in any residential zone; provided, that a
conditional use permit as set forth in this chapter and a business permit as
set forth in title 3 of this code are first obtained.
   B.   Specific Conditions: In addition to the general conditions of a
conditional use permit and any special conditions that may be imposed by the
planning and zoning commission, the following specific conditions shall also
apply:
      1.   Not more than one-half (1/2) of one floor shall be used for an
occupation if the occupation is conducted in a family residence.
      2.   An occupation may be conducted in an accessory building if first
approved by the planning and zoning commission.
      3.   No goods, products or manufactured items associated with the home
occupation shall be attached, displayed or stored outside of any buildings or
structures located on the premises or general area. Goods, products or
manufactured items shall be confined to the building or buildings in which an
occupation or home business is being conducted.
      4.   For sign requirements in conjunction with a home occupation or small
business, see section
12-9-11 of this title.
   C.   Not Allowed To Continue: The home occupation or small home business
license shall not be granted or allowed to continue if it is determined by the
planning and zoning commission or the town council that the conduct of such
home occupation or small business infringes upon the residential quality and
life of neighbors or immediate family or when it is determined that such
business or occupation becomes a nuisance and warrants moving to a commercial
area. (1987 Code § 17.72.030)
   D.   Prohibited Occupations:
      1.   Vehicle Repairs: Vehicle repair including the assembly or
disassembly of vehicle parts, paint and body work, and accessory components
installation is not permitted as a home occupation.
      2.   Retail Stores: Business where the primary function is the sale of
retail goods shall not be permitted as a home occupation.
   E.   Exemptions:
      1.   Criteria For Exemption: Any home occupation may be exempt from
obtaining a conditional use permit if the home occupation can meet all of the
following criteria:
         a.   Employees: In addition to family members residing in the dwelling
unit, only one person may be employed by the home occupation. (Ord. 8-94, 12-
15-1994)
         b.   Visual Indicators: No exterior display, no exterior storage of
materials, and no other exterior indication of the home occupation or variation
from the residential character of the principal or accessory building. Signs
for home occupations are allowed not to exceed twelve (12) square feet in size.
(Ord. 2011-15, 1-5-2012)
         c.   Environmental Contaminants: No home occupation shall emit odor,
dust, gas, noise, vibration, smoke, heat, glare, or other environmental
contaminants associated with the home occupation beyond any boundary of the lot
on which the home occupation is conducted.
         d.   Operating Hours: Activity shall be limited to the hours between
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M., except for home
occupation childcare facilities and those occupations which do not adversely
impact the neighborhood.
         e.   Operating Equipment: No mechanical equipment shall be used except
that normally used for domestic, hobby, standard office or household purposes.
         f.   Business License: A town business license is required for all
home occupations.
         g.   Parking: Any parking incidental to the home occupation shall be
provided on the site and must be improved.
         h.   Business Area: Not more than fifty percent (50%) of the total
area under the primary residential roof shall be used for any home occupation,
except for home occupation childcare facilities. Accessory buildings may be
used by approval of the planning and zoning commission.
         i.   Increased Traffic: Home occupations which generate business
traffic resulting in excess of eight (8) trips per day, or more than two (2)
vehicles at any one time, shall require approval of the planning and zoning
commission.
         j.   State Licensing: Home occupations requiring Wyoming state
licensing shall require planning and zoning approval. (Ord. 8-94, 12-15-1994)
      2.   Notice To Adjacent Property Owners: If an application for a home
occupation business complies with all the criteria of subsection E1 of this
section, the town shall notify, by letter, all adjacent property owners and
occupants. If no objections from those notified are received within fourteen
(14) days of the notification letter date, the business license may be issued
by the town clerk. (Ord. 8-94, 12-15-1994; amd. 2004 Code)
      3.   Commercial Zone: A home occupation located in the commercial zone is
not required to obtain a conditional use permit. A business license is still
required.
      4.   Criteria Requiring Permit: Any one of the following criteria shall
cause the home occupation to obtain a conditional use permit:
         a.   A written objection from an adjacent property owner when letters
are sent to all adjacent property owners;
         b.   Failure to comply with the criteria listed in subsection E1 of
this section;
         c.   The home occupation is located in an accessory building;
         d.   The home occupation generates business traffic in excess of eight
(8) trips per day, or more than two (2) vehicles at any one time;
         e.   The home occupation requires Wyoming state licensing; or
         f.   A written objection from any interested party who becomes aware
that the business does not comply with the criteria listed in subsection E1 of
this section.
      5.   Appeal: If an application for a business license for a home
occupation is denied, the applicant may appeal to the planning and zoning
commission. (Ord. 8-94, 12-15-1994)
12-12-4: MULTIPLE ANIMAL PERMITS:
Multiple animal permits as described and regulated in title 5, chapter 3,
article B of this code shall be conditionally permitted in any zone; provided,
that a conditional use permit as set forth in this chapter and a business
permit (if required) as set forth in title 3 of this code are first obtained.
Multiple animals shall be permitted in an A zone without a conditional use
permit, however, a business permit may still be required. (Ord. 2011-10, 8-4-
2011)
12-12-5: INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES 1 :
   A.   Permit Required: Inoperable motor vehicles as described in title 6,
chapter 8 of this code shall be permitted in any zone; provided, that when
required, a conditional use permit as set forth in this chapter is first
obtained.
   B.   Conditions For Approval: A conditional use permit may be granted if the
applicant complies with all the following conditions:
      1.   All inoperable vehicles shall be kept in the rear or side yard;
      2.   All inoperable vehicles are kept in a safe condition;
      3.   All property owners within three hundred feet (300') of the subject
property have been notified and have been given opportunity to comment as
provided in this chapter; and
      4.   All but two (2) inoperable motor vehicles shall remain covered.
   C.   Additional Conditions: The planning and zoning commission may also
require any other reasonable conditions that will ensure that keeping the
inoperable vehicles will not be detrimental to the subject property,
surrounding properties, or the town. Such reasonable conditions may include
time limits, location requirements, coverings, etc. (Ord. 6-97, 1-8-1998, eff.
6-1-1998)
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 6, chapter 8 of this code.
12-12-6: GAMING:
   A.   Generally: No property shall be used as a gaming establishment except
as provided in this title. Any place where one or more gaming devices are found
is presumed to be intended for use as a gambling establishment.
   B.   Commercial Zone: Gaming establishments may only be located in areas
zoned commercial and they shall be a conditional use in that zone.
   C.   Application For Permit: A written application shall be made to the
planning and zoning commission as provided in section
12-12-7 of this chapter.
   D.   Signs; Parking: For sign and parking requirements, see chapters 8 and 9
of this title.
   E.   Exemptions: Gaming activities such as bingo, pulltabs, raffles, etc.,
used by nonprofit groups as fundraising activities where all the proceeds of
such activities go solely to the benefit of that nonprofit organization are
exempt from the conditional use requirements. (Ord. 6-94, 10-2-1994)
12-12-7: APPLICATION; FEE:
   A.   Application: Application for a conditional use permit shall be made by
the property owner or his authorized agent upon forms provided by the planning
and zoning commission. Accompanying an application shall be the following:
      1.   A map showing the property described in the application and
adjoining properties and public streets and ways within a radius of three
hundred feet (300') of the exterior boundaries.
      2.   A list of all property owners whose names and addresses appear on
the latest adopted tax roll as owning property within a distance of three
hundred feet (300') of the exterior boundaries.
      3.   Photographs, drawings and other supporting documents as may be
required by the planning and zoning commission.
   B.   Filing Fee: The planning and zoning commission shall charge and collect
a filing fee for each application, as determined by resolution of the town
council. (1987 Code § 17.72.040)
12-12-8: HEARING:
   A.   Required: The planning and zoning commission shall hold a public
hearing upon the application for a conditional use permit.
   B.   Notice Of Hearing:
      1.   Mail: Written notices concerning the hearing on an application for
conditional use permit shall be mailed to the owners of the property, and
occupants of property within a distance of three hundred feet (300') of the
exterior boundaries, not less than seven (7) days before the date of the public
hearing.
      2.   Publication: A public notice shall be printed in the official town
newspaper at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing.
      3.   Contents: The notice shall set forth the person requesting the
conditional use permit, the intent of the conditional use permit, the legal
description of the property, the street address, if applicable, any other
pertinent information, and the date, time and place of the public hearing.
(1987 Code § 17.72.050)
12-12-9: FINDINGS FOR APPROVAL:
The planning and zoning commission, in approving by an affirmative vote of not
less than a majority of the members attending and at which time a quorum is
present, shall find as follows:
   A.   Adequacy Of Site: The site for the proposed use is adequate in size,
shape, location, and topography to accommodate the use, and all yards, spaces,
walls and fences, parking, loading and landscaping are adequate to properly
adjust such use with the land and uses in the vicinity.
   B.   Adverse Effect On Abutting Property: The site for the proposed use will
have no adverse effect upon abutting property from the permitted use thereof,
nor will it conflict with the comprehensive general plan.
   C.   Adverse Effect From Use: The proposed use will have no adverse effect
upon abutting property from the permitted use thereof, nor will it conflict
with the comprehensive general plan.
   D.   General Conditions Imposed: The planning and zoning commission shall,
in addition to any special conditions, impose the following general conditions
upon every conditional use permit granted:
      1.   The right to a use an occupancy permit shall be contingent upon the
fulfillment of all general and special conditions imposed by the conditional
use permit procedure.
      2.   All of the special conditions shall constitute restrictions running
with the land and shall be binding upon the owner of the land, his successors
or assigns.
      3.   All of the special conditions shall be consented to, in writing, by
the applicants and all owners of interest and lien holders.
      4.   The vote granting the application, together with all consent forms,
shall be recorded by the town clerk or his authorized deputy.
      5.   Each permit shall be subject to yearly review.
   E.   Inspection: An on site inspection shall be made by the commission or
its authorized representative prior to a decision being rendered. (1987 Code §
17.72.060)
   F.   Limitations Or Modifications: In addition, and to further clarify those
listed in subsections A through E of this section, and by way of illustration,
but not limitation, the following criteria and such limitations or
modifications may be placed upon the conditional use permit to accentuate or
mitigate their impacts:
      1.   Street And Road Capacities: Street and road capacities on the
property and on public rights of way leading to and from the property.
      2.   Intensification Of Traffic Congestion Or Hazard: Intensification of
traffic congestion or hazard caused by the use which may be over and above
normal traffic for the area, as determined by the town or as advised by the
Wyoming department of transportation. Ingress and egress to adjoining public
streets, location and amount of off street parking, internal traffic
circulation systems.
      3.   Open Space: Usable open space, including area and height to be
occupied by buildings or other structures.
      4.   Density: Density for the proposed use in terms of units per acre and
the number of employees or both.
      5.   Volume Of Business: Volume of business in terms of the number of
customers per day.
      6.   Location And Use: Location and use with respect to the same or
similar uses in the immediate area.
      7.   Performance Standards: Noise, vibration, air pollution, and other
environmental influences.
      8.   Utility Capacity: Capacity of water, sewer, solid waste, electric,
telecommunication and other public and municipal systems.
      9.   Water Drainage: On site and off site surface water drainage
requirements.
      10.   Nearby Structures And Environmental Conditions: Landscaping,
architectural themes, including signs, of nearby structures and environmental
conditions.
      11.   Other Criteria: Any other criteria affecting public health, safety,
and welfare as provided for by the written rules of the planning and zoning
commission or town council. (Ord. 6-94, 10-20-1994)
12-12-10: APPEALS:
   A.   Right To Appeal: Written appeals may be reviewed by the town council,
by the applicant for a conditional use permit, or by any person owning property
within three hundred feet (300') of the exterior boundaries of the conditional
use permit applicant's property, who is aggrieved by a determination for a
conditional use permit, or upon failure of the planning and zoning commission
to make its determination on any application by (or at) the next regular
monthly planning and zoning commission meeting.
   B.   Hearing: The town council shall hold a public hearing as required by
Wyoming Statutes.
   C.   Board Of Adjustment: The town council shall perform all duties formerly
allocated to the board of adjustment under this title of the code. (1987 Code §
17.72.070)
12-12-11: REVOCATION OR MODIFICATION:
   A.   Grounds For Revocation Or Modification: A conditional use permit may be
revoked or modified by the planning and zoning commission, on any one or more
of the following grounds:
      1.   The approval was obtained by fraud.
      2.   The use for which such approval was granted is not being exercised
within the time specified in such permit.
      3.   The use for which such approval was granted has ceased to exist or
has been suspended for one year or more.
      4.   The permit granted is being, or recently has been, exercised
contrary to the terms or conditions of such approval, or in violation of any
statute, resolution, law or regulation.
      5.   The location or address of the use of the conditional use permit has
changed to a different location or address within the corporate limits of the
town.
      6.   The person holding the conditional use permit moves from the
corporate limits of the town.
      7.   The person holding the conditional use permit moves from the
corporate limits of the town, and the successor or assign to the location or
address wishes to continue the use granted by permit.
      8.   The conditional use permit has proven to be, as practiced,
detrimental to the development of the community, to the property abutting the
use, or to the community as a whole.
   B.   Notice Of Intent To Revoke: Written notices of intention to revoke
shall be mailed to the owners of the property and the occupants of property not
less than fifteen (15) days before the date of the planning and zoning
commission hearing addressing the revocation. (Ord. 2011-08, 6-2-2011)
   C.   Effect Of Revocation: The revocation of a conditional use permit shall
have the effect of denying all rights granted by the conditional use permit.
(1987 Code § 17.72.080)
   D.   Appeal: In the event of a revocation by the planning and zoning
commission, the applicant may appeal in the same manner as an appeal from a
denial of a conditional use permit in the first instance. (Ord. 2011-08, 6-2-
2011)
   E.   Annual Review: The planning and zoning commission shall annually review
all the conditional use permits active within the town. Holders of the
conditional use permits shall be notified by mail at the address listed on the
conditional use permit request as to their intentions to maintain the current
permit. Permit holders who do not respond, or respond that the conditional use
permit is no longer needed, may have their conditional use permits revoked
without further notice.
   F.   Grandfathering: No conditional use permit shall be deemed to remain in
effect solely for the reason that the conditional use permit was granted prior
to the date of any new ordinance governing such permits. (Ord. 2008-15, 7-17-
2008)
12-12-12: MODIFICATION OF APPROVED STRUCTURES:
Any proposed additions, enlargements or modifications of the structures
approved in any conditional use permit or any proposed extension of the use
into areas not approved in any such permit shall require a conditional use
permit. No building permit for such additions, enlargements, modifications or
extensions shall be issued unless the planning and zoning commission has
granted a conditional use permit therefor. (1987 Code § 17.72.090)
CHAPTER 13
AMENDMENTS; REZONES
SECTION:
12-13-1: Authority
12-13-2: Initiation
12-13-3: Planning And Zoning Commission Hearing And Action
12-13-4: Town Council Hearing And Action
12-13-1: AUTHORITY:
The town council, after a report thereon by the planning and zoning commission,
and after public hearings as required by law, may amend, supplement or change
the regulations and zoning districts established in this title or subsequently
established, and shall zone new annexed areas and unzoned areas within the
territorial jurisdiction of this title. (1987 Code § 17.76.010)
12-13-2: INITIATION:
   A.   Who May Initiate: An amendment, supplement, change or zoning of newly
annexed areas may be initiated by the town council, by the planning and zoning
commission, or by petition of property owners.
   B.   Request; Fee: Whenever the town council, the planning and zoning
commission, or owner of any land desires a reclassification of his property, or
a change of land use district or regulations pertaining to property, or zoning
of a newly annexed area, or zoning of any unzoned area within the territorial
jurisdiction of the town, a request shall be presented to the planning and
zoning commission. The form setting forth the request and related facts,
circumstances or information shall be filed with the secretary of the planning
and zoning commission, together with a fee as set by the town council. The
secretary shall acknowledge, in writing, receipt of the request and of the fee
and shall thereafter report the request to the planning and zoning commission
at its next regular meeting or special meeting following the date of filing.
(1987 Code § 17.76.020)
12-13-3: PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION HEARING AND ACTION:
   A.   Hearing: The planning and zoning commission shall hear the request
filed as provided in section
12-13-2 of this chapter and shall take such action as it deems necessary in
order to proceed with any studies, surveys, investigations or public hearings
as required by section 15-1-602, Wyoming Statutes Annotated, 1977 republished
edition.
   B.   Recommendations To Town Council: Following a public hearing, the
planning and zoning commission shall report its findings and recommendations to
the town council on the request, upon the boundaries of the district involved,
or such other matters as may be related to the request. (1987 Code § 17.76.030)
   C.   Rezoned And Unzoned Areas: All zone changes or zoning of all unzoned
areas shall be by resolution duly adopted by the town council after the town
council has received from the planning and zoning commission its report and
recommendation. (Ord. 2007-10, 5-1-2007)
12-13-4: TOWN COUNCIL HEARING AND ACTION:
The town council, after receipt of the report and recommendation from the
planning and zoning commission, shall hold at least one public hearing and/or
review the proceedings from the public hearing held by the planning and zoning
commission, and shall thereafter proceed by its action on the report and
recommendation, as provided by applicable Wyoming Statutes, and all zone
changes or zoning of all unzoned areas shall be by resolution duly adopted by
the town council. (Ord. 2007-10, 5-1-2007)
CHAPTER 14
ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
12-14-1: Administrative Duty
12-14-2: Building Permits
12-14-3: Law Enforcement Agency Duties
12-14-4: Penalty
12-14-1: ADMINISTRATIVE DUTY:
It is the responsibility of the town council and its authorized agency, the
planning and zoning commission, to administer this title. (1987 Code §
17.80.010)
12-14-2: BUILDING PERMITS:
The purpose of this section is to provide for the safety, health and public
welfare through proof of structural strength and stability, means of egress,
adequate light and ventilation, and protection of life and property from fire
and hazards incident to the design, construction and alteration of buildings
and structures.
   A.   Building Code: The town council shall enforce the most recent edition
of the building code.
   B.   Application; Term: The building permit application shall be filled out
by the contractor, authorized agent, or owner of land, and submitted to the
town council for all building construction. Such permit becomes null and void
if work or construction authorized is not commenced within one hundred twenty
(120) days. (1987 Code § 17.80.020; amd. 2004 Code)
12-14-3: LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY DUTIES:
It is the duty of the law enforcement agency of the town charged with the
enforcement of the law to enforce all provisions of this title. (1987 Code §
17.80.030)
12-14-4: PENALTY:
No person shall locate, erect, construct, reconstruct, enlarge, change,
maintain or use any building or use any land in violation of this title. Unless
specifically set out in this title, any violation of this title constitutes a
class B misdemeanor punishable as set forth in subsection
1-4-1A2 of this code. (Ord. 2012-11, 1-17-2013)
