COUNTY CODE
of
LYON COUNTY, NEVADA
1991
Code current through:
Ord. 643, passed August, 21, 2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
(800) 445-5588
www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
         This code of the county of Lyon County, as supplemented, contains
ordinances up to and including ordinance 643, passed August 21, 2025.
Ordinances of the county adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions
of this code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith.
Consult the county office in order to ascertain whether any particular
provision of the code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
                     American Legal Publishing
                     Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not amend the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
BILL NO._25-01_
ORDINANCE NO. __639_______
SUMMARY:  AN ORDINANCE AMENDING LYON COUNTY CODE TITLE 15, CHAPTER 348, SECTION
4, CREATING DESIGN STANDARDS RELATED TO THE ROOF FORM OF MULTI-FAMILY
RESIDENTIAL STRUCUTRES IN LYON COUNTY.
TITLE:  AN ORDINANCE AMENDING LYON COUNTY CODE TITLE 15, CHAPTER 348, SECTION
4, CREATING DESIGN STANDARDS RELATED TO THE ROOF FORM OF MULTI-FAMILY
RESIDENTIAL STRUCUTRES IN LYON COUNTY.
   THE BOARD OF COUNTY COMMISIONERS OF LYON COUNTY, NEVADA DOES HEREBY ORDAIN:
 
Section 1. The Lyon County Land Use and Development Code, Title 15, Chapter
348, section 4 is hereby amended as follows:
 
15.348.04: DESIGN STANDARDS:
All of the following design standards shall be met by all multi- family
residential developments:
   A.   Building Orientation: Multi-family residential developments, when
abutting a private street, local, collector, or arterial street that has
existing or planned on-street parking, shall have the building oriented to the
street along a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the site's frontage (see
figure 15.348-2 of this subsection).
FIGURE 15.348-2
BUILDING ORIENTATION AND STORAGE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b3e37bf04674f7b3738d62883ef5a27ed6aa631/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2820_8447x5982.jpg]
 
The "orientation" standard is met when all of the following criteria are met:
      1.   Primary building entrances shall face the street;
      2.   The front of the buildings shall be within twenty five feet (25') of
the front lot/parcel line,
Exception: Open, courtyard space in excess of twenty five feet (25') may be
placed in front of building entrances. Open courtyard space is defined as
usable, hard-surfaced space with pedestrian amenities including benches,
seating walls or similar furnishings.
      3.   Off-street parking or vehicular circulation shall not be placed
between buildings and streets used to comply with this standard;
   B.   Building Form: New multi-family construction shall comply with the
following building form standards (see figure 15.348-3 of this subsection).
FIGURE 15.348-3
BUILDING FORM
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b3e37bf04674f7b3738d62883ef5a27ed6aa631/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2842_8397x5467.jpg]
 
      1.   Structures shall not have continuous horizontal distance exceeding
one hundred feet (100') (measured from end wall to end wall).
      2.   A minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the front facade (area
measurement) shall contain windows or doors. All windows and doors shall be
trimmed or be recessed (i.e., into the front facade) to provide shadowing.
      3.   Garages attached to living units and accessed from the street (front
setback) shall be recessed at least four feet (4') behind the front facade of a
dwelling structure; and
      4.   Exterior building elevations shall incorporate design features
including offsets, balconies, projections, window reveals, or similar elements
to preclude large expansions of uninterrupted building surfaces. Along the
vertical face of a structure, the features shall occur at a minimum of every
thirty feet (30'), and on each floor shall contain a minimum of two (2) of the
following features:
         a.   Recesses (e.g., deck, patio, courtyard, entrance, window reveals)
that have a minimum depth of three feet (3');
         b.   Extensions (e.g., floor area, deck, patio, entrance) that have a
minimum depth of two feet (2') and minimum length of four feet (4'); and/or
         c.   Offsets or breaks in roof elevation of two feet (2') or greater
in height. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
C. Roof Form: New multi-family residential structure(s) shall comply with the
following building form standards
1. Roof Architecture
a. General Design Principles
1. No specific architectural style is required; however, within a development,
buildings shall incorporate complementary forms, materials, colors, and
rooflines that result in a cohesive and integrated design.
2. Roof massing shall avoid box-like or monotonous appearances. Articulation
shall be achieved through variations in roof planes, changes in materials, and
the integration of architectural elements.
3. Architectural detailing and materials shall be consistently applied on all
building elevations to retain a cohesive design.
2. Roof Form and Massing
a. Roof Design and Variation
1. Roof forms shall be used to break up long horizontal massing, reflect
internal building organization, and emphasize entries, corners, or unit
modules.
2. Roofs shall have variations in plane accomplished by changes in plane or by
the use of traditional roof forms such as dormers (pitched, shed-roof or
eyebrow), gables, hipped roofs and variations in pitch.
3. Flat roofs may be permitted if fully concealed behind architectural facade
roof elements that simulate sloped rooflines through construction of false or
partial roof forms integrated into the building’s exterior. These elements
shall be constructed along all exterior elevations of the building and shall
maintain a minimum height consistent with a 3:12 roof pitch measured from the
top of the primary roof surface to the peak of the facade roof. The facade roof
shall be continuous around the entire perimeter of the building to ensure a
consistent and integrated architectural appearance, which shall be compatible
with and complimentary to the architectural character of the surrounding
development.
b. Roof Function and Expression
1. Roof forms shall be aligned with and reinforce the layout of the building,
highlighting entrances, corners, and unit configurations.
2. Applied or purely decorative roof features that are not structurally or
visually integrated into the building are discouraged.
 
 
3. Rooftop Mechanical Equipment Screening
a. All rooftop mechanical equipment shall be fully screened from view from
public streets, adjacent residential uses, and publicly accessible locations
(e.g. sidewalks, parks, or other ground level areas open to the public).
Required screening shall be designed to ensure that rooftop mechanical
equipment is not visible when viewed from any adjacent public street, adjacent
residential use, or publicly accessible location located at or below the
elevation of the top of the highest occupied floor of the building.
b. Screening shall be accomplished through one or more of the following:
1. Locating equipment within recessed roof wells below the height of facade
roof elements;
2. Enclosing equipment within a rooftop structure designed and finished in a
manner architecturally consistent with the primary building; or
3. Using facade roof forms that are of sufficient height and design to fully
conceal equipment from all public views.
c.    Mechanical equipment shall not extend above the visible roofline or roof
screen.
4. Alternative Compliance
The Community Development Director may approve deviations from the standards
set forth in this section through the minor variance process if the applicant
demonstrates that the proposed design:
a. Meets or exceeds the overall intent of these design standards;
b. Provides an equal or greater level of architectural quality and visual
interest; and
c. Maintains compatibility with surrounding development patterns.
    
Section 2. If any section of this ordinance or portion thereof is for any
reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction,
such holding shall not invalidate the remaining parts of this ordinance
 
Section 3. All ordinances, parts of ordinances, chapters, sections,
subsections, clauses, phrases or sentences contained in the Lyon County Code in
conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
 
 Section 4. This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its
passage, approval and publication as required by law.
 
 
Proposed on the 15th day of  May , 2025.
 
Proposed by Commissioner: Tammy Hendrix      
 
 
 
 
THIS Ordinance has been PASSED, ADOPTED and APPROVED this _18th day of _June_,
2025 by the following vote of the Board of Commissioners, Lyon County:
 
Ayes: _Jacobson, Cassinelli, Hendrix, Keller, Hockaday      ____
Nays: None_________________________________________________
Absent: _None_________________________________________________
 
 
 
Attest:
 
 
_________________________ _______________________________
County Clerk Chair of the Board
 
 
This ordinance shall be in force and effect from and after the _23rd  day of
the month of _July_of the year 2025.
BILL NO. 25-02
ORDINANCE NO.  640
SUMMARY: AN ORDINANCE AMENDING LYON COUNTY CODE TITLE 15,
CHAPTER 336, SECTIONS 6-9 and SECTION 12, AND CHAPTER 320, TABLE 320-1 AND 320-
4, AMENDING CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT STANDARDS FOR NEW COMMERCIAL WIND
GENERATION, GEOTHERMAL GENERATION, AND SOLAR GENERATION, AND ADDING CONDITIONAL
USE PERMIT STANDARDS FOR ENERGY STORAGE SYSTEMS, AMENDING
TABLE OF ALLOWED USES - RURAL RESIDENTIAL, COMMERCIAL MIXED USE, COMMERCIAL AND
AGRICULTURAL/RESOURCE ZONING DISTRICTS TO ADD ENERGY STORAGE SYSTEMS AS AN
ALLOWABLE USE, AND TABLE OF ALLOWED USES - EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRIAL ZONING
DISTRICTS TO ADD ENERGY STORAGE SYSTEMS AS AN ALLOWABLE USE IN LYON COUNTY.
TITLE: AN ORDINANCE AMENDING LYON COUNTY CODE TITLE 15,
CHAPTER 336, SECTIONS 6-9 and SECTION 12, AND CHAPTER 320, TABLE 320-1 AND 320-
4, AMENDING CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT STANDARDS FOR NEW COMMERCIAL WIND
GENERATION, GEOTHERMAL GENERATION, AND SOLAR GENERATION, AND ADDING CONDITIONAL
USE PERMIT STANDARDS FOR ENERGY STORAGE SYSTEMS, AMENDING
TABLE OF ALLOWED USES - RURAL RESIDENTIAL, COMMERCIAL MIXED USE, COMMERCIAL AND
AGRICULTURAL/RESOURCE ZONING DISTRICTS TO ADD ENERGY STORAGE SYSTEMS AS AN
ALLOWABLE USE, AND TABLE OF ALLOWED USES - EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRIAL ZONING
DISTRICTS TO ADD ENERGY STORAGE SYSTEMS AS AN ALLOWABLE USE IN LYON COUNTY.
THE BOARD OF COUNTY COMMISSIONERS OF LYON COUNTY, NEVADA DOES HEREBY ORDAIN:
23
24   Section 1. 
The Lyon County Land Use and Development Code, Title 15, Chapter 336, section 7 is
hereby
25   amended as follows:
26
27   CHAPTER 15.336.07: WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS, COMMERCIAL:
28
29   15.336.07: WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS, COMMERCIAL:
30   A. Purpose:
 The purpose of this section is to regulate commercial wind energy conversion
systems
31   
(WECS) to protect the public health, safety and welfare while encouraging the development
of
32   wind energy within Lyon County.
 
1   B. Acknowledgment/Approval:
 Written acknowledgment and general approval from the property
2   owner as well as the public utility whose transmission lines to which the commercial WECS
is
3   proposed to connect into must be included in all commercial WECS
applications.
4   C. Siting Requirements:
5   1. Parcel Size: A minimum parcel size of ten 
(10) acres net is required. No part of the commercial
6   WECS shall be located within or over drainage, utility or other established
easements.
7   2. Setback: Each wind machine must be set back a minimum of two 
(2) times the total extended
8   height from any property line, railroad, aboveground utility lines or
public
9   roads. Setback increases to a minimum of one half mile 
(2,640 Feet) from a trail easement,
10   highway, and/
or adjacent properties with an existing residential use. Setback increases to
one
11   mile 
(5,280 Feet) from an airport, river, perennial or intermittent stream, and/
or lake. The
12   Board of County Commissioners may, at their sole discretion, approve setbacks that are
less
13   than the setbacks outlined in this chapter if the project is a part of a Planned
Unit
14   Development (PUD).
15   3. Comstock Historic District:
 In addition to all other requirements, all proposed commercial
16   WECS located within the Comstock Historic District, as established by the Comstock
Historical
17   Commission pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes chapter 384, shall receive a
review,
18   approval and a certificate of appropriateness from the Comstock Historic District
Commission
19   prior to submitting an application for a Conditional   use permit.
20   4. Height: Unless otherwise approved, 
the total extended height of the wind machine shall not
21   exceed two hundred feet (200'). The system must be in compliance with FAA
regulations
22   regarding height and lighting. Projects located in an area with military airspace shall
comply
23   with military height and lighting regulations.
24   5. Minimum Standards:
 Remaining standards regarding such things as access, noise, design and
25   installation, etc., shall meet or exceed those of private wind energy systems
(see
26   subsection 15.335.03FFF of this title). However, conditions placed on the
Conditional
27   Use Permit may be more restrictive than the minimum standards provided in this
chapter.
28   6. Building Permit:
 A permit from the County Building Department is required to install an
29   alternative energy system in Lyon County. In evaluating whether to approve a building
permit,
30   the building official may request and consider:
31   a. Supporting technical data,
32   b. Test reports, and
33   c. Appropriate documentation from approved sources.
34   7. Road Impacts:
35   a. Developer shall be responsible for all roadway improvements necessary to support
all
36   construction and ongoing operations of the WECS, to the satisfaction of the Lyon
County
37   Road Director.
38   b. The project shall require two separate traffic studies:
 one traffic study for the construction
39   phase of the project and a second traffic study for the operations and maintenance phase
of
40   the project. Traffic Studies shall be provided at the time of application for the
Conditional
41    Use Permit or Planned Unit Development process.
42   c. WECS projects shall not block, re-
route, or restrict access to public roads, including but not
43   limited to RS 2477 roads, which provide access to public lands. The developer may
propose
44   an alternate route as a part of the Conditional Use Permit process or Planned
Unit
45   Development process which the Board may approve at their sole discretion.
Factors
46   considered when determining approval of an alternate route include but are not limited
to
47   changes in travel distance/time, terrain, maintenance, granting of right-
of-way, and impact
48   to surrounding properties.
 
1   8.  Drainage:
 All improvements, including necessary road improvements, shall comply with the
2   most recent version of the Lyon County Drainage Guidelines.
3   9.   Fire Protection:
 All WECS projects located outside of the boundaries of a Fire Protection
4   District must enter into an agreement with the nearest Fire Protection District to provide
fire
5   protection, inspection, and emergency medical services. If the Fire Protection District
chooses
6   not to provide fire protection, inspection, and/
or emergency medical services to the project,
7   the project proponent must provide a plan for how they will provide for those
services.
8   10.  Decommission and Reclamation Plan:
 Developer shall submit a reclamation plan to the
9   department as a part of a Conditional Use Permit application. The reclamation plan
shall
10   identify the life expectancy of the project and a decommissioning timeline with
milestones
11   and shall comply with all requirements in L.C.C. 15.336.12.
12   11. Reclamation:
 The project must be reclaimed in accordance with the reclamation plan once the
13   project has reached the end of its useful life. If the project owner takes steps to increase
the
14   useful life of the project, the project owner must notify the Department in writing and
submit
15   a new reclamation plan reflecting the increased project life.
16       12.    Variance:
 Deviations from the standards established by this chapter shall require a variance
in
17   accordance with chapter 203 of this title. 18
19   Section 2. 
The Lyon County Land Use and Development Code, Title 15, Chapter 336, section 8 is
hereby
20   amended as follows:
21
22   CHAPTER 15.336.08: GEOTHERMAL GENERATING SYSTEMS
23
24   15.336.08: GEOTHERMAL GENERATING SYSTEMS:
25   A. Purpose:
 The purpose of this section is to manage the exploration, development and use
of
26   geothermal resources in Lyon County.
27   B. Other Permits:
 All geothermal projects shall be required to obtain all necessary permits from
the
28   regulatory agencies with authority over such developments including, but not limited to the
State
29   Division of Minerals, the State Department of Environmental Protection, the State Division
of
30   Water Resources, the State Health Department, U.S. Forest Service, Nevada State Lands,
  and the
31   U.S. Bureau of Land Management prior to the issuance of any building/
grading permits for the
32   project.
33   C. Consultant Services:
 If required, outside consulting services for data and modeling reviews shall
be
34   the financial responsibility of the applicant. The applicant and County shall enter into an
agreement
35   regarding the fees and confidentiality prior to the chosen consultant's review of the data
and
36   modeling. The chosen consultant shall act as the County's designated
agent.
37   D. Geothermal Exploration Project:
 A geothermal exploration project is for the purpose of evaluating
38   the presence and characteristics of geothermal resources prior to starting a geothermal
field
39   development project.
40   1. Prior to commencing a geothermal exploration project, the developer shall provide
Lyon
41   County Community Development Department with a written notice of intent including
the
42   following:
43   a. A description of the project including a map of appropriate scale showing the location
of
44   the proposed wells and effluent disposal.
45   b. A description of the potential impacts to the local community, existing authorized
uses,
46   and natural environment, and proposed measures to mitigate impacts.
47   c. Statement in which the applicant agrees to provide the County access to the data used
to
48   develop the conceptual aquifer model.
 
1   2. The Community Development Department shall not take possession of the written notice
of
2   intent; rather the applicant shall make the information available for inspection by
County
3   officials or their designated agents provided the County officials and/
or designated agents
4   agree not to disclose the information contained in the notice of intent or disseminate
the
5   information to the public.
6   3. Prior to commencing a geothermal exploration project, grading permits and a
reclamation
7   plan shall be submitted to Community Development for approval prior to
beginning
8   exploration activities. Any grading 
(including temporary access roads, drilling pads etc.) that
9   exceeds 50 cubic yards must have a mass grading plan approved.
10   E. Geothermal Well Field Gathering Systems
and Power Generation Facilities: In order to establish a
11   geothermal well field gathering system and/
or power generation facility, the following items shall
12   be submitted to the Community Development Department:
13   1. Monitoring Plan:
 A modeling plan shall be submitted in compliance with 40 CFR part 146
14   underground injection control program 
(unless waived by the County based upon the review
15   of the conceptual aquifer model). Prior to commencement of any operations of
the
16   geothermal well field and power generating facilities, baseline data representation
and
17   collection shall be established to the satisfaction of the County. Projection of
geothermal
18   fluids use and injection will be presented to the County as well as a conceptual model.
The
19   monitoring plan must be approved by the County and their designated agent prior to
the
20   operation of the facilities.
21   2. Numeric Aquifer Model:
 A numeric aquifer model shall be submitted based on the collection
22   of three 
(3) years of data following the commencement of operations. The numeric aquifer
23   model shall be designed to show hydrogeological and thermal data to enable modeling
of
24   impacts of pumping and injection to the aquifer and potential mitigation
actions. The model
25   shall include data on the following:
26   a. Thermal properties of the aquifer including local and large-
 scale impacts to local
27   aquifers;
28   b. Potential subsidence impacts based on analysis of existing and predicted
conditions
29   using the pumping and injection volumes proposed for the project;
30   c. Changes in the radioactive characteristics from pumping (if any); and
31   d. Groundwater aquifer physical and chemical changes before and after the
project
32    completion including pressure, temperature trends, volumes and water
chemistry.
33   e.
The County and their authorized representative will review and if necessary revise
the
49    numeric aquifer model.
35
36   3. Siting Of Geothermal Well Field Gathering Systems And Power Generation
Facilities:
37   Geothermal well field gathering systems and related power generation facilities shall be
sited
38   in areas with the appropriate zoning district as designated in the land use table contained
in
39   section 15.320.03  
of this title. If necessary, a zone change application as described in chapter
40   220 of this title must be requested and approved prior to any permits for the geothermal
well
41   field system being issued.
42   4. Proximity To Existing   Wells: Geothermal temperature gradient and
43   exploration/
development test wells shall be located a minimum of three thousand feet
44   (3,000') from any adjacent private domestic or agricultural well
(s) unless a lease agreement
45   exists between the domestic well owner and the geothermal developer, and 
46   a minimum of three thousand feet (3,000') from State-
permitted municipal and industrial or
47   quasi-
municipal and industrial purpose wells. A variance request as outlined in chapter 203
of
 
1   this title from this separation standards may be submitted if supported by the outcome of
the
2   conceptual aquifer models results.
3   5. Minimum Siting Requirements and Standards:
 A geothermal well field gathering system and all
4   related above-
ground structures related to power generation shall comply with the following
5   minimum standards:
6   a. Visual Appearance:
 Placement of facilities shall endeavor to minimize the visual impact of
7   the development from surrounding properties and public rights-of-way.
8   b. Height Limits:
 The maximum height of structures shall comply with the maximum building
9   height listed in the underlying zoning district as listed in chapter 330 of this
title.
10   c. Screening And Lighting: Screening and/
or buffering treatments may be required to
11   mitigate visual and noise impacts. Where possible, all equipment shall be of a color
that
12   blends into the natural surroundings. Lighting shall include light shields that minimize
light
13   pollution by eliminating glare into adjoining properties and minimizes light visible
from
14   public rights-of-way.
15   d. Noise:
 Geothermal well field gathering systems' wells and power generation equipment
16   shall not generate noise levels that exceed sixty five 
(65) dBA time weighted average as
17   measured at the property line located closest to the wells and/or power
generation
18   equipment or one-half (1/
2) mile from the facility, whichever is closer. Adjustments for
19   ambient noise will be acceptable and irregular short periods of exceeding the sixty
five
20   (65) dBA standard in association with operational anomalies or maintenance
is
21   permissible. Acoustical shielding may be required for well heads and power
generation
22   equipment in order to comply with this development standard.
23   e. Road Impacts:
24   1. Developer shall be responsible for all roadway improvements necessary to support
all
25   construction and ongoing operations of the Geothermal Generating System, to
the
26   satisfaction of the Lyon County Road Director.
27   2. The project shall require two separate traffic studies:
 one traffic study for the
28   construction phase of the project and a second traffic study for the operations
and
29   maintenance phase of the project. Traffic studies shall be provided at the time
of
30   application for the Conditional Use Permit or Planned Unit Development
process.
31   3. Geothermal Generation projects shall not block, re-
route, or restrict access to public
32   roads, including but not limited to RS 2477 roads, which provide access to
public
33   lands. The developer may propose an alternate route as a part of the Conditional
Use
34   Permit process or Planned Unit Development process which the Board may approve
at
35   their sole discretion. Factors considered when determining approval of an
alternate
36   route include but are not limited to changes in travel distance/time,
terrain,
37   maintenance, granting of right-of-way, and impact to surrounding
properties.
38   f. Drainage:
 All improvements, including necessary road improvements, shall comply with
39   the most recent version of the Lyon County Drainage Guidelines.
40   g. Fire Protection:
 All Geothermal projects located outside of the boundaries of a Fire
41   Protection District must enter into an agreement with the nearest Fire Protection
District
42   to provide fire protection, inspection, and emergency medical services. If the
Fire
43   Protection District chooses not to provide fire protection, inspection, and/
or emergency
44   medical services to the project, the project proponent must provide a plan for how
they
45   will provide for those services.
46   h. Decommission and Reclamation Plan:
 Developer shall submit a reclamation plan to the
47   department as a part of a Conditional Use Permit application. The reclamation plan
shall
 
1   identify the life expectancy of the project and a decommissioning timeline with
milestones
2   and shall comply with all requirements in L.C.C. 15.336.12.
3   i. Reclamation:
 The project must be reclaimed in accordance with the reclamation plan once
4   the project has reached the end of its useful life. If the project owner takes steps
to
5   increase the useful life of the project, the project owner must notify the Department
in
6   writing and submit a new reclamation plan reflecting the increased project
life.
7   F. Geothermal Direct Use Wells:
 Geothermal direct use wells for commercial or industrial space
8   heating, food dehydration, or other similar such uses shall be subject to the standards listed in
this
9   chapter and Nevada Revised Statutes 534A. 10
11   Section 3. 
The Lyon County Land Use and Development Code, Title 15, Chapter 336, section 9 is
hereby
12   amended as follows:
13
14   CHAPTER 15.336.09: SOLAR GENERATION, COMMERCIAL:
15
16   15.336.09: SOLAR GENERATION, COMMERCIAL:
17   A. Purpose:
 The intent of this section is to encourage the development of commercial solar
energy
18   conversion systems (SECS) while protecting the
public health, safety and general welfare. 19
20   B. Definitions: Solar Energy Conversion Systems  (SECS) -
 a facility for the generation of electricity
21   utilizing the energy in sunlight for the purpose of producing electricity to be used on site
and/or
22   sold and distributed through the established commercial power grid. Technologies
include
23   photovoltaics and concentrated solar power generators. SECS does not include facilities
that
24   are used to provide power to manufacturing and/
or data center uses, and are accessory to the
25   primary use of manufacturing or data center, if located on the same parcel or entitled
through
26   a common Conditional Use Permit or Planned Unit Development. 27
28   C. Shade Structures: Non-commercial building-
mounted solar systems, including solar energy
29   conversion systems 
(SECS) used as parking lot shade structures, shall not require a CUP
30   provided the structure is conforming, houses or is accessory to a permitted use, and meets
all
31   Building Code requirements.
32   D. Acknowledgment/Approval:
 Written acknowledgment and general approval from the public
33   utility must be included in all commercial SECS applications.
34   E. Siting Requirements:
35   1. Parcel Size: A minimum parcel size of ten 
(10) acres net is required. No part of the
36   commercial SECS shall be located within or over drainage, utility or other
established
37   easements.
38   2. Setback: Each commercial SECS array must be set a
39   minimum of one half mile (2,640 Feet) from a trail easement, highway and/
or adjacent
40   properties with an existing residential use. Setback increases to one mile 
(5,280 Feet) from
41   an airport, river, perennial or intermittent stream, and/
or lake. An SECS may be placed
42   closer than 2,640 Feet from a property with an existing residential use, trail easement,
or
43   highway if it is separated by a geologic feature or building of a height
sufficient
44   to completely obstruct views of the commercial SECS from a point sixteen 
(16) vertical feet
45   above the boundary of any Residential Zoning District.
The Board of County Commissioners 
46   may, at their sole
1   discretion, approve setbacks that are less than the setbacks outlined in this chapter if
the
2   project is a part of a Planned Unit Development (PUD).
3   3. Components:
 All components of the commercial SECS must be set back from the property
4   boundary a minimum of thirty feet (30').
5   4. Comstock Historic District:
 In addition to all other requirements, all proposed commercial
6   SECS located within the Comstock Historic District, as established by the
Comstock
7   Historical Commission pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes chapter 384, shall receive
a
8   review, approval and a certificate of appropriateness from the Comstock Historic
District
9   Commission prior to submitting an application for a conditional use permit.
10   5. Height:
 Unless otherwise approved the total extended height of a commercial SECS shall
11   not exceed twenty four feet 
(24'). The system must be in compliance with FAA regulations
12   regarding height and lighting.
13   6. Minimum Standards:
 Standards for access, noise, design and installation, etc., shall meet or
14   exceed the requirements of chapter 337, "Performance Requirements For Industrial
Uses",
15   of this title. However, conditions placed on the conditional use permit may be
more
16   restrictive than the minimum standards provided in this chapter.
17   7. Building Permit:
 A permit from the County Building Department is required to install a
18   commercial SEC system in Lyon County. In evaluating whether to approve a
building
19   permit, the building official may request and consider:
20   a. Supporting technical data,
21   b. Test reports, and
22   c. Appropriate documentation from approved sources.
23   8.  Road Impacts:
24   a.  Developer shall be responsible for all roadway improvements necessary to support
all
25   construction and ongoing operations of the
SECS, to the satisfaction of the Lyon
26   County Road Director.
27   b.  The project shall require two separate traffic studies:
 one traffic study for the
28   construction phase of the project and a second traffic study for the operations
and
29   maintenance phase of the project. Traffic studies shall be provided at the time
of
30   application for the Conditional Use Permit or Planned Unit Development
process.
31   c.   SECS projects shall not block, re-
route, or restrict access to public roads, including but
32   not limited to RS 2477 roads, which provide access to public lands. The developer
may
33   propose an alternate route as a part of the Conditional Use Permit or Planned
Unit
34   Development process which the Board may approve at their sole discretion.
Factors
35   considered when determining approval of an alternate route include but are
not
36   limited to changes in travel distance/
time, terrain, maintenance, granting of right-of-
37   way, and impact to surrounding properties.
38   9.  Visual Appearance:
 Placement of facilities shall minimize the visual impact of the
39   development from surrounding properties and public rights-of-
way. SECSs shall be
40   constructed and/
or screened as to not unreasonably infringe upon the use and enjoyment
41   of the surrounding properties and rights-of-
way. There shall be no reflection or glare
42   permitted to impact any public rights-of-
way. Developers shall submit a visual impact study
43   to the Community Development Department at the time of the Conditional Use
Permit
44   application or Planned Unit Development process.
45   10. Drainage:
 All improvements, including necessary road improvements, shall comply with the
46   most recent version of the Lyon County Drainage Guidelines.
 
1   11. Fire Protection:
 All SECS projects located outside of the boundaries of a Fire Protection
2   District must enter into an agreement with the nearest Fire Protection District to
provide
3   fire protection, inspection, and emergency medical services. If the Fire Protection
District
4   chooses not to provide fire protection, inspection, and/
or emergency medical services to
5   the project, the project proponent must provide a plan for how they will provide for
those
6   services.
7   12. Decommission and Reclamation Plan:
 Developer shall submit a reclamation plan to the
8   department as a part of a Conditional Use Permit application or Planned Unit
Development
9   process. The reclamation plan shall identify the life expectancy of the project and
a
10   decommissioning timeline with milestones and shall comply with all requirements in
L.C.C.
11   15.336.12.
12   13. Reclamation:
 The project must be reclaimed in accordance with the reclamation plan once
13   the project has reached the end of its useful life. If the project owner takes steps
to
14   increase the useful life of the project, the project owner must notify the Department
in
15   writing and submit a new reclamation plan reflecting the increased project
life.
16   14.   Variance:
 Deviations from the standards established by this chapter shall require a
17   variance in accordance with chapter 203 of this title. 18
19   Section 4. 
The Lyon County Land Use and Development Code, Title 15, Chapter 336, is hereby
20   amended to add section 6: Commercial Energy Storage Systems, as follows:
21
22   CHAPTER 15.336.06 ENERGY STORAGE SYSTEMS:
23
24   15.336.06: ENERGY STORAGE SYSTEMS:
25   A. Purpose: The intent of this section is to regulate the development of
Energy Storage Systems (ESS)
26   to protect the public health, safety and general welfare.
27   B. Definitions:
28   Commercial Energy Storage System  (ESS) - a system that uses mechanical,
chemical,
29   hydrological or thermal processes to store energy that was generated at one time for use
at
30   a later time and is designed to have a storage capacity of over 10 megawatt hours for
the
31   entire facility. Commercial Energy Storage System does not include Energy Storage
Systems
32   that are used to provide back-up power to manufacturing and/
or data center uses, and are
33   accessory to the primary use of manufacturing or data center, if located on the same
parcel.
34   Lithium Ion Battery Energy Storage System (LiBESS) 
– is a commercial Energy Storage System
35   
(ESS) that uses Lithium ion Batteries as a component of the energy storage system.
Lithium
36   Ion Battery Energy Storage System does not include LiBESS that are used to provide back-
up
37   power to manufacturing and/
or data center uses, and are accessory to the primary use of
38   manufacturing or data center, if located on the same parcel.
39   C.   Conditional Use Permit:
 A conditional use permit shall be required for an ESS project that is
40   located in Lyon County in order to review, identify and develop mitigation measures that
reduce
41   the potential negative impacts to abutting properties.
42   D. Siting Requirements:
43   1.  Parcel Size: A minimum parcel size of ten 
(10) acres net is required. No part of the ESS or
44   LiBESS shall be located within or over drainage, utility or other established
easements.
45   2.  Setback: Each LiBESS must be set a minimum of one mile 
(5,280 Feet) from a trail easement,
46   highway, river, perennial or intermittent stream, lake and/
or property with an existing
47   residential use. The Board of County Commissioners may, at their sole discretion,
approve
 
1   setbacks that are less than the setbacks outlined in this chapter if the project is a part of
a
2   Planned Unit Development (PUD).
3   3.  Components:
 All components of the ESS must be set back from the property boundary a
4   minimum of thirty feet (30').
5   4.   Comstock Historic District:
 In addition to all other requirements, all proposed ESS located
6   within the Comstock Historic District, as established by the Comstock Historical
Commission
7   pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes chapter 384, shall receive a review, approval and
a
8   certificate of appropriateness from the Comstock Historic District Commission prior
to
9   submitting an application for a conditional use permit.
10   5.   Height:
 Unless otherwise approved the total extended height of a commercial ESS shall
not
11   exceed twenty four feet (24'). The system must be in compliance with FAA
regulations
12   regarding height and lighting.
13   6.  Minimum Standards:
 Standards for access, noise, design and installation, etc., shall meet or
14   exceed the requirements of chapter 337, "Performance Requirements for Industrial
Uses",
15   of this title. However, conditions placed on the conditional use permit may be
more
16   restrictive than the minimum standards provided in this chapter.
17   7.  Building Permit:
 A permit from the County Building Department is required to install an ESS
18   in Lyon County. In evaluating whether to approve a building permit, the building official
may
19   request and consider:
20      a. Supporting technical data,
21      b. Test reports, and
22      c. Appropriate documentation from approved sources.
23   8.  Road Impacts:
24   a.  Developer shall be responsible for all roadway improvements necessary to support
all
25   construction and ongoing operations of the ESS, to the satisfaction of the Lyon
County
26   Road Director.
27   b.  The project shall require two separate traffic studies:
 one traffic study for the
28   construction phase of the project and a second traffic study for the operations
and
29   maintenance phase of the project. Traffic studies shall be provided at the time
of
30   application for the Conditional Use Permit or Planned Unit Development
process.
31   c.   ESS projects shall not block, re-
route, or restrict access to public roads, including but not
32   limited to RS 2477 roads, which provide access to public lands. The developer
may
33   propose an alternate route as a part of the Conditional Use Permit process or
Planned
34   Unit Development process which the Board may approve at their sole discretion.
Factors
35   considered when determining approval of
an alternate route include but are not limited
36   to changes in travel distance/
time, terrain, maintenance, granting of right-of-way, and
37   impact to surrounding properties.
38   9.   Visual Appearance:
 Placement of facilities shall minimize the visual impact of the
39   development from surrounding properties and public rights-of-way.
40   10.  Drainage:
 All improvements, including necessary road improvements, shall comply with the
41   most recent version of the Lyon County Drainage Guidelines.
42   11.  Fire Protection: All ESS
projects located outside of the boundaries of a Fire Protection
43   District must enter into an agreement with the nearest Fire Protection District to
provide
44   fire protection, inspection, and emergency medical services. LiBESS projects must
receive
45   approval from the appropriate Fire Protection District prior to construction. LiBESS
projects
46   must provide the necessary equipment and training, as the Fire Protection District
may
47   require, to effectively fight a fire at the facility. If the Fire Protection District chooses not
to
 
1   provide fire protection, inspection, and/
or emergency medical services to the project, the
2   project proponent must provide a plan for how they will provide for those
services.
3   12. Decommission and Reclamation Plan:
 Developer shall submit a reclamation plan to the
4   department as a part of a Conditional Use Permit application. The reclamation plan
shall
5   identify the life expectancy of the project and a decommissioning timeline with
milestones
6   and shall comply with all requirements in L.C.C. 15.336.12.
7   13. Reclamation:
 The project must be reclaimed in accordance with the reclamation plan once
8   the project has reached the end of its useful life. If the project owner takes steps
to
9   increase the useful life of the project, the project owner must notify the Department
in
10   writing and submit a new reclamation plan reflecting the increased project
life.
11   14. Variance:
 Deviations from the standards established by this chapter shall require a
variance
12   in accordance with chapter 203 of this title. 13
14   Section 5. The Lyon County Land Use and Development Code, Title 15, Chapter 336, is hereby
amended
15   to add section 12:
 Decommissioning and Reclamation of Commercial Wind Conversion Systems,
16   Geothermal Generating Systems, Commercial Solar Generation, and Commercial Energy
Storage
17   Systems.
18
19   CHAPTER 15.336.12 DECOMMISSIONING AND RECLAMATION OF COMMERCIAL WIND
CONVERSION
20   SYSTEMS, GEOTHERMAL GENERATING SYSTEMS, COMMERCIAL SOLAR GENERATION, AND
21   COMMERCIAL ENERGY STORAGE SYSTEMS:
22
23   15.336.12: DECOMMISSIONING AND RECLAMATION OF COMMERCIAL WIND CONVERSION
SYSTEMS,
24   GEOTHERMAL GENERATING SYSTEMS, COMMERCIAL SOLAR GENERATION, AND COMMERCIAL
25   ENERGY STORAGE SYSTEMS:
26   A. Purpose:
 The intent of this section is to regulate and ensure the proper decommissioning
and
27   reclamation of commercial wind conversion systems, geothermal generating systems,
commercial
28   solar generation, and commercial energy storage systems to protect the public health, safety
and
29   general welfare.
30   B. DECOMMISSIONING AND RECLAMATION:
 The Conditional Use Permit for commercial wind
31   conversion systems, geothermal generating systems, commercial solar generation, and
commercial
32   energy storage systems shall include the submission of a Detailed Decommissioning Plan. Prior
to
33   the issuance of construction permits, the cost estimate for the complete removal of
non-
34   operational above and below ground improvements must be submitted and financial
assurance
35   must be posted.
36   a. Decommissioning Plan:
 The Decommissioning Plan will address the following items:
37   i.  All physical improvements, materials, and equipment related to solar
energy
38   generation, transmission, and storage must be removed from the surface and
39   the subsurface to a minimum depth of forty-eight (48”) inches. The pre-
existing
40   soil grade shall also be restored following disturbance caused in the
removal
41   process. These shall include, but are not limited to, structures,
buildings,
42   equipment, cabling and wiring, solar electric systems, electrical
components,
43   security barriers, foundations, pilings, berms, storm water improvements,
and
44   any other associated facilities.
45   ii.  All fencing shall be removed and recycled or reused unless the
Community
46   Development Director grants approval for any existing perimeter fencing to
47   remain in place, in which case, the Nevada Department of Wildlife will be
48   consulted to ensure that the remaining fence will not negatively impact
wildlife.
 
1   iii.  All access roads located within the Project Area shall be removed unless
the
2   road was in existence prior to the development or the Community Development
3   Director approves a written request from the current or purchasing
landowner
4   to allow a portion of the access roads and associated culverts or related
5   materials to remain.
6   iv.  For any part of the facility on leased property, the Decommissioning Plan
may
7   propose to incorporate agreements with landowners regarding the retainment
8   of driveways, roads, landscaping, berms, fences, gates or repurposed
buildings
9   or other structures with approval by the Board of County Commissioners.
10   However, any proposed use of remaining buildings or other structures must
be
11   in conformance with the regulations for the zoning district in effect at the
time
12   of Board of County Commissioners approval.
13   v.  Ground cover and screening established as part of the Facility Development
Plan
14   and other existing vegetation may remain as part of the Decommissioning
Plan.
15   Land disturbed as part of the decommissioning process must be reseeded and
16   re-vegetated with certified weed free native seed mixes or other plant
species
17   suitable to the area. A list of such appropriate plant materials shall be
provided
18   by the Community Development Director. Such planting and associated
grading
19   or other land disturbance must be completed within one (1) year of removal
of
20   Facility structures and equipment, in accordance with the Decommissioning
21   Plan approved and adopted by the Board of County Commissioners.
22   vi.  Disposal and recycling of all facility materials and equipment, including but
not
23   limited to, PV panels, inverters, and batteries must fully comply with all
24   applicable County, state and federal laws, regulations, and code
requirements,
25   which includes a County-approved demolition permit for work to be
performed
26   by a licensed contractor and an approved location for disposal of such
materials
27   and equipment.
28   vii.  Guaranteed Funds: Financial assurance for the estimated cost of
29   decommissioning and reclamation, which may include the possibility of
salvage
30   value if allowed by the Board of County Commissioners must be guaranteed
by
31   the owner or operator of the Facility prior to issuance of construction permits
to
32   ensure that decommissioning and reclamation can successfully occur. Should
33   another authority having jurisdiction (e.g., NDEP, Bureau of Land
Management,
34   etc.) also require financial assurance for decommissioning and reclamation,
the
35   Board of County Commissioners may consider accepting the same or portions
of
36   the same financial assurance to satisfy both requirements, so long as the
37   assurance meets the specifications of both Lyon County and the separate
38   authority. Upon issuance of the financial assurance, the applicant shall name
the
39   County as a party to the financial assurance. The applicant may choose one
of
40   the following options (either the full cost option or the tiered
securitization
41   option) to provide financial assurance.
42   viii.  Full Decommissioning Cost: The full cost of decommissioning and
reclamation
43   will be guaranteed by one or any combination of the following as
determined
44   acceptable by the Board of County Commissioners.
45   1.  Trust Fund: The owner or operator of the Facility shall establish a
trust
46   fund into which money specifically earmarked for decommissioning and
47   reclamation is deposited. The Facility Conditional Use Permits and the
48   terms of the trust fund shall prohibit the release of these funds without
 
1   the written consent of the County. The County shall consent to the
2   release of the funds upon compliance with the Decommissioning Plan
3   approved by the Board of County Commissioners.
4   2.  Payment Surety Bond: The owner or operator of the Facility shall obtain
5   a surety bond satisfactory to and approved by the County in an amount
6   equal to the estimated cost of decommissioning and reclamation. A
7   standby trust fund must be established into which the surety company
8   will make payments if the owner or operator fails to comply with their
9   financial responsibilities. This money deposited into the standby trust
10   fund shall be used to pay a third party to perform the work described in
11   the Decommissioning Plan approved by the Board of County
12   Commissioners.
13   3.  Letter of Credit: A letter of credit issued by a financial institution
that
14   has a credit rating of at least A- or higher by Standard and Poor's or A3
15   or higher by Moody's; and financial ratios and capitalization
16   requirements that are acceptable to the County, in the full amount of
17   the decommissioning and reclamation estimate.
18   4.  Tiered Securitization: An amount equal to, or more than, ten (10%)
19   percent of the approved decommissioning and reclamation cost
20   estimate shall be either: deposited into a cash escrow account at a
21   financial institution acceptable to the County; or an amount equal to, or
22   more than, ten (10%) percent of the decommissioning and reclamation
23   cost estimate in the form of a payment surety bond or a letter of credit
24   issued by a financial institution that has a credit rating of at least A-
25   from Standard & Poor's or A3 from Moody's and assets (50%) and
26   capital surplus (50%) totaling at least $10,000,000,000, or an A.M. Best
27   financial strength rating of at least A- (Excellent) or other credit
rating
28   and capitalization reasonably acceptable to the County shall be
29   obtained. The amount deposited in the cash escrow account, or the
30   amount of the surety bond or letter of credit, shall increase by an
31   additional ten (10%) percent each year on the anniversary of the
32   commencement of operation of the Facility for nine (9) additional years
33   until 100% of the full cost estimate of decommissioning and reclamation
34   is achieved.
35   ix.  Cost Estimate Update: The estimated decommissioning and reclamation
costs
36   must be recalculated at an interval no sooner than every year but not later
than
37   every five years by an independent third-party Nevada licensed engineer,
38   following the requirements for the original decommissioning cost estimate,
and
39   using the most current industry standards. The cost of preparing this
update
40   must be paid by the owner or operator.
41   x.  If the recalculated estimated cost of decommissioning and reclamation
exceeds
42   the original estimated cost by two percent (2%) or greater, then the
Facility
43   owner or operator shall deposit additional funds into the trust fund or
cash
44   escrow account or make an update to the payment surety bond or letter of
45   credit to meet the new cost estimate.
46   xi.  If the recalculated estimated cost of decommissioning and reclamation is
less
47   than ninety-eight percent (98%) of the original estimated cost, then the
County
48   may consider approval of a written request by the owner or operator to
reduce
 
1   the required deposits or, payment surety bond, or letter of credit to the
2   recalculated estimate of decommissioning and reclamation cost.
3   xii.  Any increase or decrease in the decommissioning and reclamation
securitization
4   shall be funded by the applicant or refunded to the applicant 
(if permissible by
5   the form of security) within ninety (90) calendar days and shall be
similarly
6   readjusted for every subsequent five (5)-year decommissioning cost estimate
7   update.
8   B. Amendment to Decommissioning Plan:
 Any amendment must be approved by the Board of
9   County Commissioners prior to beginning decommissioning and reclamation.
Applications
10   for an amendment shall require a public hearing under the same procedures as
required
11   for the Facility Conditional Use Permit. Required timeframes for completion
of
12   decommissioning and reclamation shall not be extended due to the amendment
13   application process.
14   C. Partial Decommissioning:
 If decommissioning is triggered for a portion, but not the entire
15   Facility, then the owner or operator shall complete decommissioning and reclamation
in
16   accordance with the Decommissioning Plan for the applicable
portion of the Solar Facility.
17   The remaining portion of the Solar Facility shall continue to be subject to
the
18   Decommissioning Plan.
19   D. Date of Decommissioning:
 If the Solar Facility is to be decommissioned and reclaimed, the
20   Facility owner or operator must notify the Community Development Director in writing
of
21   the proposed date of discontinued operations and plans for removal.
22   E. Abandonment of Facility: Unless otherwise approved by the Community
Development
23   Director (e.g., to allow time to repair damage from severe weather or to
update
24   equipment), Facilities that have not been in active and continuous service for a period
of
25   twelve 
(12) months, as determined by the Community Development Director based upon
26   receipt of a valid Land Use complaint, an unsatisfactory report from a state of
federal
27   agency, unsatisfactory annual life and fire safety inspections and/
or unsatisfactory self-
28   inspection of battery units, or a failure to provide any of these reports, shall
be
29   decommissioned and reclaimed at the Facility owner or operator’s expense.
However,
30   following the first six 
(6) months of failure to maintain the site, the County will have the
31   option to hire appropriate professionals to perform needed maintenance using the
surety
32   funds required by the Conditional Use Permit.
33   F. The owner or operator or their successors, within six 
(6) months after the complete cessation
34   of use of the Facility and at their sole expense, shall initiate and provide
continuous
35   decommissioning of the Facility in accordance with the approved Decommissioning
Plan.
36   a. Following the completion of decommissioning of the entire
Facility and payment for any
37   such costs arising out of a default by the owner or operator or their successors,
any
38   remaining securitized funds held by the County shall be distributed to the
project
39   owner(s) in the same percentage of the securitized funds matched with the
percentage
40   of the project owner's acreage ownership of the Facility.
41   G. Default Decommissioning and Reclamation by the County:
 If the owner or operator, or their
42   successors, fail to decommission the Facility pursuant to the approved
Decommissioning
43   Plan, and the County has not approved a repowering of the Facility, the County shall
have
44   the right, but not the obligation, to commence decommissioning and reclamation
activities
45   and shall have access to the property, and shall have the right to draw on securitized
funds
46   up to the amount of the actual decommissioning costs, and the rights to the
generation
47   equipment and ESS equipment and materials remaining on the property. If applicable,
any
48   excess decommissioning and reclamation securitized funds shall be returned to the
current
 
1   owner(s) of the property after the County has completed the decommissioning
and
2   reclamation activities and paid all outstanding invoices, divided according to
the
3   percentage of the property owner's acreage ownership of the Solar Facility. Nothing
herein
4   shall limit other rights or remedies that may be available to the County to enforce
the
5   obligations of the owner or operator or their successors, including under the
County's
6   zoning powers.
7
8   Section 6. The Lyon County Land Use and Development Code, Title 15, Chapter 320, Table 15.320-
1
9   Table of allowed uses -
 rural residential, commercial mixed use, commercial and agricultural/resource
10   zoning districts is hereby amended as follows: 11
 
                                               Rural          Commercial Agricultural/   Commercial
                                               Residential    Mixed-use  Resource
             Use Category                      RR RR RR RR RR CMU HMU                       TC     Use Specific Regulations (Code Reference)
                                               -  -  -5 -2 -1 -R  -R     A GNIA R LP LNC -R
                                               20 10
Energy
production   Fossil or alternative fuel        -  -  -  -  -  -   -      -   -   C   C   -  -      Chapter 337
and          generating facility, commercial
distribution
             Geothermal generating systems,                                                        Section 15.336.09 - non- commercial (i.e., private) geothermal
             commercial                        C  -  -  -  -  -   -      C   C   C   C   -  -      systems are allowed in all zoning districts without a conditional
                                                                                                   use permit
             Power substations                 C  C  -  -  -  -   -      C   C   C   C   -  -      Section 15.336.11
                                                                                                   15.336.10 - Power
             Power transmission lines (60 kV   C/ C/ C/ C/ C/ C/P C/P    C/  C/P C/  C/  C/ C/P    transmission lines (greater than 60 kV) located within a
             or greater)                       P  P  P  P  P             P       P   P   P         designated utility corridor identified in Master Plan are
                                                                                                   permitted subject to design review
             Solar power generating facility,                                                     Section 15.336.11 - non- commercial (i.e., private) solar power
             commercial                        C  -  -  -  -  -   -      C   C   C   C   -  -      generating facilities are allowed in all zoning districts without
                                                                                                   a
 
 
                                   conditional use permit
 Energy                            Section 15.336.16 and Section
 storage C - - - - - - C C C C - - 15.336.12 non-
 systems                           commercial (i.e., private) energy storage facilities
                                   are allowed in all zoning districts
1
2   Section 7. 
The Lyon County Land Use and Development Code, Title 15, Chapter 320, Table 15.320-
4
3   Table of allowed uses -
 employment and industrial zoning districts is hereby amended as follows: 4
Use Category Use Type                                                                  LI- LI- HI- HI- SI EMU XX Specific Use Requirements (Code Reference)
                                                                                       R   S   R   S
Energy
production   Fossil or alternative fuel generating facility, commercial              -   -   C   C   -  -   -  Chapter 336
and
distribution
             Geothermal generating systems, commercial (non- commercial - see specificC   C   C   C   C  -   -  Non-commercial geothermal systems are allowed in all zoning districts
             use requirements)                                                                                   without a conditional use permit
             Power distribution lines, less than 60kV                               P   P   P   P   P  P   P
             Power substations                                                         C   C   C   C   C  -   -  Chapter 336
                                                                                                       C/     C/ Chapter 336; power transmission lines (greater
             Power transmission lines, 60kV or greater                                C/P C/P C/P C/P P  C/P P  than 60kV) located within a designated utility corridor identified in
                                                                                                                 Master Plan are permitted subject to design review
             Solar power generating facility, commercial (non- commercial - see       C   C   C   C   C  -   -  Non-commercial solar power generating facilities are allowed in all
             specific use requirements)                                                                          zoning districts without a conditional use permit
             Wind energy conversion, commercial (non- commercial - see specific use C   C   C   C   C  -   -  Non-commercial wind energy conversion systems are allowed in all zoning
             requirements)                                                                                       districts without a conditional use permit -
 
 
                               refer to
                               subsection 15.335.03FFF
 Energy storage               Section 15.336.16 and
 systems         - - C C - - - Section 15.336.12 non- commercial (i.e., private) energy storage
                               facilities are allowed in all zoning districts
1
2
3   Section 8. 
If any section of this ordinance or portion thereof is for any reason held invalid
or
4   unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not invalidate the
remaining
5   parts of this ordinance 6
7   Section 9. 
All ordinances, parts of ordinances, chapters, sections, subsections, clauses, phrases
or
8   sentences contained in the Lyon County Code in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
9
10   Section 10. 
This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval
and
11   publication as required by law. 12
13
14   Proposed on the 15 th day of May, 2025.
15
16   Proposed by Commissioner: Scott Keller    17
18   THIS Ordinance has been PASSED, ADOPTED and APPROVED this  18 th  day of 
June , 2025 by the
19   following vote of the Board of Commissioners, Lyon County: 20
21   Ayes: Tammy Hendrix, Scott Keller, Dave Hockaday   
22   Nays: Robert Jacobson, John Cassinelli   
23   Absent:    
24
25
26
27   Attest:
28
29
30       
31   County Clerk   Chair of the Board
32
33
34   This ordinance shall be in force and effect from and after the  23 rd
 day of the month of July of
35   the year 2025.
 
BILL NO. 25-03
ORDINANCE NO. 641
SUMMARY: An ordinance approving a development agreement concerning the
development of property in Silver Springs for data centers and related uses,
located within Assessor’s Parcel Numbers 015-111-01, 02, 04, 05, 06 and a
portion of 015-091-08.
TITLE: AN ORDINANCE APPROVING A DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT BETWEEN TRACT CAPITAL
MANAGEMENT, LP CONCERNING THE DEVELOPMENT OF LAND IN SILVER SPRINGS FOR THE
SILVER SPRINGS TECHNOLOGY PARK (SSTP) SPECIFIC PLAN; A 460-ACRE DEVELOPMENT FOR
DATA CENTERS, HIGH VOLTAGE POWER LINES, ELECTRICAL POWER SUBSTATIONS, A WATER
TANK, AND OTHER ASSOCIATED UTILITY AND ACCESS IMPROVEMENTS IN SILVER SPRINGS,
LOCATED ON ASSESSOR PARCEL NUMBERS (APN) 015-111-01, 02, 04, 05, 06 AND A
PORTION OF 015-091-08, CONSISTING OF 460 ACRES OF SIX (6) SUBJECT PARCELS THAT
TOTAL APPROXIMATELY 1,070 ACRES; AND PROVIDING FOR OTHER MATTERS PROPERLY
RELATING THERETO.
THE BOARD OF COUNTY COMMISSIONERS OF LYON COUNTY, NEVADA DOES HEREBY ORDAIN:
WHEREAS, Lyon County desires to enter into a development agreement with TRACT
Capital Management, LP, for the Silver Springs Technology Park (SSTP) Specific
Plan for the 460-acre development for data centers, high voltage power lines,
electrical power substations, a water tank, and other associated utility and
access improvements in Silver Springs, located on Assessor Parcel Numbers (APN)
015-111-01, 02, 04, 05, 06 and a portion of 015-091-08, consisting of 460 acres
of six (6) subject parcels that total approximately 1,070 acres.
 
WHEREAS, the Lyon County Board of County Commissioners (“Board”) finds that the
contents of the development agreement conform to the Lyon County Development
Code Section 15.110 – Development Agreements and Nevada Revised Statutes
278.0201 and NRS 278.0203; and
 
WHEREAS, the Board finds that the provisions of the development agreement are
consistent with the Silver Springs Technology Park Specific Plan and the Lyon
County Master Plan.
 
SECTION 1: NOW, THEREFORE, the Board hereby approves by ordinance the
development agreement, attached and incorporated herein as Exhibit 1, between
Lyon County and TRACT Capital Management, LP, for the Silver Springs Technology
Park (SSTP) Specific Plan for the 460-acre development for data centers, high
voltage power lines, electrical power substations, a water tank, and other
associated utility and access improvements in Silver Springs, located on
Assessor Parcel Numbers (APN) 015-111-01, 02, 04, 05, 06 and a portion of 015-
091-08, consisting of 460 acres of six (6) subject parcels that total
approximately 1,070 acres.
 
SECTION 2: The Board further directs that the Clerk of the Board shall cause
the original agreement to be recorded with the county recorder within a
reasonable time after approval of the agreement.
  
SECTION 3. The county recorder shall be collecting the fee imposed by this
section.
 
SECTION 4.    If any section, paragraph, sentence or phrase of this ordinance
or portion thereof is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any
court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not invalidate the
remaining parts of this ordinance.
 
SECTION 5.   All ordinances, parts of ordinances, chapters, sections,
subsections, clauses, phrases or sentences contained in the Lyon County Code in
conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
 
SECTION 6.   This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after
its passage, approval and publication as required by law.
 
PROPOSED THIS 1 st day of May, 2025.
 
PROPOSED BY Commissioner John Cassinelli.
PASSED on the 5th day of June, 2025.
AYES: John Cassinelli, Scott Keller, Tammy Hendrix, Robert Jacobson, Dave
Hockaday
NAYS: None
ABSENT: None
ABSTENTIONS: None
                  
 
 
BOARD OF LYON COUNTY
                  COMMISSIONERS
 
 
 
                                                             Scott Keller,
Chairman
Attest:
 
            
County Clerk
 
THIS ORDINANCE shall be in full force and effect from and after the 30th day of
July, 2025.
 
 
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATIVE
CHAPTER 1
OFFICIAL COUNTY CODE
SECTION:
1.01.01: Title
1.01.02: Acceptance
1.01.03: Amendments
1.01.04: Code Alterations
1.01.05: Effective Date
1.01.01: TITLE:
Upon the adoption by the Board of County Commissioners, this County Code is
hereby declared to be and shall hereafter constitute the official County Code
of the County of Lyon, State of Nevada, and it is hereby published by authority
of the Board of County Commissioners 1 and shall be kept up to date as provided
in Section
1.01.03 of this Chapter under the direction of said Commissioners. Any
reference to the number of any section contained herein shall be understood to
refer to the position of the same number, its appropriate chapter and title
heading and to the general penalty clause relating thereto, as well as to the
section itself, when reference is made to this County Code by title in any
legal document. (1991 Code)
Whenever a reference is made to this Code as the "Lyon County Code" or to any
portion thereof or to any ordinance of Lyon County, the reference shall apply
to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made.
(1973 Code §1.01.050)
 
Notes
1 1. NRS 244.116 et seq.
1.01.02: ACCEPTANCE:
This County Code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be
received without further proof in all courts and in all administrative
tribunals of this State as the ordinances of the County of general and
permanent effect, except the excluded ordinances enumerated in Section
1.02.01 of this Title. (1991 Code)
1.01.03: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this County Code shall set forth the title, chapter and
section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall
constitute a sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to
the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this County Code. All
such amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
Codifiers, and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this County Code. Each such replacement page
shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of
the County Code. (1991 Code)
1.01.04: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this County Code in such a manner that
the meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages
may be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized by
the County Board. The County official so designated by the County Board shall
see that the replacement pages are properly inserted in the official copies
maintained in the office of the County Clerk.
Any person having in his custody an official copy of this County Code shall
make every effort to maintain said Code in an up to date and efficient manner.
He shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such
are delivered to him or made available to him through the office of the County
Clerk. Said Code books, while in actual possession of officials and other
interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the County and shall be
returned when directed so to do by order of the County Board. (1991 Code)
1.01.05: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This Code shall become effective on the date the ordinance adopting this Code
as the "Lyon County Code" shall become effective. (1973 Code §1.01.090)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1.02.01: Repeal of General Ordinances
1.02.02: Public Utility Ordinances
1.02.03: Court Proceedings
1.02.04: Severability Clause
1.02.01: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
This Code consists of all the regulatory and penal ordinances and certain of
the administrative ordinances of Lyon County, codified pursuant to the
provisions of sections 244.116 to 244.119 of the NRS. All general ordinances of
the County passed prior to the adoption of this County Code are hereby
repealed, except such as are referred to herein as being still in force or are
by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving
clause contained in the following section), from which are excluded the
following ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances;
appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations;
franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or
corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances
establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places;
improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections;
ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the
County and all special ordinances. (1973 Code §1.01.030; 1991 Code)
1.02.02: PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroads or railroad crossings with streets and other
public ways or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public
utilities shall be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this County Code or by
virtue of the preceding section, excepting as this County Code may contain
provisions for such matters, in which case this County Code shall be considered
as amending such ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only.
(1991 Code)
1.02.03: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance,
whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense
committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty,
forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising
under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense
or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so
incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes
effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform to the
ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as practicable. If
any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any provision of a new
ordinance, such provision may be, by the consent of the party affected, applied
to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes effect.
This Section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or
implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions
upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed as abating any action now
pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the County herein
repealed and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this Code
shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the same
provision; nor shall this Chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating,
modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the
liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the
County under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the
adoption of this County Code. (1991 Code)
1.02.04: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
of this County Code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of
the remaining portions of the Code, or any part thereof. The County Board of
Commissioners hereby declares that it would have passed each section,
subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof
irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections,
subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared
unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. (1991 Code)
CHAPTER 3
INTERPRETATION; DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1.03.01: Interpretation; Construction of Words
1.03.02: Definitions, General
1.03.03: Catchlines
1.03.01: INTERPRETATION; CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
   A.   Generally: The provisions of this Code and all proceedings under it are
to be construed with a view to effect its objects and to promote justice. (1973
Code §1.04.040)
   B.   Grammatical Interpretation: The following grammatical rules shall apply
in this Code:
      1.   Any gender includes the other genders.
      2.   The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the
singular.
      3.   Words used in the present tense include the past and the future
tenses and vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable. (1973 Code §1.04.020)
      4.   All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to
the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases
and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the
law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and
appropriate meaning. (1973 Code §1.04.01)
      5.   The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the County has
been changed in the content of this County Code to "Title", "Chapter",
"Section" and/or "subsection" or words of like import for organizational and
clarification purposes only. Such change to the County's ordinances is not
meant to amend passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (1991
Code)
The provisions of this Code shall not in any manner affect matters of record
which refer to or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein
specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within
the Code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding
provisions contained within this Code. (1973 Code §1.01.070)
   C.   Prohibited Acts: Whenever, in this Code, any act or omission is made
unlawful, it includes causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting,
suffering or concealing the fact of such act or omission. (1973 Code §1.04.030)
   D.   Repealers: The repeal of an ordinance shall not repeal the repealing
clause of such ordinance or revive any ordinance which has been repealed
thereby. (1973 Code §1.04.050)
   E.   Acts by Principals and Agents: When an act is required by an ordinance
or resolution, the same being such that it may be done as well by an agent as
by the principal, such requirement shall be construed as to include all such
acts performed by an authorized agent. (1973 Code §1.04.010)
1.03.02: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this Code, shall be construed
as defined in this Section unless from the context a different meaning is
intended or unless a different meaning is specifically defined and more
particularly directed to the use of such words and phrases:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred either
express or implied to do so.
BOARD: Unless otherwise indicated, the Board of County Commissioners of the
County of Lyon, State of Nevada.
CODE: The County Code of the County of Lyon and amendments thereto.
COMMISSIONERS or ALL ITS MEMBERS: The total number of Commissioners provided by
the general laws of the State of Nevada.
COUNTY: The County of Lyon, Nevada or the area within the limits of the County
and such territory outside of the County over which the County has jurisdiction
or control by virtue of any constitutional or statutory provisions.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a County employee by
title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the
County of Lyon".
FEE: A sum of money charged by the County for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation.
LAW: Denotes applicable Federal law, the constitution and statutes of the State
of Nevada, the ordinances and resolutions of the County and, when appropriate,
any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession
or occupation.
MAY: Is permissive.
MISDEMEANOR: Any offense deemed a violation of the provisions of this Code
which is a lesser offense than a felony, as defined by State law. 1
MONTH: A calendar month.
MUST and SHALL: Each is mandatory.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive to the sensibilities of reasonable persons, or any
act or activity creating a hazard which threatens the health and welfare of
inhabitants of the county, or any activity which by its perpetuation can
reasonably be said to have a detrimental effect on the property of a person or
persons within the community.
OATH: Includes an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by law, an
affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear"
and "sworn" are equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed".
OCCUPANT: When applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with
others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of any
act required by the provisions of this code.
OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this code to a county officer by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the county of
Lyon".
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OR; AND: May be read "and" and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner,
tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or a part
of such building or land.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, or the manager,
lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them, as well as a
natural person.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Includes every description of money, goods, chattels,
effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any
pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged,
transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or
interest therein.
PRECEDING AND FOLLOWING: Next before and next after, respectively.
PROPERTY: Includes real and personal property.
REAL PROPERTY: Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate
to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things direct to the consumer.
SIDEWALK: That portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
STATE: The state of Nevada.
STREET: Includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places,
squares, curbs or other public ways in this county which have been or may
hereafter be dedicated and open to the public use or such other public property
so designated in any law of this state; except, that this definition shall not
include any streets, alleys or roads which are within the boundaries of any
unincorporated city or town of this county unless specifically included
therein.
TENANT and OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, includes any person who
occupies whole or part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.
TITLE OF OFFICE: Use of the title of any officer, employee, board or commission
means that officer, employee, department board or commission of the County.
WHOLESALER and WHOLESALE DEALER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, such
terms shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles
or things to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by
law to any official or public writing or bond required by law, it shall be in
the proper handwriting of such person, or in case he is unable to write, by his
proper mark.
YEAR: A calendar year. (1973 Code §1.04.010; 1991 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. NRS 193.120.
1.03.03: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this County Code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of the section nor, unless
expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections,
including the catchlines, are amended or re-enacted. (1991 Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1.04.01: General Penalty
1.04.02: Application of Provisions
1.04.03: Jurisdiction
1.04.04: Liability of Officers
1.04.01: GENERAL PENALTY:
   A.   Except where other penalties are provided by law, violations of the
Lyon County Code, other than violations designated as civil infractions under
this Code or the Nevada Revised Statutes, hereby are declared to be
misdemeanors, punishable as provided in the Nevada Revised Statutes for
misdemeanor violations as said statutes may be from time to time amended.
   B.   "Civil Infraction" means a non-criminal violation of any provision of
this code that is specifically stated by Nevada Revised Statutes or this Code
that it not punishable as a misdemeanor. Unless a different penalty is
expressly provided by this code or a different penalty is provided for a
particular offense in the Nevada Revised Statutes, the monetary penalty for a
civil infraction is a civil penalty of not more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) per offense. (Ord. 321, 9-1-88; amd. Ord. 633, 1-3-23)
1.04.02: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
The penalty provided in this Chapter shall be applicable to every section of
this County Code 1  the same as though it were a part of each and every
separate section. Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this
County Code where any duty is prescribed or obligation imposed or where any act
which is of a continuing nature or declared to be unlawful shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each
day such duty or obligation remains unperformed or such act continues, unless
otherwise specifically provided in this County Code.
In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by
different clauses or sections of this County Code, the prosecuting officer may
elect under which to proceed, but not more than one recovery shall be had
against the same person for the same offense; provided, that the revocation of
a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar
any other penalty being enforced.
Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes a
breach of any section or provision of this code and there shall be no fine or
penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of this chapter
shall apply. (1991 Code)
 
Notes
1 2. NRS 193.150.
1.04.03: JURISDICTION:
The commission of any act within the county outside the limits of any
incorporated city therein or the failure to perform any act within the county
outside the limits of any incorporated city therein which is made a misdemeanor
by the laws of the state constitutes a misdemeanor. (Ord. 272, 12-15-1983)
1.04.04: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
The failure of any officer or employee to perform any official duty imposed by
this code shall not subject such officer or employee to the penalty imposed for
violation of this code unless a penalty is specifically provided for. (1991
Code)
CHAPTER 5
BOARD OF COUNTY COMMISSIONERS
SECTION:
1.05.01: Members
1.05.02: Meetings Of The Board
1.05.03: Election District Boundaries
1.05.01: MEMBERS:
Pursuant to section 244.011 of Nevada Revised Statutes, the board of county
commissioners shall consist of five (5) members. (Ord. 556, 3-1-2012)
1.05.02: MEETINGS OF THE BOARD:
   A.   Regular Meetings: Pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 244.085, the
first and third Thursdays of each month are fixed as the dates of regular
meetings of the board of county commissioners
   B.   The first meeting of the board in odd numbered years shall be held on
the first Monday in January.
   C.   All regular meetings of the board of county commissioners shall be held
either at the administrative complex in the City of Yerington, County of Lyon
(county seat), or at such place within the county as may be designated by the
unanimous consent and order of the board of county commissioners. However, the
regular meetings of the board of county commissioners must be held at the
county seat at least once in each calendar month as required by NRS 244.085.
   D.   Additional Meetings: In addition to the regular meeting dates
established in subsection A of this section, the board of county commissioners,
may schedule additional meetings as determined by the Chair or the consent of
the board of county commissioners. Additional meetings of the board of county
commissioners may be held at any place within the boundaries of the county.
   E.   At a meeting held outside the county seat, the board of county
commissioners may, in accordance with NRS 241.020, take final action on any
matter except zoning or planning matters which relate to a different
geographical area than the geographical area in which the meeting is held.
   F.   Meeting Dates Falling On Saturdays, Sundays Or Holidays: In the event
that any meeting date of the board of county commissioners established in this
section shall fall on a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, then, and in that
event, the meeting shall be held upon the next succeeding day which is not a
Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. (Ord. 556, 3-1-2012; amd. Ord. 614, 5-6-
2021)
1.05.03: ELECTION DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
   A.   In Lyon County there are hereby established contiguous election
districts numbered consecutively and having boundaries described as follows:
      1.   District one will consist of the following election precincts:
9 South Dayton #1
10 South Dayton #2
11 South Dayton #3
15 North Dayton #3
16 North Dayton #4
17 North Dayton #5
18 Mound House #1
19 Mound House #2
20 Silver City
      2.   District two will consist of the following election precincts:
23 Silver Springs #1
27 Fernley #1
28 Fernley #2
29 Fernley #3
37 Fernley #11
38 Fernley #12
39 Fernley #13
      3.   District three will consist of the following election precincts:
12 South Dayton #4
13 North Dayton #1
14 North Dayton #2
21 Stagecoach #1
22 Stagecoach #2
25 Silver Springs #3
26 Silver Springs #4
      4.   District four will consist of the following election precincts:
30 Fernley #4
31 Fernley #5
32 Fernley #6
33 Fernley #7
34 Fernley #8
35 Fernley #9
36 Fernley #10
40 Fernley #14
      5.   District five will consist of the following election precincts:
1 East Mason Valley #1
2 East Mason Valley #2
3 West Mason Valley #1
4 West Mason Valley #2
5 West Mason Valley #3
5A East Mason Valley #3
6 Spragg-Plummer
7 Smith Valley #1
8 Smith Valley #2
24 Silver Springs #2
(Ord. 556, 3-1-2012; amd. Ord. 624, 2-17-2022)
CHAPTER 6
COUNTY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES; GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
1.06.01: County Officers And Employees Enumerated
1.06.02: Inspections; Entry Powers
1.06.01: COUNTY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES ENUMERATED:
   A.   Elected Officials:
 
Official          NRS Provisions
Clerk             246.010
Treasurer         249.010
Sheriff           248.010
Recorder-auditor  247.010, 251.010
District attorney 252.010
Assessor          250.010
 
B. Appointed Officials:
Official NRS Provisions Code Provisions
Official                   NRS Provisions Code Provisions
Coroner                    244.163        Title 1, chapter 8
Comptroller                251.060
Public administrator       253.010        Title 1, chapter 17
Manager                                   Title 1, chapter 7
Safety officer                            Mentioned in code, not established
Director of county welfare                6.05.02
department
Director of public works   244.151        Mentioned in code, not established
Road superintendent                       Mentioned in code, not established
Building official                         Mentioned in code, not established
Court administrator                       Title 1, chapter 16
County health officer                     3.11.06
 
C. Boards, Commissions And Councils:
Board, Commission  NRS Provisions Code Provisions
Or Council
Board, Commission                     NRS Provisions Code Provisions
Or Council
Citizens' advisory boards                            Title 3, chapter 1
Planning commission                   Chapter 278    Title 3, chapter 2
Emergency management                                 Title 3, chapter 3
Regional transportation commission    Chapter 373    Title 3, chapter 4
Fair and rodeoboard                                  Title 3, chapter 5
Public land management advisory board                Title 3, chapter 6
Historical site advisory board                       Title 3, chapter 7
Communications advisory board                        Title 3, chapter 8
Animal control advisory board                        Title 3, chapter 9
County health board                                  Title 3, chapter 11
Liquor board                          244.300        Title 5, chapter 2
 
(1991 Code; amd. Ord. 383, 6-17-1993, eff. 7-2-1993; Ord. 408, 12-1-1994, eff.
12-16-1994; Ord. 417, 10-5-1995, eff. 10-20-1995; Ord. 440, 9-17-1998, eff. 10-
2-1998; Ord. 445, 8-19-1999, eff. 9-3-1999; Ord. 545, 11-4-2010; Ord. 555, 12-
15-2011; Ord. 559, 7-19-2012; Ord. 583, 2-18-2016)
1.06.02: INSPECTIONS; ENTRY POWERS:
Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any ordinance or resolution
or whenever there is reasonable cause to believe there exists an ordinance or
resolution violation in any building or upon any premises within the
jurisdiction of the county, any authorized official of the county may, upon
presentation of proper credentials, enter such building or premises at all
reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon him by
ordinance; provided, that except in emergency situations or when consent of the
owner and/or occupant to the inspection has been otherwise obtained, he shall
give the owner and/or occupant, if he can be located after reasonable effort,
twenty four (24) hours' written notice of the authorized official's intention
to inspect. The notice transmitted to the owner and/or occupant shall state
that the property owner has the right to refuse entry and that in the event
such entry is refused, inspection may be made only upon issuance of a search
warrant by a duly authorized magistrate. In the event the owner and/or occupant
refused entry after such request has been made, the official is empowered to
seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such
entry. (1973 Code §1.08.010)
CHAPTER 7
COUNTY MANAGER
SECTION:
1.07.01: Purpose
1.07.02: Manager's Office
1.07.03: Appointment; Qualifications; Removal From Office
1.07.04: Administrative Powers And Duties
1.07.05: County Administration
1.07.06: Budgetary Matters
1.07.07: Departmental Supervision
1.07.08: Employment Policies And Practices
1.07.09: General Services
1.07.10: Salary And Benefits
1.07.01: PURPOSE:
It is the intent of the Board of County Commissioners, in adopting this
chapter, to create the position of Lyon County Manager and to provide Lyon
County government with a County Manager who, under the direction of the Board
of County Commissioners, shall provide effective, centralized administration
for Lyon County government and to define the duties, responsibilities,
authority and qualifications thereof. (Ord. 348, 7-5-1990)
1.07.02: MANAGER'S OFFICE:
There shall be in the County a County Manager's Office, under a County Manager,
who shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the Board of County
Commissioners or on such other contractual terms as may be agreed upon by the
parties. (Ord. 348, 7-5-1990)
1.07.03: APPOINTMENT; QUALIFICATIONS; REMOVAL FROM OFFICE:
The County Manager shall:
   A.   Be chosen upon the basis of knowledge and skills in public
administration, demonstrated administrative ability and knowledge of public
budgeting, personnel, finance and organization. This requirement may normally
be met by a combination of education and experience equal to a bachelor's
degree in business or public administration and at least five (5) years of
administrative experience, preferably in government or public administration
and involved management responsibilities.
   B.   Be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the Board of County
Commissioners and may be removed from office by a majority vote of the Board of
County Commissioners upon ninety (90) days' written notice of such removal. The
Board may also relieve the County Manager of his duties during such period.
   C.   Maintain residence within the County during his tenure in office, but
he need not be a resident of the County at the time of appointment.
   D.   In the event that the County Manager is incapacitated or otherwise
unable to perform the duties of County Manager the Board of Commissioners may
appoint a person to serve as Acting County Manager until the County Manager is
able to return to work or is determined to have terminated employment.
No person who is or has been an elected officer of Lyon County shall be
appointed County Manager unless he has been out of office for at least one year
prior to the date of his application. (Ord. 605, 3-7-2019)
1.07.04: ADMINISTRATIVE POWERS AND DUTIES:
The County Manager shall be the Chief Administrative Officer of the County and
shall be responsible to the Board of County Commissioners for the proper and
efficient administration of all County offices, departments, institutions and
special districts under the jurisdiction of the Board of County Commissioners.
To this end, the County Manager shall have those powers and duties set forth in
this chapter and as reasonably implied therefrom and shall be authorized to
assign or delegate the administration of these duties to any department or
person under the Board's control, subject to the limitations imposed by law.
The Board of County Commissioners and its members have delegated administrative
responsibilities over County governmental activities to the County Manager and
shall not intervene or detract from this delegation or contact department heads
without prior notification to the County Manager. (Ord. 348, 7-5-1990)
1.07.05: COUNTY ADMINISTRATION:
The County Manager shall:
   A.   Administer and enforce policies established by the Board of County
Commissioners and promulgate rules and regulations as necessary to implement
Board policies.
   B.   Refer policy matters and other matters beyond his authority to the
Board of County Commissioners for determination, direction or authorization.
   C.   Represent the Board of County Commissioners in the County's
intergovernmental relationships, including legislative matters, in accordance
with Board policies and instructions and when directed, represent the Board in
dealing with individuals or groups concerned with County affairs.
   D.   Attend all meetings of the Board of County Commissioners, except when
excused and when directed, attend meetings of advisory councils, commissions
and committees established by the Board of County Commissioners.
   E.   In conjunction with the Chairman of the County Commissioners, supervise
and assist the preparation of the agendas for regular and special Board
meetings of the County Commissioners; evaluate departmental and other requests
to determine if such requests should be submitted to the Board and make
recommendations to the Board on all agenda items; propose necessary revisions
of this Code in conjunction with the District Attorney; make regular reports to
the Board on County matters.
   F.   Implement the Board of County Commissioners' legislative advocacy
program, including the initiation of legislation approved by the Board of
County Commissioners, that will benefit the County and County government,
analyze proposed State and Federal legislation, make recommendations to the
Board of County Commissioners for positions on proposed legislation and review
all department head requests involving legislative activities.
   G.   In conjunction with the District Attorney and other relevant County
officers, employees or designated representatives, negotiate and/or supervise
the negotiation of all County contractual agreements, including, but not
limited to, agreements between the County and any third party to acquire, buy,
sell, borrow, loan, encumber or hypothecate real or personal property and all
collective bargaining units; further, execute on behalf of the Board of County
Commissioners, subject to the limitations and procedures established by State
law and the Board of County Commissioners, all County agreements and administer
and enforce said agreements on behalf of the County.
   H.   In conjunction with the Treasurer and Comptroller, maintain or
supervise the maintenance of inventories of all the County's real and personal
property and undertake activities to prevent the misuse, loss, theft or damage
of County property.
   I.   Conduct continuous research in administrative practices so as to bring
about greater efficiency and economy in County government; develop and
recommend to the Board of County Commissioners long-range plans to improve
County operations and to prepare for future County growth and development.
(Ord. 348, 7-5-90)
1.07.06: BUDGETARY MATTERS:
The County Manager shall:
   A.   In conjunction with the County Comptroller, develop budget instructions
and policies, revenue estimates and departmental budget targets to guide
departments in budget preparation; recommend to the County Commissioners and on
all department budgets including staffing levels and other budget amounts.
   B.   Recommend to the Board of County Commissioners an annual County
operating budget based upon long-range plans for acquiring, constructing or
improving buildings, roads and other County facilities; make recommendations to
the Board on the acquisition and disposition of real property, easements and
rights of way.
   C.   Establish a control system or systems to assure that the various County
departments and other agencies under the jurisdiction of the Board of County
Commissioners are operating within their respective budgets; make
recommendations to the Board regarding requests for unforeseen and unbudgeted
expenditures; approve fund transfers and budget revisions within
appropriations; establish policies for acquiring additional or replacement
fixed assets.
   D.   The County Manager may establish a budgetary allotment system and such
other expenditure controls which are necessary or desirable and may authorize
department heads to approve fund transfers except those requiring approval of
the Board of County Commissioners under State law.
   E.   In conjunction with the County Treasurer and Comptroller, keep the
Board of County Commissioners informed of the financial status of the County;
keep the Board of County Commissioners informed of the other matters of major
significance which affect the County. (Ord. 348, 7-5-90)
1.07.07: DEPARTMENTAL SUPERVISION:
The County Manager shall:
   A.   Supervise the performance of County departments, under the jurisdiction
of the County Commissioners, within the limitations established by State law or
the Board of County Commissioners, by directing the establishment of standards,
goals and objectives for quality and quantity of departmental performance and
the measure of the performance of individual departments against those
standards and goals; assign projects and scrutinize departmental expenditures
to assure that they are necessary and proper.
   B.   Evaluate all proposed departmental budgets, staffing levels and
programs and recommend those to the Board of County Commissioners that he feels
should be approved or modified; periodically evaluate existing departmental
budgets, staffing levels and programs and recommend changes to the Board where
they are indicated.
   C.   Evaluate departmental organization on a continuous basis; subject to
the limitations of State law or the directives of the Board of County
Commissioners, initiate changes in interdepartmental organization, structure,
duties or responsibilities when warranted, including authorizing the transfer
of equipment between departments; assign space to County departments in County
facilities and authorize budgeted out-of-County travel and in-County business
expense in accordance with rules and regulations prepared, based upon policies
established by the Board; recommend to the Board of County Commissioners the
transfer of positions between departments and consolidation or combining of
County offices, departments, positions or units.
   D.   Evaluate appointed department head performance, under the direction of
the Board of County Commissioners, and recommend compensation in accordance
with demonstrated performance; confer with department heads as necessary to
discuss any shortcomings noted and suggest remedial action.
   E.   Appoint qualified candidates to fill any vacancies occurring in a
department head position and, when appropriate, transfer, discipline or dismiss
appointed department heads. All appointed department heads shall work for and
report to the County Manager.
   F.   When necessary or upon a department's request, assist department head
in solving problems which inhibit efficient operation within a department or
create friction between departments and be responsible to the Board of County
Commissioners for ensuring that coordination exists between and among the
various County Departments and offices, both elective and appointive.
   G.   Provide, under the direction of the Board of County Commissioners,
management training and develop leadership qualities among department heads to
build a County management team that can plan for and meet present and future
challenges. In order to facilitate improved communication between the Board of
County Commissioners, the County Manager and departments, the County Manager
shall create a management advisory panel. The management advisory panel shall
consist of all appointive and elective department heads and others deemed
necessary or appropriate. The management advisory panel may provide input to
the Board of County Commissioners, through the County Manager, regarding
matters of general policy.
(Ord. 348, 7-5-90; amd. Ord. 643, 7-17-2025)
1.07.08: EMPLOYMENT POLICIES AND PRACTICES:
The County Manager shall:
   A.   Review all requests to fill permanent and limited-term personnel
positions to assure that the position is required and that salary funds are
available; authorize advanced step recruitment upon recommendations by
department heads; authorize and control the use of extra help and payment for
overtime within available funds.
   B.   Be responsible for orientation and training of new department heads.
   C.   Supervise the administration of employee relations, classifications,
recruitment and selection, affirmative action and management, employee
training, personnel policies and procedure and other performance programs.
(Ord. 348, 7-5-90)
1.07.09: GENERAL SERVICES:
The County Manager shall be responsible for and exercise supervision and
control over services provided to County departments as follows:
   A.   Direct the purchasing of supplies, materials and equipment through the
procedures established by the Board of County Commissioners.
   B.   Exercise general supervision over all public buildings and property,
whether leased or owned by the County, and such other public lands and
facilities under the control and jurisdiction of the Board of County
Commissioners.
   C.   In conjunction with the Public Works Department, supervise building
construction, alterations, maintenance and the utilization of County vehicles
and equipment.
   D.   Supervise all support services such as data processing, duplication,
central services, communication and other ancillary services. (Ord. 348, 7-5-
90)
1.07.10: SALARY AND BENEFITS:
The salary of the County Manager shall be established by the Board of County
Commissioners and be paid by the Treasurer in the same manner as the salaries
of the other County employees are paid. All other benefits conferred upon
County management employees shall be granted to the County Manager. (Ord. 348,
7-5-90)
CHAPTER 8
COUNTY CORONER
SECTION:
1.08.01: Definitions
1.08.02: Office Created; Qualifications; Facilities and Expenses
1.08.03: Deputies, Assistants and Professionals
1.08.04: Bonds
1.08.05: Coroner's Duties
1.08.06: Duties of Medical Examiner
1.08.07: Procedures
1.08.08: Interference with Coroner Prohibited
1.08.09: Property of Deceased
1.08.10: Burials by County; Costs
1.08.11: Coroner's Register; Fee for Report
1.08.12: Rules and Regulations
1.08.13: Violations by Coroner; Penalty
1.08.01: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this Chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this Section:
AUTOPSY REPORT: Any report of an autopsy or postmortem examination, including
all reports of laboratory examinations and other technical tests performed.
BOARD: The County Commissioners of the County of Lyon.
INQUEST: An inquiry before a Coroner's jury, with testimony obtained under
oath, duly recorded and handed down.
INSPECTION: An examination of a dead human body, the death of which must be
investigated by the Coroner or the Coroner's deputies or assistants under the
terms of this Chapter. It shall also refer to a medical examiner's medical
examination and/or a partial or complete autopsy as necessary to determine the
cause and manner of death.
INVESTIGATION: An inquiry by the Coroner's office and may include testimony
obtained from witnesses under oath.
MEDICAL EXAMINER: An individual licensed to practice medicine and surgery in
the State of Nevada and who, when practicable, shall be a skilled pathologist
with training or experience in forensic pathology and certified by the American
Board of Pathology or qualified to be so certified. When such a pathologist is
not available, the Coroner may designate and authorize a qualified doctor of
medicine (not necessarily a pathologist) to serve in the place of such medical
examiner for the purpose of making a particular examination or report or to
serve as a temporary substitute. The medical examiner or temporary appointee
who is not a skilled pathologist may call any other medical examiner who is a
skilled pathologist for consultation and assistance. The compensation of
medical examiners shall be fixed by the Board.
POSTMORTEM EXAMINATION: An examination of a dead body by a competent
pathologist or licensed physician involving the opening and dissection of the
body, including the removal of organs and tissues and fluids and other material
for microscopic, toxicological, chemical, bacterial or other examinations as
deemed necessary to study the cause of death. The term "autopsy" is a
synonymous term.
RECORDS: Those reports duly summarized on a Coroner's office form for inclusion
in a register or journal, whether bound or not.
REPORTS: Those findings, in written form, which are filed in the coroner's
office, including examinations, witnesses' statements, correspondence,
insurance forms and other evidence in support of the conclusions and findings
recorded on the official records.
TOXICOLOGIST: A specialized toxicologist or specialist in the science dealing
with poisons and their effect and with chemical, industrial, or legal problems
involved in or connected therewith. (1973 Code §2.06.010)
1.08.02: OFFICE CREATED; QUALIFICATIONS; FACILITIES AND EXPENSES:
   A.   Office Created; Jurisdiction: There is created and established the
office of County Coroner for Lyon County with jurisdiction co-extensive with
the boundaries of Lyon County.
   B.   Appointment; Sheriff Serves As: The Board shall appoint as County
Coroner a suitable and qualified person who shall serve at its pleasure. To be
eligible for appointment as County Coroner, a person shall be the Lyon County
Sheriff (who, as ex officio, shall also serve as County Coroner).
   C.   Facilities and Expenses: The office of the County Coroner and related
facilities necessary to the administration of the office shall be as designated
and provided by the Board. Any and all costs, salaries and expenses connected
with or entailed in the operation of the County Coroner's office shall be borne
and provided for by Lyon County. (1973 Code §2.06.020)
1.08.03: DEPUTIES, ASSISTANTS AND PROFESSIONALS:
   A.   Deputies; Assistants; Staff: Subject to the approval and authorization
thereof by the Board, the Coroner may appoint and employ such deputy or
deputies, assistants and such other staff personnel as may be necessary for
proper administration of the office and performance and discharge of the
responsibilities and duties. (1973 Code §2.06.030)
   B.   Use of Professional Services: The County Coroner, only if not a
pathologist and subject to approval of contractual compensation therefor by the
Board, is authorized to engage the services of a qualified and/or licensed
pathologist required for proper performance and discharge of the
responsibilities. The County Coroner is similarly authorized, by contract, to
engage any desired toxicological or other professional services required for
performance of the duties. (1973 Code §2.06.040)
1.08.04: BONDS:
   A.   Coroner's Bond: The County Coroner shall give bond, issued by a bonding
or surety company authorized to do business in the State, in a sum not less
than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) nor more than fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00), as fixed by the Board, and such bond shall be conditioned for the
faithful performance of the duties of the office.
   B.   Bonds for Deputies, Assistants and Staff: The County Coroner shall be
authorized to require personal bond on the part of any of the deputies,
assistants or other staff personnel in an amount not to exceed ten thousand
dollars ($10,000.00).
   C.   Responsibility of County: The expense or premium for the County
Coroner's bond or bond of the deputies, assistants or staff personnel shall be
paid by Lyon County. The Board may, at any time during the Coroner's term of
office, require the County Coroner or the deputies, assistants or staff
personnel to give additional sureties on their bonds or to give a new bond.
(1973 Code §2.06.050)
1.08.05: CORONER'S DUTIES:
   A.   Generally: It shall be the duty of the County Coroner to determine the
cause of death of any person reported as having been killed by violence, having
suddenly died under such circumstances as to afford reasonable grounds to
suspect or infer that death has been caused or occasioned by the act of another
by criminal means, having died under circumstances affording reasonable grounds
to suspect that the death has been occasioned by unnatural, unlawful or
suspicious means or having committed suicide. When applicable, State law makes
it the duty of the Coroner to sign certificates of death. The Coroner shall
determine the cause of all such deaths and shall sign and certify such cause on
the death certificate prepared in connection with each said death or shall sign
and certify on the death certificate that the cause of death cannot be
determined with reasonable medical certainty.
   B.   Deaths Investigated: The County Coroner, or the assigned deputy or
assistant, shall go to the scene of the dead person or persons and shall
investigate all deaths as generally described in this Section including
(without limitation) deaths occurring under the following circumstances:
      1.   Unattended deaths.
      2.   Deaths wherein the deceased has not been attended by a physician in
the ten (10) days before death.
      3.   Deaths related to or following known or suspected self-induced or
criminal abortion.
      4.   Known or suspected homicide, suicide or accidental poisoning.
      5.   Deaths known or suspected to have resulted in whole or in part from
or related to accident or injury, either old or recent.
      6.   Deaths due to drowning, fire, hanging, gunshot, stabbing, cutting,
exposure, starvation, alcoholism, drug addiction, strangulation or aspiration.
      7.   Death in whole or in part occasioned by criminal means.
      8.   Deaths in a place of legal incarceration or while under sentence.
      9.   Deaths under such circumstances as to afford a reasonable ground to
suspect that the death was caused by the criminal act of another or any deaths
reported by physicians or other persons having knowledge of death for inquiry
by a coroner.
      10.   Deaths occurring in the following situations:
         a.   In the course of hospitalization of less than twenty four (24)
hours.
         b.   In an operating room or recovery room where the patient has
expired.
         c.   When a person has died under general or local anesthesia.
   C.   Death Certificate: In any case in which the Coroner or the Coroner's
assigned deputy or assistant conducts an inquiry into the cause of death
pursuant to this Section, the Coroner or deputy or assistant shall personally
sign the certificate of death, notwithstanding any other provision of law, and
shall certify the cause of death thereon or shall certify that the cause of
death cannot be determined with reasonable medical certainty. (1973 Code
§2.06.080)
1.08.06: DUTIES OF MEDICAL EXAMINER:
The designated medical examiner, upon being notified by the office of the
Coroner of the location of a deceased human body and the circumstances of the
case requiring further medical inquiry, shall, at the earliest possible time
thereafter, conduct a medical examination, a partial or a complete autopsy as
may be required and shall immediately report his findings, in writing, stating
the cause of death, if known, or that additional microscopic, toxicological or
other studies are necessary to establish the cause of death. Such reports shall
reflect whether or not the body is medically released for final disposition,
pending issuance of the detailed autopsy report. (1973 Code §2.06.090)
1.08.07: PROCEDURES:
   A.   Notification of Death:
      1.   It shall be the duty of every person who knows of the existence and
location of a dead body coming under the jurisdiction of the County Coroner, as
set forth herein, to notify the Coroner thereof in the most expeditious manner
possible.
      2.   A physician, funeral director or any other person having knowledge
of a death which has occurred or having charge or custody of a body where death
has occurred shall immediately notify the County Coroner if he has knowledge
that the death has occurred:
         a.   Without medical attendance;
         b.   During the continued absence of the attending physician;
         c.   Where the attending physician is unable to state the cause of
death;
         d.   Where suicide is suspected;
         e.   Following an injury or an accident; and
         f.   Under such circumstances justifying a reasonable inference that
the death was caused by the criminal act of another. (1973 Code §2.06.180)
   B.   Inquests:
      1.   Inquest Required: When the County Coroner or the deputy or assistant
has been informed that a person has been killed or committed suicide or has
suddenly died under circumstances affording reasonable grounds to suspect that
the death has been occasioned by unnatural means, the Coroner or staff shall:
         a.   Immediately notify the office of the District Attorney of Lyon
County so as to afford said District Attorney and police or sheriff officials
an opportunity to assist in the inquiry as to cause of death.
         b.   Hold an inquest as provided herein, if such should be indicated,
requested or ordered, within the sound discretion of the District Attorney or a
judge of the District Court within the County, but such inquest need not be
conducted in any case of death manifestly occasioned by natural cause, suicide,
accident or when the death is publicly known to have been caused by a person
already in custody, and the District Attorney or a judge of the District Court
within the County, certifies that no inquest is required.
      2.   Jury:
         a.   If an inquest is held, the County Coroner or the deputy or
assistant, in addition to notifying police or sheriff officials, shall summon
three (3) persons qualified by law to serve as jurors to appear before him
forthwith at the place within the County as may be designated by the Coroner or
the deputy or assistant to inquire into the cause of death.
         b.   Every person summoned as an inquest juror who fails to appear
without having a reasonable excuse shall forfeit any sum not exceeding one
hundred dollars ($100.00) to be recovered in any court of competent
jurisdiction by the Coroner and paid by him into the County Treasury.
         c.   Attending inquest jurors shall be sworn by the County Coroner to:
            (1)   Inquire who the dead person was;
            (2)   Determine when, where and by what means the person came to
his death;
            (3)   Determine the circumstances attending the person's death; and
            (4)   Render a true verdict thereon according to the evidence.
         d.   Inquest jurors shall be entitled to receive for each day's
service the sum of six dollars ($6.00) upon certification therefor to the
County Clerk by the County Coroner, such payments being audited, allowed and
paid as are other claims against the County.
When it is necessary for an inquest jury to travel a greater distance than one
mile to view the remains of a dead person or to the place where the inquest is
to be held, the necessary and actual expenses entailed for the transportation
of the jury shall also be allowed, audited and paid as are other claims against
the County, upon proper certification therefor by the County Coroner.
      3.   Witnesses:
         a.   The County Coroner is authorized to issue subpoenas for
witnesses, returnable as may be directed, such subpoenas to be served by the
Coroner or such person as may be directed. Witnesses at a Coroner's inquest
shall be compensated as provided by law for witnesses required to attend in the
courts of this State, and such charge shall be a charge against the County.
The County Coroner must summon and examine, as witnesses, every person who, in
the Coroner's opinion or in the opinion of any of the jurors, as or may have
any knowledge of the facts. The Coroner may also summon a qualified surgeon or
physician to inspect and examine the body or hold a postmortem examination
thereon, or a chemist to make an analysis of the stomach or the tissues of the
deceased to give their professional opinions as to the cause of the death.
         b.   Any witness failing to obey the subpoena to attend an inquest may
be attached and fined for contempt of such inquest jury, in like manner as in a
court of the justice of the peace.
      4.   Verdict and Certifications: Upon conclusion of the inquest, the
inquest jury shall render its verdict and certify the same in writing, signed
by each of them and setting forth the name of the deceased and when, where and
by what means death occurred and, if death was by criminal means, factually
known or reasonably established, the name of the person causing the death, if
known.
      5.   Filing Testimony: Testimony at such inquest shall be reduced to
writing, without delay, and filed in the office of the clerk of the District
Court.
      6.   Arrest Warrant: If the inquest jury finds that the person was killed
by another under circumstances not excusable or justifiable in law and the
party committing the act is not already in custody, the County Coroner or
District Attorney shall immediately take appropriate action for the issuance of
a warrant for the arrest of the accused.
The warrant may be served in any county of the State and returned by the
officer serving the same before a judge of the county in which issued. The
officer receiving such warrant shall have the same power under such warrant as
is afforded under a warrant from any court or judge in the State of Nevada.
      7.   Single Inquest for Multiple Deaths: A single inquest may be held
with respect to more than one death where all such deaths were occasioned by a
common cause. (1973 Code §2.06.130)
   C.   Powers and Duties in Examination of Bodies: If the preliminary
investigation of the County Coroner or of others assisting the Coroner has
failed to satisfy the Coroner or medical examiner as to the cause of the
particular death or where reasonable grounds exist to suspect that a crime has
been committed, the County Coroner or medical examiner is authorized to:
      1.   Take possession of and inspect or examine the body of the deceased
person, including a postmortem examination, which shall include the power to
exhume such body, in connection with any inspection or examination authorized
herein, and no search warrant shall be necessary for access thereto.
      2.   At the Coroner's discretion, make or cause to be made an analysis of
the stomach, blood or contents of organs or tissues of the body and secure
professional opinions as to the result of such postmortem examination. The
information so secured shall be reduced to writing and filed by the Coroner in
the records of the death of the deceased person. At the Coroner's discretion,
the Coroner may, if the circumstances warrant, hold an inquest as hereinabove
provided. The County Coroner or medical examiner shall have the right to retain
only such tissue of the body removed at the time of the autopsy as may, in his
opinion, be necessary or advisable to make proper investigation of the case or
for verification of the findings relating to the cause of death.
      3.   The County Coroner, or any person assisting the Coroner who may be
duly licensed by the State to do so, may perform an autopsy of any remains as
to which the Coroner has jurisdiction and authority as herein provided if the
deceased, prior to death, has authorized such an autopsy in a will or other
written instrument or upon receipt of a written authorization from a person
representing to be any of the following:
         a.   The surviving spouse;
         b.   A surviving child or parent;
         c.   A surviving brother or sister;
         d.   Any other kin or person who has or has acquired the right to
control the disposition of the remains;
         e.   The District Attorney; or
         f.   Any other duly authorized public officer. (1973 Code §2.06.190)
   D.   Death Certificate: The cause of death appearing on a certificate of
death signed by the Coroner shall be in conformity with facts ascertained from
inquiry, autopsy and other scientific findings. In case of death without
medical attendance and without violence, casualty, criminal or undue means, the
Coroner may, without holding an inquest or autopsy, make the certificate of
death from statements of relatives, persons last in attendance or persons
present at the time of death, after due medical consultation and opinion has
been given by one qualified and licensed to practice medicine and so recorded
in the records of death, providing such information affords clear grounds to
establish the correct medical cause of death within accepted medical practice
and within the requirements for accuracy prescribed by the Division of Vital
Statistics of the State Division of Health. (1973 Code §2.06.140)
   E.   Designation of Morgue or Mortuaries; Designee Not Liable: In the
absence of a County morgue only, the County Coroner is authorized, equitably,
to designate one or more commercial mortuaries in the County, if furnished with
sufficient accommodations and facilities, to receive bodies. No person
operating a morgue or mortuary and no person employed in the same shall be
liable for the acts of the County Coroner or for the acts of any of his
deputies, assistants or staff personnel or other persons assisting the County
Coroner in performing the removal of any body to a morgue or mortuary or for
the performance of an autopsy upon such body. (1973 Code §2.06.200)
   F.   Relatives Notified; Release of Remains: The County Coroner shall use
due diligence to locate and notify the relatives of the deceased of the death
and of the location of the remains. The County Coroner, after his investigation
has been completed and upon proper identification of the body by the next of
kin, legal representative or close friend who has responsibility for burial,
shall release the body to such claim. The body of any unknown or unclaimed
person shall be buried by order of the County Coroner after a period not to
exceed ten (10) days from completion of the Coroner's investigation. (1973 Code
§2.06.210)
1.08.08: INTERFERENCE WITH CORONER PROHIBITED:
   A.   Removal or Disturbance of Remains and Effects Prohibited:
      1.   No person shall disturb or remove, nor search or remove any effects
from the body of a deceased person or persons whose death occurred under any of
the circumstances enumerated in Section
1.08.05 of this Chapter, from the position in which it is or has been found
without proper authorization therefor from the County Coroner or the authorized
deputy, except when the preserving of such body or bodies would endanger the
life, safety or health of other persons.
When necessary, the Coroner may lock the premises and apply a seal to all doors
and/or windows, to prohibit entrance to the premises pending the arrival of a
legally authorized representative of the deceased; provided, that this shall
not be done in such a manner as to interfere with the investigation being
conducted by other law enforcement agencies. Any costs arising from the
premises being locked and sealed while occupied by property of the deceased may
be a proper and legal charge against the estate of the deceased, and shall be
disposed of through the office of the Lyon County Treasurer. Any weapons,
property or evidence related to the investigation or prosecution of any known
or suspected criminal death may, with knowledge of the Coroner, be delivered to
a law enforcement agency or District Attorney, receipt for which shall be
acknowledged.
      2.   Where the absence of severe trauma or other obvious signs of death
exist in those cases examined by lay persons prior to the arrival of the
Coroner, medical examiner or other physician, no ambulance attendant, mortician
or other person shall remove a body from the place of its discovery for
pronouncement of death without prior knowledge of an express approval from the
Coroner or the appointed deputy.
      3.   Wilful disregard of the provisions of this subsection shall be a
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00)
or imprisonment not to exceed six (6) months or by both said fine and
imprisonment. (1973 Code §2.06.100)
   B.   Unauthorized Embalming: Any person embalming a deceased human body when
the Coroner or the chief medical examiner has certified in writing that the
cause of death is unknown and that embalming is not to be done shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor punishable by fine not to exceed five hundred dollars
($500.00) or imprisonment not to exceed six (6) months or by both said fine and
imprisonment.
   C.   Penalty: Any person hindering, obstructing or preventing the Coroner's
or the deputies' or assistants' performance and discharge of official duties
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by fine not to exceed five hundred
dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment not to exceed six (6) months or by both said
fine and imprisonment. (1973 Code §2.06.120)
1.08.09: PROPERTY OF DECEASED:
   A.   Delivery to Treasurer: The County Coroner shall establish and maintain
adequate receipting and accounting procedures and records respecting decedent's
money, personal property and effects. The County Coroner, as soon as
practicable, shall file an affidavit setting out the amount of, and shall
deliver to the County Treasurer, any money or property which may have been
found with the deceased, unless taken from the Coroner's possession by legal
authority. If the County Coroner or the deputy or assistant fails to so pay or
deliver such money or property, the County Treasurer may recover the same by an
action of law. Nothing in this Section contained shall preclude prosecution
under applicable State law.
   B.   Disposition of Money and Property; Public Sale:
      1.   Upon payment of money into the County Treasurer's office in such
case, the money shall be placed to the credit of the County. Upon delivery of
property, the County Treasurer shall:
         a.   Deliver such property to the Public Administrator for disposition
according to law; or
         b.   Give written notice to the Public Administrator of intention to
sell such property at public sale.
      2.   If, within ten (10) days after the giving of notice pursuant to
subsection B1b above, the Public Administrator claims the property for
disposition, the County Treasurer shall deliver it to the Public Administrator.
      3.   If the Public Administrator does not claim the property as provided
in subsection B1 above, the County Treasurer may, after giving notice by
posting at the Courthouse for at least ten (10) days, sell the property at
public sale and place the proceeds to the credit of the County.
   C.   Payment to Representatives of Deceased: If the money so deposited is
demanded within six (6) years, the County Treasurer shall pay the same to the
person legally authorized to receive it; the same may also be paid at any time
subsequent to the expiration of six (6) years to the representatives of the
deceased upon order from a competent court of authority invested with the power
to allow claims against the County. (1973 Code §2.06.150)
1.08.10: BURIALS BY COUNTY; COSTS:
After a Coroner's inquiry, inspection, investigation or inquest, as provided in
this Chapter, if no one takes charge of the remains of the deceased, the County
Coroner shall cause the same to be decently buried. The expenses of the burial
shall be paid from the money deposited with the County Treasurer or the estate
of the deceased, as the case may be. If the deceased has no money or estate or
the money or estate of the deceased is insufficient to bear the entire cost of
the burial, the County shall bear the costs of the burial in excess of any
money or estate available. (1973 Code §2.06.160)
1.08.11: CORONER'S REGISTER; FEE FOR REPORT:
   A.   Register Kept: The County Coroner shall keep an official register,
labeled "Coroner Register", in which shall be entered:
      1.   The name and any aliases of the deceased, when known, including such
description as may be sufficient for identification and which may, at the
Coroner's discretion, include fingerprint records.
      2.   A narrative summary of the circumstances leading to and surrounding
the death of the deceased and transportation of the body, together with names
and addresses of any witnesses to such events.
      3.   The property taken from the person or premises of the deceased by
the Coroner or by any other law enforcement agency or officer.
      4.   The date and cause of death, when known, with reference or direction
to the detailed medical reports upon which decision as to cause of death has
been based.
      5.   Information as to disposition of remains.
      6.   Persons notified of the death, together with a notation of any
unsuccessful attempts at notification.
      7.   The date of holding of any inquest.
      8.   The disposition of the property of the deceased made by the Coroner.
(1973 Code §2.06.060)
   B.   Fee for Coroner's Report: The County Coroner may charge a fee, not to
exceed five dollars ($5.00), for each copy or certification of a coroner's
report. (1973 Code §2.06.070)
1.08.12: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The County Coroner may, from time to time, promulgate such rules and
regulations as may be deemed necessary to carry out the purposes of this
Chapter, and such rules and regulations shall have the same effect in law as
the provisions of this Chapter when approved by the Board. (1973 Code
§2.06.220)
1.08.13: VIOLATIONS BY CORONER; PENALTY:
Any County Coroner or deputy or assistant or staff personnel who violates any
of the provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined in any sum not exceeding five hundred
dollars ($500.00). (1973 Code §2.06.170)
CHAPTER 9
COUNTY PUBLIC DEFENDER
SECTION:
1.09.01: Office Created; Authority
1.09.02: Compensation
1.09.01: OFFICE CREATED; AUTHORITY:
There is hereby created the office of Lyon County Public Defender. The County
Public Defender shall be authorized to private practices of law pursuant to NRS
260.040(4). (Ord. 340, 4-19-90, eff. 7-1-90)
1.09.02: COMPENSATION:
The compensation to be paid for the services of the County Public Defender
shall be established by contract between the County and the Public Defender on
terms and conditions as mutually agreed. The contract shall provide that the
compensation paid upon shall cover the cost of office space, furniture,
equipment, supplies and personnel. (Ord. 340, 4-19-90, eff. 7-1-90)
CHAPTER 10
BUSINESS LICENSE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
1.10.01: Department Established
1.10.02: Supervision; Staff
1.10.01: DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED:
The Board hereby establishes the County Business License Department to be the
collector of County business licenses. The Department shall replace the Sheriff
as the ex officio collector of County business licenses in Lyon County. (Ord.
311, 8-13-87)
1.10.02: SUPERVISION; STAFF:
The Department shall be headed by the County Clerk, without further
compensation, and shall be staffed by an employee (or employees) who shall work
under the immediate supervision of the County Clerk. Department staff shall be
paid from the revenues generated from business license fees and, if necessary,
from the County's General Fund. (Ord. 311, 8-13-87)
CHAPTER 11
DIVISION OF RECORDS MANAGEMENT
SECTION:
1.11.01: Definitions
1.11.02: Division Created; Administration
1.11.03: Scope and Intent of Division
1.11.04: Duties, Procedures and Standards
1.11.05: Records Committee
1.11.06: Rights of Custody and Control
1.11.07: Disposition of Records
1.11.01: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the following
words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section. (Ord.
273, 12-29-83; 1991 Code)
DIVISION: The Division of Records Management in the Lyon County Recorder's
office.
DUPLICATE: Any accurate and unabridged copy of a record or series of records
which is not an original.
NONRECORD MATERIAL: Published books and pamphlets, books and pamphlets printed
by a governmental printer, worksheets used to collect or compile data after
that data has been included in a record, answer pads for a telephone or other
informal notes, stenographers' notes after the information contained therein
has been transcribed, unused forms except ballots, brochures, newsletters,
magazines, newspapers, except those newspapers received pursuant to NRS 247.070
or parts of newspapers retained as evidence of publication, scrapbooks and
property left or deposited with an office which would otherwise be defined as a
record; except, that the ownership of that property does not reside with Lyon
County.
OFFICE: An office, department, board, commission, committee, agency or any
other subdivision of Lyon County.
ORIGINAL: An original, as defined in NRS 52.205, a reproduction made pursuant
to the provisions of NRS 239.051 or any record designated by the records
committee to be an original. An original made pursuant to the provisions of NRS
239.051 consists of both the stored copy, and the copy maintained for the use
of authorized persons.
RECORD: All documents, papers, letters, pamphlets, books, maps, charts,
blueprints, drawings, photographs, films, sound recordings, magnetic or other
tapes, hardware and software used to process electronic data, punched cards,
computer-generated printouts, audio or video discs or other discs used to store
and retrieve information, newspapers received pursuant to NRS 247.070,
artifacts entered as exhibits in a proceeding in any court and any other
documentary evidence, regardless of physical form or characteristics, and
including all duplicates thereof made or received pursuant to a law or
ordinance or in connection with the transaction of the official business of any
office of Lyon County.
RECORDS COMMITTEE: The Records Committee established in Section
1.11.05 of this Chapter. (Ord. 273, 12-29-83)
1.11.02: DIVISION CREATED; ADMINISTRATION:
Pursuant to the provisions of NRS chapter 239, section 125, subsection 1, the
Division of Records Management is hereby created in the Lyon County Recorder's
office. The Division is administered by the Lyon County Recorder. (Ord. 273,
12-29-83)
1.11.03: SCOPE AND INTENT OF DIVISION:
It is the intent of the Lyon County Board of Commissioners that the Division,
in carrying out its functions, follow accepted:
   A.   Procedures for the management of records to increase the efficiency of
the record keeping system and reduce the administrative costs associated with
the creation, maintenance, use retention and disposition of records; and
   B.   Standards of archival practice to ensure the preservation of records
with permanent value and maximum accessibility to records for the general
public. (Ord. 273, 12-29-83)
1.11.04: DUTIES, PROCEDURES AND STANDARDS:
The Division shall:
   A.   Establish standards, procedures and techniques for the effective
management of records;
   B.   Make continuing surveys of current practices for the management of
records and recommend improvements in those practices, including the use of
space, equipment and supplies to create, maintain and store records;
   C.   Establish standards for the preparation of schedules providing for the
retention of records of continuing value and for the prompt and orderly
disposition of records which no longer possess sufficient administrative,
fiscal, legal or research value to warrant their further retention;
   D.   Establish, maintain and operate a center for storing and receiving
records of the several County offices pending their disposition in a manner
prescribed by law;
   E.   Establish a unit to provide micrographics services to the several
offices of the County;
   F.   Establish a program for the management of forms and files;
   G.   Establish a program for the protection of records essential for the
continuation or re-establishment of governmental operations in the event of
natural or other disaster; and
   H.   Establish a program for the preservation and conservation of records
designated by the State Librarian or the Division as having a permanent value.
(Ord. 273, 12-29-83)
1.11.05: RECORDS COMMITTEE:
   A.   Committee Established: A records committee is hereby established to be
known as the Lyon County Records Committee.
   B.   Composition: The Lyon County Records Committee shall be composed of:
      1.   The County Assessor;
      2.   The County Clerk;
      3.   The Administrative Assistant to the County Commission;
      4.   The County Comptroller;
      5.   The County Recorder; (Ord. 273, 12-29-83)
      6.   The District Attorney. (Ord. 277, 4-19-84)
   C.   Duties: The Records Committee shall:
      1.   Approve all records retention and disposition schedules, requests
for the purchase of filing equipment or the creation of a new form or an
application for conversion to micrographics, word processing or data
processing;
      2.   Review and request for access to information which was denied by an
official to determine whether the denial was in keeping with prevailing law;
and,
      3.   Review all proposals for the expansion or modification of the
records management program and make recommendations to the Board of County
Commissioners. (Ord. 273, 12-29-83)
1.11.06: RIGHTS OF CUSTODY AND CONTROL:
   A.   The rights of custody and control of records transferred to the County
records center remain with the transferring office.
   B.   The rights of custody and control of accessions to the County archives
transfer to the Division at the time the records are accepted as an accession.
(Ord. 273, 12-29-83)
1.11.07: DISPOSITION OF RECORDS:
Records may be disposed of only in accordance with the schedules for the
retention and disposition of records prepared by the Division and approved by
the Records Committee.
Records to be destroyed must be shredded or burned (unless prohibited by local
ordinance). The records administrator or a representative of the office must
supervise the destruction of all records in his care and attest that such
destruction was carried out in a method provided by law. (Ord. 273, 12-29-83)
CHAPTER 12
LEGAL ADVERTISING
SECTION:
1.12.01: Purpose
1.12.02: Requirements to Qualify for Bidding
1.12.03: Printing Size Requirements
1.12.04: Bid Award or Rejection
1.12.05: Additional Publishings
1.12.01: PURPOSE:
Lyon County, in order to obtain the best value and coverage for its legal
notices and advertising, shall, from time to time, solicit bids for said legal
notices and advertising from all qualified newspapers within the County. (Ord.
352, 12-6-90)
1.12.02: REQUIREMENTS TO QUALIFY FOR BIDDING:
In order to submit a bid, all newspapers must be qualified as required by NRS
238.030. (Ord. 352, 12-6-90)
1.12.03: PRINTING SIZE REQUIREMENTS:
All advertising must be no smaller than that used by the newspaper in columns
of classified advertising. (Ord. 352, 12-6-90)
1.12.04: BID AWARD OR REJECTION:
   A.   Awarding Bids: The award shall be made to the lowest responsive and
responsible bidder and judged on the basis of price, bidder's qualifications,
quality and utility, verified paid circulation and in the best interest of the
public.
   B.   Right to Reject Bids: Lyon County reserves the right to determine that
any bidder is not responsive or responsible and to reject any or all bids.
(Ord. 352, 12-6-90)
1.12.05: ADDITIONAL PUBLISHINGS:
Nothing in this Chapter shall limit the County's right to publish its legal
notices and advertising in additional newspapers or publications, as required.
(Ord. 352, 12-6-90)
CHAPTER 13
PLANNING DISTRICT
SECTION:
1.13.01: District Established
1.13.01: DISTRICT ESTABLISHED:
Lyon County is hereby declared to be part of a County Planning District, the
boundaries of which District shall be the boundaries of Lyon County outside the
boundaries of any incorporated city therein. (Ord. 288, 1-24-85)
CHAPTER 14
CENTRAL CASHIERING SYSTEM
SECTION:
1.14.01: Title
1.14.02: System Established
1.14.03: Purpose
1.14.04: General Policies
1.14.05: Bank Accounts; Establishment
1.14.06: Bank Accounts; Review
1.14.01: TITLE:
This Chapter shall be known as the Central Cashiering Chapter. (Ord. 370, 6-4-
92, eff. 6-19-92)
1.14.02: SYSTEM ESTABLISHED:
This Chapter is enacted pursuant to Nevada Revised Statute 244.207. (Ord. 370,
6-4-92, eff. 6-19-92)
1.14.03: PURPOSE:
The purposes of this Chapter are to:
   A.   Assure the separation of money-handling duties.
   B.   Assure the accountability for moneys received and disbursed.
   C.   Reduce the clerical effort needed to handle, process and account for
all moneys received. (Ord. 370, 6-4-92, eff. 6-19-92)
1.14.04: GENERAL POLICIES:
   A.   All moneys received by the offices of the County shall be deposited
into the banking system on the day of receipt. Exceptions to this practice
shall be limited to cases where the money received is nominal in amount, and
will be permitted only on written approval by the County Manager or his
designee.
   B.   To the extent possible all payments to County must be made to the
County Treasurer's office.
   C.   All moneys received shall be deposited intact; that is, moneys received
shall not be used to pay bills, cash personal checks, or be used in any other
type of transaction which will interfere with the concept that all moneys
received in a day will be deposited that day in the form in which they were
received.
   D.   Each department involved shall have fully documented procedure manuals
concerning all aspects of its handling of County funds. Such manuals shall be
maintained in an up-to-date manner and shall be readily available to all County
personnel. All County personnel involved in the handling of County moneys shall
be required to sign a statement to the effect that they have read and
understand the procedure manual.
   E.   Persons making payment shall be advised to make checks payable to the
office and not to the person currently holding the office.
   F.   Any bank account maintained by a department or office of the County
shall be formally reconciled each month, by the tenth day following the end of
such month. The reconciliation shall be:
      1.   In a form approved by the County Manager or his designee;
      2.   Dated and signed by the preparer and the department head; and
      3.   Kept as a permanent record.
   G.   The policies set forth in subsection A to F, inclusive, of this Section
shall be implemented on a gradual basis. Specific requirements implementing
these policies shall be proposed as part of the study of the cash procedures
followed by each department, and will be required only when incorporated in the
Central Receiving and Disbursing Ordinance by amendment. (Ord. 370, 6-4-92,
eff. 6-19-92)
1.14.05: BANK ACCOUNTS; ESTABLISHMENT:
New bank accounts shall be established only after the following actions have
been taken:
   A.   Transmittal of a letter from the requesting department to the County
Treasurer explaining the need for the bank account, with additional copies
being transmitted to the County Manager, the County Comptroller.
   B.   Receipt of responses from the County Manager and County Comptroller and
analysis by the County Treasurer.
   C.   Receipt by the Board of County Commissioners of specific
recommendations from the County Treasurer, after his evaluation of the initial
request and of the responses from the County Manager and the County Comptroller
and analysis, as well as his consideration of the purposes established for the
handling of moneys by Section
1.14.01 of this Chapter.
   D.   Affirmative action by the Board of County Commissioners. (Ord. 370, 6-
4-92, eff. 6-19-92)
1.14.06: BANK ACCOUNTS; REVIEW:
   A.   The County Treasurer shall maintain formal records on all County bank
accounts, including but not limited to reasons for establishment, authorized
signatures, and statistics covering the activity in the bank account and
estimated bank profitability.
   B.   At least once a year, the County Treasurer shall cause to be made a
formal review of cash-handling procedures in each office handling money. Such
review shall determine whether the policies and procedures set forth in the
Central Receiving and Disbursing Ordinance are being followed and whether bank
accounts should be added or closed. The County Treasurer shall recommend
procedural changes as needed, and shall provide the County Manager with a
formal report of each review. (Ord. 370, 6-4-92, eff. 6-19-92)
CHAPTER 15
PRISONER FEES
SECTION:
1.15.01: Intermittent Confinement
1.15.02: Fees
1.15.03: Conditions
1.15.01: INTERMITTENT CONFINEMENT:
Each person who is regularly employed and sentenced to serve a term of
confinement in the Lyon County jail may apply to the court to be allowed to
serve his term of confinement intermittently on days other than his regular
days of employment. (Ord. 373, 11-5-92, eff. 1-1-93)
1.15.02: FEES:
   A.   A person allowed to serve a term of confinement intermittently pursuant
to Section
1.15.01 above, must pay a fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) per day of
confinement.
   B.   The fee must be paid to the Lyon County Sheriff for deposit with the
County Treasurer in an account within the General Fund. The monies in the
account may only be used to defer the expenses of administering the Lyon County
jail. (Ord. 373, 11-5-92, eff. 1-1-93)
1.15.03: CONDITIONS:
If the court grants an application to serve a sentence intermittently it shall:
   A.   Establish the conditions of the intermittent sentence;
   B.   Direct whether the fee is to be paid weekly or monthly; and
   C.   If the person is unable to pay the amount of the fee, set the terms of
payment and set the amount of the fee, according to the applicant's ability to
pay. (Ord. 373, 11-5-92, eff. 1-1-93)
CHAPTER 16
COURT ADMINISTRATOR
SECTION:
1.16.01: Purpose
1.16.02: Court Administrator; Appointment
1.16.03: Court Administrator; Duties
1.16.01: PURPOSE:
Section 1 of article 3 of the Nevada constitution provides for a separation of
governmental powers, prohibiting the exercise of powers properly belonging to
the judicial department by any other governmental department. Pursuant to the
Nevada supreme court decision in State, ex. rel. Harvey v. The Second Judicial
District Court, a district court may exercise control over the court clerk's
office either directly, by assuming all or part of the court clerk's functions,
or indirectly, by supervising the county clerk in the performance of his or her
duties as the ex officio court clerk. The purposes of sections 1.16.01 through
1.16.03 of this chapter are to recognize that employees in the office of the
clerk of the district court are under complete jurisdiction and control of the
district judges (subject to the provisions of title 2 of this code and the
county personnel policies), and to provide a method, by the appointment and/or
designation of a court administrator, for the institution of administrative
methods and procedures for the improvement of the judicial system. (Ord. 559,
7-19-2012)1.16.02: COURT ADMINISTRATOR; APPOINTMENT:The district judges, for
the judicial district of the state of Nevada, in which Lyon County sits, shall,
by majority action, appoint and/or designate a court administrator. The
district judges have denominated the court administrator as clerk of the
district court. The court administrator shall be subject to the provisions of
title 2 of this code and the Lyon County personnel policies. (Ord. 559, 7-19-
2012)1.16.03: COURT ADMINISTRATOR; DUTIES:The administrator shall, under the
supervision and direction of the district judges:A. Supervise the deputy court
clerks that are hired to work in the district court;B. Complete all statutory
and legal duties required of the court clerk;C. Prepare and submit budgets to
the board of county commissioners necessary for the maintenance and operation
of the district court and make recommendations in respect thereto; andD. Attend
to such other matters as may be assigned by the district judges. (Ord. 559, 7-
19-2012)
CHAPTER 17
PUBLIC ADMINISTRATOR
SECTION:
1.17.01: Definitions
1.17.02: Authority Of The Board
1.17.03: Payment For Expenses
1.17.04: Public Administrator To Report To Board
1.17.05: Promulgation Of Regulations
1.17.06: Board To Review Reports
1.17.07: Investigation Of Complaints
1.17.08: Investigation Of Guardianships And Estates
1.17.09: Financial Reporting
1.17.10: Office Of Public Administrator Is Abolished
1.17.11: Duties Of Public Administrator May Be Accomplished By An Employee Or
Contractor
1.17.12: Qualifications For A Person To Be Employed Or Contracted As the Public
Administrator
1.17.01: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings ascribed to them by this section:
ADMINISTRATOR: A person duly qualified and legally appointed or otherwise
responsible for the management and settlement of the estate of an intestate, or
of a testator who has no executor, performed under the supervision of a court,
and usually involving:
   A.   Collection of the decedent's assets;
   B.   Payment of debts and claims against the estate;
   C.   Payment of estate taxes; and
   D.   Distribution of the remainder of the estate among those entitled
thereto.
BOARD: The Lyon County board of commissioners.
INTESTATE: Without making a will. A person is said to die intestate when he or
she dies without making a will, or dies without leaving anything to testify
what his or her wishes were with respect to the disposal of his or her property
after his or her death.
PUBLIC ADMINISTRATOR: The person appointed or contracted to carry out the
duties and responsibilities set forth in Chapter 253 of the Nevada Revised
Statutes.
WARD: A person who, for defect of age, understanding or self- control, is
considered incapable of administering his or her own affairs. (Ord. 586, 4-7-
2016; amd. Ord. 609, 10-17-2019)
1.17.02: AUTHORITY OF THE BOARD:
In all cases within Lyon County where an administrator of an estate is or may
be needed, the board is authorized to direct the public administrator or any
other suitable person to:
   A.   Investigate whether there is any qualified person who is willing and
able to serve as administrator of the estate of an intestate decedent, and to
determine whether there is a need for an administrator and whether the public
administrator or other suitable person designated by the board is eligible to
serve in that capacity.
   B.   Petition the court for letters of administration of the estate of a
person dying intestate if, after investigation, the public administrator or
other suitable person designated by the board finds that there is no other
qualified person having a prior right who is willing and able to serve, and the
estate exceeds one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) in gross value.
   C.   File an affidavit pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 253.0403 to
administer the estate if, after investigation, the public administrator or
other suitable person designated by the board finds that the gross value of the
decedent's property situated in this state does not exceed ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00).
   D.   Act, upon order of a court, as administrator of the estate of a person
dying intestate, regardless of the amount of assets in the estate of the
decedent, if no other qualified person is willing and able to serve. (Ord. 586,
4-7-2016; amd. Ord. 609, 10-17-2019)
1.17.03: PAYMENT FOR EXPENSES:
The public administrator, or other suitable person designated by the board, who
performs duties pursuant to section
1.17.02 of this chapter may file with the board a request for payment for
expenses incurred in the performance of such duties.
   A.   The amount to be paid as expenses must be determined by the board.
   B.   Payment must be made from the general fund of the county, if the board
approves the request and determines that there is sufficient money in the fund
to pay the public administrator or other suitable person designated by the
board to perform those duties.
   C.   The board need not authorize payment of any expense that can be paid
from the assets of a person or an estate subject to Nevada Revised Statutes
253.040 or section
1.17.02 of this chapter. (Ord. 586, 4-7-2016; amd. Ord. 609, 10-17-2019)
1.17.04: PUBLIC ADMINISTRATOR TO REPORT TO BOARD:
The public administrator shall file with the board, not less than quarterly, a
report of all activities conducted within the scope of his or her authority as
public administrator. The report shall include the following information:
   A.   A list of all estates being administered by the public administrator
including:
      1.   Name of the decedent;
      2.   Date of death;
      3.   Date file was opened;
      4.   Approximate gross value of the estate;
   B.   A list of all estates for which property was secured pursuant to Nevada
Revised Statutes 253.0405;
   C.   A list of estates under investigation by the board pursuant to Nevada
Revised Statutes 253.091(2);
   D.   All monies collected by the public administrator;
   E.   All monies expended by the public administrator. (Ord. 586, 4-7-2016;
amd. Ord. 609, 10-17-2019)
1.17.05: PROMULGATION OF REGULATIONS:
The board shall establish regulations for the form of reports made by the
public administrator, pursuant to section
1.17.04 of this chapter; and from time to time, will review and may amend those
regulations. (Ord. 586, 4-7-2016; amd. Ord. 609, 10-17-2019)
1.17.06: BOARD TO REVIEW REPORTS:
The board shall review the reports submitted to the board by the public
administrator; and it shall take any action concerning those reports deemed
necessary to assure compliance with the state statutes and this chapter. (Ord.
586, 4-7-2016; amd. Ord. 609, 10-17-2019)
1.17.07: INVESTIGATION OF COMPLAINTS:
The board shall investigate any complaint received by the board regarding the
activities of the public administrator; and it shall take any action it deems
necessary to resolve such complaints and to assure that problems found to exist
are remedied. (Ord. 586, 4-7-2016; amd. Ord. 609, 10-17-2019)
1.17.08: INVESTIGATION OF GUARDIANSHIPS AND ESTATES:
The board may at any time investigate any guardianship or estate for which the
public administrator is serving as guardian or administrator. (Ord. 586, 4-7-
2016; amd. Ord. 609, 10-17-2019)
1.17.09: FINANCIAL REPORTING:
The public administrator shall provide to the county comptroller financial
records annually for the period July 1 through June 30 on or before October 31
to the comptroller for examination. (Ord. 586, 4-7-2016; amd. Ord. 609, 10-17-
2019)
1.17.10: OFFICE OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATOR IS ABOLISHED:
The board declares that the Office of Public Administrator is abolished in
accordance with Senate Bill 460, Section 3, approved and passed by the 2019
Nevada Legislature and approved by the Governor. (Ord. 609, 10-17-2019)
1.17.11: DUTIES OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATOR MAY BE ACCOMPLISHED BY AN EMPLOYEE OR
CONTRACTOR:
The board shall employ or contract for the services of the Public Administrator
to perform the duties and responsibilities of the public administrator set
forth in Chapter 253 and other applicable provisions of the Nevada Revised
Statutes. (Ord. 609, 10-17-2019)
1.17.12: QUALIFICATIONS FOR A PERSON TO BE EMPLOYED OR CONTRACTED AS THE PUBLIC
ADMINISTRATOR:
A.   Be at least twenty one (21) years of age;
B.   Not have been convicted of a felony for which his or her civil rights have
not been restored by a court of competent jurisdiction; and
C.   Not have been found liable in a civil action involving a finding of fraud,
misrepresentation, material omission, misappropriation, theft or conversion.
(Ord. 609, 10-17-2019)
TITLE 2
PERSONNEL REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PERSONNEL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
2.01.01: Merit Personnel System Established
2.01.02: Administration
2.01.03: Regulations, Policies And Procedures
2.01.04: Officer And Employee Travel Expenses
2.01.05: Conflict
2.01.01: MERIT PERSONNEL SYSTEM ESTABLISHED:
A merit personnel system for all employees of the county, except those exempted
by policy or regulation adopted by the Lyon County board of commissioners and
permitted by state and federal law to be exempt, is hereby established. (Ord.
450, 8-17-2000, eff. 9-4-2000; amd. Ord. 615, 6-3-2021)
2.01.02: ADMINISTRATION:
The Lyon County board of commissioners shall be responsible for the
establishment and administration of Lyon County personnel regulations, policies
and procedures. (Ord. 450, 8-17-2000, eff. 9-4-2000; amd. Ord. 615, 6-3-2021)
2.01.03: REGULATIONS, POLICIES AND PROCEDURES:
The board of commissioners shall adopt, by resolution, rules, regulations or
policies governing Lyon County personnel. The board of county commissioners may
amend or change, by resolution, the personnel regulations, policies and
procedures at any time. (Ord. 450, 8-17-2000, eff. 9-4-2000; amd. Ord. 615, 6-
3- 2021)
2.01.04: OFFICER AND EMPLOYEE TRAVEL EXPENSES:
   A.   Travel expenditures and reimbursement requested and received by county
officers and employees shall comply with the county travel policy or policies
adopted by the board under the authority of this Section and Nevada Revised
Statute 245.062.
   B.   The Board may adopt one or more separate policies for different
classifications of officers or employees, and may also include travel
expenditure and request in the administrative policies or personnel policies
adopted by the Board.
   C.   Each department of the county shall set forth in its annual budget the
maximum amount of money that it estimates will be necessary to pay for
necessary travel expenses for the fiscal year. (Ord. 615, 6-3-2021)
2.01.05: CONFLICT:
In the event of a conflict between the regulations, policies and procedures
adopted pursuant to this title and the provisions of a collective bargaining
agreement entered into pursuant to Nevada law, the terms of the agreement shall
prevail. (Ord. 450, 8-17-2000, eff. 9-4-2000; amd. Ord. 615, 6-3-2021)
CHAPTER 2
WHISTLEBLOWER PROTECTION
SECTION:
2.02.01: Purpose
2.02.02: Definitions
2.02.03: Reporting Improper Governmental Action; Prohibition On Reprisals And
Retaliatory Action
2.02.04: Obligations Of Lyon County Officers And Employees
2.02.05: Appealing Reprisals or Retaliatory Action And Other Violations Of This
Chapter
2.02.06: Appointment Of Hearing Officer
2.02.07: Appeal Proceedings
2.02.08: Disclosure Of Untruthful Information
2.02.09: Annual Summary
2.02.01: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to encourage disclosure, to the extent not
expressly prohibited by law, of improper governmental action and to protect the
rights of Lyon County officers and employees who make such disclosures in good
faith. This chapter is established pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 281.611
through 281.671, inclusive, with the intent to provide the same level of
whistleblower protections provided therein. (Ord. 546, 2-17-2011; amd. Ord.
612, 5-7-2020)
2.02.02: DEFINITIONS:
"Employee" means any person who performs public duties under the direction and
control of a Lyon County officer for compensation paid by Lyon County,
including Lyon County's judicial services personnel.
"Improper governmental action" is defined as action taken by an officer or
employee in the performance of official duties which is:
   A.   In violation of state law or regulation;
   B.   In violation of city code, ordinance, or regulation adopted by the
employer;
   C.   An abuse of authority;
   D.   Of substantial and specific danger to the public health or safety; or
   E.   A gross waste of public money.
“Officer” means a person elected or appointed to a position within Lyon County
that involves the exercise of a local governmental power, trust, or duty,
including:
   A.   Actions taken in an official capacity which involve a substantial and
material exercise of administrative discretion in the formulation of Lvon
County policy;
   B.   The expenditure of money of Lyon County; and
   C.   The enforcement of laws and regulations of Lyon County.
"Official authority or influence" includes taking, directing others to take,
recommending, processing, or approving any personnel action such as an
appointment, promotion, transfer, assignment, reassignment, reinstatement,
restoration, reemployment, evaluation, or other disciplinary action.
"Reprisal or retaliatory action" means adverse action taken, in whole or in
part, because of the disclosure of improper governmental action. It includes:
   A.   The denial of adequate personnel to perform duties;
   B.   Frequent replacement of members of the staff;
   C.   Frequent and undesirable changes in the location of an office;
   D.   The refusal to assign meaningful work;
   E.   The issuance of letters of reprimand or evaluations of poor
performance;
   F.   A demotion;
   G.   A reduction in pay;
   H.   The denial of a promotion;
   I.   A suspension;
   J.   A dismissal;
   K.   A transfer;
   L.   Frequent changes in the working hours or workdays;
   M.   If the employee is licensed or certified by an occupational licensing
board, the filing with that board, by or on behalf of Lyon County, of a
complaint concerning the employee; or
   N.   Knowingly placing false information, including without limitation, a
false complaint, in the personnel file of the employee. (Ord. 546, 2-17-2011;
amd. Ord. 612, 5-7-2020)
2.02.03: REPORTING IMPROPER GOVERNMENTAL ACTION; PROHIBITION ON REPRISALS AND
RETALIATORY ACTION:
Officers and employees may and are encouraged to report improper governmental
action to their supervisor, department head, or elected official. Officers and
employees may alternatively report improper governmental action to the Lyon
County Human Resources Director, County Manager, or the District Attorney. No
reprisal or retaliatory action shall be taken against an officer or employee
because the officer or employee made a report of improper governmental action.
(Ord. 546, 2-17-2011; amd. Ord. 612, 5-7-2020)
2.02.04: OBLIGATIONS OF LYON COUNTY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES:
All Lyon County officers and employees:
   A.   Shall use their official authority or influence to remedy any reprisal
or retaliatory action of which they become aware.
   B.   Shall not:
      1.   Directly or indirectly use or attempt to use their official
authority or influence to intimidate, threaten, coerce, command, influence or
attempt to intimidate, threaten, coerce, command, or influence another officer
or employee in an effort to interfere with or prevent the disclosure of
information concerning improper governmental action, including, without
limitation, by intimidating, threatening, coercing, commanding, influencing, or
attempting to intimidate, threaten, coerce, command, or influence the other
officer or employee to take reprisal or retaliatory action: or
      2.   Fail to use their official authority or influence to remedy any
reprisal or retaliatory action of which they become aware. (Ord. 546, 2-17-
2011; amd. Ord. 612, 5-7-2020)
2.02.05: APPEALING REPRISALS OR RETALIATORY ACTION AND OTHER VIOLATIONS OF THIS
CHAPTER:
If an alleged violation of this Chapter occurs or if any alleged reprisal or
retaliatory action is taken against an officer or employee for the disclosure
of improper governmental action within two (2) years of such disclosure, the
aggrieved officer or employee (hereinafter "the appellant") may file an appeal.
The appellant must deliver this appeal in writing to the Lyon County Manager
within sixty (60) days of the alleged violation of this Chapter or the alleged
reprisal or retaliatory action. The appeal must state, with specificity:
   A.   All facts and circumstances pertaining to the improper governmental
action, including, without limitation, when, where, and how the improper
governmental action occurred, the individual(s) involved, and any laws,
regulations, codes, or ordinances alleged to have been violated.
   B.   All facts and circumstances pertaining to the disclosure of the
improper governmental action, including when, where, how, and to whom the
information was disclosed.
   C.   All facts and circumstances pertaining to the alleged violation of this
Chapter or alleged reprisal or retaliatory action, including, without
limitation, when, where, how, and by whom the alleged violation of this Chapter
or alleged reprisal or retaliatory action was committed.
Lyon County will provide on its website a form on which officers and employees
may submit an appeal containing the information set forth above. Copies of all
relevant documents, videos, or other physical evidence in the appellant's
custody or control shall be submitted with the appeal. In the event an appeal
submission is incomplete or otherwise deficient, the County Manager may, within
five (5) days, provide the appellant with written notice of any deficiencies
and afford the appellant no less than fourteen (14) days to correct them.
Failure to comply with any deadline in this Section may result in denial of the
appeal. (Ord. 546, 2-17-2011; amd. Ord. 612, 5-7-2020)
2.02.06: APPOINTMENT OF HEARING OFFICER:
Upon receipt of an appeal satisfying the requirements in the preceding section,
the County Manager shall appoint a hearing officer. The fees of the hearing
officer, if any, shall be borne by Lyon County. The hearing officer shall
adjudicate the matter consistent with this Chapter. In the event the hearing
officer determines that a violation of this Chapter or a reprisal or
retaliatory action occurred, the hearing officer shall be empowered to issue an
order directing: (1) the proper person to desist and refrain from engaging in
such a violation or action; (2) the termination of the employment of the proper
person; and/or (3) other relief as the hearing officer deems just and
appropriate. (Ord. 546, 2-17-2011; amd. Ord. 612, 5-7-2020)
2.02.07: APPEAL PROCEEDINGS:
The appointed hearing officer shall convene a hearing within sixty (60) days of
appointment, unless a later hearing date is agreed upon by the parties.
The parties may propound reasonable requests for discovery in advance of the
hearing. Discovery disputes shall be submitted to the hearing officer for
resolution. Failure to respond to a proper discovery request may, at the
discretion of the hearing officer, result in the exclusion of evidence or other
sanctions.
At the hearing, formal rules of evidence shall not apply. The hearing officer
may make evidentiary rulings as necessary to ensure the hearing is fair to both
parties. The parties shall have the opportunity to cross examine all witnesses
and provide rebuttal evidence. All testimony shall be under oath. In addition,
the hearing officer may adopt any additional procedural rules not inconsistent
with this section.
The burden of proof at the hearing shall be as follows:
   A.   It shall be the appellant's initial burden to establish: (1) the
appellant disclosed improper governmental action: (2) reprisal or retaliatory
action, or another violation of this Chapter, was taken against the appellant
in whole or in part because of the appellant's disclosure of improper
governmental action: (3) said reprisal or retaliatory action, or other
violation of this Chapter, was taken within two (2) years of the disclosure of
improper governmental action: and (4) the appellant was an officer or employee
of Lyon County at the time of the reprisal or retaliatory action or violation.
   B.   If the appellant meets this burden, the burden shall shift to the
employer to establish: (1) it did not engage in the alleged reprisal or
retaliatory action or other violation of this chapter; or (2) the alleged
reprisal or retaliatory action was taken for other legitimate, non-retaliatory
reasons.
   C.   If the employer meets this burden, the burden shall shift back to the
appellant to establish that the employer's reason is unworthy of credence and
is pretext for the reprisal or retaliatory again, or other violation of this
Chapter. (Ord. 546, 2-17-2011; amd. Ord. 612, 5-7-2020)
2.02.08: DISCLOSURE OF UNTRUTHFUL INFORMATION:
This chapter does not preclude an employer from initiating proper disciplinary
action against an individual who discloses untruthful information concerning
improper governmental action. (Ord. 546, 2-17-2011)
2.02.09: ANNUAL SUMMARY:
As required by Nevada Revised Statutes 281.661, a summary of this chapter will
be provided to employees upon hire and annually thereafter. (Ord. 546, 2-17-
2011; amd. Ord. 612, 5-7-2020)
TITLE 3
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 1
CITIZENS' ADVISORY BOARDS
SECTION:
3.01.01: Purpose
3.01.02: Advisory Boards Established; Jurisdiction
3.01.03: Appointment; Organization
3.01.04: Service On And Removal From Citizens' Advisory Boards
3.01.05: Bylaws
3.01.06: Conduct Of Meeting Of Citizens' Advisory Boards
3.01.07: Budget And Compensation
3.01.08: Advisory Boards Dissolution
3.01.01: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish citizens' advisory boards covering
designated geographical areas of Lyon County and to set forth procedures by
which they function. Citizens' advisory boards are established to assist the
Board of County Commissioners with issues of concern in the designated
geographical areas. Citizens' advisory boards are a venue at which citizens
have an opportunity to interact with local County government and as such,
enable and enhance citizen participation at a local community level with
matters relating to specific community and County issues. Citizens' advisory
boards are advisory only and the creation of advisory boards does not diminish
or alter in any way the statutory and constitutional authority of the Board of
County Commissioners of Lyon County. (Ord. 599, 5-17-2018)
3.01.02: ADVISORY BOARDS ESTABLISHED; JURISDICTION:
The Board of County Commissioners may establish by resolution citizens'
advisory boards. The resolution by which a citizens' advisory board is created
shall specify the specific purposes for its creation, the number of members of
the board, the categories of membership on the board and the board's
geographical area of responsibility. (Ord. 599, 5-17-2018)
3.01.03: APPOINTMENT; ORGANIZATION:
   A.   Membership: In determining the number of members on a citizens'
advisory board and the categories of membership, the Board of County
Commissioners shall ensure that the advisory board consists of a representative
cross section of persons residing within the advisory board's geographical area
of responsibility.
   B.   Appointment: When applications are needed for an advisory board, the
Board of County Commissioners shall cause advertisements seeking applications
from interested citizens to be distributed throughout the represented
communities in the County. Such advertisements shall include, but are not
limited to, placement in a newspaper of general circulation in the County.
Applications received in response to the advertisements shall be kept on file
and remain valid for a period of one year from the date of receipt thereof.
The members of said boards shall be appointed by the County Commissioners.
   C.   Officers: Citizens' advisory boards shall select their own officers
from among their members. Each advisory board shall have at least a Chairman, a
Vice Chairman and a Secretary.
   D.   Term Of Office: Subject to the provisions of section
3.01.04 of this chapter, members of citizens' advisory boards serve two (2)
year terms commencing on January 1 and ending December 31. When a new citizens'
advisory board is created, one-half (1/2) of the members thereof shall be
appointed for an initial one year term and the remaining members shall be
appointed for an initial two (2) year term. A member may be reappointed by the
Board of County Commissioners at the end of his term in accordance with Board
of County Commissioner rules.
   E.   Vacancies: A vacancy occurring on a citizens' advisory board shall be
filled by the Board of County Commissioners for the remainder of the unexpired
term. Except as provided in subsection F of this section, if a member of an
advisory board misses three (3) consecutive meetings of the advisory board
without just cause as determined by the Chairman of the advisory board, a
vacancy in that member's position automatically occurs and the Board of County
Commissioners shall fill the vacancy as set forth in this subsection.
   F.   Elective Public Office: A member of a citizens' advisory board must
take a leave of absence from the citizens' advisory board during any period of
time in which he is a candidate or applicant for appointment to the Board of
County Commissioners. A leave of absence does not constitute absence without
cause as a member of the board and the Chairman of the advisory board may
request an alternate to serve in that member's place and stead until the member
is no longer a candidate. Election or appointment of a member to the Board of
County Commissioners will result in automatic termination of that person's
membership on the advisory board.
   G.   Appointments To Other County Boards Or Commissions: A citizens'
advisory board member may not concurrently serve as a member of the County
Planning Commission. Upon acceptance of an appointment to the Planning
Commission, the citizens' advisory board member must immediately resign from
the citizens' advisory board. (Ord. 599, 5-17-2018)
3.01.04: SERVICE ON AND REMOVAL FROM CITIZENS' ADVISORY BOARDS:
   A.   Although members are appointed to specific terms of office, citizens'
advisory board members serve at the discretion of the Board of County
Commissioners. Members of citizens' advisory boards may be removed at any time
during their term by a vote of the Board of County Commissioners.
   B.   Prior to a meeting of the Board of County Commissioners to consider
removal of a member of a citizens' advisory board, the Board or any
Commissioner may choose to address any issue giving rise to the removal at a
meeting of the affected citizens' advisory board. In addition, the Board or any
Commissioner may address the issue with the affected citizens' advisory board
member before the meeting of the Board of County Commissioners at which the
removal is to be considered.
   C.   Action regarding removal of a member shall be taken at a meeting of the
Board of County Commissioners where notice of possible action regarding the
member is noted on the agenda.
   D.   The member who may be removed at such meeting will be sent a letter
advising the member of the reasons for the proposed action. The letter will
also contain the date, time and location of the meeting. The letter will be
sent by certified mail approximately fourteen (14) days in advance of the
scheduled meeting.
   E.   At the meeting, the member may present information as to why he should
not be removed. If the member's character, alleged misconduct, professional
competence, or physical or mental health is to be discussed, the Board of
County Commissioners may close the meeting in accordance with Nevada Revised
Statutes 241.030. If a closed session is held, a copy of the minutes of the
closed session will be made available to the person who is the subject of that
meeting pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 241.035(2).
   F.   Prior to voting to remove a member, any persons who are in attendance
at the meeting who desire to be heard regarding the member's removal, will have
the opportunity to present their comments to the Board of County Commissioners.
   G.   At the meeting, and following a closed session if one is held, the
Board of County Commissioners may either remove the member from the citizens'
advisory board, take no action with respect to the member, or take any other
action the Board of County Commissioners deems proper under the circumstances
and which is permissible under the Nevada Open Meeting Law. (Ord. 599, 5-17-
2018)
3.01.05: BYLAWS:
   A.   The Board of County Commissioners shall adopt a standard set of bylaws
for citizens' advisory boards to govern the conduct of the affairs of such
boards.
   B.   Each citizens' advisory board shall adopt the standard set of bylaws.
   C.   If amendments or additions to the standard bylaws are adopted by a
citizens' advisory board, the bylaws become effective upon approval by the
Board of County Commissioners.
   D.   Bylaws of a citizens' advisory board may be amended at any time.
Amendments to the bylaws become effective upon approval of the Board of County
Commissioners. (Ord. 599, 5-17-2018)
3.01.06: CONDUCT OF MEETING OF CITIZENS' ADVISORY BOARDS:
   A.   Meetings of citizens' advisory boards shall be conducted in full
compliance with Nevada's Open Meeting Law and the bylaws adopted by the
citizens' advisory boards.
   B.   Citizens' advisory boards are required to keep written minutes of their
meetings in compliance with Nevada Revised Statutes 241.035. Citizens' advisory
boards shall file copies of their minutes with the Lyon County Manager's Office
within thirty (30) days after adjournment of the meeting at which the minutes
were taken. (Ord. 599, 5-17-2018)
3.01.07: BUDGET AND COMPENSATION:
The Board of County Commissioners may establish an annual budget to meet the
operating expenses of each citizens' advisory board. Members of citizens'
advisory boards shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for
their necessary expenses. (Ord. 599, 5-17-2018)
3.01.08: ADVISORY BOARDS DISSOLUTION:
The Board of County Commissioners, by resolution, may dissolve a citizens'
advisory board if the Board of County Commissioners determines that the board
is no longer needed to meet the purposes for which it was established. (Ord.
599, 5-17-2018)
CHAPTER 2
PLANNING COMMISSION
SECTION:
3.02.01: Commission Created
3.02.02: Membership; Appointment; Terms
3.02.03: Compensation And Expenses
3.02.01: COMMISSION CREATED:
There is hereby created and established a County Planning Commission, which
commission is authorized to act for and on behalf of the County and to fulfill
all the duties, perform all functions and exercise all powers of a County
Planning Commission, as the same are defined and set forth in Nevada Revised
Statutes sections 278.010 to 278.630, inclusive, and all acts amendatory
thereof, which body shall be known and designated as the Lyon County Planning
Commission. (Ord. 288, 1-24-1985)
3.02.02: MEMBERSHIP; APPOINTMENT; TERMS:
The Lyon County Planning Commission shall be composed of seven (7) members who
shall be selected and determined as follows:
   A.   The Chairman of the Board of County Commissioners with the approval of
the Governing Body, shall appoint seven (7) members of the Planning Commission
who shall be residents of the County. The terms of each such appointed member
shall commence on the first Monday in January and shall be four (4) years or
until a successor is named; except, that the terms of two (2) of the members
first appointed shall be for four (4) years, the terms of two (2) members first
appointed shall be for three (3) years, and the terms of the three (3)
remaining members first appointed shall be two (2) years.
Members may be removed, after public hearing, by a majority vote of the Board
of County Commissioners for inefficiency, neglect of duty or malfeasance of
office. Vacancies occurring, other than through expiration of the term, shall
be filled by appointment for the unexpired term.
   B.   The appointed members of the Planning Commission shall hold no other
public office. (Ord. 606, 3-7-2019)
3.02.03: COMPENSATION AND EXPENSES:
The County may provide for compensation to the members of the County Planning
Commission up to the maximum amount allowed by Nevada Revised Statutes 278.040.
The County may also provide compensation for reasonable travel expenses and
subsistence allowances for the members in the same amounts as are allowed for
other officers and employees of the County. (Ord. 606, 3-7-2019)
CHAPTER 3
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
SECTION:
3.03.01: Purpose
3.03.02: Definitions
3.03.03: Declaration Of An Emergency Or A Disaster
3.03.04: Use Of Emergency Powers And Continuity Of Government
3.03.05: Emergency Management Coordinator
3.03.06: Coordinator; Emergency Power
3.03.07: Advisory Council
3.03.08: Incorporation Of Certain Provisions Of Nevada Revised Statutes
3.03.09: Unlawful Acts; Penalties
3.03.10: Emergency Response Expenses Reimbursable
3.03.11: Adoption By Municipalities
3.03.12: National Incident Management System
3.03.01: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the safety and welfare of the
people and the protection of their property within this county in a disaster
situation through organized emergency operations; to provide for the
coordination of such operations with appropriate public authorities, private
persons, business associations and organizations; and to provide for the
delegation of the disaster assistance responsibilities of the board of county
commissioners to those county agencies having the resources for providing
disaster assistance. (Ord. 530, 10-16-2008)
3.03.02: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
BOARD: The Lyon County board of commissioners, and is to be the governing body
for all emergency management operations.
DISASTER: A flood, fire of extraordinary proportion, earthquake, storm,
epidemic, actual or threatened riot, serious domestic violence, insurrection,
general war or other major calamity which is so severe or widespread that it is
beyond the resources normally available to local government or private relief
agencies to alleviate the damage, loss, hardship or suffering caused by such a
calamity.
EMERGENCY: Any humanmade or natural event or circumstance causing or
threatening loss of life, injury to person or property, human suffering or
financial loss of such an extent that extraordinary measures must be taken to
protect the public health, safety and welfare.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT: The preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency
functions, other than functions for which military forces are primarily
responsible, to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from
disasters caused by enemy attack, sabotage, or other hostile action, or by
fire, flood, earthquake or other natural causes. These functions include
firefighting, police services, medical and health services, searches, rescues,
engineering, air raid warning services, communications, radiological, chemical
and other special weapons of defense, evacuation of persons from stricken
areas, emergency welfare services (civilian war aid), emergency transportation,
existing or properly assigned functions of plant protection, temporary
restoration of public utility services, and other functions related to civilian
protection, together with all activities necessary or incidental to the
preparation for and carrying out of the foregoing functions.
EMERGENCY OPERATIONS: The planning, preparation for and carrying out of all
emergency functions necessary to prevent, minimize and recover from the effects
of a disaster.
EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLAN OR THE PLAN: A plan adopted pursuant to this chapter
which contains the county's policies and procedures and provides guidance to
the chief executive, policymakers, county personnel and the community when
managing emergency operations, the planning process and programs.
EMERGENCY SERVICE WORKER: A.A county employee or official, whether full time,
part time or temporary, or
B.A person, registered with the county as an emergency worker, who performs
services during an emergency, a disaster or during emergency exercise or drills
subject to the order or control of, or pursuant to a request of a county
official.
LOCAL EMERGENCY PLANNING COMMITTEE OR LEPC: An organization consisting of
representatives from state and local government, fire, law enforcement,
emergency management, public health, environment, emergency medical,
transportation, media, community service organizations, manufacturers, retail
businesses, public utilities, and education, established to perform emergency
planning functions as required by federal, state, and local law.
NATIONAL INCIDENT MANAGEMENT SYSTEM: The national incident management system
(NIMS) is a comprehensive national approach to incident management, applicable
at all jurisdictional levels and across functional disciplines. NIMS provides a
consistent nationwide approach for federal, state, tribal entities, local
governments, and private and nongovernmental organizations to work effectively
and efficiently together to prepare for, respond to, and recover from domestic
incidents, regardless of cause, size, or complexity. (Ord. 530, 10-16-2008)
3.03.03: DECLARATION OF AN EMERGENCY OR A DISASTER:
The declaration of an emergency or a disaster must be made whenever it is
deemed necessary:
   A.   By the board, if a quorum is present;
   B.   By the county manager, if no quorum of the board is present in Lyon
County;
   C.   By the county manager's designee, if no quorum of the board is present
in Lyon County and the county manager is not present in Lyon County or is
unable to act.
A declaration of an emergency or a disaster may be suspended or revoked by the
person or body that declared it or by the board in any event. (Ord. 530, 10-16-
2008)
3.03.04: USE OF EMERGENCY POWERS AND CONTINUITY OF GOVERNMENT:
   A.   The county manager is empowered to execute the emergency operations
plan and resources management plan and control the overall accomplishment of
the purpose of this chapter at the direction of the board who performs
emergency duties necessary for the general health, welfare, and safety of Lyon
County. The emergency operations plan must designate who shall perform the
county manager's emergency management duties in the absence of the county
manager.
   B.   The county manager shall appoint an emergency management coordinator
(coordinator).
   C.   The county manager, or designee, may:
      1.   Direct other employees in order to implement the emergency
operations plan;
      2.   Obtain vital services, supplies and equipment needed to protect life
and property through requisition or contract with private parties or other
governmental entities and may bind the county for the value thereof without
being required to comply with the normal purchasing procedures if compliance
with those procedures would unreasonably hamper or impair the implementation of
the plan; or
      3.   Suspend the licensing requirement for persons whose services are
required for implementation of the emergency plans. (Ord. 530, 10-16-2008)
3.03.05: EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT COORDINATOR:
   A.   The emergency management coordinator shall:
      1.   Review and develop an emergency operations plan and maintain an
organization for emergency operations management utilizing for this purpose,
county, public and private resources;
      2.   Coordinate the implementation of the emergency operations plan and
establish an emergency operations center from which centralized direction and
control of the emergency operations organization may be exercised;
      3.   Exercise the emergency operations organization at drills and to
otherwise train and prepare the organization to effect the purpose of this
chapter;
      4.   Represent the emergency operations organization of this county in
all dealings with public or private agencies pertaining to emergency
operations; excepting, that the sheriff will provide such representation in all
matters dealing exclusively with law and order;
      5.   Plan, organize and conduct emergency and disaster training and
exercises;
      6.   Prepare an emergency operations plan for the county, in support of
and in consonance with federal and state emergency plans and guidance;
      7.   May employ technical, clerical, stenographic and other personnel as
may be required, and may make such expenditures therefor and for other expenses
of his/her office within the appropriation therefor, or from other funds made
available to him/her for the purpose of emergency operations as may be
necessary to carry out the purpose of this chapter;
      8.   Assist with negotiations and recommendations to the board for
adoption of such mutual aid agreements with adjoining cities, towns, and
counties as are determined essential to any part of emergency management and
emergency operations.
      9.   Other duties as the board or county manager may designate. (Ord.
530, 10-16-2008)
3.03.06: COORDINATOR; EMERGENCY POWER:
Upon declaration by the board or as otherwise provided in section
3.03.03 of this chapter of a disaster or emergency, the coordinator is further
empowered, under the direction of the board, to execute the emergency
operations plan, and coordinate the overall effort of the emergency operations
organization of this county for the accomplishment of the purpose of this
chapter; including the temporary procurement of equipment, services, shelter
and the procurement of supplies as provided under the emergency provisions of
Nevada Revised Statutes 332.055 and 338.011; excepting, that in a disaster
arising from civil disobedience, coordination of the emergency operations
organization will be exercised by the sheriff, assisted by the coordinator as
required. (Ord. 530, 10-16-2008)
3.03.07: ADVISORY COUNCIL:
The local emergency planning commission (LEPC) shall act as advisory council to
the emergency management coordinator.
   A.   The council must, as a specific function, provide technical and policy
guidance to the coordinator on emergency preparation, and public relations and
information. (Ord. 530, 10-16-2008)
3.03.08: INCORPORATION OF CERTAIN PROVISIONS OF NEVADA REVISED STATUTES:
All functions under this chapter and all other activities relating to emergency
management are hereby declared to be governmental functions. Pursuant to Nevada
Revised Statutes 414.110 (immunity and exemption), the county is not liable for
the death or injury to persons or for property damage as a result of any
emergency services worker complying with or reasonably attempting to comply
with this chapter, or any order or regulation promulgated pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 530, 10-16-2008)
3.03.09: UNLAWFUL ACTS; PENALTIES:
It is a misdemeanor for any person during a disaster or emergency to:
   A.   Wilfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency
operations organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation
imposed upon him by virtue of this chapter;
   B.   Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant
to this chapter, if such act is of a nature as to imperil the lives or property
of inhabitants of this county, or to prevent, hinder or delay the protection
thereof, or to give or be likely to give assistance to the enemy.
   C.   Wear, carry or display, without authority, any means of identification
specified by the state office of emergency management or the county.
The penalty for violations of the provisions of this section shall be as
prescribed in section
1.04.01 of this code. (Ord. 530, 10-16-2008)
3.03.10: EMERGENCY RESPONSE EXPENSES REIMBURSABLE:
Those expenses of an emergency response necessary to protect the public from a
real or potential threat to health and safety incurred by a public agency
within Lyon County to confine, prevent, or mitigate the release, escape, or
burning of hazardous substances are a charge against any person whose
negligence causes the incident. Such expenses are a debt of the person liable
therefor, and shall be collectible in the same manner as in the case of an
obligation under contract, express or implied. The charge created against the
person by this section is also a charge against the person's employer if the
negligence causing the incident occurs in the course of the person's
employment. (Ord. 530, 10-16-2008)
3.03.11: ADOPTION BY MUNICIPALITIES:
The city of Fernley and the city of Yerington may adopt by reference the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 530, 10-16-2008)
3.03.12: NATIONAL INCIDENT MANAGEMENT SYSTEM:
Lyon County hereby establishes the national incident management system (NIMS)
as the county standard for incident management. This system provides a
consistent approach for federal, state, and municipal governments to work
together more effectively and efficiently to prevent, prepare for, respond to
and recover from domestic incidents, regardless of cause, size or complexity.
NIMS will utilize standardized terminology, standardized organizational
structures, interoperable communications, consolidated action plans, unified
command structures, uniform personnel qualification standards, uniform
standards for planning, training, and exercising, comprehensive resource
management, and designated incident facilities during emergencies or disasters.
The NIMS incident command system (ICS) will be utilized by all Lyon County
emergency and disaster responders for incident management. (Ord. 530, 10-16-
2008)
CHAPTER 4
REGIONAL TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
SECTION:
3.04.01: Commission Created
3.04.02: Meetings
3.04.03: Organization
3.04.01: COMMISSION CREATED:
There is hereby created a regional transportation commission. The creation of
said commission, together with its duties, power and authority, are as set
forth in Nevada Revised Statutes chapter 373 1 . (Ord. 297, 5-27-1986)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 4, chapter 3, "Motor Vehicle Fuel Tax", of this code.
3.04.02: MEETINGS:
The regional transportation commission, as created herein, shall meet at least
once per fiscal year. All meetings shall be called and noticed pursuant to the
Nevada open meeting law 1 . (Ord. 297, 5-27-1986)
 
Notes
1 2. NRS 241.010 et seq.
3.04.03: ORGANIZATION:
The members of the regional transportation commission shall, at their last
meeting of each calendar year, select one of their members to act as chairman.
It shall take three (3) members to constitute a quorum, with a simple majority
of the quorum voting in favor needed to carry a motion. All members present may
make, second and vote on motions. (Ord. 459, 8-16-2001, eff. 9-7-2001)
CHAPTER 5
FAIR AND RODEO BOARD
SECTION:
3.05.01: Board Established; Appointment
3.05.02: Duties
3.05.01: BOARD ESTABLISHED; APPOINTMENT:
The Lyon County fair and rodeo board, heretofore existing, is reestablished as
an advisory board to the Lyon County fair and recreation board, if such shall
be created, or to the board of Lyon County commissioners if a fair and
recreation board shall not be created. The Lyon County fair and rodeo board
shall be appointed by the board of Lyon County commissioners. (Ord. 335, 11-16-
1989)
3.05.02: DUTIES:
The Lyon County fair and rodeo board:
   A.   Although denominated as an advisory board, shall have operational
authority to annually present the Lyon County fair and rodeo and to manage the
Lyon County fairgrounds, subject to approval by the board of Lyon County
commissioners, so long as no transient lodging tax funds 1  are transmitted to
the Lyon County fair and rodeo board.
   B.   Shall continue to perform its traditional functions as authorized by
other Lyon County ordinances.
   C.   Is reauthorized expressly to continue to obtain funding for the Lyon
County fair and rodeo as it traditionally has done.
   D.   Shall advise the Lyon County fair and recreation board, if such shall
be created, or otherwise the board of Lyon County commissioners, as to how
transient lodging tax monies may be expended for the purposes herein provided.
(Ord. 335, 11-16-1989)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 4, chapter 2 of this code.
CHAPTER 6
PUBLIC LAND MANAGEMENT ADVISORY BOARD
SECTION:
3.06.01: Board Established
3.06.02: Powers And Duties
3.06.01: BOARD ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established a Lyon County public land management advisory board
made up of seven (7) nonelected, Lyon County residents drawn from a diversity
of backgrounds.
   A.   The Lyon County planning commission shall act as the Lyon County public
land management advisory board. (Ord. 545, 11-4-2010)
3.06.02: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Lyon County public land management advisory board:
   A.   Shall advise the county board of commissioners regarding the goals and
policies established in the Lyon County interim plan for federally managed
public lands and other public lands issues.
   B.   May establish standing subcommittees utilizing its members and other
volunteers from mining, agriculture, hunting, recreation and other users of the
public lands.
   C.   May establish temporary committees for specific issues or problems.
   D.   May recommend ordinances to the county board of commissioners for
passage to implement the intent of the interim plan for federally managed
public lands.
   E.   Will oversee creation of a final Lyon County plan for federally managed
public lands and present it to the county board of commissioners. (Ord. 545,
11-4-2010)
CHAPTER 7
HISTORICAL SITE ADVISORY BOARD
SECTION:
3.07.01: Title
3.07.02: Purpose
3.07.03: Lyon County Historical Site Advisory Board
3.07.04: Scope Of The Lyon County Historical Site Advisory Board
3.07.05: Issuance Of Certificate Of Appropriateness
3.07.06: Issuance Of Certificate Based Upon Economical Hardship
3.07.07: Appeal To The Board Of Commissioners
3.07.01: TITLE:
This Chapter shall be known as the LYON COUNTY HISTORICAL SITE ADVISORY BOARD
ORDINANCE. (Ord. 408, 12-1-1994, eff. 12-16-1994)
3.07.02: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to create a board to allow the residents of the
County to have a representative voice in the promotion of the education,
cultural, economic, general welfare and safety of the public through the
preservation and protection of structures, sites and areas of historic interest
within the County. (Ord. 408, 12-1-1994, eff. 12-16-1994)
3.07.03: LYON COUNTY HISTORICAL SITE ADVISORY BOARD:
The Lyon County Planning Commission shall serve as the Lyon County Historical
Site Advisory Board. (Ord. 408, 12-1-1994, eff. 12-16-1994)
3.07.04: SCOPE OF THE LYON COUNTY HISTORICAL SITE ADVISORY BOARD:
The sole scope of the Advisory Board is to ensure that any proposed
improvements to the exterior architectural features of a structure within the
Historical Zoning Overlay District are done in accordance with the style of the
original structure at the time the historical zoning overlay was put in place.
   A.   The following factors shall be considered in determining whether a
certificate of appropriateness should be issued for a proposed improvement to
the exterior architectural features:
      1.   Historic and architectural value and significance of the proposed
alteration; and
      2.   Position of the proposed new structures in relation to the street or
public way and whether it is subject to public view from a public place; and
      3.   The relationship of the proposed changes to the exterior
architectural features to well-recognized styles of early western architecture
of the late nineteenth and twentieth centuries.
   B.   A certificate of appropriateness may be refused for any structure,
erection, reconstruction, restoration, alteration, moving or razing of which,
in the opinion of the Advisory Board, would be detrimental to the interest of
the historic site.
   C.   "Exterior architectural features" means the architectural style,
general design and general arrangement of the exterior of a structure,
including the kind and texture of the building material, the type and style of
all windows, doors, light fixtures, signs, colors, and other apparent fixtures.
   D.   The Advisory Board shall neither consider nor have any authority over
alterations to the interior of any structure. (Ord. 408, 12-1-1994, eff. 12-16-
1994)
3.07.05: ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS:
   A.   If the Advisory Board determines that the proposed improvement or
alteration would not be detrimental to the interest of the historic site, then
a certificate of appropriateness must be issued.
   B.   If the Advisory Board determines that the proposed improvement or
alteration would be detrimental and a certificate of appropriateness is not to
be issued, then a report shall be issued to the Board stating the reasons for
denial.
   C.   A certificate of appropriateness is not required if:
      1.   The ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural
feature does not involve a change of design, material or the outward appearance
thereof; or
      2.   The construction, reconstruction, alteration, or demolition of any
such feature which the Community Development Department or similar authority
has certified is required to protect the public safety because of an unsafe or
dangerous condition; or
      3.   The construction, reconstruction, alteration, or demolition of any
such feature is to be completed under a permit issued by a building inspector
or similar authority prior to the effective date of the establishment of the
historical zoning overlay.
   D.   The Advisory Board may attach conditions to the certificate of
appropriateness that promote the purpose of this Chapter. (Ord. 408, 12-1-1994,
eff. 12-16-1994)
3.07.06: ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE BASED UPON ECONOMICAL HARDSHIP:
The Advisory Board may issue a certificate of appropriateness despite a finding
that the improvements would be detrimental if the Advisory Board finds that
failure to issue the certificate would place a substantial financial hardship
upon the applicant because of conditions especially affecting the structure
involved. (Ord. 408, 12-1-1994, eff. 12-16-1994)
3.07.07: APPEAL TO THE BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS:
Any applicant may appeal any decision rendered by the Advisory Board to the
Board. Any appeal must be submitted in writing to the Board within thirty (30)
days after the determination of the Advisory Board or all rights to the appeal
are waived. (Ord. 408, 12-1-1994, eff. 12-16-1994)
CHAPTER 8
COMMUNICATIONS ADVISORY BOARD
SECTION:
3.08.01: Title
3.08.02: Definitions
3.08.03: Purpose
3.08.04: Obligations And Administration Of The Agreement
3.08.05: CAB Bylaws
3.08.06: Powers And Functions Of CAB
3.08.07: Limitations On CAB's Powers And Functions
3.08.08: Public Works And Road Department Communications
3.08.09: Compensation
3.08.01: TITLE:
This Chapter shall be known as the LYON COUNTY COMMUNICATIONS ADVISORY BOARD
ORDINANCE. (Ord. 417, 10-5-1995, eff. 10-20-1995)
3.08.02: DEFINITIONS:
CAB: Communications Advisory Board.
CDS: Communications Dispatch Center.
CLCFPD: Central Lyon County Fire Protection District.
CITY: The City of Yerington.
COUNTY: Lyon County.
MVFPD: Mason Valley Fire Protection District.
NLCFPD: North Lyon County Fire Protection District.
PARTICIPATING ENTITIES: Includes County, City, CLCFPD, NLCFPD, MVFPD and/or
SVFPD.
SVFPD: Smith Valley Fire Protection District. (Ord. 417, 10-5-1995, eff. 10-20-
1995)
3.08.03: PURPOSE:
The primary purpose and objective of this Advisory Board is to provide a more
efficient law enforcement, fire, emergency medical and emergency communications
dispatch system. This Advisory Board will provide a means for all County law
enforcement and fire districts to become involved in the design, operation,
development of policy and procedures and maintenance of the County's dispatch
system that each entity relies upon to perform its governmental duties. The
purpose is not to create a separate public agency. (Ord. 417, 10-5-1995, eff.
10-20-1995)
3.08.04: OBLIGATIONS AND ADMINISTRATION OF THE AGREEMENT:
   A.   Recommendations: City, CLCFPD, MVFPD, NLCFPD and SVFPD shall recommend
a member from within their respective districts to the County for appointment
to CAB.
   B.   Membership: CAB shall be comprised of the following seven (7) members:
      1.   One representative appointed by the County upon the recommendation
of the Lyon County Sheriff's office.
      2.   One representative appointed by the County upon the recommendation
of the Emergency Management Department.
      3.   One representative appointed by the County upon the recommendation
of the Yerington City Police Department and City.
      4.   One representative appointed by the County upon the recommendation
of the CLCFPD.
      5.   One representative appointed by the County upon the recommendation
of the MVFPD.
      6.   One representative appointed by the County upon the recommendation
of the NLCFPD.
      7.   One representative appointed by the County upon the recommendation
of the SVFPD. (Ord. 417, 10-5-1995, eff. 10-20-1995)
3.08.05: CAB BYLAWS:
CAB shall operate according to the following bylaws:
   A.   Four (4) members shall constitute a quorum.
   B.   The affirmative vote of a simple majority of Boardmembers as
constituted shall effect adoption of any motion, resolution, order or other
action by CAB. Written proxy votes will be accepted and included in all votes
if presented prior to the actual vote.
   C.   CAB members shall select a chairperson and vice chairperson from its
membership who shall each serve a one year term.
      1.   In the event a person selected cannot serve the full term, CAB
members may elect another member to either finish the unexpired term or to hold
the position for a full year.
      2.   No member shall serve in either position for more than two (2)
consecutive terms.
   D.   CAB members shall appoint a secretary who may or may not be a member of
CAB.
   E.   Meetings shall be held in accordance with Robert's Rules of Order to
the practical extent possible. CAB may adopt written rules that are not in
conflict with this Chapter. All such written rules shall be kept on file at a
place chosen by CAB.
   F.   All meetings shall be conducted in accordance with the Nevada Open
Meeting Laws. Regular meetings shall be conducted at a minimum of once every
three (3) months at a place chosen by CAB. The chairperson or vice chairperson
shall have the right to call for an unscheduled meeting. (Ord. 417, 10-5-1995,
eff. 10-20-1995)
3.08.06: POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF CAB:
CAB is authorized to promulgate operational protocol that dispatch personnel
will follow concerning fire, emergency and emergency medical communications
processed through the CDS in the dispatch of personnel of the various
participating entities. CAB shall also perform, but is not limited to,
performing the following functions:
   A.   Budgets: The CDS Department supervisor shall create budget proposals
for CAB. CAB shall submit these budgets to the County for approval.
   B.   Equipment And Personnel Needs: CAB shall analyze the CDS and submit
reports to the County on the status of the CDS. The CDS supervisor shall submit
proposals for additional equipment or personnel to the County through CAB. The
CDS Department head shall create all bidding specifications with the advice and
consent of CAB upon receiving permission from the County to go out to bid. The
CDS Department head shall submit reports concerning the CDS to CAB on a
quarterly basis.
   C.   Grant And Assistance Programs: CAB shall have the authority to
coordinate applications for grants and assistance programs that would benefit
the CDS. (Ord. 417, 10-5-1995, eff. 10-20-1995)
3.08.07: LIMITATIONS ON CAB'S POWERS AND FUNCTIONS:
CAB shall not have any authority over the following:
   A.   Indebtedness: CAB cannot incur any debt on its own behalf or on behalf
of any of the participating entities. All contracts must be made in the name of
the County and can only be executed after approval of the Lyon County Board of
Commissioners.
   B.   Personnel: All personnel matters concerning County employees involved
in the CDS shall be handled by the County. CAB shall have the right, but not
the obligation, to submit recommendations to the CDS Department head, but all
final decisions shall be made at the sole discretion of the CDS Department head
and his/her County supervisor.
   C.   NCIC Criminal Justice Information Department Information: The Lyon
County Sheriff shall retain sole discretion over NCIC Criminal Justice
Department Information processed through the CDS. (Ord. 417, 10-5-1995, eff.
10-20-1995)
3.08.08: PUBLIC WORKS AND ROAD DEPARTMENT COMMUNICATIONS:
CAB shall consult with the Lyon County Public Works and Lyon County Road
Department whenever CAB actions would impact public works and road department
equipment. (Ord. 417, 10-5-1995, eff. 10-20-1995)
3.08.09: COMPENSATION:
All CAB members shall serve without compensation. (Ord. 417, 10-5-1995, eff.
10-20-1995)
CHAPTER 9
ANIMAL CONTROL ADVISORY BOARD
SECTION:
3.09.01: Advisory Board Established
3.09.02: Purpose
3.09.03: Powers And Duties
3.09.04: Compensation; Travel Expenses
3.09.05: Limitations
3.09.01: ADVISORY BOARD ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established a Lyon County animal control advisory board made up
of at least five (5) and not more than seven (7) nonelected Lyon County
residents drawn from a variety of backgrounds, and appointed by the county
board of commissioners. The county board of commissioners shall attempt to
select one resident from each of the Lyon County commissioner districts. Any
person appointed shall be a resident of Lyon County. (Ord. 446, 10-7-1999, eff.
10-22-1999)
3.09.02: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to create a board to allow the residents of the
county to have a representative voice in the promotion and discussion of animal
control issues. The animal control advisory board is advisory to the county
board of commissioners. (Ord. 440, 9-17-1998, eff. 10-2-1998)
3.09.03: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The animal control advisory board:
   A.   Shall advise and make recommendations to the county board of
commissioners and the director of animal services relating to the humane
treatment and control of animals.
   B.   Shall advise and make recommendations to the county board of
commissioners and the director of animal services regarding the implementation
of policies and ordinances relating to animal control.
   C.   Shall adopt bylaws for the governing body of the board and shall comply
with the Nevada open meeting law.
   D.   May establish temporary committees or standing subcommittees for
specific issues or problems. (Ord. 456, 2-15-2001, eff. 3-2-2001)
3.09.04: COMPENSATION; TRAVEL EXPENSES:
All members shall serve without compensation excepting reasonable travel
expenses and subsistence incurred in attending meetings. Reimbursement for
reasonable travel and other expenses shall be in accordance with Lyon County
policies and at the amounts set by the Lyon County board of commissioners.
(Ord. 440, 9-17-1998, eff. 10-2-1998)
3.09.05: LIMITATIONS:
The animal control advisory board may not enter into contracts on behalf of or
otherwise obligate Lyon County. (Ord. 440, 9-17-1998, eff. 10-2-1998)
CHAPTER 10
SURCHARGE FOR ENHANCEMENT OR IMPROVEMENT OF TELEPHONE SYSTEM USED FOR REPORTING
EMERGENCY
SECTION:
3.10.01: Authority And Purpose
3.10.02: Definitions
3.10.03: Establishment Of An Advisory Committee
3.10.04: Chairman, Election, And Duties
3.10.05: Rules And Regulations
3.10.06: Quorum
3.10.07: Meetings
3.10.08: Creation Of Special Revenue Fund; Use Of Money In Fund
3.10.09: Imposition Of Telephone Surcharge
3.10.10: Penalty For Failure To Remit Surcharges
3.10.01: AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE:
This chapter is enacted pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 244A.7641 through
244A.7647 for the following purposes:
   A.   To establish an Advisory Committee to develop a five year Master Plan
for the enhancement or improvement of the telephone system for reporting
emergencies in Lyon County and to oversee any money allocated for that purpose.
   B.   To impose a surcharge for the enhancement or improvement of the
telephone system for reporting an emergency in Lyon County on:
      1.   Each access line or trunk line of each customer to the local
exchange of any telecommunications provider providing those lines in Lyon
County; and
      2.   The mobile telephone services provided to each customer of that
service whose place of primary use is in Lyon County. (Ord. 550, 5-19-2011)
3.10.02: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the words and terms defined in this section have the
meanings ascribed to them unless the context requires otherwise.
INCUMBENT LOCAL EXCHANGE CARRIER: Has the meaning ascribed to it in 47 USC 251
(h)(1), as that section existed on October 1, 1995, and includes a local
exchange carrier that is treated as an incumbent exchange carrier pursuant to
that section.
MOBILE TELEPHONE SERVICE: Cellular or other service to a telephone installed in
a vehicle or which is otherwise portable.
PLACE OF PRIMARY USE: Has the meaning ascribed to it in 4 USC 124(8), as that
existed on August 1, 2002.
PORTABLE EVENT RECORDING DEVICE: Has the meaning ascribed to in Nevada Revised
Statutes 289.830.
SUPPLIER: A person authorized by the Federal Communications Commission to
provide mobile telephone service.
TRUNK LINE: A line that provides a channel between a switchboard owned by a
customer of a telecommunications provider and the local exchange of the
telecommunications provider.
VEHICULAR RECORDING DEVICE: Means a device which is affixed to a marked vehicle
of a law enforcement agency, as defined in Nevada Revised Statutes 289.830, and
which records both audio and visual events. (Ord. 596, 12-21-2017, eff. 1-10-
2018)
3.10.03: ESTABLISHMENT OF AN ADVISORY COMMITTEE:
The Board of County Commissioners creates an Advisory Committee of a minimum of
five (5) members to develop a five year Master Plan to enhance or improve the
telephone system for reporting an emergency in Lyon County and to oversee any
money allocated for that purpose (the committee). The Master Plan must include
an estimate of the cost of the enhancement or improvement of the telephone
system and all proposed sources of money for funding the enhancement or
improvement.
   A.   Members will serve without compensation.
   B.   A minimum of five (5) members appointed to the committee must:
      1.   Be a resident of Lyon County;
      2.   Possess knowledge concerning telephone systems for reporting
emergencies; and
      3.   Not be an elected public officer.
   C.   As Lyon County has a population of less than one hundred thousand
(100,000), at least one member of the committee must be a representative of an
incumbent local exchange carrier which provides services to persons in Lyon
County.
   D.   Include the chief law enforcement officer or his or her designees from
each office of the County Sheriff, metropolitan Police Department, Police
Department of an incorporated city within the County and department, division
or Municipal Court of a city or town that employs Marshals within the County,
as applicable.
   E.   Members will be selected at large by the Board of County Commissioners
at its discretion.
   F.   The Board of County Commissioners must appoint for a term of two (2)
years, except for the initial term, and may reappoint any member to subsequent
terms of two (2) years. Any vacancy occurring during a member's term will be
filled by the Board of County Commissioners. A person appointed to fill a
vacancy occurring during a term must serve out the unexpired term of the member
replaced. Initially, the Board of County Commissioners must set the appointed
members' terms to provide for the terms of three (3) of the appointed members
to end on December 31, 2010, and for the terms of two (2) of the appointed
members to end on December 31, 2009. (Ord. 596, 12-21-2017, eff. 1-10-2018)
3.10.04: CHAIRMAN, ELECTION, AND DUTIES:
   A.   The committee must elect from its membership a Chairman and Vice
Chairman.
   B.   The Chairman will preside at meetings and be the signatory of any
correspondence necessitated by operation of the committee. (Ord. 550, 5-19-
2011)
3.10.05: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The committee may adopt rules and regulations regarding its meetings and
procedures. (Ord. 550, 5-19-2011)
3.10.06: QUORUM:
Three (3) members of the committee will constitute a quorum. The approval of a
majority of all members present to vote is necessary on any action the
committee desires to take. (Ord. 550, 5-19-2011)
3.10.07: MEETINGS:
The committee must hold a public meeting on a regular day not less than
quarterly unless a rule changing the meeting is adopted by the committee. At
least three (3) working days prior to any meeting, copies of the proposed
agenda must be available to the public in the County Clerk's Office and must,
additionally be mailed or electronically mailed to each member of the
committee. Notice of the meetings and the conduct of the meetings of the
committee, include taking of minutes and their transcript and retention, must
comply with the provisions of chapter 241 of Nevada Revised Statutes, Open
Meeting Law. (Ord. 550, 5-19-2011)
3.10.08: CREATION OF SPECIAL REVENUE FUND; USE OF MONEY IN FUND:
   A.   The Board of County Commissioners creates a Special Revenue Fund for
the deposit of any money collected pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes
244A.7643. The money in the fund must be used only for the following purposes:
      1.   With respect to the telephone system for reporting an emergency:
         a.   Paying recurring and nonrecurring charges for telecommunication
services necessary for the operation of the enhanced telephone system.
         b.   Paying costs for personnel and training associated with the
routine maintenance and updating the database for the system.
         c.   Purchasing, leasing or renting equipment and software necessary
to operate the enhanced telephone system; and
         d.   Paying costs associated with any maintenance, upgrade and
replacement of equipment and software necessary for the operation of the
enhanced telephone system.
      2.   To improve the telephone system for reporting emergencies in the
County.
      3.   With respect to purchasing and maintaining portable event recording
devices and vehicular event recording devices, paying costs associated with the
acquisition, maintenance, storage of data, upgraded and replacement of
equipment and software necessary for the operation of portable event recording
devices and vehicular event recording devices or systems that consist of both
portable event recording devices and vehicular event recording devices.
   B.   If the balance of the fund created pursuant to subsection A1 of this
section which has not been committed for expenditure exceeds one million
dollars ($1,000,000.00) at the end of any fiscal year, the Board of County
Commissioners must reduce the amount of the surcharge imposed during the next
fiscal year by the amount necessary to ensure that the unencumbered balance in
the fund at the end of the next fiscal year does not exceed one million dollars
($1,000,000.00). (Ord. 596, 12-21-2017, eff. 1-10-2018)
3.10.09: IMPOSITION OF TELEPHONE SURCHARGE:
   A.   The Board of County Commissioners imposes a surcharge for the
enhancement of the telephone system for reporting an emergency in Lyon County
on:
      1.   Each access line or trunk line of each customer to the local
exchange of any telecommunications provider providing those lines in Lyon
County; and
      2.   The mobile telephone service provided to each customer of that
service whose place of primary use is in Lyon County.
   B.   The surcharge on access lines to the local exchange of
telecommunications provider will be one dollar ($1.00) per month per line.
   C.   The surcharge on trunk lines to the local exchange of a
telecommunications provider will be ten dollars ($10.00) per month per line.
   D.   The surcharge for each telephone number assigned to a customer by a
supplier of mobile telephone services will be one dollar ($1.00) per month per
line.
   E.   A telecommunications provider that provides access or trunk lines in
Lyon County and a supplier that provides mobile telephone service to customers
in Lyon County must collect the surcharge from its customers each month. Except
as otherwise provided in Nevada Revised Statutes 244A.7647, each
telecommunications provider and supplier must remit the surcharge it collects
to the Treasurer of the county in which the surcharge is imposed no later than
the fifteenth day of the month after the month it receives payment of the
surcharge from its customer. In accordance with Nevada Revised Statutes
244A.7647, a telecommunications provider or supplier which collects the
surcharge imposed pursuant to this section is entitled to retain an amount of
the surcharge collected which is equal to the cost to collect the surcharge.
   F.   Telecommunications providers and mobile telephone service suppliers
affected by this chapter must begin imposing the surcharge described in this
section within sixty (60) days after the Board of County Commissioners approves
the five year Master Plan for the enhancement or improvement of the telephone
system for reporting emergencies in the County commencing with a full monthly
billing cycle.
   G.   The County Manager may adopt procedures as necessary to effectuate the
provisions of this section. (Ord. 596, 12-21-2017, eff. 1-10-2018)
3.10.10: PENALTY FOR FAILURE TO REMIT SURCHARGES:
Any telecommunications provider or mobile telephone service supplier that fails
to remit surcharges due within ninety (90) days after the date on which the
telecommunications provider or supplier must otherwise remit the surcharges to
the County Treasurer will be subject to a penalty of five percent (5%) of the
cumulative amount of surcharges owed by the telecommunications provider or
supplier. (Ord. 550, 5-19-2011)
CHAPTER 11
COUNTY HEALTH BOARD AND COUNTY HEALTH OFFICER
SECTION:
3.11.01: Definitions
3.11.02: Composition Of The Board
3.11.03: Compensation
3.11.04: Duties
3.11.05: Powers
3.11.06: County Health Officer
3.11.07: Deputy County Health Officer; Appointment; Compensation; Duties
3.11.08: County Board Of Health; Supervision By Health Division
3.11.09: Meetings Of County Board Of Health
3.11.10: Severance Clause
3.11.01: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless stated otherwise herein, the following
definitions shall apply:
BOARD: The Lyon County health board.
BOARD MEMBER: A member of the Lyon County health board.
COUNTY COMMISSIONERS, COUNTY COMMISSION, OR COMMISSION: The board of county
commissioners for Lyon County, Nevada.
COUNTY HEALTH OFFICER: A person appointed by the board of county commissioners
as a county health officer on or before January 1 next following each general
election.
HEALTH DIVISION: The health division of the department of health and human
services for the state of Nevada.
SHERIFF: The sheriff of Lyon County, Nevada.
STATE BOARD OF HEALTH: Shall have the meaning ascribed unto it by Nevada
Revised Statutes 439.060 et seq.
STATE HEALTH OFFICER: Shall have the meaning ascribed unto it by Nevada Revised
Statutes 439.100 et seq. (Ord. 583, 2-18-2016)
3.11.02: COMPOSITION OF THE BOARD:
The board shall consist of the members of the Lyon County commission, sheriff,
and the county health officer. The county health officer shall act as chairman
of the county board of health. The county clerk shall be the clerk of the
board. (Ord. 583, 2-18-2016)
3.11.03: COMPENSATION:
Except as provided for by Nevada Revised Statutes 439.300, relating to the
provision of compensation to the county health officer, all officers of the
board shall serve without compensation. (Ord. 583, 2-18-2016)
3.11.04: DUTIES:
The county board of health shall:
   A.   Oversee all sanitary conditions within Lyon County, Nevada.
   B.   Adopt such regulations as may be necessary for the prevention,
suppression and control of any contagious or infectious disease dangerous to
the public health. Any regulations adopted by the board must first be approved
by the state board of health prior to becoming effective.
Any regulations adopted by the board under this section may be adopted by
resolution thereof. (Ord. 583, 2-18-2016)
3.11.05: POWERS:
The county board of health may:
   A.   Abate nuisances in accordance with law.
   B.   Establish and maintain an isolation hospital or quarantine station when
necessary for the isolation or quarantine of a person or group of persons.
   C.   Restrain, quarantine and disinfect any person or group of persons sick
with or exposed to any contagious or infectious disease that is dangerous to
the public health.
   D.   Appoint quarantine officers when necessary to enforce a quarantine,
shall provide whatever medicines, disinfectants and provisions which may be
required, and shall arrange for the payment of all debts or charges so incurred
from any funds available, but each patient shall, if he is able, pay for his
food, medicine, clothes and medical attendance.
   E.   Subject to prior review and approval of the board of county
commissioners and except as otherwise provided in Nevada Revised Statutes
576.128, adopt a schedule of reasonable fees to be collected for issuing or
renewing any health permit or license required by the board pursuant to a law
of the state of Nevada or an ordinance adopted by Lyon County, Nevada. Such
fees must be for the sole purpose of defraying the costs and expenses of the
procedures for issuing licenses and permits, and investigations related
thereto, and not for the purposes of general revenue. (Ord. 583, 2-18-2016)
3.11.06: COUNTY HEALTH OFFICER:
The county health officer is the executive officer of the county board of
health and may be a physician.
   A.   Appointment; Qualifications; Term: The county health officer shall be
appointed by the board of county commissioners on or before January 1 next
following the general election. He must bear graduate education in public
health, and further possess proper training, experience and interest in public
health and related programs. His term of office is two (2) years or until his
successor has been appointed and qualified.
   B.   Compensation: For performing the duties prescribed by this chapter, the
county health officer shall receive such compensation as is fixed by the board
of county commissioners upon resolution.
   C.   Vacancy; Appointment By State Health Officer: In the case of refusal or
neglect by the board of county commissioners to appoint a county health officer
within thirty (30) days after January 1 next following any general election, or
if a vacancy shall exist in the office of county health officer for a period
exceeding thirty (30) days, the state health officer may make such appointment
for the county for that term and fix the compensation. Any county public health
officer appointed under this subsection shall have the same duties, power and
authority as though appointed by the board of county commissioners.
   D.   Relationship With Lyon County Local Emergency Planning Committee: The
county health officer, or his deputy, shall serve as the board's liaison with
the Lyon County local emergency planning committee. The county health officer
shall consult with such committee in the event of a disaster within Lyon
County. (Ord. 583, 2-18-2016)
3.11.07: DEPUTY COUNTY HEALTH OFFICER; APPOINTMENT; COMPENSATION; DUTIES:
Upon approval by the board of county commissioners, the county health officer
may appoint such deputies as may be necessary. Deputy county health officers
shall receive such compensation as is fixed by the board of county
commissioners. Deputy health officers shall, no later than the fifth day of
each month, file monthly reports with the county health officer. Such reports
shall be compiled by the county health officer and forwarded to the health
division or the health division's designee no later than the tenth of each
month. (Ord. 583, 2-18-2016)
3.11.08: COUNTY BOARD OF HEALTH; SUPERVISION BY HEALTH DIVISION:
The county board of health shall be subject to supervision of the health
division, and shall make such reports to the health division as the state board
of health may require. (Ord. 583, 2-18-2016)
3.11.09: MEETINGS OF COUNTY BOARD OF HEALTH:
The board will conduct at the request of one or more board members or as
necessary. The board will keep a complete record of all matters discussed and
any actions taken. The meetings of the board may be conducted in conjunction
with regular meetings of the board of county commissioners. Other meetings may
be conducted as needed.
   A.   A majority of the board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction
of business.
   B.   Any resolution, motion or other action shall be adopted or ordered
taken by a majority of the board forming a quorum.
   C.   The clerk of the board shall take general minutes of each meeting and
shall cause said minutes to be maintained in the official records of Lyon
County, Nevada.
   D.   Meetings shall be conducted pursuant to the requirements of chapter 241
of the Nevada Revised Statutes (open meeting law). Except where the board
intends to meet at a time or place other than the time or place designated for
meetings of the board of county commissioners, all meetings of the board may be
conducted in commission chambers located at 27 South Main Street, Yerington,
Nevada.
   E.   The clerk, or designee, shall be responsible to provide an agenda for
the board to be made a part of the regular agenda for meetings of the board of
county commissioners. (Ord. 583, 2-18-2016)
3.11.10: SEVERANCE CLAUSE:
If any section or clause of this chapter shall be found to be unlawful or void
by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder hereof shall remain in full
force and effect. (Ord. 583, 2-18-2016)
TITLE 4
REVENUE AND TAXATION
CHAPTER 1
COUNTY-CITY RELIEF TAX
SECTION:
4.01.01: Short Title
4.01.02: Rules and Definitions
4.01.03: Sales Tax
4.01.04: Use Tax
4.01.05: Exemptions from Taxes
4.01.06: Deposit of Security
4.01.07: Tax Returns; Payment of Taxes
4.01.08: Review of Returns; Underpayments and Overpayments
4.01.09: Failure to File Returns; Delinquencies
4.01.10: Liability of Successors
4.01.11: Injunction Prohibited; Action for Refund
4.01.12: Recovery of Erroneous Refunds; Cancellation of Illegal Determination
4.01.13: Administration and Enforcement
4.01.14: Amendments
4.01.15: Violations and Penalties
4.01.16: Effective Date of Tax
4.01.01: SHORT TITLE:
This Chapter shall be known and referred to as the LYON COUNTY COUNTY-CITY
RELIEF TAX ORDINANCE. (1973 Code §4.04.010)
4.01.02: RULES AND DEFINITIONS:
Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this
Section govern the construction of this Chapter. (1973 Code §4.04.020)
When used in this Chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this Section:
BUSINESS: Includes any activity engaged in by any person or caused to be
engaged in by him with the object of gain, benefit or advantage, either direct
or indirect. (1973 Code §4.04.030)
EXEMPTED FROM THE TAXES IMPOSED BY THIS TITLE: As used in this definition and
in Section
4.01.05 of this Chapter, means exempted from the computation of the amount of
taxes imposed. (1973 Code §4.04.200)
GROSS RECEIPTS: A. The total amount of the sale or lease or rental price, as
the case may be, of the retail sales of retailers, valued in money, whether
received in money or otherwise, without any deduction on account of any of the
following:
      1.   The cost of the property sold; however, in accordance with such
rules and regulations as the Tax Commission may prescribe, a deduction may be
taken if the retailer has purchased property for some other purpose than
resale, has reimbursed his vendor for tax which the vendor is required to pay
to the County or has paid the use tax with respect to the property and has
resold the property prior to making any use of the property other than
retention, demonstration or display while holding it for sale in the regular
course of business. If such a deduction is taken by the retailer, no refund or
credit will be allowed to his vendor with respect to the sale of the property.
      2.   The cost of the materials used, labor or service cost, interest
paid, losses or any other expense.
      3.   The cost of transportation of the property prior to its sale to the
purchaser.
   B.   The total amount of the sale or lease or rental price includes all of
the following:
      1.   Any services that are a part of the sale.
      2.   All receipts, cash, credits and property of any kind.
      3.   Any amount for which credit is allowed by the seller to the
purchaser.
   C.   "Gross receipts" does not include any of the following:
      1.   Cash discounts allowed and taken on sales.
      2.   Sale price of property returned by customers when the full sale
price is refunded either in cash or credit, but this exclusion shall not apply
in any instance when the customer, in order to obtain the refund, is required
to purchase other property at a price greater than the amount charged for the
property that is returned.
      3.   The price received for labor or services used in installing or
applying the property sold.
      4.   The amount of any tax (not including, however, any manufacturers' or
importers' excise tax) imposed by the United States upon or with respect to
retail sales, whether imposed upon the retailer or the customer.
   D.   For the purposes of the sales tax, if the retailers establish to the
satisfaction of the Tax Commission that the sales tax has been added to the
total amount of the sale price and has not been absorbed by them, the total
amount of the sale price shall be deemed to be the amount received exclusive of
the tax imposed. (1973 Code §4.04.040)
IN LYON COUNTY - IN THE COUNTY: Within the exterior limits of Lyon County and
includes all territory within such limits owned by or ceded to the United
States. (1973 Code §4.04.050)
OCCASIONAL SALE: Includes:
   A.   A sale of property not held or used by a seller in the course of an
activity for which he is required to hold a seller's permit, provided such sale
is not one of a series of sales sufficient in number, scope and character to
constitute an activity requiring the holding of a seller's permit;
   B.   Any transfer of all or substantially all the property held or used by a
person in the course of such an activity when, after such transfer, the real or
ultimate ownership of such property is substantially similar to that which
existed before such transfer.
For the purposes of this definition, stockholders, bondholders, partners or
other persons holding an interest in a corporation or other entity are regarded
as having the "real or ultimate ownership" of the property of such corporation
or other entity. (1973 Code §4.04.060)
PERSON: Includes any individual, firm, copartnership, joint venture,
association, social club, fraternal organization, corporation, estate, trust,
business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, cooperative, assignee or any
other group or combination acting as a unit, but shall not include the United
States, the State or any agency thereof or any city, county, district or other
political subdivision of the State. (1973 Code §4.04.070)
PURCHASE: Any transfer, exchange or barter, conditional or otherwise, in any
manner or by any means whatsoever, of tangible personal property for a
consideration.
A transaction whereby the possession of property is transferred but the seller
retains the title as security for the payment of the price is a purchase.
A transfer for a consideration of tangible personal property which has been
produced, fabricated or printed to the special order of the customer or of any
publications is also a purchase. (1973 Code §4.04.080)
RETAIL SALE or SALE AT RETAIL: A sale for any purpose other than resale in the
regular course of business of tangible personal property.
The delivery in this County of tangible personal property by an owner or former
owner thereof or by a factor, or agent of such owner, former owner or factor,
if the delivery is to a consumer or person for redelivery to a consumer,
pursuant to a retail sale made by a retailer not engaged in business in this
County, is a retail sale in this County by the person making the delivery. He
shall include the retail selling price of the property in his gross receipts.
(1973 Code §4.04.090)
RETAILER: Includes:
   A.   Every seller who makes any retail sale or sales of tangible personal
property and every person engaged in the business of making retail sales at
auction of tangible personal property owned by the person or others.
   B.   Every person engaged in the business of making sales for storage, use
or other consumption or in the business of making sales at auction of tangible
personal property owned by the person or others for storage, use or other
consumption.
   C.   Every person making more than two (2) retail sales of tangible personal
property during any twelve (12) month period, including sales made in the
capacity of assignee for the benefit of creditors, or receiver or trustee in
bankruptcy.
When the Tax Commission determines that it is necessary for the efficient
administration of this Chapter to regard any salesmen, representatives,
peddlers or canvassers as the agents of the dealers, distributors, supervisors
or employers under whom they operate or from whom they obtain the tangible
personal property sold by them, irrespective of whether they are making sales
on their own behalf or on behalf of such dealers, distributors, supervisors or
employers, the Tax Commission may so regard them and may regard the dealers,
distributors, supervisors or employers as retailers for purposes of this
Chapter.
A licensed optometrist or physician and surgeon is a consumer of, and shall not
be considered a retailer within the provisions of this Chapter with respect to,
the ophthalmic materials used or furnished by him in the performance of his
professional services in the diagnosis, treatment or correction of conditions
of the human eye, including the adaptation of lenses or frames for the aid
thereof. (1973 Code §4.04.100)
SALE: A. "Sale" means and includes any transfer of title or possession,
exchange, barter, lease or rental, conditional or otherwise, in any manner or
by any means whatsoever of tangible personal property for a consideration.
   B.   "Transfer of possession", "lease", or "rental" includes only
transactions found by the Tax Commission to be in lieu of a transfer of title,
exchange or barter.
   C.   "Sale" includes:
1. The producing, fabricating, processing, printing or imprinting of tangible
personal property for a consideration for consumers who furnish, either
directly or indirectly, the materials used in the producing, fabricating,
processing, printing or imprinting.
      2.   The furnishing and distributing of tangible personal property for a
consideration by social clubs and fraternal organizations to their members or
others.
      3.   The furnishing, preparing or serving for a consideration of food,
meals or drinks.
      4.   A transaction whereby the possession of property is transferred but
the seller retains the title as security for the payment of the price.
      5.   A transfer for a consideration of the title or possession of
tangible personal property which has been produced, fabricated or printed to
the special order of the customer, or of any publication. (1973 Code §4.04.110)
SALES PRICE:
   A.   "Sales price" means the total amount for which tangible property is
sold, valued in money, whether paid in money or otherwise, without any
deduction on account of any of the following:
      1.   The cost of the property sold.
      2.   The cost of the materials used, labor or service cost, interest
charged, losses or any other expenses.
      3.   The cost of transportation of the property prior to its purchase.
   B.   The total amount for which property is sold includes all of the
following:
      1.   Any services that are a part of the sale.
      2.   Any amount for which credit is given to the purchaser by the seller.
   C.   "Sales price" does not include any of the following:
      1.   Cash discounts allowed and taken on sales.
      2.   The amount charged for property returned by customers when the
entire amount charged therefor is refunded either in cash or credit, but this
exclusion shall not apply in any instance when the customer, in order to obtain
the refund, is required to purchase other property at a price greater than the
amount charged for the property that is returned.
      3.   The amount charged for labor or services rendered in installing or
applying the property sold.
      4.   The amount of any tax (not including, however, any manufacturers' or
importers' excise tax) imposed by the United States upon or with respect to
retail sales, whether imposed upon the retailer or the consumer.
      5.   The amount of any tax imposed by the State upon or with respect to
the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased
from any retailer. (1973 Code §4.04.120)
SELLER: Includes every person engaged in the business of selling tangible
personal property of a kind, the gross receipts from the retail sale of which
are required to be included in the measure of the sales tax. (1973 Code
§4.04.130)
STORAGE AND USE: A. "Storage" includes any keeping or retention in this County
for any purpose, except sale in the regular course of business or subsequent
use solely outside the County, of tangible personal property purchased from a
retailer. (1973 Code §4.04.140)
   B.   "Use" includes the exercise of any right or power over tangible
personal property incident to the ownership of that property; except, that it
does not include the sale of that property in the regular course of business.
(1973 Code §4.04.190)
   C.   "Storage" and "use" do not include the keeping, retaining or exercising
any right or power over tangible personal property for the purpose of
subsequently transporting it outside the County for use thereafter solely
outside the County or for the purpose of being processed, fabricated or
manufactured into, attached to or incorporated into other tangible personal
property to be transported outside the County and thereafter used solely
outside the County. (1973 Code §4.04.150)
TANGIBLE PERSONAL PROPERTY: Personal property which may be seen, weighed,
measured, felt or touched or which is, in any other manner, perceptible to the
senses. (1973 Code §4.04.160)
TAX COMMISSION: The Nevada Tax Commission. (1973 Code §4.04.170)
TAXPAYER: Any person liable for tax under this Chapter. (1973 Code §4.04.180)
4.01.03: SALES TAX:
   A.   Tax Imposed: For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at
retail, a tax is imposed upon all retailers at the rate of two and twenty five
one-hundredths percent (2.25%) of the gross receipts of any retailer from the
sales of all tangible personal property sold at retail, stored, used or
otherwise consumed in the County on or after May 1, 1981. (1973 Code §4.08.010)
   B.   Collection of Tax from Consumer: The tax imposed shall be collected by
the retailer from the consumer insofar as it can be done. (1973 Code §4.08.020)
   C.   Advertising Restrictions and Regulations:
      1.   It is unlawful for any retailer to advertise or hold out or state to
the public or to any customer, directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part
thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the retailer or that it will not be
added to the selling price of the property sold or that, if added, it or any
part thereof will be refunded. Any person violating any provision of this
subsection is guilty of a misdemeanor. (1973 Code §4.08.030)
      2.   The Tax Commission may, by regulation, provide that the amount
collected by the retailer from the consumer in reimbursement of the tax be
displayed separately from the list price, the price advertised in the premises,
the marked price or other price on the sales check or other proof of sale.
(1973 Code §4.08.040)
   D.   Seller's Business Permit:
      1.   Application for Permit: Every person desiring to engage in or
conduct business as a seller within the County shall file with the Tax
Commission an application for permit for each place of business. Every
application for permit shall:
         a.   Be made upon a form prescribed by the Tax Commission.
         b.   Set forth the name under which the applicant transacts or intends
to transact business and the location of his place or places of business.
         c.   Set forth such other information as the Tax Commission may
require.
The application shall be signed by the owner if he is a natural person; in the
case of an association or partnership, by a member or partner; in the case of a
corporation, by an executive officer or some person specifically authorized by
the corporation to sign the application, to which shall be attached the written
evidence of his authority. (1973 Code §4.12.010)
      2.   Permit Fees:
         a.   At the time of making an application, the applicant shall pay to
the Tax Commission a permit fee of one dollar ($1.00) for each permit. (1973
Code §4.12.020)
         b.   A seller whose permit has been previously suspended or revoked
shall pay the Tax Commission a fee of one dollar ($1.00) for the renewal or
issuance of a permit. (1973 Code §4.12.040)
      3.   Issuance and Display of Permit; Nontransferability: After compliance
with subsections D1 and D2a of this Section and Section
4.01.06 of this Chapter by the applicant, the Tax Commission shall grant and
issue to each applicant a separate permit for each place of business within the
County. A permit shall not be assignable and shall be valid only for the person
in whose name it is issued and for the transaction of business at the place
designated therein. It shall at all times be conspicuously displayed at the
place for which issued. (1973 Code §4.12.030)
      4.   Revocation or Suspension of Permit: Whenever any person fails to
comply with any provision of this Chapter relating to the sales tax or any rule
or regulation of the Tax Commission relating to the sales tax prescribed and
adopted hereunder, the Tax Commission, upon hearing, after giving the person
ten (10) days' notice in writing specifying the time and place of hearing and
requiring him to show cause why his permit or permits should not be revoked,
may revoke or suspend any one or more of the permits held by the person.
The Tax Commission shall give to the person written notice of the suspension or
revocation of any of his permits. The notices may be served personally or by
mail in the manner prescribed for service of notice of a deficiency
determination.
The Tax Commission shall not issue a new permit after the revocation of a
permit unless it is satisfied that the former holder of the permit will comply
with the provisions of this Chapter relating to the sales tax and the
regulations of the Tax Commission.
If a permit is revoked, the Tax Commission may seal and padlock the place of
business for which the permit was issued. (1973 Code §4.12.050)
      5.   Violation; Business Shut Down:
         a.   A person who engages in business as a seller in this County
without a permit or permits or after a permit has been suspended, and each
officer of any corporation which so engages in business, is guilty of a
misdemeanor.
         b.   If, after notice to the seller, served personally or by mail, the
seller continues to engage in business without a permit, or after a permit has
been suspended or revoked, the Tax Commission may seal and padlock any place of
business of the seller. If notice under this subsection is served by mail, it
shall be addressed to the seller at his address as it appears in the records of
the Tax Commission. (1973 Code §4.12.060)
   E.   Certificate of Resale:
      1.   Presumption of Taxability: For the purpose of the proper
administration of this Chapter and to prevent evasion of the sales tax, it
shall be presumed that all gross receipts are subject to the tax until the
contrary is established. The burden of proving that a sale of tangible personal
property is not a sale at retail is upon the person who makes the sale, unless
he takes from the purchaser a certificate to the effect that the property is
purchased for resale. (1973 Code §4.16.010)
      2.   Effect of Certificate: The certificate relieves the seller from the
burden of proof only if taken in good faith from a person who is engaged in the
business of selling tangible personal property and who holds the permit
provided for in this subsection and subsection D of this Section and who, at
the time of purchasing the tangible personal property, intends to sell it in
the regular course of business or is unable to ascertain at the time of
purchase whether the property will be sold or will be used for some other
purpose. (1973 Code §4.16.020)
      3.   Contents and Form of Certificate: The certificate shall:
         a.   Be signed by and bear the name and address of the purchaser.
         b.   Indicate the number of the permit issued to the purchaser.
         c.   Indicate the general character of the tangible personal property
sold by the purchaser in the regular course of business.
The certificate shall be substantially in such form as the Tax Commission may
prescribe. (1973 Code §4.16.030)
      4.   Liability of Purchaser Giving Certificate: If a purchaser who gives
a certificate makes any use of the property other than retention, demonstration
or display while holding it for sale in the regular course of business, the use
shall be taxable to the purchaser as of the time the property is first used by
him, and the sales price of the property to him shall be deemed the measure of
the tax. Only when there is an unsatisfied use tax liability on this basis
shall the seller be liable for sales tax with respect to the sale of the
property to the purchaser. If the sole use of the property other than
retention, demonstration or display in the regular course of business is the
rental of the property while holding it for sale, the purchaser may elect to
include in his gross receipts the amount of the rental charged rather than the
sale price of the property to him. (1973 Code §4.16.040)
      5.   Commingled Fungible Goods: If a purchaser gives a certificate with
respect to the purchase of fungible goods and thereafter commingles these goods
with other fungible goods not so purchased but of such similarity that the
identity of the constituent goods in the commingled mass cannot be determined,
sales from the mass of commingled goods shall be deemed to be sales of the
goods so purchased until a quantity of commingled goods equal to the quantity
of purchased goods so commingled has been sold. (1973 Code §4.16.060)
      6.   Improper Use of Certificate: Any person who gives a resale
certificate for property which he knows at the time of purchase is not to be
resold by him in the regular course of business for the purpose of evading
payment to the seller of the amount of the tax applicable to the transaction is
guilty of a misdemeanor. (1973 Code §4.16.050)
4.01.04: USE TAX:
   A.   Registration Required: Every retailer selling tangible personal
property for storage, use or other consumption in the County shall register
with the Tax Commission and give:
      1.   The name and address of all agents operating in the County.
      2.   The location of all distribution or sales houses or offices or other
places of business in the County.
      3.   Such other information as the Tax Commission may require. (1973 Code
§4.20.080)
   B.   Tax Imposed: An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other
consumption in the County of tangible personal property purchased from any
retailer on or after May 1, 1981, for storage, use or other consumption in the
County at the rate of two and twenty five one-hundredths percent (2.25%) of the
sales price of the property. (1973 Code §4.20.010)
   C.   Liability for Tax: Every person storing, using or otherwise consuming
in the County tangible personal property purchased from a retailer is liable
for the tax. His liability is not extinguished until the tax has been paid to
the County; except, that a receipt from a retailer maintaining a place of
business in the County or from a retailer who is authorized by the Tax
Commission, under such rules and regulations as it may prescribe, to collect
the tax and who is, for the purposes of this Section relating to the use tax,
regarded as a retailer maintaining a place of business in the County, given to
the purchaser pursuant to subsection D of this Section is sufficient to relieve
the purchaser from further liability for the tax to which the receipt refers.
(1973 Code §4.20.020)
   D.   Collection of Tax from Consumer; Receipt: Every retailer maintaining a
place of business in the County and making sales of tangible personal property
for storage, use or other consumption in the County, not exempted under Section
4.01.02 of this Chapter, definition of "exempted from laws imposed by this
Chapter", and Section
4.01.05 of this Chapter, shall, at the time of making the sales or, if the
storage, use or other consumption of the tangible personal property is not then
taxable hereunder, at the time the storage, use or other consumption becomes
taxable, collect the tax from the purchaser and give to the purchaser a receipt
therefor in the manner and form prescribed by the Tax Commission. (1973 Code
§4.20.030)
The tax required to be collected by the retailer constitutes a debt owned by
the retailer to the County. (1973 Code §4.20.040)
   E.   Advertising Restrictions and Regulations:
      1.   It is unlawful for any retailer to advertise or hold out or state to
the public or to any customer, directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part
thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the retailer, or that it will not be
added to the selling price of the property sold, or that if added, it or any
part thereof will be refunded. (1973 Code §4.20.050)
      2.   The tax required to be collected by the retailer from the purchaser
shall be displayed separately from the list price, the price advertised in the
premises, the marked price or other price on the sales check or other proof of
sales. (1973 Code §4.20.060)
   F.   Certificate of Resale:
      1.   Presumption of Taxability: For the purpose of the proper
administration of this Chapter and to prevent evasion of the use tax and the
duty to collect the use tax, it shall be presumed that tangible personal
property sold by any person for delivery in the County is sold for storage, use
or other consumption in the County until the contrary is established. The
burden of proving the contrary is upon the person who makes the sale, unless he
takes from the purchaser a certificate to the effect that the property is
purchased for resale. (1973 Code §4.24.010)
      2.   Effect of Certificate: The certificate relieves the person selling
the property from the burden of proof only if taken in good faith from a person
who is engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property and who
holds the permit provided for by subsections 4.01.03D and E of this Chapter and
who, at the time of purchasing the tangible personal property, intends to sell
it in the regular course of business or is unable to ascertain at the time of
purchase whether the property will be sold or will be used for some other
purpose. (1973 Code §4.24.020)
      3.   Contents and Forms of Certificate: The certificate shall:
         a.   Be signed and bear the name and address of the purchaser.
         b.   Indicate the number of the permit issued to the purchaser.
         c.   Indicate the general character of the tangible personal property
sold by the purchaser in the regular course of business.
The certificate shall be substantially in such form as the Tax Commission may
prescribe. (1973 Code §4.24.030)
      4.   Liability of Purchaser Giving Certificate: If a purchaser who gives
a certificate makes any storage or use of the property other than retention,
demonstration or display while holding it for sale in the regular course of
business, the storage or use is taxable as of the time the property is first so
stored or used. If the sole use of the property, other than retention,
demonstration or display in the regular course of business, is the rental of
the property while holding it for sale, the purchaser may elect to pay the tax
on the use measured by the amount of the rental charge rather than the sales
price of the property to him. (1973 Code §4.24.040)
      5.   Commingled Fungible Goods: If a purchaser gives a certificate with
respect to the purchase of fungible goods and thereafter commingles these goods
with other fungible goods not so purchased but of such similarity that the
identity of the constituent goods in the commingled mass cannot be determined,
sales from the mass of commingled goods shall be deemed to be sales of the
goods so purchased until a quantity of commingled goods equal to the quantity
of purchased goods so commingled has been sold. (1973 Code §4.24.050)
      6.   Presumptions:
         a.   Presumptions of Purchase from Retailer: It shall be further
presumed that tangible personal property shipped or brought to the County by
the purchaser after January 1, 1971, was purchased from a retailer on or after
January 1, 1971, for storage, use or other consumption in the County. (1973
Code §4.24.060)
         b.   Presumption of Use; Out-of-County Delivery: On and after January
1, 1971, it shall be further presumed that tangible personal property delivered
outside this County to a purchaser known by the retailer to be a resident of
the County was purchased from a retailer for storage, use or other consumption
in the County and stored, used or otherwise consumed in the County. This
presumption may be controverted by:
            (1)   A statement in writing, signed by the purchaser or his
authorized representative and retained by the vendor, that the property was
purchased for use at a designated point or points outside the County.
            (2)   Other evidence satisfactory to the Tax Commission that the
property was not purchased for storage, use or other consumption in the County.
(1973 Code §4.24.070)
   G.   Violations: Any person violating subsections D and E of this Section is
guilty of a misdemeanor. (1973 Code §4.20.070)
4.01.05: EXEMPTIONS FROM TAXES:
These are exempted from the taxes imposed by this Chapter:
   A.   Constitutional and Statutory Exemptions:
      1.   The gross receipts from the sale of and the storage, use or other
consumption in the County of tangible personal property, the gross receipts
from the sale of which or the storage, use or other consumption of which the
County is prohibited from taxing under the Constitution or laws of the United
States or under the Constitution of this State. (1973 Code §4.28.010)
      2.   Proceeds of Mines: The gross receipts from the sale of and the
storage, use or other consumption in the County of the proceeds of mines which
are subject to taxes levied pursuant to chapter 362 of the NRS. (1973 Code
§4.28.020)
      3.   Motor Vehicle Fuels: 1  The gross receipts from the sale and
distribution of and the storage, use or other consumption in the County of any
combustible gas, liquid or material of a kind used in an internal combustion or
diesel engine for the generation of power to propel a motor vehicle on the
highways. (1973 Code §4.28.030)
      4.   Animals; Agricultural Products: The gross receipts from sales of and
the storage, use or other consumption of:
         a.   Any form of animal life of a kind, the products of which
ordinarily constitute food for human consumption.
         b.   Feed for any form of animal life of a kind, the products of which
ordinarily constitute food for human consumption or are to be sold in the
regular course of business.
         c.   Seeds and annual plants, the products of which ordinarily
constitute food for human consumption or are to be sold in the regular course
of business.
         d.   Fertilizer to be applied to land, the products of which are to be
used as food for human consumption or sold in the regular course of business.
(1973 Code §4.28.040)
      5.   Meals and Food Products: The gross receipts from the sale of and the
storage, use or other consumption in the County of meals and food products for
human consumption served by public or private schools, school districts,
student organizations and parent-teacher associations to the students or
teachers of a school. (1973 Code §4.28.050)
      6.   Containers: The gross receipts from sales of and the storage, use or
other consumption in the County of:
         a.   Nonreturnable containers, when sold without the contents to
persons who place the contents in the container and sell the contents together
with the container.
         b.   Containers, when sold with the contents if the sales price of the
contents is not required to be included in the measure of the taxes imposed by
this Chapter.
         c.   Returnable containers, when sold with the contents in connection
with a retail sale of the contents or when resold for refilling.
As used in this subsection, the term "returnable containers" means containers
of a kind customarily returned by the buyer of the contents for reuse. All
other containers are "nonreturnable containers". (1973 Code §4.28.060)
      7.   Gas, Electricity and Water: The gross receipts from the sales,
furnishing or service of and the storage, use or other consumption in the
County of gas, electricity and water when delivered to consumers through mains,
lines or pipes. (1973 Code §4.28.070)
      8.   Domestic Fuels: The gross receipts from the sale, furnishing or
service of and the storage, use or other consumption in the County of any
matter used to produce domestic heat by burning including, without limitation,
wood, coal, petroleum and gas. (1973 Code §4.28.080)
      9.   Public Works Contracts: The gross receipts from the sale of and the
storage, use or other consumption in the County of tangible personal property
used for the performance of a contract on public works executed prior to
January 1, 1971. (1973 Code §4.28.090)
      10.   Contracts Executed Prior to January 1, 1971: The gross receipts
from the sale of and the storage, use or other consumption in the County of
tangible personal property used for the performance of a written contract
entered into prior to January 1, 1971. (1973 Code §4.28.100)
      11.   Newspapers and Periodicals: The gross receipts from the sale of and
the storage, use or other consumption in the County of tangible personal
property which becomes an ingredient or component part of any newspaper or
periodical regularly issued at average intervals, not exceeding three (3)
months, and any such newspaper or periodical. (1973 Code §4.28.110)
      12.   Occasional Sales: The gross receipts from occasional sales of
tangible personal property and the storage, use or other consumption in the
County of tangible personal property, the transfer of which to the purchaser is
an occasional sale. (1973 Code §4.28.120)
   B.   There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax
the gross receipts from the sale of any tangible personal property:
      1.   Government; Religious and Charitable Institutions to:
         a.   The United States, its unincorporated agencies and
instrumentalities.
         b.   Any incorporated agency or instrumentality of the United States
wholly owned by the United States or by a corporation wholly owned by the
United States.
         c.   The State, its unincorporated agencies and instrumentalities.
         d.   Any county, city, district or other political subdivision of the
State.
         e.   Any organization created for religious, charitable or
eleemosynary purposes; provided, that no part of the net earnings of any such
organization inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual.
(1973 Code §4.28.130)
      2.   Sales to Common Carriers: To a common carrier, shipped by the seller
via the purchasing carrier under a bill of lading, whether the freight is paid
in advance or the shipment is made and freight charges collected, to a point
outside the County, and the property is actually transported to the out-of-
County destination for use by the carrier in the conduct of its business as a
common carrier. (1973 Code §4.28.140)
      3.   Property Shipped Outside County: Which is shipped to a point outside
the County pursuant to the contract of sale by delivery by the vendor to such
point by means of:
         a.   Facilities operated by the vendor;
         b.   Delivery by the vendor to a carrier for shipment to a consignee
at such point; or
         c.   Delivery by the vendor to a customs broker or forwarding agent
for shipment outside the County. (1973 Code §4.28.150)
   C.   The storage, use or other consumption in the County of property, the
gross receipts from the sale of which are required to be included in the
measure of the sales tax, is exempted from the use tax. (1973 Code §4.28.170)
   D.   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the tax imposed under this
Chapter shall apply to the gross receipts from the sale of any tangible
personal property to contractors purchasing such property either as the agents
of the United States or for their own account and subsequent resale to the
United States for use in the performance of contracts with the United States
for the construction of improvements on or to real property, not including,
however, contractors qualified to issue and who do issue resale certificates to
vendors for tangible personal property for subsequent incorporation into real
property outside the County in the performance of a contract to improve the
out-of-County realty. (1973 Code §4.28.160)
   E.   If a purchaser certifies in writing to a seller that the property
purchased will be used in a manner or for a purpose entitling the seller to
regard the gross receipts from the sale as exempted by this Chapter from the
computation of the amount of the sales tax and uses the property in some other
manner or for some other purpose, the purchaser shall be liable for payment of
sales tax as if he were a retailer making a retail sale of the property at the
time of such use, and the cost of the property to him shall be deemed the gross
receipts from such retail sale. (1973 Code §4.28.180)
 
Notes
1 1. See Chapter 3 of this Title for fuel tax.
4.01.06: DEPOSIT OF SECURITY:
   A.   Deposit Required; Amount: The Tax Commission, whenever it deems it
necessary to insure compliance with this Chapter, may require any person
subject thereto to place with it such security as the Tax Commission may
determine. The amount of the security shall be fixed by the Tax Commission but,
except as noted below, shall not be greater than twice the estimated average
liability of persons filing returns for quarterly periods or three (3) times
the estimated average liability of persons required to file returns for monthly
periods, determined in such manner as the Tax Commission deems proper, or five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00), whichever amount is the lesser.
In case of persons habitually delinquent in their obligations under this
Chapter, the amount of the security shall not be greater than three (3) times
the average liability of persons filing returns for quarterly periods or five
(5) times the average liability of persons required to file returns for monthly
periods or five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), whichever amount is less.
The limitations herein provided apply regardless of the type of security placed
with the Tax Commission.
   B.   Increase in Security: The amount of the security may be increased or
decreased by the Tax Commission subject to the limitations herein provided.
   C.   Sale of Security: The Tax Commission may sell the security at public
auction if it becomes necessary so to do in order to recover any tax or any
amount required to be collected, interest or penalty due. Notice of the sale
may be served upon the person who placed the security personally or by mail; if
by mail, service shall be made in the manner prescribed for service of a notice
of the deficiency determination and shall be addressed to the person at his
address as it appears in the records of the Tax Commission. Security in the
form of a bearer bond issued by the United States or the state which has a
prevailing market price may, however, be sold by the Tax Commission at a
private sale at a price not lower than the prevailing market price thereof.
Upon any sale, any surplus above the amounts due shall be returned to the
person who placed the security. (1973 Code §4.48.010)
4.01.07: TAX RETURNS; PAYMENT OF TAXES:
   A.   Filing Returns: On or before the first day of the month following each
monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period shall be filed with
the Tax Commission in such form as the Tax Commission may prescribe.
For purposes of the sales tax, a return shall be filed by every seller. For
purposes of the use tax, a return shall be filed by every retailer maintaining
a place of business in the County and by every person purchasing tangible
personal property, the storage, use or other consumption of which is subject to
the use tax, who has not paid the use tax due to a retailer required to collect
the tax.
Returns shall be signed by the person required to file the return or by his
duly authorized agent but need not be verified by oath. (1973 Code §4.32.020)
   B.   Contents of Return:
      1.   For the purposes of the sales tax, the return shall show the gross
receipts of the seller during the preceding reporting period.
      2.   For purposes of the use tax, in case of a return filed by a
retailer, the return shall show the total sales price of the property sold by
him, the storage, use or consumption of which property became subject to the
use tax during the preceding reporting period.
In case of a return filed by a purchaser, the return shall show the total sales
price of the property purchased by him, the storage, use or consumption of
which became subject to the use tax during the preceding reporting period.
      3.   The return shall also show the amount of the taxes for the period
covered by the return and such other information as the Tax Commission deems
necessary for the proper administration of this Chapter. (1973 Code §4.32.030)
   C.   Payment of Tax; Adjustments:
      1.   The person required to file the return shall deliver the return,
together with a remittance of the amount of the tax due, to the office of the
Tax Commission. (1973 Code §4.32.050)
      2.   The tax payer shall deduct and withhold from the taxes otherwise due
from him five tenths' percent (0.5%) thereof to reimburse himself for the cost
of collecting the tax. (1973 Code §4.32.040)
   D.   Return Periods: The Tax Commission, if it deems it necessary in order
to insure payment to or facilitate the collection by the County of the amount
of taxes, may require returns and payment of the amount of taxes for any
periods designated, depending upon the principal place of business of the
seller, retailer or purchaser, as the case may be, or for other than quarterly
periods. (1973 Code §4.32.060)
   E.   Revenue Stamps for Collection of Tax: The Tax Commission, if it deems
it necessary to insure the collection of the taxes, may provide by rule and
regulation for the collection of the taxes by the affixing and canceling of
revenue stamps and may prescribe the form and method of the affixing and
canceling. (1973 Code §4.32.080)
   F.   Extensions for Filing Returns and Payments: The Tax Commission, for
good cause, may extend for not to exceed one month the time for making any
return or paying any amount required to be paid under this Chapter.
Any person to whom an extension is granted and who pays the tax within the
period for which the extension is granted shall pay, in addition to the tax,
interest at the rate of six percent (6%) per year from the date on which the
tax would have been due without the extension until the date of payment. (1973
Code §4.32.090)
   G.   Payment of Tax on Rentals and Leases: For the purposes of the sales
tax, gross receipts from rentals or leases of tangible personal property shall
be reported and the tax paid in accordance with such rules and regulations as
the Tax Commission may prescribe. (1973 Code §4.32.070)
4.01.08: REVIEW OF RETURNS; UNDERPAYMENTS AND OVERPAYMENTS:
   A.   Recomputation of Tax; Determination on Discontinuance of Business:
      1.   If the Tax Commission is not satisfied with the return or returns of
the tax or the amount of tax required to be paid to the County by any person,
it may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of
the facts contained in the return or returns or upon the basis of any
information within its possession or that may come into its possession. One or
more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more
than one period.
      2.   When a business is discontinued, a determination may be made at any
time thereafter within the periods specified in subsection B2 of this Section
as to liability arising out of that business, irrespective of whether the
determination is issued prior to the due date of the liability as otherwise
specified in this Chapter. (1973 Code §4.36.010)
   B.   Notice of Tax Commission's Determination:
      1.   Generally: The Tax Commission shall give to the retailer or person
storing, using or consuming tangible personal property written notice of its
determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, the
notice shall be addressed to the retailer or person storing, using or consuming
tangible personal property at his address as it appears in the records of the
Tax Commission.
In case of service by mail of any notice required by this Chapter, the service
is complete at the time of deposit in the United States post office. (1973 Code
§4.36.060)
      2.   Deficiency Determination:
         a.   Except in the case of fraud, intent to evade this Chapter or
authorized rules and regulations issued hereunder, failure to make a return or
claim for additional amount pursuant to subsection
4.01.09B2c of this Chapter, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be
personally served or mailed within three (3) years after the last day of the
calendar month following the quarterly period for which the amount is proposed
to be determined or within three (3) years after the return is filed, whichever
period expires later. In the case of failure to make a return, or claim for
additional amount pursuant to subsection
4.01.09B2c of this Chapter, every notice of determination shall be mailed or
personally served within eight (8) years after the last day of the calendar
month following the quarterly period for which the amount is proposed to be
determined.
         b.   The limitation specified in this subsection does not apply in
case of a sales tax proposed to be determined with respect to sales of property
for the storage, use or other consumption of which notice of a deficiency
determination has been or is given pursuant to subsections B1 and B2a of this
Section and subsections 4.01.09A5 and B1 of this Chapter. The limitation
specified in this subsection B2 does not apply in case of an amount of use tax
proposed to be determined with respect to storage, use or other consumption of
property for the sale of which notice of a deficiency determination has been or
is given pursuant to subsections B1 and B2a of this Section and subsections
4.01.09A5 and B1 of this Chapter.
         c.   If, before the expiration of the time prescribed in this
subsection B2 for the mailing of a notice of deficiency determination, the
taxpayer has consented in writing to the mailing of the notice after such time,
the notice may be mailed at any time prior to the expiration of the period
agreed upon. The period so agreed upon may be extended by subsequent agreements
in writing made before the expiration of the period previously agreed upon.
(1973 Code §4.36.070)
   C.   Interest and Penalties:
      1.   Interest on Deficiency: The amount of the determination, exclusive
of penalties, shall bear interest at the rate of one-half of one percent (.50%)
per month, or fraction thereof, from the last day of the month following the
quarterly period for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been
returned until the date of payment. (1973 Code §4.36.020)
      2.   Offsetting Overpayments; Computation of Interest: In making a
determination, the Tax Commission may offset overpayments for a period or
periods, together with interest on the overpayments, against underpayment for
another period or periods, against penalties and against the interest on the
underpayments.
The interest on underpayments and overpayments shall be computed in the manner
set forth in subsection D3 of this Section and subsection
4.01.09B2 of this Chapter. (1973 Code §4.36.030)
      3.   Penalties:
         a.   Negligence, Disregard of Law and Regulations: If any part of the
deficiency for which a deficiency determination if made is due to negligence or
intentional disregard of this Chapter or authorized rules and regulations, a
penalty of ten percent (10%) of the amount of the determination shall be added
thereto. (1973 Code §4.36.040)
         b.   Fraud; Intent to Evade: If any part of the deficiency for which a
deficiency determination is made is due to fraud or an intent to evade this
Chapter or authorized rules and regulations, a penalty of twenty five percent
(25%) of the amount of the determination shall be added thereto. (1973 Code
§4.36.050)
   D.   Overpayments; Excess Collected:
      1.   Certification of Excess Collected; Overpayment of Use Tax:
         a.   If the Tax Commission determines that any amount, penalty or
interest has been paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally
collected or computed, the Tax Commission shall set forth that fact in the
records hereof and shall certify to the Board of County Commissioners the
amount collected in excess of the amount legally due and the person from whom
it was collected or by whom paid. If approved by the Board of County
Commissioners, the excess amount collected or paid shall be credited on any
amounts then due and payable from the person under this Chapter, and the
balance shall be refunded to the person or his successors, administrators or
executors.
         b.   Any overpayment of the use tax by a purchaser to a retailer who
is required to collect the tax and who gives the purchaser a receipt therefor
pursuant to Section
4.01.04 of this Chapter shall be credited or refunded by the County. (1973 Code
§4.36.080)
      2.   Claims for Refund and Credits:
         a.   Generally:
            (1)   No refund shall be allowed unless a claim therefor is filed
with the Tax Commission within three (3) years from the last day of the month
following the close of the quarterly period for which the overpayment was made
or, with respect to determinations made under subsection A, B and C of this
Section and subsection
4.01.09A of this Chapter, within six (6) months after the determinations become
final or within six (6) months from the date of overpayment, whichever period
expires later.
            (2)   No credit shall be allowed after the expiration of the period
specified for filing claims for refund unless a claim for credit is filed with
the Tax Commission within such period or unless the credit relates to a period
for which a waiver is given pursuant to subsection B2 of this Section. (1973
Code §4.36.090)
         b.   Credit or Refund for Use Tax: No credit or refund of any amount
paid pursuant to Section
4.01.04 of this Chapter shall be allowed on the grounds that the storage, use
or other consumption of the property is exempted under subsection
4.01.05C of this Chapter unless the person who paid the amount reimburses his
vendor with respect to the sale of the property and paid by the vendor to the
County. (1973 Code §4.36.100)
         c.   Claim Form and Contents: Every claim shall be in writing and
shall state the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded. (1973 Code
§4.36.110)
         d.   Notice of Disallowance of Claim: Within thirty (30) days after
disallowing any claim in whole or in part, the Tax Commission shall serve
notice of its action on the claimant in the manner prescribed for service of
notice of a deficiency determination. 1  (1973 Code §4.36.130)
         e.   Failure to File Claim: Failure to file a claim within the time
prescribed in subsection D2a of this Section constitutes a waiver of any demand
against the County on account of overpayment. (1973 Code §4.36.120)
      3.   Interest on Overpayments: Interest shall be paid upon any
overpayment of any amount of tax at the rate of one-half of one percent (.5%)
per month from the last day of the calendar month following the quarterly
period for which the overpayment was made, but no refund or credit shall be
made of any interest imposed upon the person making the overpayment with
respect to the amount being refunded or credited.
The interest shall be paid as follows:
         a.   In the case of a refund, to the last day of the calendar month
following the date upon which the person making the overpayment, if he has not
already filed a claim, is notified by the Tax Commission that a claim may be
filed or the date upon which the claim is certified to the Board of County
Commissioners, whichever date is earlier;
         b.   In the case of a credit, to the same date as that to which
interest is computed on the tax or amount against which the credit is applied.
(1973 Code §4.36.140)
If the Tax Commission determines that any overpayment has been made
intentionally or by reason of carelessness, it shall not allow any interest
thereon. (1973 Code §4.36.150)
 
Notes
1 1. See subsection
  4.01.08B of this Chapter.
4.01.09: FAILURE TO FILE RETURNS; DELINQUENCIES:
   A.   Nonpayments:
      1.   Failure to File Return; Estimates:
         a.   If any person fails to make a return, the Tax Commission shall
make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the person or, as the
case may be, of the amount of the total sales price of tangible personal
property sold or purchased by the person, the storage, use or other consumption
of which in the County is subject to the use tax. The estimate shall be made
for the period of periods in respect to which the person failed to make a
return and shall be based upon any information which is in the Tax Commission's
possession or may come into its possession. Upon the basis of this estimate,
the Tax Commission shall compute and determine the amount required to be paid
to the County, adding to the sum thus arrived at a penalty equal to ten percent
(10%) thereof. One or more determinations may be made for one or for more than
one period.
         b.   When a business is discontinued, a determination may be made at
any time thereafter within the periods specified in subsection
4.01.08B2 of this Chapter as to liability arising out of that business,
irrespective of whether the determination is issued prior to the due date of
the liability as otherwise specified in this Chapter. (1973 Code §4.40.010)
      2.   Computation of Offsets; Interest: In making a determination, the Tax
Commission may offset overpayments for a period or periods, together with
interest on the overpayments, against underpayments for another period or
periods, against penalties and against the interest on the underpayments.
The interest on underpayments and overpayments shall be computed in the manner
set forth in subsections 4.01.08D3 and 4.01.09B2g of this Chapter. (1973 Code
§4.40.020)
      3.   Interest on Amount of Determination: The amount of the
determination, exclusive of penalties, shall bear interest at the rate of one-
half of one percent (.5%) per month, or fraction thereof, from the last day of
the month following the quarterly period for which the amount, or any portion
thereof, should have been returned until the date of payment. (1973 Code
§4.40.030)
      4.   Penalties for Fraud or Intent to Evade: If the failure of any person
to file a return is due to fraud or intent to evade this Chapter or rules and
regulations, a penalty of twenty five percent (25%) of the amount required to
be paid by the person, exclusive of penalties, shall be added thereto in
addition to the ten percent (10%) penalty provided in subsection A1 hereof.
(1973 Code §4.40.040)
      5.   Notice of Estimate, Determination and Penalty: Promptly after making
its determination, the Tax Commission shall give to the person written notice
of the estimate, determination and penalty, the notice to be served personally
or by mail in the manner prescribed for service of notice of a deficiency
determination. 1  (1973 Code § 4.40.050)
   B.   Jeopardy Determination; Petition for Redetermination:
      1.   Jeopardy Determination: If the Tax Commission believes that the
collection of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected and paid to
the County or of any determination will be jeopardized by delay, it shall
thereupon make a determination of the tax or amount of tax required to be
collected, noting that fact upon the determination. The amount determined is
due and payable immediately. (1973 Code §4.44.010)
If the amount specified in the determination is not paid within ten (10) days
after service of notice thereof upon the person against whom the determination
is made, the amount becomes final at the expiration of the ten (10) days,
unless a petition for redetermination is filed within the ten (10) days, and
the delinquency penalty and the interest provided in subsection B2g hereof
shall attach to the amount of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be
collected. (1973 Code §4.44.020)
      2.   Petition for Redetermination: The person against whom a jeopardy
determination is made may petition for the redetermination thereof pursuant to
this subsection. He shall, however, file the petition for redetermination with
the Tax Commission within ten (10) days after the service upon him of notice of
determination. The person shall also, within the ten (10) day period, deposit
with the Tax Commission such security as it may deem necessary to insure
compliance with this Chapter. The security may be sold by the Tax Commission in
the manner prescribed by Section
4.01.06 of this Chapter. (1973 Code §4.44.030)
         a.   Filing Petition: Any person against whom a determination is made,
under subsections 4.01.08A, B and C and 4.01.09A5 of this Chapter or any person
directly interested may petition for a redetermination within thirty (30) days
after service upon the person of notice thereof. If a petition for
redetermination is not filed within the thirty (30) day period, the
determination becomes final at the expiration of the period. (1973 Code
§4.44.040)
         b.   Hearing: If a petition for redetermination is filed within the
thirty (30) day period, the Tax Commission shall reconsider the determination
and, if the person has so requested in his petition, shall grant the person an
oral hearing and shall give him ten (10) days' notice of the time and place of
the hearing.
The Tax Commission may continue the hearing from time to time as may be
necessary. (1973 Code §4.44.050)
         c.   Change of Amount of Determination: The Tax Commission may
decrease or increase the amount of the determination before it becomes final,
but the amount may be increased only if a claim for the increase is asserted by
the Tax Commission at or before the hearing. (1973 Code §4.44.060)
         d.   Finality of Tax Commission's Decision: The order or decision of
the Tax Commission upon a petition for redetermination becomes final thirty
(30) days after service upon the petitioner of notice thereof. (1973 Code
§4.44.070)
         e.   Payment of Determinations; Penalties: All determinations made by
the Tax Commission under subsections 4.01.08A, B and C and 4.01.09A5 of this
Chapter are due and payable at the time they become final. If they are not paid
when due and payable, a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the amount of the
determination, exclusive of interest and penalties, shall be added thereto.
(1973 Code §4.44.080)
         f.   Notices: Any notice required by subsections B2a through B2e
hereof shall be served personally or by mail in the manner prescribed for
service of notice of a deficiency determination. 2  (1973 Code §4.44.090)
         g.   Failure to Pay Tax; Penalties and Interest: Any person who fails
to pay any tax to the County or any amount of tax required to be collected and
paid to the County, except amounts of determinations made by the Tax Commission
under subsections 4.01.08A, B and C and 4.01.09A5 of this Chapter within the
time required shall pay a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the tax or amount of
the tax, in addition to the tax or amount of tax, plus interest at the rate of
one-half of one percent (.5%) per month, or fraction thereof, from the date on
which the tax or the amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and
payable to the County until the date of payment. (1973 Code §4.44.100)
   C.   Notice of Delinquency:
      1.   If any person is delinquent in the payment of the amount required to
be paid by him or in the event a determination has been made against him which
remains unpaid, the Tax Commission may, not later than three (3) years after
the payment became delinquent or within three (3) years after the last
recording of an abstract under subsection D2c of this Section or of a
certificate under subsection D4 of this Section, give notice thereof personally
or by registered mail to all persons, including any officer or department of
the State or any political subdivision or agency of the State, having in their
possession or under their control any credits or other personal property
belonging to the delinquent or owing any debts to the delinquent or person
against whom a determination has been made which remains unpaid, or owing any
debts to the delinquent or such person. In the case of any State officer,
department or agency, the notice shall be given to such officer, department or
agency prior to the time it presents the claim of the delinquent taxpayer to
the State controller.
      2.   After receiving the notice, the persons so notified shall neither
transfer nor make any other disposition of the credits, other personal property
or debts in their possession or under their control at the time they received
the notice until the Tax Commission consents to a transfer or disposition or
until sixty (60) days elapse after the receipt of the notice, whichever period
expires earlier.
      3.   All persons so notified shall, within ten (10) days after receipt of
the notice, advise the Tax Commission of all such credits, other personal
property or debts in their possession, under their control or owing by them.
      4.   If such notice seeks to prevent the transfer or other disposition of
a deposit in a bank or other credits or personal property in the possession or
under the control of a bank, the notice, to be effective, shall be delivered or
mailed to the branch or office of such bank at which such deposit is carried or
at which such credits or personal property is held.
      5.   If, during the effective period of the notice to withhold, any
person so notified makes any transfer or disposition of the property or debts
required to be withheld hereunder, to the extent of the value of the property
or the amount of the debts thus transferred or paid, he shall be liable to the
County for any indebtedness due under this Chapter from the person with respect
to whose obligation the notice was given if, solely by reason of such transfer
or disposition, the County is unable to recover the indebtedness of the person
with respect to whose obligation the notice was given. (1973 Code §4.52.010)
   D.   Collection of Tax:
      1.   Action for Collection of Tax:
         a.   Authority: At any time within three (3) years after any tax or
any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable and at any
time within three (3) years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of
tax required to be collected or within three (3) years after the last recording
of an abstract under subsection D2c hereof or of a certificate under subsection
D4 hereof, the Tax Commission may bring an action in the courts of this State
or any other state or of the United States in the name of the county to which
the tax is due and payable to collect the amount delinquent together with
penalties and interest. (1973 Code §4.56.010)
         b.   Prosecution of Action: The district attorney of the county to
which a part of the tax is due and payable, on behalf of the county, shall
prosecute the action, and the provisions of the NRS and the Nevada Rules of
Civil Procedure relating to the service of summons, pleadings, proofs, trials
and appeals are applicable to the proceedings. (1973 Code §4.56.020)
         c.   Writ of Attachment: In the action, a writ of attachment may
issue, and no bond or affidavit previous to the issuing of the attachment is
required. (1973 Code §4.56.030)
         d.   Prima Facie Evidence: In the action, a certificate by the Tax
Commission showing the delinquency shall be prima facie evidence of the
determination of the tax or the amount of the tax, of the delinquency of the
amounts set forth and of the compliance of the Tax Commission with all the
provisions of this Chapter in relation to the computation and determination of
the amount. (1973 Code §4.56.040)
         e.   Action for Use Tax: In any action relating to the use tax brought
under this Chapter, process may be served according to the Nevada Rules of
Civil Procedure or may be served upon any agent or clerk in this State employed
by any retailer in a place of business maintained by the retailer in this
State. In the latter case, a copy of the process shall forthwith be sent by
registered mail to the retailer at his principal or home office. (1973 Code
§4.56.050)
      2.   Summary Judgment:
         a.   Application for Judgment; Certificate of Delinquency: If any
amount required to be paid to the County under this Chapter is not paid when
due, the Tax Commission may, within three (3) years after the amount is due,
file in the office of the County Clerk a certificate specifying the amount
required to be paid, interest and penalty due, the name and address as it
appears on the records of the Tax Commission of the person liable, the
compliance of the Tax Commission with this Chapter in relation to the
determination of the amount required to be paid and a request that judgment be
entered against the person in the amount required to be paid, together with
interest and penalty as set forth in the certificate. (1973 Code §4.56.060)
         b.   Entry of Judgment: The County Clerk, immediately upon the filing
of the certificate shall enter a judgment for the County to which the tax is
due and payable against the person in the amount required to be paid, together
with interest and penalty as set forth in the certificate. (1973 Code
§4.56.070)
         c.   Filing of Abstract Judgment or Copy; Lien: An abstract of the
judgment or a copy may be filed for record with the county recorder of any
county.
From the time of the filing, the amount required to be paid, together with
interest and penalty set forth, constitutes a lien upon all the real property
in such County owned by the person liable or, afterwards and before the lien
expires, acquired by him. The lien has the force, effect and priority of a
judgment lien and shall continue for five (5) years from the date of the
judgment so entered by the County Clerk unless sooner released or otherwise
discharged.
The lien may, within five (5) years from the date of the judgment or within
five (5) years from the date of the last extension of the lien in the manner
herein provided, be extended by filing for record in the office of the County
Recorder of any county an abstract or copy of the judgment, and from the time
of such filing, the lien shall be extended to the real property in such county
for five (5) years, unless sooner released or otherwise discharged. (1973 Code
§4.56.080)
         d.   Execution of Judgment; Sale: Execution shall issue upon the
judgment upon request of the Tax Commission in the same manner as execution may
issue upon other judgments, and sales shall be held under such execution as
prescribed in the NRS. (1973 Code §4.56.090)
      3.   Priority of Tax Claim or Lien; Prior Recorded Liens or Other Debts:
The amounts required to be paid by any person under this Chapter, together with
interest and penalties, shall be satisfied first in any of the following cases:
         a.   Whenever the person is insolvent.
         b.   Whenever the person makes a voluntary assignment of his assets.
         c.   Whenever the estate of the person in the hands of executors,
administrators or heirs is insufficient to pay all of the debts due from the
deceased.
         d.   Whenever the estate and effects of an absconding, concealed or
absent person required to pay any amount under this Chapter are levied upon by
process of law.
This subsection does not give the County a preference over any recorded lien
which attached prior to the date when the amounts required to be paid became a
lien or preference over costs of administration, funeral expenses, expenses of
last illness, family allowances, debts preferred by the laws of the United
States or wages as provided in the NRS 150.220. (1973 Code §4.56.100)
      4.   Certificate of Delinquency; Lien:
         a.   If any amount required to be paid to the County under this
Chapter is not paid when due, the Tax Commission may, within three (3) years
after the amount is due, file for record in the office of the Lyon County
Recorder or of any other county, a certificate specifying the amount, interest
and penalty due, the name and address as it appears on the records of the Tax
Commission of the person liable for the same and the fact that the Tax
Commission has complied with all provisions of this Chapter in the
determination of the amount required to be paid.
         b.   From the time of the filing for record, the amount required to be
paid, together with interest and penalty, constitutes a lien upon all real
property in the county where filed, owned by the person or, afterwards and
before the lien expires, acquired by him. The lien has the force, effect and
priority of a judgment lien and shall continue for five (5) years from the time
of the filing of the certificate unless sooner released or otherwise
discharged.
         c.   The lien may, within five (5) years from the date of the filing
of the certificate or within five (5) years from the date of the last extension
of the lien in the manner herein provided, be extended by filing for record a
new certificate in the office of the county recorder of any such county, and
from the time of such filing, the lien shall be extended to the real property
in such county for five (5) years, unless sooner released or otherwise
discharged. (1973 Code §4.56.110)
      5.   Release or Subordinate Lien: The Tax Commission may, at any time,
release all or any portion of the property subject to any lien provided for in
this Chapter from the lien or subordinate the lien to other liens and
encumbrances if it determines that the amount, interest and penalties are
secured sufficiently by a lien on other property or that the release or
subordination of the lien will not jeopardize the collection of the amount,
interest and penalties. (1973 Code §4.56.120)
A certificate by the Tax Commission to the effect that any property has been
released from the lien or that the lien has been subordinated to other liens
and encumbrances shall be conclusive evidence that the property has been
released or that the lien has been subordinated as provided in the certificate.
(1973 Code §4.56.130)
      6.   Warrant for Collection of Tax: At any time, within three (3) years
after any person is delinquent in the payment of any amount herein required to
be paid or within three (3) years after the last recording of an abstract under
subsection D2c hereof or of a certificate under subsection D4 hereof, the Tax
Commission or its authorized representative may issue a warrant for the
enforcement of any liens and for the collection of any amount required to be
paid to the County under this Chapter.
The warrant shall be directed to any sheriff and shall have the same effect as
a writ of execution.
The warrant shall be levied and sale made pursuant to it in the same manner and
with the same effect as a levy of and a sale pursuant to a writ of execution.
(1973 Code §4.56.140)
      7.   Fees:
         a.   Sheriff's Fees: The Tax Commission may pay or advance to the
Sheriff the same fees, commissions and expenses for his services as are
provided by law for similar services pursuant to a writ of execution.
         b.   Publication Fees: The Tax Commission, and not the court, shall
approve the fees for publication in a newspaper. (1973 Code §4.56.150)
         c.   Liability for Fees: The fees, commissions and expenses are the
obligation of the person required to pay any amount under this Chapter and may
be collected from him by virtue of the warrant or in any other manner provided
in this Chapter for the collection of the tax. (1973 Code §4.56.160)
   E.   Seizure and Sale of Delinquent's Property:
      1.   Authority: At any time, within three (3) years after any person is
delinquent in the payment of any amount, the Tax Commission, forthwith, may
collect the amount in the following manner: The Tax Commission shall seize any
property, real or personal, of the person and sell the property, or a
sufficient part of it, at public auction to pay the amount due, together with
any interest or penalties imposed for the delinquency and any costs incurred on
account of the seizure and sale.
Any seizure made to collect a sales tax due shall be only of the property of
the retailer not exempt from execution under the provisions of the NRS. (1973
Code §4.60.010)
      2.   Notice of Sale: Notice of the sale and the time and place thereof
shall be given to the delinquent person in writing at least ten (10) days
before the date set for the sale in the following manner: The notice shall be
enclosed in an envelope addressed to the person, in case of a sale for use
taxes due, at his last known address or place of business and, in case of a
sale for sales taxes due, at his last known residence or place of business in
this State. It shall be deposited in the United States mail, postage prepaid.
The notice shall also be published for at least ten (10) days before the date
set for the sale in a newspaper of general circulation, published in the county
in which the property seized is to be sold. If there is no newspaper of general
circulation in the county, notice shall be posted in three (3) public places in
the county ten (10) days prior to the date set for the sale.
The notice shall contain a description of the property to be sold, a statement
of the amount due, including interest, penalties and costs, the name of the
delinquent and the further statement that unless the amount due, interest,
penalties and costs are paid on or before the time fixed in the notice for the
sale, the property, or so much of it as may be necessary, will be sold in
accordance with law and the notice. (1973 Code §4.60.020)
      3.   Sale of Property; Disposition of Unsold Property: At the sale, the
Tax Commission shall sell the property in accordance with law and the notice
and shall deliver to the purchaser a bill of sale for the personal property and
a deed for any real property sold. The bill of sale or deed vests the interests
or title of the person liable for the amount in the purchaser.
The unsold portion of any property seized may be left at the place of sale at
the risk of the person liable for the amount. (1973 Code §4.60.030)
      4.   Disposition of Excess Proceeds:
         a.   If, upon the sale, the moneys received exceed the total of all
amounts, including interest, penalties and costs due the County, the Tax
Commission shall return the excess to the person liable for the amounts and
obtain his receipt.
         b.   If any person having an interest in or lien upon the property
files with the Tax Commission, prior to the sale, notice of his interest or
lien, the Tax Commission shall withhold any excess, pending a determination of
the rights of the respective parties thereto by a court of competent
jurisdiction.
         c.   If, for any reason, the receipt of the person liable for the
amount is not available, the Tax Commission shall deposit the excess moneys
with the County Treasurer, as trustee for the owner, subject to the order of
the person liable for the amount, his heirs, successors or assigns. (1973 Code
§4.60.040)
 
Notes
1 1. See subsection
  4.01.8B of this Chapter.
2 1. See subsection
  4.01.08B of this Chapter.
4.01.10: LIABILITY OF SUCCESSORS:
If any retailer liable for any amount under this Chapter sells out his business
or stock of goods or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall
withhold sufficient of the purchase price to cover such amount until the former
owner produces a receipt from the Tax Commission showing that it has been paid
or a certificate stating that no amount is due. (1973 Code §4.64.010)
If the purchaser of a business or stock of goods fails to withhold the purchase
price as required, he becomes personally liable for the payment of the amount
required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchasing price, valued in
money. Within sixty (60) days after receiving a written request from the
purchaser for a certificate or within sixty (60) days from the date the former
owner's records are made available for audit, whichever period expires later,
but in any event not later than ninety (90) days after receiving the request,
the Tax Commission shall either issue the certificate or mail notice to the
purchaser at his address as it appears on the records of the Tax Commission of
the amount that must be paid as a condition of issuing the certificate.
Failure of the Tax Commission to mail the notice will release the purchaser
from any further obligation to withhold the purchase price as above provided.
The time within which the obligation of a successor may be enforced shall start
to run at the time the retailer sells out his business or stock of goods or at
the time that the determination against the retailer becomes final, whichever
event occurs later. (1973 Code §4.64.020)
4.01.11: INJUNCTION PROHIBITED; ACTION FOR REFUND:
   A.   Injunction or Other Process Prohibited: No injunction or writ of
mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or
proceeding in any court against the State, a county or any officer thereof to
prevent or enjoin the collection under this Chapter of any tax or any amount of
tax required to be collected. (1973 Code §4.68.010)
   B.   Action for Refund:
      1.   Claim Required: No suit or proceeding shall be maintained in any
court for the recovery of any amount alleged to have been erroneously or
illegally determined or collected unless a claim for refund or credit has been
duly filed. (1973 Code §4.68.020)
      2.   Time to Sue: Within ninety (90) days after the mailing of the notice
of the Tax Commission's action upon a claim filed pursuant to this Chapter, the
claimant may bring an action against the Tax Commission on the grounds set
forth in the claim in a court of competent jurisdiction in any county for the
recovery of the whole or any part of the amount with respect to which the claim
has been disallowed.
Failure to bring action within the time specified constitutes a waiver of any
demand against the County on account of alleged overpayments. (1973 Code
§4.68.030)
      3.   Failure of Tax Commission to Mail Notice; Right of Action: If the
Tax Commission fails to mail notice of action on a claim within six (6) months
after the claim is filed, the claimant may, prior to the mailing of notice by
the Tax Commission of its action on the claim, consider the claim disallowed
and bring an action against the Tax Commission on the grounds set forth in the
claim for the recovery of the whole or any part of the amount claimed as an
overpayment. (1973 Code §4.68.040)
   C.   Judgments:
      1.   If judgment is rendered for the plaintiff, the amount of the
judgment shall first be credited as follows:
         a.   If the judgment is for a refund of sales taxes, it shall be
credited on any sales or use tax or amount of use tax due from the plaintiff.
         b.   If the judgment is for a refund of use taxes, it shall be
credited on any use tax or amount of use tax due from the plaintiff under
Section
4.01.04 of this Chapter.
The balance of the judgment shall be refunded to the plaintiff. (1973 Code
§4.68.050)
      2.   In any judgment, interest shall be allowed at the rate of six
percent (6%) per year upon the amount found to have been illegally collected
from the date of payment of the amount to the date of allowance of credit on
account of the judgment or to a date preceding the date of the refund warrant
by not more than thirty (30) days, the date to be determined by the Tax
Commission. (1973 Code §4.68.060)
      3.   A judgment shall not be rendered in favor of the plaintiff in any
action brought against the Tax Commission to recover any amount paid when the
action is brought by or in the name of an assignee of the person paying the
amount or by any person other than the person who paid the amount. (1973 Code
§4.68.070)
4.01.12: RECOVERY OF ERRONEOUS REFUNDS; CANCELLATION OF ILLEGAL DETERMINATION:
   A.   Recovery of Erroneous Refunds:
      1.   The Tax Commission may recover any refund or part thereof which is
erroneously made and any credit or part thereof which is erroneously allowed in
an action brought in a court of competent jurisdiction in the County, in the
name of the County. (1973 Code §4.72.010)
      2.   The District Attorney of the County, on behalf of the County, shall
prosecute the action, and the provisions of the NRS and the Nevada Rules of
Civil Procedure relating to service of summons, pleadings, proofs, trials and
appeals are applicable to the proceedings. (1973 Code §4.72.020)
   B.   Cancellation of Illegal Determination:
      1.   If any amount in excess of twenty five dollars ($25.00) has been
illegally determined either by the person filing the return or by the Tax
Commission, the Tax Commission shall certify this fact to the Board of County
Commissioners, and such Board shall authorize the cancellation of the amount
upon the records of the Tax Commission.
      2.   If an amount not exceeding twenty five dollars ($25.00) has been
illegally determined either by the person filing a return or by the Tax
Commission, the Tax Commission, without certifying this fact to the Board,
shall authorize the cancellation of the amount upon the records of the Tax
Commission. (1973 Code §4.72.030)
4.01.13: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Tax Commission:
      1.   Prior to January 1, 1971, the Board of County Commissioners shall
contract with the Tax Commission to perform all functions incident to the
administration and operation of this Chapter. (1973 Code §4.76.100)
      2.   The Tax Commission shall enforce the provisions of this Chapter and
may prescribe, adopt and enforce rules and regulations relating to the
administration and enforcement hereof.
      3.   The Tax Commission may prescribe the extent to which any ruling or
regulation shall be applied without retroactive effect. (1973 Code §4.76.010)
   B.   Administrative Assistants: The Tax Commission may employ accountants,
auditors, investigators, assistants and clerks necessary for the efficient
administration of this Chapter, and may delegate authority to its
representatives to conduct hearings, prescribe regulations or perform any other
duties imposed hereby. (1973 Code §4.76.020)
   C.   Records Kept by Taxpayers:
      1.   Every seller, every retailer and every person storing, using or
otherwise consuming in this County tangible personal property purchased from a
retailer shall keep such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers
in such form as the Tax Commission may require. Every such seller, retailer or
person who files the returns required under this Chapter shall keep such
records for not less than four (4) years from the making of such records unless
the Tax Commission, in writing, sooner authorizes their destruction.
      2.   Every such seller, retailer or person who fails to file the returns
required under this Chapter shall keep such record for not less than eight (8)
years from the making of such records unless the Tax Commission, in writing,
sooner authorizes their destruction. (1973 Code §4.76.030)
   D.   Reports for Administering Use Tax: In administration of the use tax,
the Tax Commission may require the filing of reports by any person or class of
persons having in his or their possession or custody information relating to
sales of tangible personal property, the storage, use or other consumption of
which is subject to the tax. The report shall:
      1.   Be filed when the Tax Commission requires.
      2.   Set forth the names and addresses of purchasers of the tangible
personal property, the sales price of the property, the date of sale and such
other information as the Tax Commission may require. (1973 Code §4.76.050)
   E.   Investigation:
      1.   Authority: The Tax Commission, or any person authorized in writing
by it, may examine the books, papers, records and equipment of any person
selling tangible personal property and any person liable for the use tax and
may investigate the character of the business of the person in order to verify
the accuracy of any return made or, if no return is made by the person, to
ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. (1973 Code §4.76.040)
      2.   Confidentiality:
         a.   It is a misdemeanor for any member or official or employee of the
Tax Commission to make known in any manner whatever the business affairs,
operations or information obtained by an investigation of records and equipment
of any retailer or any other person visited or examined in the discharge of
official duty or the amount or source of income, profits, losses, expenditures
or any particular thereof set forth or disclosed in any return or to permit any
return or copy thereof or any book containing any abstract or particulars
thereof to be seen or examined by any person not connected with the Tax
Commission.
The Governor may, however, by general or special order, authorize examination
of the records maintained by the Tax Commission under this Chapter by other
State officers, by tax officers of another state, by the Federal government, if
a reciprocal arrangement exists, or by any other person. The information so
obtained pursuant to the order of the Governor shall not be made public except
to the extent and in the manner that the order may authorize that it be made
public.
         b.   Successors, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators,
assignees and guarantors, if directly interested, may be given information as
to the items included in the measure and amounts of any unpaid tax or amounts
of tax required to be collected, interest and penalties. (1973 Code §4.76.060)
4.01.14: AMENDMENTS:
All amendments to the Local Support Tax Law, chapter 374 of NRS, which becomes
effective on or after January 1, 1971, and are not inconsistent with chapter
377 of NRS, shall automatically become a part of this Chapter on their
respective effective dates. (1973 Code §4.80.020)
4.01.15: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any retailer or other person who fails or refuses to furnish any return
required to be made or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or
other data required by the Tax Commission or who renders a false or fraudulent
return or any person who violates any provision of this Chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor. (1973 Code §4.76.070)
Any person deemed guilty of a misdemeanor under the provisions of this Chapter
shall, unless otherwise specified herein, upon conviction thereof, be fined in
the sum of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or be imprisoned in the
County jail for a term not to exceed six (6) months or punished by both fine
and imprisonment. (1973 Code §4.80.010)
In the determination of any case arising under this Chapter, the rule of res
judicata is applicable only if the liability involved is for the same quarterly
period as was involved in another case previously determined. (1973 Code
§4.76.080)
The remedies of the County provided for in this Chapter are cumulative, and no
action taken by the Tax Commission, the Attorney General or the District
Attorney constitutes an election by the County to pursue any remedy to the
exclusion of any other remedy for which provision is made in this Chapter.
(1973 Code §4.76.090)
4.01.16: EFFECTIVE DATE OF TAX:
The taxes imposed by this Chapter are due and payable to the Tax Commission on
the first day of the first month following the effective date of Ordinance
Number 60. (1973 Code §4.32.010)
CHAPTER 2
TRANSIENT LODGING TAX
SECTION:
4.02.01: Short Title
4.02.02: Definition
4.02.03: Tax Imposed
4.02.04: Payment Of Tax; Delinquencies
4.02.05: Disposition And Use Of Tax Receipts
4.02.06: Confidentiality Of Tax Data
4.02.01: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the LYON COUNTY TRANSIENT LODGING TAX ORDINANCE
and may be known as the LYON COUNTY ROOM TAX ORDINANCE. (Ord. 335, 11-16-1989)
4.02.02: DEFINITION:
For the purposes of this chapter, "transient lodging" is defined as all rooms
or spaces rented in hotels, motels, timeshare projects, vacation trailer parks,
campgrounds, recreational vehicle parks, and any other establishment that rents
rooms or spaces to temporary or transient guests. (Ord. 470, 11-21-2002, eff.
1-1-2003)
4.02.03: TAX IMPOSED:
   A.   There is hereby fixed and imposed a license tax on every person
operating, conducting or engaging in a rental business within the county
(outside and beyond the limits of the incorporated cities that impose their own
transient lodging tax within the county), on the gross receipts received or
derived from such rental at a rate of five percent (5%).
   B.   In addition to the tax imposed and set forth in subsection A of this
section, there is fixed and imposed a tax on every licensee operating,
conducting or engaging in a rental of lodging business within the county
(outside and beyond the limits of any incorporated cities that impose their own
transient lodging tax within the county), at the rate of one percent (1%) of
the gross income received or derived for lodging or room rentals from such
endeavors, business, or enterprise. Three-eighths (3/8) of the proceeds of said
tax shall be paid to the department of taxation, state of Nevada, for the fund
for the promotion of tourism established in chapter 231 of the Nevada Revised
Statutes; the remaining five-eighths (5/8) of all proceeds of the tax shall be
deposited with the county room tax board created pursuant to Nevada Revised
Statutes 244A.597 and 244A.598, to be used to advertise the resources of the
county related to tourism, including, but not limited to, available
accommodations, transportation, entertainment, natural resources, climate and
to promote special events. The advertising is restricted to the following types
of media: television, radio, newspaper, magazine, internet, or brochures. (Ord.
547, 3-17-2011)
4.02.04: PAYMENT OF TAX; DELINQUENCIES:
The transient lodging tax shall be transmitted to the Lyon County treasurer
monthly, within fifteen (15) days after the end of each calendar month.
If the tax imposed herein is not paid within the time set forth herein, persons
liable therefor shall pay, in addition to the tax:
   A.   A penalty of ten percent (10%) of the amount due; and
   B.   Interest on the amount due at the rate of one and one-half percent
(1.5%) per month, or fraction thereof, from the date on which the tax became
due until the date of payment. (Ord. 547, 3-17-2011)
4.02.05: DISPOSITION AND USE OF TAX RECEIPTS:
   A.   Except as otherwise provided herein, the board of commissioners may use
the revenue received from the provisions of this chapter to plan, construct,
finance, maintain, operate, repair, equip, furnish, improve and manage
recreational facilities related to tourism. Revenue not used for these purposes
shall be allocated to the county room tax board for the uses specified in
subsection B2 of this section.
   B.   All revenue derived from the one percent (1%) tax on gross receipts of
the rental of lodging in Lyon County set forth in subsection
4.02.03B of this chapter, for the promotion of tourism, shall be divided,
distributed and used as follows:
      1.   Three-eighths (3/8) of all proceeds shall be remitted to the state
department of taxation for deposit in the fund for promotion of tourism.
      2.   Five-eighths (5/8) of all proceeds shall be deposited with the Lyon
County room tax board to be used to advertise the county's tourist attractions,
events and facilities. The advertising is restricted to the following types of
media: television, radio, newspaper, magazine, internet, or brochures. (Ord.
547, 3-17-2011)
4.02.06: CONFIDENTIALITY OF TAX DATA:
The Lyon County room tax board, if such shall be created, or otherwise the
board of Lyon County commissioners, is authorized to inspect all records of
persons liable for the transient lodging tax to determine compliance with this
chapter. Any information or business data obtained thereby is declared
confidential and must not be disclosed by any member, officer or employee of
the room tax board or county unless the disclosure is authorized by affirmative
action of a majority of the members of the room tax board or county
commissioners. Continuing disclosure may be authorized under an agreement with
the Nevada department of taxation for the exchange of information concerning
taxpayers. (Ord. 547, 3-17-2011)
CHAPTER 3
MOTOR VEHICLE FUEL TAX 1
SECTION:
4.03.01: Tax Imposed
4.03.02: Tax Returns; Payment Of Tax
4.03.03: Administration Of Provisions
4.03.04: Amendments
4.03.05: Effective Date Of Tax
 
Notes
1 1. See title 3, chapter 4, "Regional Transportation Commission", of this
  code.
4.03.01: TAX IMPOSED:
   A.   There is hereby imposed a nine cent ($0.09) per gallon tax on motor
vehicle fuel sold in Lyon County.
   B.   There is hereby imposed a five cent ($0.05) per gallon tax on diesel
fuel, as defined in NRS 373.0246, sold in Lyon County. (Ord. 410, 5-18-1995,
eff. 6-2-1995; amd. Ord. 611, 4-2-2020)
4.03.02: TAX RETURNS; PAYMENT OF TAX:
   A.   Render to the county a statement of all motor vehicle fuel sold,
distributed or used by him within the county, as well as all fuel sold,
distributed or used in this county by a purchaser thereof, upon which sale,
distribution or use the dealer has assumed liability for the tax thereon under
Nevada Revised Statutes 365.020 during the preceding calendar month; an
additional dealer's license is not required; and
   B.   Pay an excise tax of nine cents ($0.09) per gallon on all fuel so sold,
distributed or used in the manner and within the time prescribed in Nevada
Revised Statutes chapter 373.
   C.   Pay an excise tax of five cents ($0.05) per gallon on all diesel fuel,
as defined in NRS 373.0246, so sold, distributed or used in the manner and
within the time prescribed in Nevada Revised Statutes chapter 373. (Ord. 410,
5-18-1995, eff. 6-2-1995; amd. Ord. 611, 4-2-2020)
4.03.03: ADMINISTRATION OF PROVISIONS:
Lyon County shall contract with the department of motor vehicles and public
safety to perform all functions incident to the administration or operation of
the county motor vehicle fuel and diesel tax, unless an amendment is
unnecessary under Nevada Revised Statutes chapter 373. (Ord. 461, 11-1-2001,
eff. 1-1-2002; amd. Ord. 611, 4-2-2020)
4.03.04: AMENDMENTS:
All amendments to Nevada Revised Statutes chapter 365, subsequent to the
effective date hereof, not inconsistent with Nevada Revised Statutes chapter
373, automatically become a part of this chapter. (Ord. 410, 5-18-1995, eff. 6-
2-1995; amd. Ord. 611, 4-2-2020)
4.03.05: EFFECTIVE DATE OF TAX:
   A.   The county motor vehicle fuel tax imposed pursuant to
4.03.01A, or any change in the amount of the tax become effective on the first
day of the second calendar month following enactment of the ordinance imposing,
or changing the amount of, the motor vehicle fuel tax.
   B.   The diesel tax imposed pursuant to
4.03.01B, or any change in the amount of the tax become effective on the first
day of the second calendar month following enactment of the ordinance imposing,
or changing the amount of, the diesel tax. (Ord. 410, 5-18-1995, eff. 6-2-1995;
amd. Ord. 611, 4-2-2020)
CHAPTER 4
HISTORIC AND LAND PRESERVATION
SECTION:
4.04.01: Definitions
4.04.02: Procedure And Purpose
4.04.03: Criteria For Determining Open Space Assessment
4.04.01: DEFINITIONS:
The following words or terms shall have the meanings given herein:
HISTORIC, ARCHAEOLOGICAL AND CULTURAL SITES: An area of land associated with
history, tradition, archaeological findings or the cultural heritage of Lyon
County.
PRIMITIVE AREAS: An area of undisturbed natural environment which may be
considered as wilderness area with limited recreational use.
SCENIC RESOURCES: A natural setting in combination with certain undisturbed
physical qualities such as streams, rivers, rock outcroppings, vegetation or
outstanding service features.
WATERSHEDS: An area of land separated from other land by a ridge or highland
and serving as a drainage area by stream or river. (1973 Code §§3.04.010,
3.04.020, 3.04.030, 3.04.040 and 3.04.050)
4.04.02: PROCEDURE AND PURPOSE:
Applications pursuant to this chapter shall be received by the Lyon County
Assessor from owners of real property and shall be in conformance with State
law and shall be for the purpose of the preservation of land to conserve and
enhance natural and scenic resources, historic, archaeological and cultural
sites, primitive areas and watersheds. The additional purpose of this chapter
is to allow applicants to qualify for property taxation pursuant to Nevada
Revised Statutes chapter 361. (1973 Code §3.04.060)
4.04.03: CRITERIA FOR DETERMINING OPEN SPACE ASSESSMENT:
The following criteria shall be used in considering all applications for open
space assessment pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes:
   A.   The minimum size of the parcel of land that is the subject of the
application shall be five (5) acres. There shall be no maximum size. (1973 Code
§3.04.070)
   B.   The land shall be zoned RR-5, RR-10 or RR-20 as provided by title 15 of
this Code and be privately owned. (1973 Code §3.04.070; amd. Ord. 603, 11-1-
2018)
   C.   The subject land shall be open to use by the general public. Access to
the subject property shall be provided to the general public and designated on
the property.
   D.   The applicant shall allow the general public access to the subject
property for walking or hiking but not for camping, cooking, campfires, whether
artificial or natural, or overnight use, unless the applicant consents thereto.
(1973 Code §3.04.070)
CHAPTER 5
COUNTY FUNDS
SECTION:
4.05.01: Forensic Services Fund
4.05.01: FORENSIC SERVICES FUND:
   A.   Fund Created: The County Treasurer shall designate a Forensic Services
Fund for the deposit of Court-imposed fees for the analysis of controlled
substances.
   B.   Fee Assessed: A fee in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be
assessed by the justice or judge at the time of sentencing of a defendant who
pleads or is found guilty in Lyon County of any violation of NRS chapter 453
and an analysis of a controlled substance was performed in relation to the
defendant's case.
   C.   Payment To Treasurer: On or before the fifth day of each month, any
money collected for the preceding month, pursuant to subsection B of this
Section, must be paid by the clerk of the Court to the County Treasurer.
   D.   Disposition Of Funds:
      1.   Upon receipt, the County Treasurer shall deposit any fee collected
for the analysis of controlled substances in the Fund established in subsection
A of this Section.
      2.   The fees collected pursuant to this Section must be used to help
defray the cost of forensic services to Lyon County. (Ord. 347, 7-5-1990)
CHAPTER 6
JUSTICE COURTS ADMINISTRATIVE ASSESSMENT
SECTION:
4.06.01: Administrative Assessment
4.06.02: Exceptions
4.06.03: Assessment Collection
4.06.04: Installments
4.06.05: Special Revenue Fund
4.06.01: ADMINISTRATIVE ASSESSMENT:
When a defendant pleads or is found guilty of a misdemeanor prosecuted in the
Townships of Smith Valley, Mason Valley, Canal or Dayton, Lyon County, Nevada,
including the violation of any County or municipal ordinance, the justice or
judge shall include in the sentence the sum of ten dollars ($10.00) as an
administrative assessment for the provision of court facilities and render a
judgment against the defendant for the assessment. The administrative
assessment is in addition to any assessment imposed pursuant to NRS 176.059 or
other statutory authority. (Ord. 437, 4-2-1998, eff. 7-1-1998; amd. Ord. 608,
9-5-2019)
4.06.02: EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of Section
4.06.01 of this Chapter do not apply to:
   A.   An ordinance regulating metered parking; or
   B.   An ordinance which is specifically designated as imposing a civil
penalty or liability pursuant to NRS 244.3575 or 268.019. (Ord. 437, 4-2-1998,
eff. 7-1-1998; amd. Ord. 608, 9-5-2019)
4.06.03: ASSESSMENT COLLECTION:
The money collected for the administrative assessment provided for in this
Chapter must not be deducted from the fine imposed by the justice or judge but
must be imposed against the defendant in addition to the fine. The money
collected for this administrative assessment must be stated separately on the
court's docket and must be included in the amount posted for bail. If the
defendant is found not guilty or the charges are dismissed, the money deposited
with the court must be returned to the defendant. If the justice or the judge
cancels a fine because the fine has been determined to be uncollectible, any
balance of the fine and the administrative assessment remaining unpaid shall be
deemed to be uncollectible and the defendant is not required to pay it. If a
fine is determined to be uncollectible, the defendant is not entitled to a
refund of the fine or administrative assessment he has paid and the justice or
judge shall not recalculate the administrative assessment. (Ord. 437, 4-2-1998,
eff. 7-1-1998; amd. Ord. 608, 9-5-2019)
4.06.04: INSTALLMENTS:
If the justice or judge permits the fine and any administrative assessments
provided by law to be paid in installments, the payments must be applied in the
following order:
   A.   To pay the unpaid balance of an administrative assessment imposed
pursuant to NRS 176.059;
   B.   To pay the unpaid balance of the administrative assessment provided for
in this Chapter; and
   C.   To pay the fine. (Ord. 437, 4-2-1998, eff. 7-1-1998; amd. Ord. 608, 9-
5-2019)
4.06.05: SPECIAL REVENUE FUND:
The money collected for the administrative assessment provided for in this
Chapter must be paid by the clerk of the court to the County Treasurer on or
before the fifth day of each month for the preceding month. The County
Treasurer shall deposit the money received to a Special Revenue Fund. The
County may use the money in the Special Revenue Fund only to:
   A.   Acquire land on which to construct additional facilities for the
justice courts or a regional justice center which includes the justice courts;
   B.   Construct or acquire additional facilities for the justice courts or a
regional justice center which includes the justice courts;
   C.   Renovate or remodel existing facilities for the justice courts;
   D.   Acquire furniture, fixtures and equipment necessitated by the
construction or acquisition of additional facilities or the renovation of an
existing facility for the justice courts or a regional justice center which
includes the justice courts;
   E.   Acquire advanced technology for use in the additional or renovated
facilities;
   F.   Pay debt service on any bonds issued pursuant to subsection 3 of NRS
350.020 for the acquisition of land or facilities or the construction or
renovation of facilities for the justice courts or a regional justice center
which includes the justice courts.
Any money remaining in the Special Revenue Fund after five (5) fiscal years
from the effective date hereof must be deposited in the County General Fund for
the continued maintenance of court facilities if it has not been committed for
expenditure pursuant to a plan for the construction or acquisition of court
facilities or improvements to court facilities. The County Treasurer shall
provide, upon request by the justice courts, monthly reports of the revenue
credited to and expenditures made from the Special Revenue Fund. (Ord. 437, 4-
2-1998, eff. 7-1-1998; amd. Ord. 608, 9-5-2019)
CHAPTER 7
CIVIL CASES; ADDITIONAL FEES
SECTION:
4.07.01: Filing Fee
4.07.02: Exception
4.07.03: Collection
4.07.01: FILING FEE:
The district court clerk shall impose a filing fee of ten dollars ($10.00)
pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 19.03135, in addition to any other filing
fee required by law, to be paid on the commencement of any civil action or
proceeding in the district court for which a filing fee is required and on the
filing of any answer or appearance in any such action or proceeding for which a
filing fee is required.
Each justice of the peace shall impose a filing fee of ten dollars ($10.00)
pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 4.075, in addition to any other filing fee
required by law, to be paid on the commencement of any civil action or
proceeding in the justice court for which a filing fee is required and on the
filing of any answer of appearance in any such action or proceeding for which a
filing fee is required. (Ord. 548, 5-19-2011)
4.07.02: EXCEPTION:
The provisions of section
4.07.01 of this chapter do not apply if a district court judge grants a waiver
of filing fees pursuant to Nevada law. (Ord. 548, 5-19-2011)
4.07.03: COLLECTION:
On or before the fifth day of each month, the clerk of the district court and
each justice court shall account for and pay over to the county treasurer all
such fees collected during the preceding month for credit to an account for
programs for the prevention and treatment of the abuse of alcohol and drugs in
the county general fund. (Ord. 548, 5-19-2011)
CHAPTER 8
RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION TAX FOR PARKS
SECTION:
4.08.01: Short Title
4.08.02: Authority
4.08.03: Declaration Of Purpose
4.08.04: Definitions
4.08.05: Park District
4.08.06: Tax Rate
4.08.07: Procedure For Collecting The Tax
4.08.08: Exemption From Tax
4.08.09: Residential Construction Tax Fund
4.08.10: Acquisition Of Land
4.08.11: Use Of Revenue
4.08.12: Severability
4.08.01: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the LYON COUNTY RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION TAX
ORDINANCE FOR PARKS. (Ord. 476, 7-1-2004, eff. 7-19-2004)
4.08.02: AUTHORITY:
This chapter is enacted pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 278.497 to
278.4987, inclusive. (Ord. 476, 7-1-2004, eff. 7-19-2004)
4.08.03: DECLARATION OF PURPOSE:
The board of county commissioners have found:
   A.   The public interest, convenience, health, safety and welfare require
that Lyon County provide neighborhood parks and facilities for parks for its
residents; and
   B.   The imposition of a residential construction tax on the privilege of
constructing apartment houses and residential dwelling units and developing
mobile home lots is a desirable method of acquiring, improving and expanding
park and recreation facilities. (Ord. 476, 7-1-2004, eff. 7-19-2004)
4.08.04: DEFINITIONS:
Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this
section govern the construction of this chapter.
APARTMENT HOUSE: A building arranged in several suites of connecting rooms,
each suite designed for independent housekeeping, but with certain mechanical
conveniences, such as air conditioning, heat, light or elevator services shared
in common by all families occupying the building.
FACILITIES: Turf, trees, irrigation, playground apparatus, playing fields, play
areas, picnic areas, equipment or appurtenances designed to serve the natural
persons, families and small groups from the neighborhood from which the tax was
collected.
MOBILE HOME LOT: Any area or tract of land designated, designed or used for the
occupancy of a mobile or manufactured home.
NEIGHBORHOOD: A geographical area containing residential dwelling units in such
proximity as to create a common recreational need which can be provided by a
common facility.
NEIGHBORHOOD PARK: A site not exceeding twenty five (25) acres, designed to
serve the recreational and outdoor needs of natural persons, families and small
groups.
RESIDENTIAL DWELLING UNIT: A building or structure or a portion of a building
or structure planned, designed or used as a residence for one family only,
living independently of other families or persons and having its own bathroom
and housekeeping facilities included in the unit. This definition includes
condominiums and townhouses.
TOTALLY DESTROYED: The destruction of the residential dwelling unit from
whatever cause which requires the reconstruction of the unit from its
foundation. (Ord. 476, 7-1-2004, eff. 7-19-2004)
4.08.05: PARK DISTRICT:
Lyon County, the boundaries of which are described in Nevada Revised Statutes
243.235, is designated as one park district. This district is divided into
neighborhoods, the boundaries of which are set by resolution of the board of
county commissioners based upon a review of population trends, concentrations
and neighborhood development throughout the unincorporated areas of Lyon
County. The neighborhoods shall be established so as to ensure that monies
collected from the residential construction tax are expended for the benefit of
the neighborhoods from which they are collected. (Ord. 476, 7-1-2004, eff. 7-
19-2004)
4.08.06: TAX RATE:
   A.   The residential construction tax rate for parks on each residential
dwelling unit is equal to the lesser of one percent (1%) of the valuation of
each residential dwelling unit to the nearest dollar, or one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) unless the building permit is issued for a multiple residential
dwelling unit building. The residential construction tax on each residential
unit of a multiple-unit building is equal to the lesser of one percent (1%) of
its proportionate value to the nearest dollar or one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) per unit. Building valuation is based on the actual costs of
residential construction as determined by the county's building official. The
residential construction tax rate on the development of each mobile home lot is
eighty percent (80%) of the average residential tax paid per residential
dwelling unit in the county during the calendar year preceding the fiscal year
in which the lot development permit is issued or a lesser fee adopted by
resolution of the board of commissioners.
   B.   A credit, in the amount of fees already paid on the lot for parks, must
be allowed against the tax in subsection A of this section. If the developer
dedicates property or facilities for a park, with the county's approval, the
value may be prorated among the lots of the subdivision and may be a credit
against the tax in subsection A of this section. Credits apply to dedications
made after the adoption of this chapter. (Ord. 476, 7-1-2004, eff. 7-19-2004)
4.08.07: PROCEDURE FOR COLLECTING THE TAX:
The total residential construction tax fee must be collected prior to the
issuance of any building permits for construction of any apartment house,
residential dwelling unit, or the remodeling of any nonresidential structure
for the purposes of residential use, or lot development permit for the
development of any mobile home lots. This tax may be imposed once per mobile
home lot or residential dwelling unit. The residential construction tax must be
paid to the Lyon County community development department, which shall maintain
a record of all monies collected. (Ord. 476, 7-1-2004, eff. 7-19-2004)
4.08.08: EXEMPTION FROM TAX:
   A.   A residential unit which is totally destroyed and was issued a building
permit before the imposition of the tax or this tax was paid when the county
issued a building permit is exempt from this tax on issuance of a permit for
the unit's reconstruction.
   B.   The board delegates to the director of the department of community
development the responsibility to determine whether a residential dwelling unit
has been totally destroyed and if the reconstruction of the unit is exempt from
the tax. If the owner of a residential dwelling unit is aggrieved by the
determination made by the director, the owner may appeal the determination to
the county manager in writing. (Ord. 476, 7-1-2004, eff. 7-19-2004)
4.08.09: RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION TAX FUND:
   A.   There is established in the office of the county treasurer a special
fund known as the park residential construction tax fund.
   B.   The fund must be divided into separate accounts for each neighborhood.
   C.   All taxes collected pursuant to this chapter must be placed in the fund
for credit to the account within the fund for the neighborhood from which the
tax was collected.
   D.   All interest derived from money in the fund accrues to the fund and
must be credited to the account from which the interest was derived.
   E.   The director of community development and the county treasurer shall
establish a record keeping system for each account which will reflect the taxes
collected for each subdivision or development within each neighborhood or, in
cases where there is no subdivision or development, the neighborhood from which
the money was collected.
   F.   Money within the fund must be used only for the acquisition,
improvement, or expansion of neighborhood parks or the installation of
facilities in existing or neighborhood parks for the benefit of the
neighborhood from which it was collected. (Ord. 476, 7-1-2004, eff. 7-19-2004)
4.08.10: ACQUISITION OF LAND:
   A.   If, in the opinion of the board of county commissioners, it is in the
best interest of the public to purchase land from the subdivider or developer
within the subdivision or development for development of a park, such land may
be purchased at or below fair market value, at the option of the county, with
money in the form of credits against future construction tax payments which
become due for the subdivision or development.
   B.   At the option of the county, construction of facilities may be
performed by the county, the developer or independent contractors. If the
developer performs the work under contract with the county, land and
construction payments may be made in the form of credits in an amount not to
exceed the value of the work performed and the value of the property purchased
or the total amount of residential construction tax which may be collected on
the subdivision.
   C.   The valuation of the property and improvements must be made by an
independent appraiser agreed to by the county and paid for by the subdivider or
developer.
   D.   Title to the property and improvements shall be conveyed to the county
free of any liens, taxes or other encumbrances which will be the responsibility
of the developer until such time as the park or facility is completed and
accepted by the county in a lien free condition. Transfer of the title must be
accomplished upon recordation of the final map before the issuance of building
permits and the construction of the first unit in the subdivision or
development. (Ord. 476, 7-1-2004, eff. 7-19-2004)
4.08.11: USE OF REVENUE:
If a neighborhood park has not been developed, acquired or facilities have not
been installed in an existing park in the neighborhood in which the subdivision
or development is located within three (3) years after the date on which
seventy five percent (75%) of the residential dwelling units authorized within
that subdivision or development first became occupied, all money paid by the
subdivider or developer, together with the interest at the rate at which the
county has invested the money in the fund, must be refunded to the owners of
the lots in the subdivision or development at the time of the reversion on a
pro rata basis. The county manager is responsible to oversee that parks are
developed and facilities are installed in a timely manner. (Ord. 476, 7-1-2004,
eff. 7-19-2004)
4.08.12: SEVERABILITY:
In the event that any section, subsection, or portion of this chapter shall be
declared invalid by any court, such declaration of invalidity shall not affect
the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. (Ord. 476, 7-1-2004,
eff. 7-19-2004)
CHAPTER 9
IMPROVEMENT OF TRANSPORTATION TAX
SECTION:
4.09.01: Short Title
4.09.02: Authority
4.09.03: Declaration Of Purpose
4.09.04: Definitions
4.09.05: Tax Rate
4.09.06: Procedure For Collection Of Tax
4.09.07: Exemptions
4.09.08: Transportation Tax Fund; Creation; Expenditures
4.09.09: Use Of Revenue
4.09.10: Application To Statutes
4.09.11: Severability
4.09.01: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the LYON COUNTY TAX FOR IMPROVEMENT OF
TRANSPORTATION. (Ord. 485, 3-17-2005, eff. 4-11-2005)
4.09.02: AUTHORITY:
This chapter is enacted pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 278.710 and in
accordance with the vote at the 2004 general election for Lyon County wherein
voters approved imposition of the tax. (Ord. 485, 3-17-2005, eff. 4-11-2005)
4.09.03: DECLARATION OF PURPOSE:
The board of county commissioners has found:
   A.   The voters at the 2004 general election supported the imposition of a
tax on the privilege of development in Lyon County for the improvement and
maintenance of the transportation system in Lyon County;
   B.   The public interest, convenience, health, safety and welfare require
that Lyon County provide an adequate transportation system, including streets,
highways, and public rights of way; and
   C.   The imposition of this tax on the privilege of development is a
desirable method, in addition to other methods, of improving and maintaining
the transportation system in Lyon County. (Ord. 485, 3-17-2005, eff. 4-11-2005)
4.09.04: DEFINITIONS:
Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this
section govern the construction of this chapter.
BOARD: The Lyon County board of county commissioners.
COUNTY: Lyon County, Nevada.
INCORPORATED CITY: The cities of Yerington and Fernley.
NEW RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT: A building or a manufactured home planned,
designed or used as a residence, having its own bathroom and housekeeping
facilities in the unit. Without limiting the general nature of this definition,
"new residential development" includes each unit of an apartment, condominium,
townhouse, duplex, and other multi-family dwelling.
NEWLY DEVELOPED LOT FOR MOBILE HOME: For purposes of this chapter, is
considered a single-family dwelling unit of new residential construction.
OTHER NEW DEVELOPMENT: New industrial, commercial and agricultural development,
which includes construction of new or additional square feet of enclosed floor
space.
REGIONAL TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION: The Lyon County regional transportation
commission.
REPLACEMENT UNIT: A unit that is replacing an existing unit in Lyon County,
including the destruction of the unit from whatever cause which requires the
reconstruction or replacement of the unit. (Ord. 485, 3-17-2005, eff. 4-11-
2005)
4.09.05: TAX RATE:
The County imposes this tax in the County, including the incorporated cities,
at the following rates:
   A.   The tax rate per dwelling unit of new residential development or
equivalent thereof, which includes each unit of a townhouse, apartment,
condominium, duplex or other multi-family unit shall be:
      1.   Six hundred fifty dollars ($650.00) per unit, for the period before
July 1, 2005;
      2.   Seven hundred dollars ($700.00) per unit, on or after July 1, 2005,
and before July 1, 2010;
      3.   Eight hundred dollars ($800.00) per unit, on or after July 1, 2010,
and before July 1, 2015;
      4.   Nine hundred dollars ($900.00) per unit, on or after July 1, 2015,
and before July 1, 2020;
      5.   One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per unit on or after July 1, 2020.
   B.   The tax rate per square foot on other new development shall be:
      1.   Until July 1, 2020, twenty five cents ($0.25) per square foot.
      2.   Forty cents ($0.40) per square foot, on or after July 1, 2020 and
before July 1, 2021;
      3.   Forty five cents ($0.45) per square foot, on or after July 1, 2021
and before July 1, 2022;
      4.   Fifty cents ($0.50) per square foot, on or after July 1, 2022 and
before July 1, 2023;
      5.   Fifty five cents ($0.55) per square foot, on or after July 1, 2023
and before July 1, 2024;
      6.   Sixty cents ($0.60) per square foot, on or after July 1, 2024 and
before July 1, 2025;
      7.   Sixty five cents ($0.65) per square foot, on or after July 1, 2025.
(Ord. 485, 3-17-2005, eff. 4-11-2005; amd. Ord. 495, 8-18-2005, eff. 9-5-2005;
Ord. 610, 4-2-2020)
4.09.06: PROCEDURE FOR COLLECTION OF TAX:
   A.   County: The total tax due must be collected prior to the issuance of
any building permits for new construction or lot development permit for the
development of any mobile home lots. The tax must be paid to the Lyon County
Treasurer or other department, as determined by the County Comptroller. The
department collecting the tax shall maintain a record of all monies collected.
   B.   Incorporated Cities: The total tax due must be collected prior to the
issuance of any building permits for new construction or lot development permit
for the development of any mobile home lots within the boundaries of an
incorporated city. The tax must be paid to the department designated by the
City Manager. The department collecting the tax shall maintain a record of all
monies collected. The cities shall remit the tax collected pursuant to this
chapter to the County Treasurer on a quarterly basis. (Ord. 485, 3-17-2005,
eff. 4-11-2005)
4.09.07: EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   Replacement Unit: A replacement unit which was issued a building permit
before the imposition of the tax or this tax was paid when the County issued a
building permit is exempt from this tax on issuance of a permit for the unit's
reconstruction or replacement if the building permit or mobile home application
for the replacement unit is filed within twelve (12) months from the date the
previous unit is destroyed or removed.
   B.   Determination: The County Manager delegates to the Director of the
Department of Community Development and/or the Planning Director the
responsibility to determine whether a unit has been destroyed or is a
replacement unit, and thus is exempt from the tax. If the owner is aggrieved by
the determination made by the Director, the owner may appeal the determination
to the County Manager in writing. (Ord. 485, 3-17-2005, eff. 4-11-2005)
   C.   Agricultural Construction: New agricultural construction without
heating or cooling systems, on property zoned RR-20, is exempt from this tax.
(Ord. 485, 3-17-2005, eff. 4-11-2005; amd. Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
4.09.08: TRANSPORTATION TAX FUND; CREATION; EXPENDITURES:
   A.   There is established in the Office of the County Treasurer a special
fund known as the Tax for Improvement of Transportation Fund.
   B.   All taxes collected pursuant to this chapter must be placed in the
fund.
   C.   All expenditures from the fund shall be authorized and made in
accordance with this chapter. The County may expend the proceeds of the tax
authorized by this section, or any borrowing in anticipation of the tax,
pursuant to an interlocal agreement between the County and the Regional
Transportation Commission or the County and the cities with respect to the
projects to be financed with the proceeds of the tax. (Ord. 485, 3-17-2005,
eff. 4-11-2005)
4.09.09: USE OF REVENUE:
The tax shall be used exclusively to pay the cost of:
   A.   Projects related to the construction and maintenance of sidewalks,
streets, avenues, boulevards, highways, other public rights-of-way used
primarily for vehicular traffic and projects included in the Lyon County master
plan, transportation element, including, without limitation, overpass projects,
street projects and underpass projects, as defined in Nevada Revised Statutes
244A.037, 244A.053 and 244A.055, respectively:
      1.   Within the boundaries of the County;
      2.   Within one mile outside the boundaries of the County if the Board of
County Commissioners finds that such projects outside the boundaries of the
County will facilitate transportation within the County; or
      3.   Within thirty (30) miles outside the boundaries of the County and
the boundaries of this State, where those boundaries are coterminous, if:
         a.   The projects consist of improvements to a highway which is
located wholly or partially outside the boundaries of this State and which
connects this State to an interstate highway; and
         b.   The Board of County Commissioners finds that such projects will
provide a significant economic impact to the County.
   B.   The principal and interest on notes, bonds or other obligations
incurred to fund projects described in subsection A of this section.
   C.   Any combination of those uses. (Ord. 485, 3-17-2005, eff. 4-11-2005)
4.09.10: APPLICATION TO STATUTES:
The provisions of Nevada Revised Statutes chapter 278B and any action taken
pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes chapter 278B do not limit or in any way
apply to the tax imposed by this chapter. (Ord. 485, 3-17-2005, eff. 4-11-2005)
4.09.11: SEVERABILITY:
In the event that any section, subsection, or portion of this chapter shall be
declared invalid by any court, such declaration of invalidity shall not affect
the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. (Ord. 485, 3-17-2005,
eff. 4-11-2005)
CHAPTER 10
INDIGENT AND ELDERLY PERSONS; FUNDS FOR LEGAL SERVICES
SECTION:
4.10.01: Policy And Regulations
4.10.02: Appeals
4.10.01: POLICY AND REGULATIONS:
The Lyon County treasurer shall adopt the policy and regulations entitled "Lyon
County treasurer policy and regulations: disbursement of funds to programs
providing legal services without charge to indigent and elderly persons". (Ord.
492, 8-4-2005, eff. 8-25-2005)
4.10.02: APPEALS:
Any program may file an appeal with the board of county commissioners within
fifteen (15) calendar days of receipt of the disbursement of funds letter sent
by the Lyon County treasurer to all programs who have requested funds through
application for the quarter. The appeal must state how the policy and
regulations were not followed. The board of county commissioners will review
the applications de novo to determine whether the policy and regulations were
followed.
Any program filing an appeal must hand deliver a written notice of appeal to
the Lyon County treasurer within fifteen (15) calendar days from the date the
disbursement of funds letter was received. (Ord. 492, 8-4-2005, eff. 8-25-2005)
CHAPTER 11
RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION TAX FOR APARTMENT HOUSES, RESIDENTIAL DWELLING UNITS
AND MOBILE HOMES
SECTION:
4.11.01: Purpose
4.11.02: Definitions
4.11.03: Taxes Imposed And Collected
4.11.04: Lyon County School District
4.11.05: Funds Applicable To All Areas
4.11.06: Nevada Tax Commission Approval
4.11.01: PURPOSE:
   A.   A tax on residential construction is hereby imposed on the privilege of
constructing all apartment houses and all residential dwelling units and for
developing all lots for mobile homes within Lyon County.
   B.   All revenue collected shall be used to construct, remodel, and make
additions to school buildings within the school attendance zone in which the
residential construction occurred at the time the tax was owed. (Ord. 497, 11-
3-2005, eff. 1-3-2006)
4.11.02: DEFINITIONS:
Definitions of "apartment house", "lot for a mobile home" and "residential
dwelling unit", will be defined as contained in Nevada Revised Statutes 387.329
and as amended in the future. (Ord. 497, 11-3-2005, eff. 1-3-2006)
4.11.03: TAXES IMPOSED AND COLLECTED:
   A.   The tax on residential construction shall be in the amount of one
thousand six hundred dollars ($1,600.00) and imposed upon each:
      1.   Lot for a mobile home.
      2.   Residential dwelling unit.
      3.   Suite in an apartment building.
   B.   The tax on residential construction will be collected prior to the
issuance of any building permits. (Ord. 497, 11-3-2005, eff. 1-3-2006)
4.11.04: LYON COUNTY SCHOOL DISTRICT:
   A.   The Lyon County school district shall pay one percent (1%) of the
amount collected to a city or the county for administrative costs.
   B.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as preventing the Lyon
County school district from entering into development agreements concerning the
acquisition of school sites and compensation for the school sites. (Ord. 497,
11-3-2005, eff. 1-3-2006)
4.11.05: FUNDS APPLICABLE TO ALL AREAS:
The tax on residential construction will apply to all areas within Lyon County.
The money collected by a city or county will be deposited with the county
treasurer in Lyon County school district's fund for capital projects to be held
and expended in the same manner as other money deposited in that fund. (Ord.
497, 11-3-2005, eff. 1-3-2006)
4.11.06: NEVADA TAX COMMISSION APPROVAL:
The tax will not be imposed unless the Nevada tax commission approves of the
imposition of the tax pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 387.331. The tax
shall be imposed beginning the first day of the first calendar month after
approval is received from the Nevada tax commission. The tax on residential
construction shall continue until such time it is repealed or the Nevada tax
commission informs Lyon County that said tax is no longer needed. Upon such
notification, said tax will be discontinued at the end of the fiscal year.
(Ord. 497, 11-3-2005, eff. 1-3-2006)
CHAPTER 12
TAX FOR INFRASTRUCTURE
SECTION:
4.12.01: Title
4.12.02: Imposition
4.12.03: Statute Incorporated
4.12.04: Purposes For Use Of Tax Proceeds
4.12.05: Contract With State For Administration
4.12.06: Purchaser Entitled To Refund Under Certain Circumstances
4.12.07: Effective Date
4.12.01: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the TAX FOR INFRASTRUCTURE. (Ord. 518, 3-20-
2008)
4.12.02: IMPOSITION:
The tax for infrastructure is hereby imposed as follows: A tax of one-fourth of
one percent is imposed upon retailers on the gross receipts of any retailer
from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail, or stored, used
or otherwise consumed, in the county. (Ord. 518, 3-20-2008)
4.12.03: STATUTE INCORPORATED:
The provisions of Nevada Revised Statutes chapter 374, as well as all
amendments to Nevada Revised Statutes chapter 374 enacted after the passage of
this chapter, are incorporated herein as if fully set forth as part of this
chapter so long as said provisions are not inconsistent with this chapter.
(Ord. 518, 3-20-2008)
4.12.04: PURPOSES FOR USE OF TAX PROCEEDS:
The specific purposes for which the proceeds of the tax for infrastructure must
be expended include all purposes set forth within Nevada Revised Statutes
377B.160.
(Ord. 518, 3-20-2008; amd. Ord. 620, 11-4-2021)
4.12.05: CONTRACT WITH STATE FOR ADMINISTRATION:
The county shall contract before the effective date hereof with the state
department of taxation to perform all functions incident to the administration
or operation of the tax in the county. (Ord. 518, 3-20-2008)
4.12.06: PURCHASER ENTITLED TO REFUND UNDER CERTAIN CIRCUMSTANCES:
A purchaser is entitled to a refund, in accordance with the provisions of
Nevada Revised Statutes 374.635 to 374.720, inclusive, of the amount of the tax
required to be paid that is attributable to the tax imposed upon the sale of,
and the storage, use or other consumption in a county of, tangible personal
property used for the performance of a written contract: a) entered into on or
before the effective date of the tax or the increase in the tax; or b) for the
construction of an improvement to real property for which a binding bid was
submitted before the effective date of the tax or the increase of the tax if
the bid was afterward accepted, if, under the terms of the contract or bid, the
contract price or bid amount cannot be adjusted to reflect the imposition of
the tax or the increase in the tax. (Ord. 518, 3-20-2008)
4.12.07: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter shall be in full force and effect and the tax for infrastructure
must first be imposed on the first day of the first month of the next calendar
quarter that is one hundred twenty (120) days after the adoption date hereof.
(Ord. 518, 3-20-2008)
CHAPTER 13
FEES ON COURT ACTIONS TO SUPPORT PROGRAMS FOR COURT SECURITY
SECTION:
4.13.01: Fees In District Court
4.13.02: Collection And Payment To Treasurer
4.13.01: FEES IN DISTRICT COURT:
The district court clerk shall impose a filing fee of twenty dollars ($20.00),
in addition to any other filing fee required by law, to be paid on the
commencement of any civil action or proceeding in the third judicial district
court for which a filing fee is required and on the filing of any answer or
appearance in any such action or proceeding for which a filing fee is required,
except as otherwise required pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 19.034,
reduced fees for adoption of child with special needs. (Ord. 536, 8-6-2009)
4.13.02: COLLECTION AND PAYMENT TO TREASURER:
   A.   On or before the fifth day of each month, the district court clerk
shall account for and pay over to the county treasurer any such fees collected
by him during the preceding month for credit to an account for programs for
court security in the general fund; and
   B.   The money in that account must be administered by the county
commissioners; and:
      1.   May be used only for programs for court security;
      2.   Must not be used to supplant existing budgets for bailiffs or deputy
marshals who are assigned to work in a courtroom; and
      3.   If any balance remains at the end of each fiscal year, may be
carried forward to the next fiscal year.
   C.   As used in this section, "programs for court security" includes,
without limitation:
      1.   Funding for additional positions for bailiffs, marshals, security
guards and similar personnel;
      2.   Supplementing existing funding used to pay bailiffs, marshals,
security guards and similar personnel;
      3.   Acquiring necessary capital goods for court security;
      4.   Providing security training and education to personnel;
      5.   Conducting security audits; and
      6.   Acquiring or using appropriate technology relating to court
security. (Ord. 536, 8-6-2009)
CHAPTER 14
MISCELLANEOUS AND ADDITIONAL TAXES AND FEES
SECTION:
4.14.01: Document Recording Fee
4.14.02: Remittance Of Fees
4.14.01: DOCUMENT RECORDING FEE:
The county recorder shall charge and collect a fee of six dollars ($6.00) for
the recording of a document, instrument, paper, notice, deed, conveyance, map,
chart, survey or any other writing in the office of the county recorder, except
that no fee shall be charged under this section for recording the originally
signed copy of a certificate of marriage described in Nevada Revised Statutes
122.120 or for recording the declaration of value in relation to deeds
evidencing a transfer of title to real property described in Nevada. (Ord. 588,
8-18-2016; amd. Ord. 636, 6-6-2024)
4.14.02: REMITTANCE OF FEES:
On or before the fifth day of each month, the county recorder shall pay the
amount of fees collected by him or her pursuant to this section to the county
treasurer. On or before the fifth day of each month, the county treasurer shall
pay the amount of fees collected by him or her pursuant to this section to the
county treasurer. On or before the fifteenth day of each month, the county
treasurer shall remit the money received by him or her pursuant to this section
to the organization operating the program for legal services for the indigent
that receives the fees charged pursuant to NRS 19.031 to be used to provide
legal services for abused and neglected children. In the event there are any
excess funds or no program is identified, the funds shall be held in the
District Court Restricted Fees Account to be used to provide legal services for
abused and neglected children. . (Ord. 588, 8-18-2016; amd. Ord. 636, 6-6-2024)
TITLE 5
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL BUSINESS AND LICENSE PROVISIONS
SECTION:
5.01.01: Definitions
5.01.02: License Required; Exceptions; Other Licenses Required
5.01.03: Standard Business License; Application
5.01.04: Standard Business License; Fees
5.01.05: Special Standard Business License Fees, Conditions
5.01.06: Reserved
5.01.07: Multiple Businesses Licensed As One
5.01.08: Standard Business License; Issuance
5.01.09: Fingerprinting Certain Employees
5.01.10: Conditions Of License
5.01.11: License Renewal; When New Applications Required
5.01.12: Suspension And Revocation Of Standard Business License; Grounds;
Procedure
5.01.13: Investigation; Enforcement
5.01.01: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the
following definitions apply:
BOARD: The Board of County Commissioners for Lyon County, except where either
the Lyon County Prostitution Licensing and Control Board or the Lyon County
Liquor Board is granted exclusive jurisdiction whereby "board" means that body
possessing exclusive jurisdiction.
BUSINESS: Any person, partnership, association, firm, or corporation engaging
in enterprise.
COMMERCIAL MOBILE RADIO SERVICE: Any commercial mobile radio service as defined
in 47 CFR section 20.3 as of July 5, 1995.
COUNTY: Lyon County, a political subdivision of the State of Nevada.
DEPARTMENT: The Lyon County Business License Department.
ELECTRIC ENERGY PROVIDER: Any business or local government that provides
electric energy to the public, whether or not they are regulated by the Public
Service Commission of Nevada.
ENTERPRISE: Any trade, calling, service, profession, or business venture.
GARAGE SALE: All sales opened to the public for the purpose of disposing
personal property, including all sales entitled "garage sale", "lawn sale",
"attic sale", "rummage sale", or "yard sale" which do not extend beyond seventy
two (72) hours in duration.
GAS PROVIDER: Any business or local government that provides gas service to the
public, whether or not they are regulated by the Public Service Commission of
Nevada, including, but not limited to, natural gas providers. Gas service does
not include propane gas providers.
GROSS REVENUE: All revenue received by a public utility from customers located
within the unincorporated area of Lyon County, except:
A.Revenue collected other than intrastate telecommunications services by retail
customers; or
B.Revenue collected by natural gas providers from the sale of natural gas to a
provider of electric energy which holds a certificate of public convenience and
necessity issued by the Public Service Commission of Nevada.
KENNEL:
Breeder's Kennel: Any enclosure, premises, building, structure, lot or area
where more than three (3) dogs of a recognized registered breed over six (6)
months of age are kept, harbored or maintained as follows:
   A.   For breeding;
   B.   For showing in recognized dog shows, field or obedience trials;
   C.   For working or hunting; or
   D.   For improving the variety or breed in temperament or conformation with
a view to exhibition in shows or trials or for use as working dogs in hunting.
Commercial Kennel: Any enclosure, premises, building, structure, lot or area
where more than three (3) dogs over six (6) months of age are kept, harbored or
maintained for commercial purposes.
NONPROFIT SERVICE ORGANIZATION: Any organization which is registered as a
nonprofit organization by the State of Nevada.
PUBLIC UTILITIES: All telecommunications companies, electric energy providers,
gas providers and commercial mobile radio services.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS COMPANIES: Any business or local government which provides
telecommunications services who holds a certificate of public convenience and
necessity issued by the Public Service Commission of the State of Nevada and
derives intrastate revenue from the provision of that service to retail
customers. (Ord. 594, 10-19-2017, eff. 11-1-2017)
5.01.02: LICENSE REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS; OTHER LICENSES REQUIRED:
   A.   License Required: It is unlawful for any business to engage in any
enterprise in Lyon County without first applying for and obtaining a license or
permit as set forth in this chapter.
   B.   Exceptions: The provisions contained in this chapter do not apply to:
      1.   Any business which conducts business or operations only within the
limits of any incorporated city within the County;
      2.   Any private individual(s) who has no more than five (5) garage sales
per year;
      3.   Any nonprofit service organization; or
      4.   Any business that is specifically regulated under a separate chapter
of this title and that chapter clearly exempts the business from the provisions
of this chapter.
   C.   Other Licenses Required: Any business applying for a license under this
chapter which is required by Federal, State, County or city regulation to hold
a separate and independent license shall produce, exhibit, or otherwise prove
to the department that such license has been issued.
   D.   Licensing of Cannabis Consumption Lounges Prohibited:
      1.   Notwithstanding any other provision of Lyon County Code and pursuant
to the authority established by NRS 678D.510, as amended by Section 30.3 of
Assembly Bill 341 of the 81st (2021) Session of the Nevada Legislature, the
Lyon County Business License Department shall not issue to any person a license
to operate a cannabis consumption lounge.
      2.   As used in this section, "cannabis consumption lounge" has the
meaning ascribed to it in Section 2 of Assembly Bill 341 of the 81st (2021)
Session of the Nevada Legislature. (Ord. 594, 10-19-2017, eff. 11-1-2017; amd.
Ord. 625, 3-17-2022)
5.01.03: STANDARD BUSINESS LICENSE; APPLICATION:
   A.   Standard Business License: A standard business license may be issued to
any business wishing to conduct an enterprise within the County.
   B.   Application:
      1.   All applications for a license under this chapter shall be made on
the application and affidavit form used by the department.
      2.   Each applicant shall include the following information in the
application:
         a.   The nature of the enterprise;
         b.   The address of the business;
         c.   The date on which the business will open;
         d.   Sufficient information to calculate fees under this chapter; and
         e.   The full name of the applicant;
            (1)   If a partnership, the full name of each partner;
            (2)   If a corporation, the state of incorporation and the full
name of the designated agent within the County for the corporation; and
            (3)   If the business operates under a fictitious name, such name.
(Ord. 594, 10-19-2017, eff. 11-1-2017)
5.01.04: STANDARD BUSINESS LICENSE; FEES:
   A.   Fees: Any business applying for or operating under a standard business
license must pay the following fees, unless otherwise enumerated in this
chapter:
      1.   Application Fee: A fee set by the Board shall accompany the
application for the purpose of processing the license, including inspection and
investigation costs.
         a.   This fee is nonrefundable.
         b.   If the applicant has met all the requirements of this chapter and
his application is approved, this application fee shall be applied toward the
payment of the basic license fee for the first year of the business.
      2.   Basic License Fee: Each business licensee shall pay a basic license
fee based on the number of employees the business has working for them. Fees
will be set by the Board of Lyon County Commissioners in the fee resolution.
   B.   Notice Of When Fees Are Due: During the month of June of each year the
department shall notify by mail all business licensees of the date upon which
their business license fee shall become due and the amount of the fee due for
the following year. This shall be the businesses' sole notification of when
fees are due. It is the businesses' responsibility to make all appropriate
payments. Failure to receive notice from the department is not a defense or
excuse for non-payment of the license fee.
   C.   Penalties For Late Payment: All business license fees due under this
chapter shall be considered delinquent if not paid in full on or before the
fifteenth day following the due date. A penalty of fifteen percent (15%) of the
payment shall be added to all payments received by the department after the
fees have become delinquent.
   D.   Modified Fees: Any fees set forth in section
5.01.04 or
5.01.05 of this chapter may be modified and incorporated herein by a resolution
of the Board. (Ord. 594, 10-19-2017, eff. 11-1-2017)
5.01.05: SPECIAL STANDARD BUSINESS LICENSE FEES, CONDITIONS:
The businesses listed herein shall be required to comply with the following:
   A.   Slot Machines: Each business licensee who operates a business which
incorporates the use of slot machines shall report to the department:
      1.   The slot machine owner's name, address and phone number;
      2.   The name of the party who is responsible for payment of license
fees; and
      3.   The number of machines in operation at the business.
   B.   Public Utilities:
      1.   License Fees: Every public utility providing service within the
unincorporated area of Lyon County must pay an annual business license fee not
later than thirty (30) calendar days after the end of each calendar quarter.
         a.   The fee shall equal the following percent of the public utility's
"gross revenue" as defined in section
5.01.01 of this chapter.
 
                                 5 percent of the gross revenue from the first
Commercial mobile radio services $15.00 charged monthly for each line of access
                                 for each of the utility's customers located
                                 within the unincorporated area of Lyon County
Electric energy providers        5 percent
Gas providers                    5 percent
Telecommunications companies     5 percent
 
      2.   Notification, Revenue Statement, Payment, Penalties, And Interest:
         a.   Each public utility to which this subsection B applies or which
derives or intends to derive intrastate revenue from customers located within
the unincorporated area of Lyon County shall, not later than sixty (60)
calendar days after the effective date hereof or thirty (30) calendar days
before the public utility begins to provide service to those customers,
whichever occurs later, provide to Lyon County:
            (1)   An acknowledgment that the public utility is operating or
intends to operate within Lyon County; and
            (2)   The date that the public utility began or intends to begin to
derive revenue from customers located within Lyon County.
         b.   Each public utility to which this subsection B applies shall, not
later than thirty (30) days after the end of each calendar quarter, provide to
Lyon County a statement of the amount of revenue the public utility derived
during that calendar quarter from service to each of its customers located
within Lyon County.
         c.   The fee for the utility operator license is payable not later
than thirty (30) calendar days after the end of each calendar quarter.
         d.   An operator license fee not received or postmarked within thirty
(30) calendar days after the end of each calendar quarter shall be delinquent
and the public utility shall pay, in addition to the operator license fee, a
penalty of one percent (1%) of the delinquent amount per month and interest of
one percent (1%) of the delinquent amount per month.
      3.   Existing Franchise Agreements Not Altered: This subsection B does
not alter the terms of any existing franchise agreement between Lyon County and
a company providing public utility services within the boundaries of Lyon
County.
   C.   Kennels:
      1.   Notice: Notice of the date, time and place the Board shall consider
the application for a kennel license shall be sent by registered mail or
personal delivery to all adjoining property owners by the department. The
business applicant is responsible for providing the names and addresses of all
adjacent property owners to the department.
      2.   Conditions Of License: The following limitations and requirements
shall apply to all kennel licenses:
         a.   Commercial kennel license:
            (1)   There shall be no limit on the number of dogs.
            (2)   Every dog over the age of six (6) months shall have a current
inoculation against rabies administered by a licensed veterinarian pursuant to
title 7, chapter 1 of this Code.
            (3)   Dogs shall have a run of adequate size and escape proof
construction.
            (4)   The property shall be zoned industrial or commercial.
         b.   Breeder's kennel license:
            (1)   The number of dogs shall be set by the Commissioners, taking
into consideration the size and temperament of the dogs and the size of the lot
owner's lot and the character of the surrounding property.
            (2)   Every dog over the age of six (6) months shall have a current
inoculation against rabies, administered by a licensed veterinarian, pursuant
to title 7, chapter 1 of this Code.
            (3)   All dogs shall be of a recognized registered breed.
            (4)   Dogs shall have a run of adequate size and escape proof
construction.
            (5)   The property shall be at least an acre in size and zoned
rural residential, commercial or industrial. (Ord. 594, 10-19-2017, eff. 11-1-
2017)
5.01.06: RESERVED:
(Ord. 594, 10-19-2017, eff. 11-1-2017)
5.01.07: MULTIPLE BUSINESSES LICENSED AS ONE:
   A.   Each occupation business operating at a single location must have a
separate license.
   B.   Any business licensee who is issued a standard business license may
have endorsed on the license more than one enterprise under the following
conditions:
      1.   All enterprises endorsed on the license must be operated under the
same business name.
      2.   All enterprises must be owned or operated by the business licensee.
If the business licensee complies with the conditions set forth herein, there
shall be issued one license endorsing each specific enterprise engaged in by
the business licensee.
   C.   Any business licensee issued a license for multiple enterprises shall
only be charged one fee. This fee shall be based on the total number of
employees for all the enterprises. This section does not affect liquor, gaming
or any other license fees required by the County. (Ord. 594, 10-19-2017, eff.
11-1-2017)
5.01.08: STANDARD BUSINESS LICENSE; ISSUANCE:
   A.   Issuance Of License: The Business License Department may issue a
license to any business licensee who has complied with the provisions of this
chapter. If the Business License Department denies the application, the
applicant may appeal to the Board as hereinafter provided. Each license shall
state:
      1.   The names and addresses of all business licensees connected with the
enterprise;
      2.   The address or location of the business;
      3.   Any restrictions or limitations imposed as a condition of approval;
      4.   The date the license was issued; and
      5.   The date the license will expire.
   B.   Denial Of Business License: Any application or renewal for a license or
permit submitted to the Business License Department pursuant to this title may,
in addition to any incomplete application condition or other basis for denial
set forth in a specific section of this Code, be denied on any of the following
grounds:
      1.   The application or any other document is incomplete or contains
false, misleading or fraudulent statements.
      2.   The applicant or any of its principals fails to satisfy any
qualification or requirement imposed by this title, or other local, State or
Federal laws or regulations that pertains to the particular license or permit.
      3.   The applicant or any of its principals is or has engaged in a
business, trade or profession without having obtained a valid license, permit
or work card or permit when such applicant or principal knew or reasonably
should have known that one was required.
      4.   The applicant or any of its principals has been subject, in any
jurisdiction, to disciplinary action of any kind with respect to a license,
permit or work card or permit to the extent that such disciplinary action
reflects upon the qualifications, acceptability or fitness of the applicant or
principal to conduct such a business.
      5.   The applicant or any of its principals has been convicted of any
crime that involves any local, State or Federal law or regulation arising out
of the operation of a similar business.
      6.   The applicant or any of its principals has been convicted of a crime
as a result of having perpetrated deceptive practices or fraud upon the public,
a business partner or shareholder, a subcontractor or a government entity
within the last ten (10) years.
      7.   The applicant or any of its principals suffer from a legal
disability to conduct such business under State or Federal laws.
      8.   The premises on which the business is proposed to be conducted does
not satisfy all local, State, or Federal laws or regulations which relate to
the activity that is to be licensed or permitted.
      9.   The applicant or any of its principals is in default on any payment
or obligation owed to Lyon County.
   C.   Appeal Of Denial Of Business License: A written notice of appeal from
the denial of a license or permit may be filed with the Business License
Department not later than ten (10) business days after the applicant receives
certified mail notice of the denial. Upon receipt of the notice of appeal, the
Business License Department shall schedule a hearing before the Board. Notice
of the date, time and place of the hearing shall be served upon the applicant
not later than ten (10) business days before the time specified of the hearing
by delivering the notice to him or by certified mail to his last known address.
The applicant must appear at the hearing, the Board may sustain the Business
License Department's decision or order that the license be issued. The decision
by the Board must be in writing or orally expressed in the official record of
its public meeting and must include findings of fact. (Ord. 594, 10-19-2017,
eff. 11-1-2017)
5.01.09: FINGERPRINTING CERTAIN EMPLOYEES:
   A.   Definitions: Whenever used in this section, unless the context
otherwise requires, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them herein:
    ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES: Means and includes any and all distilled or rectified
spirits, potable alcohol, brandy, whiskey, rum, gin, aromatic bitters, beer,
wine and every liquid or solid containing alcohol capable of being consumed by
a human being.
   EMPLOYEES OF ESTABLISHMENTS WHERE ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES ARE SOLD AT RETAIL ON
THE PREMISES: Bartenders, waiters and any other person who serves alcoholic
beverages to patrons for consumption on the premises.
   EMPLOYEES OF GAMBLING HOUSES: All employees of the owners of gambling
houses.
   GAMING EMPLOYEE: As defined in Nevada Revised Statutes 463.0157:
   1.   "Gaming employee" means any person connected directly with an operator
of a slot route, the operator of a pari-mutuel system, the operator of an
inter-casino linked system or a manufacturer, distributor or disseminator, or
with the operation of a gaming establishment licensed to conduct any game, 16
or more slot machines, a race book, sports pool or pari- mutuel wagering,
including:
      (a)   Accounting or internal auditing personnel who are directly involved
in any recordkeeping or the examination of records associated with revenue from
gaming;
      (b)   Boxmen;
      (c)   Cashiers;
      (d)   Change personnel;
      (e)   Counting room personnel;
      (f)   Dealers;
      (g)   Employees of a person required by NRS 464.010 to be licensed to
operate an off-track pari-mutuel system;
      (h)   Employees of a person required by NRS 463.430 to be licensed to
disseminate information concerning racing;
      (i)   Employees of manufacturers or distributors of gaming equipment
within this state whose duties are directly involved with the manufacture,
repair or distribution of gaming equipment;
      (j)   Employees of operators of slot routes who have keys for slot
machines or who accept and transport revenue from the slot drop;
      (k)   Employees of operators of inter-casino linked systems;
      (l)   Floormen;
      (m)   Hosts or other persons empowered to extend credit or complimentary
services;
      (n)   Keno runners;
      (o)   Keno writers;
      (p)   Machine mechanics;
      (q)   Odds makers and line setters;
      (r)   Security personnel;
      (s)   Shift or pit bosses;
      (t)   Shills;
      (u)   Supervisors or managers; and
      (v)   Ticket writers.
   2.   "Gaming employee" does not include bartenders, cocktail waitresses or
other persons engaged exclusively in preparing or serving food or beverages.
   INDEPENDENT AGENT: As defined in Nevada Revised Statutes 463.0164:
   1.   "Independent agent" means any person who:
      (a)   Approves or grants the extension of gaming credit on behalf of a
state gaming licensee or collects a debt evidenced by a credit instrument; or
      (b)   Contracts with a state gaming licensee or its affiliate to provide
services outside of Nevada consisting of arranging complimentary
transportation, food, lodging or other services, or any combination thereof,
whose combined retail price per person exceeds $1,000 in any 7-day period for
guests at a licensed gaming establishment.
   2.   The term does not include:
      (a)   A state gaming licensee;
      (b)   A bonded collection agency licensed by the local government
authorities in the jurisdiction where the agency has its principal place of
business;
      (c)   A licensed attorney;
      (d)   A supplier of transportation;
      (e)   A travel agency which receives compensation solely on the price of
the transportation or lodging arranged for by the agency;
      (f)   An employee of a state gaming licensee or its affiliate; or
      (g)   A person who receives compensation for his services, other than
cash, in an amount of not more than $1,000.
   LICENSED GAMING ESTABLISHMENT: As defined in Nevada Revised Statutes
463.0169:
"Licensed gaming establishment" means any premises licensed pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter wherein or whereon gaming is done.
   NONRESTRICTED LICENSE OR NONRESTRICTED OPERATION: As defined in Nevada
Revised Statutes 463.0177:
"Nonrestricted license" or "nonrestricted operation" means a state gaming
license for, or an operation consisting of, 16 or more slot machines or a
license for or operation of any number of slot machines together with any other
game, gaming device, race book or sports pool at one establishment.
   OWNERS OF GAMBLING HOUSES: Means and includes all persons who have an
interest in or title to any gambling devices or apparatus to conduct and
operate gambling and banking games as such games are defined by Nevada Revised
Statutes chapter 463, except slot machines, pinball machines and any other
mechanically operated game where no attendant is required.
   B.   County Policy: It is the policy of the Board of County Commissioners,
as herein expressed by the Board, that the safety, morals, good order and
general welfare of the inhabitants of the County will be better protected and
served by requiring the registration with the Sheriff and the thumb and finger
printing of all owners of licensed gaming establishments holding a
nonrestricted license or having a nonrestricted operation, gaming employees and
independent agents, and all owners of establishments where alcoholic beverages
are sold at retail and served on the premises.
   C.   Fingerprinting And Registration:
      1.   Required:
         a.   It is unlawful for any person or entity to own and operate or
conduct any licensed gaming establishment holding a nonrestricted license or
having a nonrestricted operation, or establishment where alcoholic beverages
are sold at retail and consumed on the premises, unless such person shall first
have registered his or her name and address with the Sheriff and shall have had
his or her thumbprints and fingerprints taken and filed with the Sheriff.
         b.   It is unlawful for any person or entity to own and operate or
conduct any licensed gaming establishment or for any person operating a
gambling game to employ any person as a gaming employee or independent agent
unless such person shall have registered with the Sheriff, completed all
applications and provided the information required by the Sheriff and/or any
agency of the State, complied with State laws for a State work permit for
gaming employees and independent agents, and had his or her thumbprints and
fingerprints taken and filed with the Sheriff at Yerington, Nevada.
      2.   Work Permit: The Sheriff may issue a work permit to any gaming
employee or independent agent pursuant to and subject to the requirements of
Nevada Revised Statutes 463.335. If the Sheriff denies the work permit, the
Sheriff shall so notify the person and state the reasons for the denial.
      3.   Compliance: The Sheriff shall comply with the requirements of the
State of Nevada Gaming Control Board, other State of Nevada agencies and the
Nevada Revised Statutes regarding applications for work permits for gaming
employees and independent agents. The State Gaming Control Board is solely
responsible for approving the work permits for gaming employees and independent
agents. Any gaming employee or independent agent shall provide to the Sheriff
the information required by the State and the Sheriff shall forward the
information provided to the State Gaming Control Board as required by law.
      4.   FBI Background Check: Any owner, operator or employee who must be
subject to a background check must comply with the following conditions:
         a.   Applicants for this license or work card must be fingerprinted.
         b.   Applicants must provide a written authorization, along with their
application materials, allowing the submission of their fingerprints to the
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI). The authorization will allow the FBI to
conduct a national background check of the applicant.
         c.   This FBI background check shall be authorized under this section
as well as under Nevada Revised Statutes 239B.010(a).
   D.   Revocation Of Licenses: If any employee or the owner of any gambling
house or any owner of a liquor dispensing business, as heretofore defined,
fails to comply with the provisions of this section, it shall be considered
good cause for the revocation of any and all licenses issued to the owner by
the board or any board or agency authorized by law to revoke such licenses.
(Ord. 594, 10-19-2017, eff. 11-1-2017)
5.01.10: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
In addition to any other conditions imposed by the Board, business licensees
must comply with the following conditions:
   A.   License Not Transferable: Any standard business license issued under
this chapter shall not be transferred without the consent of the Business
License Department.
   B.   Posting Of License: Any standard business license issued under this
chapter shall be posted by the licensee in a conspicuous place within the
business during the entire term for which the license was issued.
   C.   Hazardous Materials: Any business that generates, treats, manufactures,
produces, stores, uses, discharges, releases, transfers, disposes of,
incinerates or emits a "hazardous material" as defined in title 6, chapter 4 of
this Code must comply with said chapter prior to being issued a business
license. (Ord. 594, 10-19-2017, eff. 11-1-2017)
5.01.11: LICENSE RENEWAL; WHEN NEW APPLICATIONS REQUIRED:
   A.   Business licenses will be renewed automatically each year, provided
that all business license fees are received prior to July 15 of each year and
the business is otherwise in compliance.
   B.   Failure of any business licensee to apply for a renewal under this
chapter shall result in an automatic revocation of the license on the
expiration date of the license. A licensee whose license has been revoked, and
who wishes to continue in business, shall file a new application and any
existing balances and penalties due the County shall be paid prior to issuance
of a new business license. The requirement for a new application will be waived
if all existing balances and penalties are paid within six (6) months of the
due date and the information is still current.
   C.   A business licensee shall file with the department, on forms provided,
a new application and affidavit for a license when a substantial change in the
business licensee's former application has occurred. No additional fee shall be
charged for filing a new application. (Ord. 594, 10-19-2017, eff. 11-1-2017)
5.01.12: SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF STANDARD BUSINESS LICENSE; GROUNDS;
PROCEDURE:
   A.   Grounds For Suspension Or Revocation: Any standard business license
issued under this chapter may be suspended, or revoked for good cause. Good
cause shall include, but is not limited to, the following:
      1.   Failure to pay business license fees within thirty (30) days of
their due date;
      2.   Failure to update the business license under the provisions of this
chapter;
      3.   Failure to renew the business license under the provisions of this
chapter;
      4.   Failure to maintain other licenses required by Federal, State,
County or city law which are necessary to conduct the enterprise endorsed on
the license;
      5.   Failure to keep the enterprise free of unsanitary conditions,
excessive noise, disturbances, and other conditions on or about the premises
which cause, or tend to cause, a public nuisance or which injuriously affect
the public health, safety or welfare;
      6.   Any act in the operation of the business which is unlawful or
prohibited by Federal, State, County or city law;
      7.   Any fraudulent practices or misrepresentations in the operation of
the business;
      8.   Any concealment or misrepresentation in procuring a license; and
      9.   Becoming more than sixty (60) days delinquent in the payment of any
Personal Property Tax owed by the business licensee.
   B.   Suspension Of Standard Business License: If a business licensee
violates any of the provisions contained in subsections A1 through A9 of this
section, the department may suspend the license, pending Board action on
revocation, under the following conditions:
      1.   The department shall notify the business licensee of the violation.
The notice shall contain:
         a.   The name and address of the business licensee;
         b.   The violation which has occurred;
         c.   That the business licensee has five (5) days, excluding weekends
and holidays, from the receipt of the notice to remedy the violation; and
         d.   That if the business licensee fails to remedy the violation the
business license will be suspended.
      2.   If the business licensee fails to remedy the violation, the
department shall send a second notice which shall contain:
         a.   The name and address of the business licensee;
         b.   The violation which has occurred;
         c.   The date the suspension will be in effect; and
         d.   A notice of revocation and hearing as provided in subsection C1
of this section.
      3.   The date the business licensee is deemed to receive the notice shall
be determined as follows:
         a.   If the department serves the business licensee, the date of
service;
         b.   If the department posts the notice at the place of business, the
date it is posted; and
         c.   If the department sends the notice by certified mail, return
receipt requested, the date of delivery as evidenced by the return receipt.
   C.   Revocation Of The Standard Business License: Unless otherwise specified
in this chapter, the Board may revoke any business license issued under this
chapter, under the following conditions:
      1.   Notice Of Revocation And Hearing: The Board shall serve upon the
business licensee a notice of revocation and hearing. The notice shall include:
         a.   The name and address of the business licensee;
         b.   The cause(s) of the revocation;
         c.   The date and time of the revocation hearing; and
         d.   That the business licensee may submit evidence in opposition to
the revocation.
This notice shall be served upon the business licensee at least forty eight
(48) hours prior to the time specified for hearing. The notice shall be deemed
received in accord with subsection B3 of this section.
      2.   Hearing Of Revocation: In order to revoke a business license under
this chapter, the Board shall conduct a hearing to determine whether to revoke
the license. The Board shall permit the department and any interested party,
including the business licensee, to testify or otherwise submit evidence in
favor of or opposition to the revocation. The Board shall consider all the
evidence presented and cause to have entered in the minutes its findings,
stating specifically any causes for revocation found by the Board. The Board
shall then enter its order in the minutes.
      3.   Notice Of Revocation: If the Board revokes the license, the business
licensee shall be served notice of revocation following the hearing. The
revocation shall be effective upon receipt of the notice, as specified in
subsection B3 of this section. (Ord. 594, 10-19-2017, eff. 11-1-2017)
5.01.13: INVESTIGATION; ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Investigation: The department may notify the County Sheriff who may
investigate possible violations of this chapter, and, if deemed appropriate,
may issue a citation or initiate a complaint to the District Attorney's Office.
   B.   Prima Facie Evidence: Any sign or advertisement which is exhibited or
published indicating that any business is engaged in enterprise shall be prima
facie evidence that such business is engaged in enterprise for which a license
is required.
   C.   Enforcement:
      1.   Violations of the provisions of this chapter may be punishable as a
misdemeanor as provided in section
1.04.01 of this Code;
      2.   A show cause hearing may be held before the Board for a
determination of revocation of the business license; and/or
      3.   The County may initiate a civil action, as provided by law,
including a civil injunction and the recovery of money damages. (Ord. 594, 10-
19-2017, eff. 11-1-2017)
CHAPTER 2
LIQUOR CONTROL
SECTION:
5.02.01: Policy
5.02.02: Definitions
5.02.03: Classification Of Liquor Establishments And Licenses
5.02.04: License Requirements For Sale Of Intoxicating Liquor; Temporary
Operation Under Another's License
5.02.05: Persons Not Qualified For Licensing
5.02.06: Disqualification And Reapplication
5.02.07: Application For License
5.02.08: Approval Of License; License Required
5.02.09: License Fees
5.02.10: Operation Of Liquor Establishment
5.02.11: Catering
5.02.12: Violation And Penalty
5.02.13: Appeal, Disciplinary Action And Penalties
5.02.01: POLICY:
It is the policy of Lyon County that all establishments where intoxicating
liquors are sold at retail for consumption on the premises without the
corporate limits of any incorporated city or town within the County shall be
licensed and controlled so as to protect the public health, safety, morals,
good order and general welfare of the inhabitants of the County. (Ord. 595, 10-
19-2017, eff. 11-1-2017)
5.02.02: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms have the meanings ascribed to them
herein:
COMPLIANCE CHECK: A procedure in which a person under twenty one (21) years of
age attempts to purchase or purchases alcohol under the supervision of law
enforcement from:
   A.   Any liquor establishments, dispensaries and all other places where
intoxicating liquors are sold; or
   B.   An employee of liquor establishments, dispensaries and all other places
where intoxicating liquors are sold.
CONVICTED: A finding of guilt resulting from a plea of guilty; a plea of nolo
contendere; the decision of a court or magistrate; or the verdict of a jury,
irrespective of the pronouncement of judgment or the suspension thereof.
CORPORATION: Includes any corporation, S-corporation, limited liability
company, partnership, trust, or other entity no matter how described or
registered with any state, county or municipality.
INTOXICATING LIQUORS: Any one or all of the following: spirituous, malt,
fermented liquors, wines, beers or any mixtures thereof.
LICENSEES: All persons whose names are required to be stated in applications
for licenses to sell and dispense intoxicating liquors.
LIQUOR BOARD: The Board of Lyon County Commissioners and the Sheriff of Lyon
County. (Ord. 595, 10-19-2017, eff. 11-1-2017)
5.02.03: CLASSIFICATION OF LIQUOR ESTABLISHMENTS AND LICENSES:
For the purpose of this chapter, liquor establishments, dispensaries and all
other places where intoxicating liquors are sold, manufactured or given away,
shall be and are divided into classes, defined as follows:
   A.   Saloon Or Barroom: A "saloon" or "barroom" is any place where
intoxicating liquors are sold, dispensed or given away, the majority of which
is to be consumed on the premises where sold or otherwise dispensed.
   B.   Retail Liquor Establishment: A "retail liquor establishment" is defined
as any place where intoxicating liquors are sold in the original container,
can, bottle, case or package, in quantities of less than five (5) gallons,
where the same is not permitted to be consumed on or about the premises where
sold or given away.
   C.   Restaurant Or Cafe: A "restaurant" or "cafe" is defined as an
establishment charging for meals, serving beer or wine in bottles or glasses
only, to be consumed on the premises with meals.
   D.   Special Events Liquor License: Profit or fraternal, civic or nonprofit
organization. This license allows for the sale or providing of intoxicating
beverages in association with a special event. Included in this is a special
event that will be held outside the premises covered by a liquor license
holder.
      1.   This license may be obtained by a fraternal, civic or nonprofit
organization at least three (3) working days before the event from the Business
License Department.
      2.   The license must be obtained by a for profit upon approval from the
Business License Department.
      3.   No more than twelve (12) special event liquor licenses per year may
be obtained by a profit or fraternal, civic or nonprofit organization or a
person associated with them. All twelve (12) licenses may be obtained at one
time if the dates for the special events are known. There can be no refund for
events that are canceled. To change a previously scheduled date, a new fee must
be paid.
         a.   Each special event liquor license shall be applied for one day
meaning that a four (4) day event would require four (4) special event liquor
licenses.
      4.   The County Clerk-Treasurer may issue a special event liquor license
without Business License Department approval for fraternal, civic or nonprofit
organizations.
      5.   The licenses required under this chapter shall be in addition to any
other licenses required of any person or business by Lyon County, the State of
Nevada or any other government entity. (Ord. 595, 10-19-2017, eff. 11-1-2017)
5.02.04: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS FOR SALE OF INTOXICATING LIQUOR; TEMPORARY
OPERATION UNDER ANOTHER'S LICENSE:
   A.   Every person engaged in the business of dispensing intoxicating
liquors, or conducting a place of business or establishment for the dispersion
of intoxicating liquors, in the County outside of any incorporated city
therein, shall secure a license therefor to be paid for and issued as provided
in this chapter.
   B.   The license is not transferable and is only valid for the particular
premises for which issued and no money paid for a license shall be refunded,
prorated or rebated for voluntary cessation of the business for which the
license was issued or where the license has been revoked or for any other
reason.
      1.   A liquor license is not transferable, however, if a business, in
which the owner or operator does possess a license, is sold to another, the
buyer may operate the business under the seller's license for up to one hundred
eighty (180) days under the following conditions:
         a.   The buyer of the business must immediately apply for a license
under his/her own name as provided by this chapter.
         b.   A written agreement, executed by buyer and seller must be filed
with the County Business License Department and the District Attorney's Office
stating:
            (1)   That the buyer may operate the business under seller's liquor
license.
            (2)   That seller, holder of the license under which buyer may
operate, remains liable for any violation of this chapter or chapter 1 of this
title.
         c.   In no event may an individual, corporation, partnership or other
entity operate under another's liquor license for longer than one hundred
eighty (180) days. (Ord. 595, 10-19-2017, eff. 11-1-2017)
5.02.05: PERSONS NOT QUALIFIED FOR LICENSING:
The following persons are not qualified to obtain licenses for the sale of
intoxicating liquors:
   A.   A person who has been convicted within the past five (5) years:
      1.   Of a felony or of any crime which under the laws of this State would
amount to a felony.
      2.   In this State or elsewhere, of any crime of which fraud or intent to
defraud is an element.
      3.   Of larceny in any degree.
      4.   Of buying or receiving stolen property.
      5.   Of unlawful entry of a building.
      6.   Of unlawful possession or distribution of narcotic drugs.
      7.   Of illegal use, carrying or possession of a pistol or other
dangerous weapon.
      8.   Of a second offense of driving under the influence of intoxicating
liquor and/or drugs.
      9.   Of contributing to the delinquency of a minor.
   B.   A person under the age of twenty one (21) years. (Ord. 595, 10-19-2017,
eff. 11-1-2017)
5.02.06: DISQUALIFICATION AND REAPPLICATION:
   A.   If any person, after obtaining a license, becomes disqualified by
conviction of any offense enumerated in subsection
5.02.05A of this chapter, the license may be revoked by the Business License
Department.
   B.   If a license has expired, but not been revoked, and the applicant
reapplies for a license within one year of the expiration date of the license,
the fee for an applicant's investigation may not be required. Whether another
investigation is required shall be determined at the discretion of the Business
License Department. (Ord. 595, 10-19-2017, eff. 11-1-2017)
5.02.07: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
   A.   Any person desiring to conduct an establishment for the sale of
intoxicating liquors shall request an application form from the County Clerk's
Office setting forth the following information:
      1.   Applicant's name, age, sex, present address and addresses of all
residences and descriptions of all occupations and businesses for the last five
(5) years prior to such application for a license.
      2.   Applicant's statement, under oath, setting forth any conviction of
those crimes enumerated in subsection
5.02.05A of this chapter within a five (5) year period prior to the date of the
application.
   B.   Applicant shall submit to the taking of their thumbprints and
fingerprints for filing in the licensing office.
      1.   Applicants for this license must be fingerprinted.
      2.   Applicants must provide a written authorization, along with their
application materials, allowing the submission of their fingerprints to the
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI). The authorization will allow the FBI to
conduct a national background check of the applicant.
      3.   This FBI background check shall be authorized under this section as
well as under Nevada Revised Statutes 239B.010(a).
   C.   Proof of ownership or current lease agreement of the premises to be
used by licensee to conduct the sale of intoxicating liquors shall be submitted
to the Office of the District Attorney of the County.
   D.   All applications and information required for obtaining a license shall
be submitted at least fifteen (15) days prior to any action taken by the
Business License Department on the application.
   E.   The Business License Department may require an applicant to verify that
he or she is lawfully in the United States.
   F.   In the event the applicant is a corporation, the following shall apply:
      1.   The applicant corporation must be a Nevada corporation or authorized
to do business in Nevada.
      2.   The applicant corporation must submit with its application a letter
from a duly authorized officer of the corporation designating the person or
persons employed by the corporation to manage or operate on site the local
establishment to be licensed.
      3.   The licensee and person or persons operating or managing the
establishment must comply with the requirements prescribed by this chapter for
a liquor license as well as the requirements of this section.
      4.   The licensee must advise the Business License Department in writing
within thirty (30) days of any changes in the person or persons managing or
operating the establishment. In the event of any change in the person or
persons managing or operating the establishment, the new manager or operator
must qualify and comply with the requirements of this chapter.
   G.   The licensee must submit an annual letter to the County Business
License Department on or before the date of the anniversary of the issuance of
the liquor license, confirming the liquor license holders and/or corporate
officer(s) responsible for liquor sales and dispensing as well as the person or
persons operating the establishment.
   H.   In addition to any other penalties in this chapter, failure to submit
an annual letter or notify the County Clerk of any changes in the person or
persons managing or operating the establishment within thirty (30) days of the
change may result in a fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
   I.   Applicant shall deposit with the application a fee to be used for
investigation of the applicant. An additional fee may be required to be
deposited with the application for each additional name, corporate entity or
partnership to be used for investigation of the additional applicants. The
amount of the investigation fees shall be determined by the Board of County
Commissioners.
   J.   Failure of any person or persons operating or managing the premises to
comply with the requirements of this chapter shall be grounds for revocation of
the license.
   K.   The Sheriff shall investigate the legal qualifications of each
applicant for a license as herein required and defined.
   L.   The applicant and licensee is hereby informed and understands that the
Lyon County Sheriff's Office will conduct periodic alcohol compliance checks as
well as any other investigative or enforcement checks prescribed by this
chapter. (Ord. 595, 10-19-2017, eff. 11-1-2017)
5.02.08: APPROVAL OF LICENSE; LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   Review: Each application must be reviewed after completion of the
investigation and approved or denied by the Business License Department.
   B.   Denial Of Application: In the event that the Business License
Department denies the application, the applicant may appeal to the Liquor
Board.
   C.   Appeal Of Denial Of Application: A written notice of appeal from the
denial of a license or permit may be filed with the Business License Department
not later than ten (10) business days after the applicant receives certified
mail notice of the denial. Upon receipt of the notice of appeal, the Business
License Department shall schedule a hearing before the Liquor Board. Notice of
the date, time and place of the hearing shall be served upon the applicant not
later than ten (10) business days before the time specified of the hearing by
delivering the notice to him or by certified mail to his last known address.
The applicant must appear at the hearing, the Liquor Board may sustain the
Business License Department's decision or order that the license be issued. The
decision by the Liquor Board must be in writing or orally expressed in the
official record of its public meeting and must include findings of fact.
   D.   License Required; Compliance: Every person engaged in keeping,
conducting, maintaining or carrying on any saloon, barroom, retail
establishment, restaurant, cafe, wholesale establishment, where any
intoxicating liquors are sold, dispensed or given away; or anyone selling,
soliciting, taking or seeking orders for the same, shall pay for in advance,
and obtain, an annual license and comply with all requirements to carry on such
business. (Ord. 595, 10-19-2017, eff. 11-1-2017)
5.02.09: LICENSE FEES:
   A.   In addition to the business license requirements of chapter 1 of this
title, each holder or holders of a liquor license shall pay an additional basic
liquor license fee. The fee required shall be determined by whether the
establishment is a saloon or other type of license holder. The amount of the
fees required shall be determined by the Board of County Commissioners.
   B.   All licenses issued under this chapter shall be issued annually on the
first day of July of each year. If license fees are not paid within fifteen
(15) days of the due date of such fees, the license holder shall be subject to
a penalty of fifteen percent (15%) of the total license fees due. Any failure
to pay the fee and penalty may be cause for revocation of the license. (Ord.
595, 10-19-2017, eff. 11-1-2017)
5.02.10: OPERATION OF LIQUOR ESTABLISHMENT:
   A.   A minor shall be permitted to serve intoxicating liquors only under the
following circumstances:
      1.   A person who has attained the age of sixteen (16) years may be
employed in a retail food store for the sale or disposition of intoxicating
liquors if:
         a.   He/she is supervised by a person who is eighteen (18) years of
age or over and who is an owner or an employee of the business which sells or
disposes of the liquor.
         b.   Such person eighteen (18) years of age or over who is supervising
such person under eighteen (18) is actually present at the time that such
person under eighteen (18) sells or disposes of the liquor.
         c.   The liquor is in a container or receptacle which is corked or
sealed.
   B.   No intoxicating liquors shall be served to any minor, nor to any
intoxicated person or habitual drunkard, nor to any person who, by reason of
any infirmity, is unable to care for himself/herself properly.
   C.   No boisterous, obscene or immoral act or conduct shall be permitted on
any premises or place having a license to dispense intoxicating liquors, and
all such places shall be open to inspection by any peace officer or member of
the Liquor Board.
   D.   No gambling prohibited by State law shall be permitted on the premises.
   E.   There shall be no restrictions upon persons of lawful age desiring to
enter a place where intoxicating liquors are sold.
   F.   Each employee of a business where intoxicating liquors are served shall
either be in physical possession of a work permit issued by the Sheriff's
Office or have the permit at the place of business while the employee is
working. (Ord. 595, 10-19-2017, eff. 11-1-2017)
5.02.11: CATERING:
   A.   A holder of a liquor license may also be licensed as a caterer if:
      1.   A "catering fee" is paid to the Business License Department in
addition to all other fees required by this chapter and chapter 1 of this
title.
      2.   The applicant operates a saloon or restaurant.
      3.   All State and local health statutes and regulations concerning food
preparation and service are complied with.
   B.   The amount of the catering fee shall be determined by the Board of
County Commissioners. (Ord. 595, 10-19-2017, eff. 11-1-2017)
5.02.12: VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
In addition to any other penalties prescribed by this chapter, any person,
whether or not they hold a license issued pursuant to this chapter, who
violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction, be punished by a fine in a sum of not more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment in the County Jail for not more than six
(6) months or by both fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 595, 10-19-2017, eff. 11-1-
2017)
5.02.13: APPEAL, DISCIPLINARY ACTION AND PENALTIES:
   A.   An administrative denial of a liquor license application may be
appealed by the applicant to the Liquor Board, who may uphold the denial or may
approve the liquor license application with or without additional conditions.
   B.   Disciplinary action is the procedure taken by the Liquor Board to
conduct hearings regarding whether a licensee is in violation of applicable
law, and the action which may be imposed by the Liquor Board pursuant to the
hearings, which action consists of imposing the penalties set forth in
subsection C of this section.
   C.   Disciplinary penalties that may be imposed upon a licensee by the
Liquor Board for criminal citations issued within any twelve (12) month period
that are related to the sale or dispensing of liquor at the licensee's
establishment or violations of the provisions of this chapter:
      1.   First Offense: First offense, the Sheriff's Office may notify the
Liquor Board of the name of the licensee whose employee or agent to whom a
criminal citation was issued, and the location, date and time of the alleged
offense. The licensee for the location at which the criminal citation was
issued may also be issued an administrative citation in the amount of up to
five hundred dollars ($500.00) and will be notified by registered mail, sent by
the Liquor Board, of the date and time of the occurrence and the name of the
employee or agent to whom a criminal citation was issued.
      2.   Second Offense: Second offense, the Sheriff's Office may notify the
Liquor Board of the name of the licensee whose employee or agent to whom a
criminal citation was issued, and the location, date and time of the alleged
offense. For a second offense, the licensee for the location at which the
criminal citation was issued may also be:
         a.   Issued an administrative citation in the amount of up to one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and will be notified by registered mail, sent by
the Liquor Board, of the date and time of the occurrence and the name of the
employee or agent to whom a criminal citation was issued;
         b.   Required to attend mandatory alcohol server training within three
(3) months of the hearing; or
         c.   Required to mandate all employees and agents of the licensee that
sell or dispense intoxicating liquors attend mandatory alcohol server training
within three (3) months of the hearing.
      3.   Third Offense: Third offense, the Sheriff's Office may notify the
Liquor Board of the name of the licensee whose employee or agent to whom a
criminal citation was issued, and the location, date and time of the alleged
offense. For a third offense, the Liquor Board may suspend or revoke the
licensee's liquor license. In addition, the licensee for the location at which
the criminal citation was issued may also be:
         a.   Issued an administrative citation in the amount of up to two
thousand dollars ($2,000.00) and will be notified by registered mail, sent by
the Liquor Board, of the date and time of the occurrence and the name of the
employee or agent to whom a criminal citation was issued;
         b.   Required to attend mandatory alcohol server training within three
(3) months of the hearing; or
         c.   Required to mandate all employees and agents of the licensee that
sell or dispense intoxicating liquors attend mandatory alcohol server training
within three (3) months of the hearing.
      4.   Emergency Suspension: If four (4) or more criminal citations are
issued within any twelve (12) month period related to the sale or dispensing of
liquor at the licensed premises, the Sheriff, his designee, or the Liquor Board
may suspend the liquor license of the licensee until the next meeting of the
Liquor Board. (Ord. 595, 10-19-2017, eff. 11-1-2017)
CHAPTER 3
PROSTITUTION
SECTION:
5.03.01: Title
5.03.02: Purpose
5.03.03: Definitions
5.03.04: Prostitution Permitted; Compliance with Provisions
5.03.05: License is a Privilege
5.03.06: Application for License
5.03.07: Investigation of Applicant; License Granted or Denied
5.03.08: License Fees; Penalty for Nonpayment
5.03.09: Issuance of License; Contents; Term
5.03.10: Number of Licenses; Location
5.03.11: Transfer of License
5.03.12: License Renewals
5.03.13: Restrictions on License
5.03.14: Requirements for Employees
5.03.15: Prohibited Conditions
5.03.16: Revocation of License
5.03.17: Violations and Penalties
5.03.01: TITLE:
This Chapter shall be known as the LYON COUNTY BROTHEL ORDINANCE. (Ord. 336. 2-
2-90)
5.03.02: PURPOSE:
Public health, safety and welfare will be promoted by the adoption of this
Chapter which licenses, regulates and controls prostitution within the County
and prohibits any prostitution within the County except as conducted in
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 336, 2-2-90)
5.03.03: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this Chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this Section:
APPLICANT: Any person, firm, or corporation applying to the Board for a license
under the provisions of this Chapter, together with all persons listed in
subsections 5.03.06A and B of this Chapter.
BOARD: The Board of County Commissioners.
EMPLOYMENT CARD: The card issued by the Sheriff to each employee, other than a
prostitute, authorizing them to be an employee at a licensed operation.
LICENSED OPERATION or OPERATION: A house of prostitution duly licensed and
operated in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
WORK CARD: The card issued by the Sheriff to each prostitute authorizing them
to work at a licensed operation. (Ord. 336, 2-2-90)
5.03.04: PROSTITUTION PERMITTED; COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS:
   A.   Prostitution Permitted: The operation of a house of prostitution within
the County in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter does not
constitute a public nuisance or an offense to public decency.
   B.   Compliance with Provisions:
      1.   Chapter Provisions:
         a.   It is unlawful for any person to keep or operate any house of
prostitution, house of ill fame or bawdy house of any description within the
County except as provided in this Chapter.
         b.   It is unlawful for any person to practice prostitution, to
solicit business for a prostitute or to procure any person for the purpose of
prostitution within the County except as provided in this Chapter.
      2.   Zoning: No licenses shall be issued without the prospective licensee
first obtaining proper zoning for the proposed operation. (Ord. 336, 2-2-90)
5.03.05: LICENSE IS A PRIVILEGE:
No applicant for a license or other affirmative Board approval has any right to
a license or the granting of the approval sought. Any license issued or other
Board approval granted pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter is a
revocable privilege and no holder acquires any vested right therein or
thereunder. (Ord. 336, 2-2-90)
5.03.06: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Any person desiring to operate a house of prostitution within the County shall
apply to the Board for a license to operate such house of prostitution. Such
license application shall contain the following information:
   A.   Names, ages and addresses of all persons who have or will have more
than a five percent (5%) financial interest in the operation.
   B.   Names, ages and addresses of persons who are or will be personally
responsible for the conduct and management of the operation.
   C.   A recent photograph and complete set of fingerprints of all persons
listed in subsections A and B of this Section.
   D.   Names and addresses of every other business in which the applicant has
any financial interest, including the type of such business and the nature of
the applicant's interest.
   E.   Names and addresses of all employers of the applicant in the preceding
ten (10) years.
   F.   All of the applicant's addresses for the preceding ten (10) years.
   G.   A list of all prior arrests and convictions of the applicant for any
crime, excluding minor traffic violations; such list shall include a statement
of the offense, the place of its occurrence, and the date of its occurrence.
   H.   A complete and accurate financial statement of the applicant.
   I.   A legal description of the property upon which the proposed operation
is to be conducted, together with copies of all deeds, mortgages, deeds of
trusts, liens or other encumbrances, leasehold interests or other interests
relating to the property.
   J.   Names, ages and addresses of all persons who have or will have
leasehold interests in the property.
   K.   Any other information deemed necessary or useful by the Board. (Ord.
336, 2-2-90)
5.03.07: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT; LICENSE GRANTED OR DENIED:
   A.   Investigation Fee: All license applications under the provisions of
this Chapter shall be filed with the County Clerk, along with the full
investigation fee which will be set by the Board by resolution and is subject
to change without any prior notice to potential applicants. (Ord. 400, 7-21-94,
eff. 8-5-94)
   B.   Sheriff's Investigation: Upon presentation of any license application
to the Board, the Board shall refer such application to the County Sheriff for
investigation. The Sheriff shall conduct a full investigation of all
information contained in the license application, which investigation shall
include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
      1.   A complete check of all records of the Federal Bureau of
Investigation and any other similar organization concerning the criminal record
of any applicant.
      2.   A personal interview with each applicant.
      3.   An interview, either personal or by mail, with all employers of the
applicant and business associates of the applicant, as shown in the license
application.
      4.   Examination of the financial statement and financial background of
the applicant.
      5.   Any other investigation deemed necessary or useful by the Sheriff.
   C.   Investigation Report: As soon as practicable after any application is
referred by the Board to the Sheriff, the Sheriff shall report the results of
his investigation in writing to the Board, such report shall include, but shall
not be limited to, the following:
      1.   A complete statement of the results of all investigations
undertaken.
      2.   A list of any errors or omissions found to exist in the application.
      3.   An evaluation of the personal and financial status and background of
the applicant.
   D.   Board Response: Within thirty (30) days after receiving the Sheriff's
report, the Board may:
      1.   Refer the application back to the Sheriff for additional
investigation.
      2.   Require a personal interview with the applicant.
      3.   Require the applicant to submit additional information relative to
his application.
      4.   Grant or refuse to grant a license under the provisions of this
Chapter. (Ord. 336, 2-2-90)
   E.   Criteria for License Denial: The Board may refuse to grant a license to
any applicant who, in the opinion of the Board, is not appropriate for any of
the following reasons: (Ord. 336, 2-2-90; 1991 Code)
      1.   Who has been convicted of any felony.
      2.   Who is financially insolvent or undergone a prior bankruptcy
proceeding.
      3.   Who has a history of financial instability.
      4.   Who has wilfully omitted or incorrectly stated any material fact in
the application.
      5.   Who has any financial interest in or connection with any business
which is illegal where such business is located.
      6.   Whose license under the provisions of this Chapter would not be in
the best interest of the health, welfare or safety of the County or its
residents.
      7.   Whose proposed establishment is not in correct zoning.
      8.   Who has associates that the Board considers inappropriate for the
operation of this privileged business.
   F.   Re-Application Upon License Denial: Upon denying any application for a
license under the provisions of this Chapter, the Board may grant the applicant
thirty (30) days within which to cure any defect in the application, and such
application may be again submitted to the Board for consideration, as herein
provided, within thirty (30) days after such denial.
   G.   Approval or Denial of License; Reasons: The Board shall grant or refuse
to grant a license after consideration of any application. Any refusal to grant
a license will be accompanied by the specific findings of fact and reasons for
the denial. (Ord. 336, 2-2-90)
5.03.08: LICENSE FEES; PENALTIES FOR NONPAYMENT:
   A.   License Fees Established: Every licensed operation shall pay licensing
fees per quarter, in advance of July 1, October 1, January 1, and April 1 of
each year, for the privilege of operating a house of prostitution in the
County. The Board will set licensing fees by resolution and such fees are
subject to change without prior notice to license holders.
License fees shall be paid to the County Clerk, quarterly, for deposit with the
County Treasurer, to be credited to the Building or Capital Acquisition Fund.
(Ord. 400, 7-21-94, eff. 8-5-94)
   B.   Penalties for Nonpayment: All brothel license fees due under this
Chapter shall be considered delinquent if not paid in full on or before the
fifteenth day following the due date. The penalties for delinquent fees shall
be as follows:
A penalty of fifteen percent (15%) of the payment shall be added to all
payments received after the fees have become delinquent.
   C.   Nonpayment of Brothel Fees; License Revocations: Any brothel fees which
are not paid within fifteen (15) days after the due date, including all accrued
penalties, shall be grounds for revocation of the brothel license. (Ord. 365,
3-19-92, eff. 4-3-92)
5.03.09: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE; CONTENTS; TERM:
Upon approval of all applications connected with an operation, the Board shall
issue a license for the operation, which license shall state:
   A.   The names and addresses of all licensees connected with the operation.
   B.   The address or location of the operation.
   C.   Any restrictions or limitations imposed by the Board.
   D.   The date of issuance of the license.
   E.   The date of expiration of the license.
All licenses shall be issued for a quarterly period. (Ord. 336, 2-2-1990)
5.03.10: NUMBER OF LICENSES; LOCATION:
The number of licenses in each township shall be as follows: The Board shall
issue no more than four (4) licensed operations under the provisions of this
chapter, and all licensed operations shall be located in an XX Zone 1 . (Ord.
336, 2-2-1990; amd. Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  15.314.05 and title 15, chapter 320 of this Code.
5.03.11: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
No license granted under this chapter may be transferred without the consent of
the Board, said consent having been obtained after the proposed transferee has
complied with all requirements as herein provided. (Ord. 336, 2-2-1990)
5.03.12: LICENSE RENEWALS:
Five (5) days before the expiration date of any license, the licensee shall
apply to the Sheriff, on forms provided, for a renewal. If any written
complaint regarding the operation shall have been received during the
immediately preceding license period, the Sheriff shall forthwith transmit the
renewal application to the Board which shall, within five (5) days, investigate
the complaint or complaints and either grant or deny the renewal. If no such
complaints have been received, the Sheriff may issue the renewed license. In
determining whether to grant a renewal, the Board may conduct hearings, summon
witnesses, interview the licensee, interview any complainant, require
additional investigation by the Sheriff, or do any and all other acts which may
be necessary or appropriate to the Board's determination.
Failure of any licensed operation to apply for a renewal, as required in this
section shall result in an automatic revocation of the license on the
expiration date thereof. Any license thus revoked may be reinstated only upon
compliance by the licensee with all requirements of this chapter relating to
original license applications. (Ord. 336, 2-2-1990)
5.03.13: RESTRICTIONS ON LICENSE:
   A.   Location And Premises: Every license issued under the provisions of
this chapter shall have the following restrictions:
      1.   Location 1 : No licensed operation may be:
         a.   Located within the geographical limits of any incorporated city
or unincorporated town within the County.
         b.   Located within three (3) miles of the boundary of any
incorporated city or unincorporated town within the County.
         c.   Conducted in violation of any city, County, State, or Federal
ordinance, statute or regulation. (Ord. 336, 2-2-1990)
      2.   Signs: All licensed operations may have one appropriate sign above
the entrance and one directional off premises sign leading to the facility.
Prior to any existing signs being changed or new signs being erected, the size,
content, appropriateness, location and placement of the sign shall be approved
by the Board. All off premises signs shall be placed in a location off the
right-of-way and in a manner so as not to constitute a hazard. The illumination
of off premises signs by external, internal or independent sources of light is
prohibited along with the use of fluorescent or any other reflective material
on signs along any County or State right- of-way. Off premises signs can only
be in a rectangular shape not exceeding four feet by eight feet (4'x8'). Sign
faces can only contain the colors of black or white. (Ord. 399, 6-16-1994, eff.
7-8-1994)
      3.   Fences: All licensed operations shall be enclosed by a fence not
less than six feet (6') in height; such fence shall be equipped with an
entrance gate that will prevent access to the premises unless the gate is
opened from the inside.
   B.   Other Restrictions: The board may, at its discretion and to promote the
health, safety and welfare of the people of the county and to promote the
orderly conduct of the operation, impose additional restrictions including, but
not limited to, the following:
      1.   Limitation of the hours per day and/or days per week that an
operation may be conducted.
      2.   Limitation of the number of prostitutes that may be employed in an
operation.
      3.   Limitation on the type or size of building in which an operation may
be conducted.
The board may impose restrictions pursuant to this subsection prior, during or
after issuance of license. (Ord. 336, 2-2-1990)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  5.03.10 of this chapter.
5.03.14: REQUIREMENTS FOR EMPLOYEES:
   A.   Prostitutes:
      1.   Registration And Work Card:
         a.   Registration And Work Card Required; Application: Every
prostitute working at a licensed operation shall be registered with and issued
a work card by the sheriff. The application for registration shall include:
            (1)   The name given at birth and all subsequent names or aliases
used.
            (2)   The age, address and physical description of the prostitute.
            (3)   A recent photo and full set of fingerprints of the
prostitute.
            (4)   Complete employment or working record of prostitute for the
preceding three (3) years.
            (5)   All addresses of the prostitute for the preceding three (3)
years.
            (6)   Complete criminal record of the prostitute, including all
arrests and convictions, except minor traffic violations; such list shall
include a statement of each offense, the place of its occurrence and the date
of its occurrence.
            (7)   An annual, nonrefundable fee in the amount of fifty dollars
($50.00) per prostitute.
            (8)   A waiver of release of medical information allowing the
medical facilities and doctors to provide to the county the results of the
referred medical examination and tests.
            (9)   An authorization to conduct an investigation into the
criminal history of the prostitute.
         b.   Investigation Of Applicant: The sheriff shall investigate,
through all available means, the accuracy of all information supplied by the
prostitute on the registration form.
            (1)   Applicants for the work card must be fingerprinted.
            (2)   Applicants must provide a written authorization, along with
their application materials, allowing the submission of their fingerprints to
the federal bureau of investigation (FBI). The authorization will allow the FBI
to conduct a national background check of the applicant.
            (3)   This FBI background check shall be authorized under this
section as well as under Nevada Revised Statutes 239B.010(a).
         c.   Restrictions On Issuance Of Work Card: No prostitute may be
issued a work card who:
            (1)   Has ever been convicted of any crime involving sale or
furnishing of any controlled substance.
            (2)   Has been convicted of possession or use of a controlled
substance in the last five (5) years.
            (3)   Has been convicted of a felony within the last five (5)
years, except as otherwise herein provided.
            (4)   Has been convicted of any crime involving embezzlement or
misappropriation of funds within the last three (3) years.
            (5)   Has been convicted of petty theft or shoplifting within the
last one year.
            (6)   Has ever been convicted of any crime involving the use of a
deadly weapon against a person.
            (7)   Has wilfully made any false statement or omission in the
application form.
            (8)   Who is under the age of eighteen (18) years.
         d.   Form And Contents Of Work Card; Revocation: The work card of
prostitutes shall be in the form and contain the information as designated by
the sheriff. Each card shall remain the property of the county and may be
revoked or retained by the sheriff for just cause.
         e.   Working At One Location Only; Fee To Change Location: The sheriff
shall be notified as to which licensed operation a prostitute is working. No
prostitute shall be authorized to work at more than one licensed operation at a
time. A fifty dollar ($50.00) fee shall be paid each time a prostitute changes
the licensed operation at which she is working.
      2.   Health Examinations:
         a.   Exams Required: Every prostitute working at a licensed operation
shall have a weekly medical examination by a medical doctor licensed to
practice medicine in the state of Nevada. Each medical examination shall
include testing to be submitted as follows:
            (1)   If available to be performed on a competitive basis, the
tests must be submitted by the doctor to a laboratory located in Lyon County.
            (2)   If the tests cannot be performed on a competitive basis at
the laboratory located in Lyon County, then at any state licensed medical
laboratory.
            (3)   Once each week, a culture to confirm the presence or absence
of gonorrhea and testing to screen for the presence or absence of chlamydia.
The frequency of the screening for chlamydia may be changed by the county
health officer.
            (4)   Once each month, a sample of blood to confirm the presence or
absence of the antibody to the human immunodeficiency virus or syphilis.
            (5)   Once every year, screening for the presence or absence of
herpes simplex II virus.
            (6)   Include other medically approved tests deemed advisable by
the examiner for determining whether the prostitute is afflicted with any
infectious or contagious disease.
            (7)   All medical examinations and tests shall conform to the
requirements of the state of Nevada division of health, the Nevada Revised
Statutes and the Nevada administrative code.
            (8)   The expense associated with cost of the required medical
examination and tests shall be paid by the prostitute directly to the medical
providers.
         b.   Medical Advisors: In order to provide timely, accurate and
consistent results of the medical examinations as required herein, medical
advisors to the sheriff shall be appointed as herein provided.
            (1)   The medical advisor(s) shall be a doctor or doctors licensed
to practice medicine in the state of Nevada.
            (2)   The medical advisor(s) shall be appointed, from time to time
as required, by a committee comprised of the sheriff, district attorney and the
chairman of the county commissioners.
            (3)   In appointing medical advisor(s) the committee shall consider
input from the Lyon County public health officer, input from representatives of
the brothels, availability of medical service, convenience to the sheriff for
receipt of the required documentation, convenience and timeliness of the
medical examinations for prostitutes and other relevant factors. The committee
shall give preference to doctors who have an established practice of medicine
in Lyon County.
            (4)   The doctors designated as medical advisor(s) to the sheriff
shall be the sole medical providers administering the medical examination and
tests, as herein provided, at the licensed operations.
         c.   Tests By Other Than Medical Advisors: In the event a prostitute
shall have the medical examination and tests required, as herein provided, by a
doctor other than a doctor designated as an advisor to the sheriff, the results
of said medical examination and tests shall be forwarded to a doctor who has
been so designated for review.
         d.   Certification Of Work Eligibility; Approval And Denial:
            (1)   After the medical doctor, who has been designated as an
advisor to the sheriff, completes the required medical examination and tests,
or having received and reviewed the report and test results from another
doctor, then that advisor shall certify to the sheriff that the prostitute is
eligible for a work card. Each certificate shall specify the date of the
examination and shall be valid for seven (7) days from the date of the
certificate. The expense associated with this review and certification shall be
paid by the prostitute directly to the doctor.
            (2)   No person who has ever been denied a certificate by an
examining doctor, as herein provided, may again work as a prostitute in any
licensed operation until such person has received and presented to the sheriff
a certificate from the appropriate state health personnel stating that the
cause or causes which resulted in the denial of the certificate have been cured
and that the person is now free of any venereal disease or other contagious or
infectious disease and has complied with all other requirements of this
chapter.
         e.   Designated Medical Facility:
            (1)   A designated medical facility shall be appointed, from time
to time as required, by a committee which is comprised of the sheriff, district
attorney and the chairman of the county commissioners.
            (2)   The licensed operation shall provide a copy of the results of
all medical tests of prostitutes to the designated medical facility on a
quarterly basis.
            (3)   The designated medical facility shall review the medical
tests. In reviewing the certificate the designated medical facility may:
               (A) Contact the examining physician and discuss procedures
utilized in connection with the examination required in subsection A2a of this
section and recommend changes in procedures.
               (B) Contact the licensed and approved clinical laboratory
processing the culture test required by the provisions of this subsection A2.
               (C) Discuss with the health division of the department of human
resources of the state the tests required and recommend changes to be adopted
by the health division of the department of human resources of the state.
               (D) Report to the sheriff the results of its review.
               (E) Require every licensee, at the sole cost and expense of the
licensee or prostitute, to pay to the designated medical facility the lesser of
a weekly fee of one hundred twenty five dollars ($125.00) or an amount
equivalent to ten dollars ($10.00) per prostitute working at licensee's place
of business, per week, for the prior quarter. Said fee shall be paid quarterly.
         f.   Seizure Of Work Card: Upon receiving information that a
prostitute is afflicted with an infectious or contagious disease or has not
obtained a current medical examination, as herein required, or is no longer
entitled to a work card, the sheriff shall immediately seize any work card
previously issued.
   B.   Employee Registration And Employment Card:
      1.   Registration And Work Card Required; Application: Each employee
present at or employed by a licensed operation shall register with and be
issued an employment card by the sheriff. The application for an employment
card shall include:
         a.   The name, age, address and physical description of the employee.
         b.   A recent photo and full set of fingerprints of the employee.
         c.   Complete employment record of employee for the preceding five (5)
years.
         d.   All addresses of the employee for the preceding five (5) years.
         e.   Complete criminal record of the employee including all arrests
and convictions, except minor traffic violations; such list shall include a
statement of each offense, the place of its occurrence and the date of its
occurrence for the preceding five (5) years.
         f.   An annual, nonrefundable fee in the amount of fifty dollars
($50.00).
      2.   Investigation Of Applicant: The sheriff shall investigate, through
all available means, the accuracy of all information supplied by the individual
on the registration form.
         a.   Applicants for this work card must be fingerprinted.
         b.   Applicants must provide a written authorization, along with their
application materials, allowing submission of their fingerprints to the federal
bureau of investigation (FBI). The authorization will allow the FBI to conduct
a national background check of the applicant.
         c.   This FBI background check shall be authorized under this section
as well as under Nevada Revised Statutes 239B.010(a).
      3.   Restrictions On Issuance Of Work Card: No employee may be issued a
work card who:
         a.   Has ever been convicted of any crime involving sale or furnishing
of any controlled substance.
         b.   Has been convicted of possession or use of a controlled substance
in the last five (5) years.
         c.   Has been convicted of a felony within the last five (5) years,
except as otherwise herein provided.
         d.   Has been convicted of any crime involving embezzlement or
misappropriation of funds within the last three (3) years.
         e.   Has been convicted of petty theft or shoplifting within the last
one year.
         f.   Has ever been convicted of any crime involving the use of a
deadly weapon against a person.
         g.   Has wilfully made any false statement or omission in the
application form.
         h.   Is under the age of eighteen (18) years.
      4.   Notice Of Employment Change; Fee: Each employee shall notify the
sheriff at which licensed establishment said employee is working. An employee
may work in one or more licensed establishments under the same ownership if the
employee applies, pays for and receives a separate registration and work card
for each establishment. Upon change of employment to another licensed
establishment, an employee shall pay a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) to the
sheriff for each change.
Licensed prostitutes may not register nor apply for more than one work card at
any given time. The privilege outlined within this subsection B4 is only for
the benefit of those regular nonprostitute employees. (Ord. 519, 4-3-2008)
5.03.15: PROHIBITED CONDITIONS:
   A.   Minors: It is unlawful:
      1.   For any person under the age of eighteen (18) years, except as
otherwise specified in this chapter, to enter or be a patron of any operation
licensed under the provisions of this chapter.
      2.   For the licensee of any operation licensed under the provisions of
this chapter or for any employee of such licensee or working prostitute to
compel, entice, encourage, permit or suffer any person under the age of
eighteen (18) years to enter or be a patron of any operation licensed under the
provisions of this chapter.
      3.   For any operation licensed under this chapter or for any licensee or
for any employee of any licensee or working prostitute to sell to any person or
to dispense or give away to anyone under twenty one (21) years of age any
alcoholic beverages on the premises occupied by any licensed operation or in
connection with such operation.
   B.   Advertising: It is unlawful to advertise or promote any operation
licensed under this chapter, except as specifically designated herein.
   C.   Unauthorized Persons: It is unlawful for any licensed operation to
allow persons on the premises except for the owners, licensed employees,
working prostitutes, potential customers or authorized emergency, medical or
county agents or employees. (Ord. 336, 2-2-1990)
5.03.16: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
   A.   The board may revoke any license issued under the provisions of this
chapter for any of the following causes:
      1.   Any cause that would constitute grounds for denial of a license.
      2.   Violation of any provision of this chapter by the licensee or any
employee of the licensee or any working prostitute at a licensed operation.
      3.   The licensee knowingly permitting the existence of any health hazard
on the premises occupied by the licensed operation or employing any person or
allowing a prostitute to work when such person does not have a work card as
herein required.
      4.   Wilful refusal of the licensee to comply with any order of the
sheriff or board.
      5.   Any other cause which the board may determine, in its sound
discretion, to be deleterious to the health, welfare and safety of the general
public.
   B.   Before revoking any license issued under this chapter, unless an
alternative procedure is clearly specified elsewhere in this chapter, the board
shall:
      1.   Conduct a hearing to determine the existence of the cause or causes
of revocation, notice of which hearing shall have been served upon the licensee
or posted upon the premises where the licensed operation is conducted at least
forty eight (48) hours prior to the time of such hearing.
      2.   Permit the licensee to submit evidence and testimony in opposition
to the revocation.
      3.   Consider all evidence and testimony in support of and in opposition
to the revocation.
      4.   Enter in the minutes of the board the findings of the board and
state with specificity any causes of revocation found by the board.
      5.   Enter in the minutes of the board an order revoking or refusing to
revoke the license. The board may impose any lesser penalty or conditions
reasonable under the circumstances as a condition of not revoking a license.
   C.   Notice of revocation shall be served upon the licensee or posted upon
the premises occupied by the licensed operation. Revocation shall be effective
upon service or posting of the notice. (Ord. 336, 2-2-1990)
5.03.17: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
In addition to the other penalties, as herein provided, any person violating
any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 336, 2-2-
1990)
CHAPTER 4
SECONDHAND DEALERS
SECTION:
5.04.01: Definitions
5.04.02: Permit Requirements
5.04.03: Records Kept; Inspection
5.04.04: Reports Required
5.04.05: Period Property to be Retained
5.04.06: Criminally Receiving Junk
5.04.07: Penalty
5.04.01: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this Chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this Section:
BOARD: The Lyon County Board of Commissioners. (1973 Code §6.24.030)
DISTRICT ATTORNEY: The Lyon County District Attorney. (1973 Code §6.24.040)
SECONDHAND DEALERS: Every person engaged in whole or in part in the business of
buying or selling secondhand personal property, metal junk or melted metals.
(1973 Code §6.24.010)
SHERIFF'S OFFICE: The Lyon County Sheriff's office. (1973 Code §6.24.020)
5.04.02: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required: It is unlawful for any person to purchase or sell and
do business as a secondhand dealer in the County without first obtaining a
permit for such business from the Board.
   B.   Application for Permit: Applications for such permits shall be made on
forms supplied by the Sheriff's office. At this time, a character check will be
made by the Sheriff's office, and if that is cleared, then there will be a
Board hearing comprised of the Board and the Sheriff.
   C.   Permit Issuance Procedure and Fee: The licensing procedure and fees
shall be as stated in Chapter 1 of this Title. (1973 Code §6.24.050)
5.04.03: RECORDS KEPT; INSPECTION:
Every secondhand dealer doing business in this County shall maintain in his
place of business an activity sheet provided by the Sheriff's office, and it
shall contain the following:
   A.   The date of the transaction.
   B.   The name of the person or employee conducting the transaction.
   C.   The name, age, driver's license number, vehicle license number, street
and house number and general description of the dress, complexion, color of
hair and facial appearance of the person with whom the transaction is had.
   D.   The name, street and house number of the owner of the property bought.
   E.   The street and house number of the place from which the property bought
was last removed.
   F.   The license number of the vehicle delivering each purchase.
   G.   A description of the property bought. In the case of watches, the
description shall contain the name of the maker and the number of both the
works and the case. In the case of jewelry, all letters and marks inscribed
thereon shall be included in the description. When the article bought is
furniture or the contents of any house or room actually inspected on the
premises, a general record of the transaction shall be sufficient.
   H.   The price paid.
   I.   The names, streets and house numbers of all persons witnessing the
transaction.
The record and all goods received shall, at all times during the ordinary hours
of business, be open to the inspection of the District Attorney or of any peace
officer. (1973 Code §6.24.060)
5.04.04: REPORTS REQUIRED:
   A.   Daily Reports: Every secondhand dealer doing business in Lyon County
shall, before twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight of each day, furnish to the
County Sheriff a full, true and correct transcript of the record of all
transactions had on the preceding day.
   B.   Report of Lost or Stolen Property: Every secondhand dealer doing
business in the County having good cause to believe that any property in his
possession has been previously lost or stolen shall forthwith report such fact
to the Sheriff's office together with the name of the owner if known, and the
date when and the name of the person from whom the same was received by him.
(1973 Code §6.24.070)
5.04.05: PERIOD PROPERTY TO BE RETAINED:
No property bought by any secondhand dealer shall be removed from his place of
business within four (4) days after the receipt thereof shall have been
reported to the Sheriff's office. (1973 Code §6.24.080)
5.04.06: CRIMINALLY RECEIVING JUNK:
Any secondhand dealer or any agent, employee or representative of a secondhand
dealer who buys or receives any junk which he knows or should reasonably know
is ordinarily used by and belongs to a telephone, telegraph, gas, water,
electric or transportation company or county, city or other political
subdivision of this State engaged in furnishing utility service and who fails
to use ordinary care in determining whether the person selling or delivering
such junk has a legal right to do so is guilty or criminally receiving such
property. (1973 Code § 6.24.090)
Any person convicted of criminally receiving junk shall be punished as provided
in Title 1, Chapter 4 of this Code. (1973 Code §6.24.090; 1991 Code)
5.04.07: PENALTY:
Failure to comply with the provisions of this Chapter shall be cause for
punishment as provided in Title 1, Chapter 4 of this Code. (1973 Code
§6.24.100; 1991 Code)
CHAPTER 5
PAWNBROKERS
SECTION:
5.05.01: Definitions
5.05.02: Permit Requirements
5.05.03: Bond Required
5.05.04: Records Kept
5.05.05: Reports Required
5.05.06: Period Pledges To Be Retained
5.05.07: Charges And Receipts
5.05.08: Inspections
5.05.09: Penalties
5.05.01: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this Chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this Section:
BOARD: The Lyon County Board of Commissioners.
DISTRICT ATTORNEY: The Lyon County District Attorney.
PAWNBROKER: Every person engaged, in whole or in part, in the business of
loaning money on the security of pledges, deposits or other secured
transactions in personal property.
SHERIFF'S OFFICE: The Lyon County Sheriff's office. (1973 Code §§6.20.010,
6.20.020, 6.20.030, 6.20.040)
5.05.02: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required: It is unlawful for any person to purchase or sell and
do business as a pawnbroker in the County without first obtaining a permit for
such business from the Board.
   B.   Autopawn Permit: An additional permit must be acquired prior to
accepting a motor vehicle as pledged property or using a motor vehicle in any
other manner as collateral for a loan.
   C.   Application For Permit: Applications for such permits shall be made on
forms supplied by the Clerk's office. At this time, a character check will be
made by the Sheriff's office, and if that is cleared, then there will be a
Board hearing comprised of the Board and the Sheriff.
   D.   Permit Issuance Procedure And Fee: The licensing procedure and fees
shall be as stated in Chapter 1 of this Title. (Ord. 409, 3-2-1995, eff. 3-17-
1995)
5.05.03: BOND REQUIRED:
Pawnbroker permits shall not be issued unless:
   A.   The license applicant has executed a bond to the County with two (2) or
more sufficient sureties to be approved by the Board or has furnished a surety
company bond as provided by law in the penal sum of five hundred dollars
($500.00) conditioned upon the faithful compliance with State, Federal and
County laws.
   B.   If the license applicant or a person currently holding a pawnbroker
license intends to accept a motor vehicle as pledged property or to use a motor
vehicle as collateral in any other manner for a loan, then the license
applicant or a person currently holding a pawnbroker license must execute an
additional bond to the County with two (2) or more sufficient sureties to be
approved by the Board or furnish a surety company bond as provided by law in
the penal sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) conditioned upon the faithful
compliance with State, Federal and County laws prior to receiving an autopawn
license.
   C.   A third additional bond that satisfies the requirements of subsection B
of this Section in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) conditioned
upon compliance with State, Federal and County environmental protection and
nuisance laws must be executed to the County prior to receiving an autopawn
license. (Ord. 409, 3-2-1995, eff. 3-17-1995)
5.05.04: RECORDS KEPT:
Every pawnbroker doing business in the County shall maintain in his place of
business an activity sheet provided by the Sheriff's office which shall contain
the following:
   A.   The date of the transaction.
   B.   The name of the person or employee conducting the transaction.
   C.   The name, age, street and house number and a general description of the
dress, complexion, color of hair and facial appearance of the person with whom
the transaction is had.
   D.   The name, street and house number of the owner of the property received
in pledge. (Ord. 409, 3-2-1995, eff. 3-17-1995)
   E.   The street and house number of the place from which the property
received in pledge was last removed.
   F.   A description of the property received in pledge. In the case of
watches, the description shall contain the name of the maker and the number of
both the works and the case. In the case of jewelry, all letters and marks
inscribed thereon shall be included in the description. When an article
received is furniture or the contents of any house or room actually inspected
on the premises, a general record of the transaction shall be sufficient.
   G.   The amount loaned.
   H.   The names, streets and house numbers of all persons witnessing the
transaction.
   I.   The number of any pawn ticket issued therefor. (1973 Code §6.20.070)
5.05.05: REPORTS REQUIRED:
   A.   Daily Report: Every pawnbroker doing business in the county shall,
before twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight of each day, furnish to the county
sheriff a full, true and correct transcript of the record of all transactions
had on the preceding day.
   B.   Report Of Lost Or Stolen Property: Every pawnbroker doing business in
the county having good cause to believe that any property in his possession had
been previously lost or stolen shall forthwith report such fact to the
sheriff's office together with the name of the owner, if known, and the date
when and the name of the person from whom the same was received by him. (1973
Code §6.20.080)
5.05.06: PERIOD PLEDGES TO BE RETAINED:
   A.   No property received in a pledge by any pawnbroker shall be removed
from his place of business, except when redeemed by the owner thereof, within
four (4) days after the receipt thereof shall have been reported to the
sheriff's office.
   B.   All personal property shall be held for redemption for a period of not
less than one hundred twenty (120) days from the date of the pledge with any
pawnbroker. (Ord. 524, 9-4-2008)
5.05.07: CHARGES AND RECEIPTS:
All pawnbrokers are authorized to charge and receive interest at the rate of
not more than ten percent (10%) a month for money loaned on the security of
personal property actually received in pledge, and a person shall not ask or
receive a higher rate of interest or discount on any such loan or on any actual
or pretended sale or redemption of personal property. For any loan made, a
pawnbroker may make an initial charge of not more than five dollars ($5.00) in
addition to interest at the authorized rate.
All pawnbrokers shall give to the person securing the loan a printed receipt
clearly showing the amount loaned with a description of the pledged property.
The reverse side of the receipt shall be marked in such a manner that the
amounts of principal and interest paid by the person securing the loan can be
clearly designated. Each payment shall designate how much of the payment is
being credited to principal and how much to interest, with dates of payments
shown thereon. (Ord. 524, 9-4-2008)
5.05.08: INSPECTIONS:
The record of transactions and all goods received shall, at all times during
the ordinary hours of business, be open to the inspection of the district
attorney or of any peace officer. (1973 Code §6.20.070)
All peace officers have the right to inspect premises of business concerned for
stolen property without obtaining a search warrant for either daytime or
nighttime search. (1973 Code §6.20.080)
5.05.09: PENALTIES:
Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall be cause for
revocation of business license or a five hundred dollar ($500.00) fine. (1973
Code §6.20.110)
CHAPTER 6
AUTOMOBILE WRECKERS
(Rep. by Ord. 593, 10-19-2017, eff. 11-1-2017)
CHAPTER 7
OUTDOOR FESTIVALS
SECTION:
5.07.01: Definition
5.07.02: License Required
5.07.03: Application for License
5.07.04: Festival Plans
5.07.05: Processing of License Application
5.07.06: Denial of License
5.07.07: Issuance of License; Fee
5.07.08: License to be Posted; Nontransferability
5.07.09: Conditions of License
5.07.10: Prohibited Acts and Conditions
5.07.11: Complaints
5.07.12: Revocation of License
5.07.13: Compliance with General Business and License Provisions
5.07.01: DEFINITION:
"Outdoor festival" means any music festival, dance festival, "rock" festival or
similar musical activity at which music is provided by paid or amateur
performers or by prerecorded means, which is held at any place other than in a
permanent building or permanent installation which has been constructed for the
purpose of conducting such activities or similar activities and to which
members of the public are invited or admitted for a charge or free of cost.
(1973 Code §9.04.010)
5.07.02: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall operate, maintain, conduct, advertise or sell or furnish
tickets for an outdoor festival in the County unless he shall first obtain a
license from the County to operate or conduct such festival. (1973 Code
§9.04.020)
5.07.03: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Application for a license to conduct an outdoor festival shall be made in
writing to the Clerk of the Board of Commissioners at least sixty (60) days
prior to the time indicated for the commencement of the planned activity and
shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee of one hundred dollars
($100.00) and shall contain the following information:
   A.   The name, age, residence and mailing address of the person making the
application. If the application is made by a partnership, the names and
addresses of the partners must appear. Where the applicant is a corporation,
the application must be signed by the president, vice president and secretary
thereof and must contain the addresses of the corporate officers, and a
certified copy of the articles of incorporation shall be submitted with the
application.
   B.   A statement of the kind, character or type of festival which the
applicant proposes to conduct, operate or carry on.
   C.   The address or legal description of the place where the proposed
festival is to be conducted, operated or carried on. Additionally, the
applicant must submit proof of ownership of the place where the festival is to
be conducted or a statement signed by the owner of the premises indicating his
consent that the site be used for the proposed festival.
   D.   The date or dates and the hours during which the festival is to be
conducted.
   E.   An estimate of the number of customers, spectators, participants and
other persons expected to attend the festival for each day it is conducted.
The applicant shall provide names and addresses of anyone contributing,
investing or having a financial interest greater than five hundred dollars
($500.00) in producing the festival.
At the time of making application the applicant shall arrange to be
fingerprinted by office of the Sheriff. (1973 Code §9.04.030)
5.07.04: FESTIVAL PLANS:
A detailed explanation of the applicant's plans to provide security and fire
protection, water supply and facilities, food supply and facilities, sanitation
facilities, medical facilities and services, vehicle parking space, vehicle
access and on-site traffic control shall be required and, if it is proposed or
expected that spectators or participants will remain at night or overnight, the
arrangements for illuminating the premises and for camping or similar
facilities. The applicant's plans shall include what provisions shall be made
for numbers of spectators in excess of the estimate, provisions for cleanup of
the premises and removal of rubbish after the event has concluded.
A plot plan showing arrangement of the facilities, including those for parking,
egress and ingress, shall be submitted with the application. (1973 Code
§9.04.040)
5.07.05: PROCESSING OF LICENSE APPLICATION:
   A.   Notice of Review; Investigation of Applicant: Upon receipt of a
complete application and the application fee, the Clerk of the Board of
Commissioners shall set the application for public hearing at a regular meeting
of the Board of Commissioners, not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than
thirty (30) days thereafter, and shall give not less than ten (10) days'
written notice thereof to the applicant. He shall promptly give notice of
hearing and copies of the application to the Sheriff, the County Health Officer
and the County Engineer who shall investigate the application and report in
writing to the Board of Commissioners, not later than the hearing, with
appropriate recommendations related to their official functions as to granting
a license and conditions thereof. (1973 Code §9.04.050)
   B.   Review by Board of Commissioners: Based upon the testimony of the
witnesses and evidence presented at the hearing, including the report of the
department heads, the Board of Commissioners shall grant the license, deny the
license or set conditions which must be met or security given that they will be
met before a license may be granted. If conditions are imposed by the Board,
the applicant shall furnish or cause to be furnished to the Clerk proof that
all conditions have been met before the license may be issued by the Clerk.
(1973 Code §9.04.060)
5.07.06: DENIAL OF LICENSE:
After holding the required public hearing, the Board of Commissioners may deny
issuance of license if it finds any of the following:
   A.   That the applicant fails to meet the conditions imposed pursuant to
this Chapter.
   B.   That the proposed festival will be conducted in a manner and/or
location not meeting the health, zoning, fire or building and safety standards
established by the ordinances of the County or the laws of the State.
   C.   That the applicant has knowingly made a false, misleading or fraudulent
statement of material fact in the application for license or in any other
document required pursuant to this Chapter.
   D.   That the applicant, his employee, agent or any person connected or
associated with the applicant as partner, director, officer, stockholder,
associate or manager has previously conducted the type of festival being
applied for which resulted in the creation of a public or private nuisance.
   E.   That the applicant, his employee, agent or any person associated with
applicant as partner, director, officer, stockholder, associate or manager has
been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction by final judgment of:
      1.   An offense involving the presentation, exhibition or performance of
an obscene production, motion picture or place or of selling obscene matter, or
      2.   An offense involving lewd conduct, or
      3.   An offense involving the use of force and violence upon the person
of another, or
      4.   An offense involving misconduct with children, or
      5.   A felony offense.
Where the application is denied, the Clerk of the Board of Commissioners shall
mail to the applicant written notice of denial within fourteen (14) days of the
action, which notice shall include a statement of the reasons the application
was denied. (1973 Code §9.04.090)
5.07.07: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE; FEE:
When the county clerk certifies that conditions have been met, the sheriff
shall, upon payment of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day of operation,
issue a license specifying the name and address of the licensee, the kind of
festival licensed and the number of days operation is authorized. The board of
commissioners may waive the requirement of payment of the one hundred dollars
($100.00) per day of operation. (1973 Code §9.04.070)
5.07.08: LICENSE TO BE POSTED; NONTRANSFERABILITY:
The licensee shall keep the license posted in a conspicuous place upon the
premises at which the festival is conducted. No license issued pursuant to this
chapter shall be transferable or removed to another location. (1973 Code
§9.04.070)
5.07.09: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
At the hearing required under subsection
5.07.05A of this chapter, the board of commissioners may establish conditions
which must be met prior to the issuance of any license hereunder; except, that
the board may take a matter under submission before determining which
conditions shall be imposed. Where the board takes a matter under submission,
written notice of any condition imposed as prerequisite to the issuance of a
license must be mailed to the applicant within fifteen (15) days of the
original hearing.
The conditions which may be imposed by the board of commissioners pursuant to
the county's general police power for the protection of health, safety and
property of local residents and persons attending festivals in the county are
as follows:
   A.   Financial Statements: Each licensee shall be required to provide a
financial statement to give assurance of the ability of the promoters and/or
applicants to meet the conditions of the permit.
   B.   Bonds: Any licensee may be called upon to post an indemnity bond and/or
a performance bond in favor of the county in connection with the operation of a
festival. Bonds required by this chapter must be approved by the county
commissioners prior to the issuance of a license. An applicant may be required
to submit a surety bond written by a corporate bonding company authorized to do
business in the state by the department of commerce, insurance division, in a
penal amount determined by the board of commissioners. The bond shall indemnify
the county, its agents, officers, servants and employees and the county board
of commissioners against any and all loss, injury and damage of any nature
whatsoever arising out of or in any way connected with the festival and shall
indemnify against loss, injury and damage to both person and property.
Additionally, the county may demand that applicant provide a corporate surety
bond written by a corporate bonding company authorized to do business in the
state, indemnifying the county and the owners of property adjoining the
festival site for any costs necessitated for cleaning up and/or removing
debris, trash or other waste from, in and around the premises. The bond shall
be in an amount determined by the board of commissioners.
   C.   Police Protection: Every licensee shall employ, at his own expense,
police protection. The number and type of officers shall be determined and
specified by the county sheriff to provide for the preservation of order and
protection of property in and around the place of the festival. Funds to employ
this specified number of law enforcement officers at the current hourly salary
rate for sheriff's deputies shall be deposited with the county at least ten
(10) days prior to the specified date the activity is to occur. A minimum of
one law enforcement officer for every five hundred (500) persons expected to be
in attendance shall be required. Where the sheriff specifies the employment of
off duty peace officers to meet the requirements of this chapter, the peace
officers shall be under the complete direction and control of the sheriff. The
sheriff must be satisfied that the requisite number of peace officers will be
provided at all times of operations, plus any specified time prior to and
following the event, before a license is issued.
   D.   Fire Protection: Every licensee shall provide, at his own expense,
adequate fire protection, as determined by the fire protection agency or
agencies having jurisdiction, where the event is to be conducted. If the event
is located in a hazardous fire area, as defined in the Lyon County fire code, a
suitable number of fire guards shall be employed by the licensee who shall be
approved by the chief of the responsible fire protection agency or agencies.
Flammable vegetation and other fire hazards shall be removed in a manner and in
such quantity as determined by the fire chief(s). First aid fire extinguishment
equipment shall be provided as directed by the fire chief(s).
   E.   Water and Sewer Facilities:
      1.   Water Facilities:
         a.   Every licensee shall provide, from a water surveyor operating
under a permit as required under section 533.080 NRS of the State Health and
Safety Code, an ample supply of potable water for drinking and sanitation
purposes on the premises of the festival. Location of water facilities on the
premises must be approved by the Health Officer prior to issuance of a license.
         b.   The minimum supply of water to outdoor festivals shall be fifteen
(15) gallons of water for each person in attendance per day. All water shall
meet U.S. Public Health Service standards.
         c.   Public and private flush-type water closets, lavatories and
drinking facilities shall be required as determined by the County Health
Officer.
      2.   Sewer Facilities: Sewage and drainage systems relating to such
facilities shall meet the requirements of the Health and Safety Code, chapters
15.04 and 15.12, and be subject to the prior approval of the County Health
Officer and County Engineer.
   F.   Sanitation Facilities: Every licensee shall provide at least one
enclosed flush-type water closet facility marked "Men" and one such facility
marked "Women" on the premises of a festival on the basis of one flush-type
water closet for each forty (40) males and one for each forty (40) females
expected to be in attendance. Urinals may be substituted for the required
flush-type water closets for men on the ratio of one urinal and one flush-type
water closet per sixty (60) males.
   G.   Medical Facilities:
      1.   Where the proposed festival is located close to adequate existing
facilities, the applicant shall provide, as required by the Health Officer,
emergency treatment facilities on the premises of the festival.
      2.   The location of such facilities, number of doctors, psychiatrists,
psychologist, nurses and other aides needed to staff the facilities and the
quantity of medical supplies, drugs, ambulances and other equipment that must
be on the site shall be approved by the County Health Officer prior to the
issuance of any license under this Chapter.
      3.   The County Health Officer shall calculate the need for medical
services, based on the number of persons expected to attend a festival, their
expected age group, the duration of events planned and the possibility of
exposure to inclement weather and outdoor elements. Traffic lanes and other
adequate space shall be designated and kept open for access and travel for
ambulance, helicopter and other emergency vehicles to transport patients or
staff to appropriate on- and off-site treatment facilities.
   H.   Parking and Access:
      1.   Parking Areas: Every licensee shall provide adequate parking space
for persons attending the festival by motor vehicle. Persons desiring to
operate or conduct a festival may be called upon to provide a separate parking
space for every two (2) persons expected to attend the festival by motor
vehicle. Such individual parking spaces shall be clearly marked and shall not
be less than twelve feet (12') wide and twenty feet (20') long. The Board of
County Commissioners must approve an applicant's parking plan before a license
shall be issued.
      2.   Access and Parking Control: Every licensee shall provide adequate
ingress and egress to festival premises and parking area therefor. Necessary
roads, driveways and alleyways shall exist to insure camping facilities and
overnight areas that meet the requirements of the provisions of section 407.065
NRS for mobile home parks, special occupancy trailer parks and campgrounds,
including travel trailer parks, recreational trailer parks, temporary trailer
parks, incidental camping area and tent camps.
Such areas and facilities shall be approved by the County Health Officer and
County Engineer prior to the issuance of any license.
   I.   Food Concessions:
      1.   Where the proposed festival is to be held a substantial distance
from public eating places, food handling places or like establishments,
applicant shall be required to demonstrate that food will be available at the
premises for each day of operation to adequately feed the number of persons
expected to be in attendance.
      2.   Concessionaires must be licensed and operate under a valid Health
Department permit pursuant to local ordinances and State laws.
      3.   Every licensee shall provide at least one flush-type water closet
and lavatory for each sex in a closed facility for employees of each food
concession or operation within the enclosure area of such food operation unless
otherwise approved by the Health Officer.
Under no circumstances shall the Health Officer allow such flush-type water
closets and lavatories to be located more than fifty feet (50') from the food
concession or operation. All lavatories required in conjunction with food
concessions and food operations shall be provided with hot and cold water,
under pressure, which shall be dispensed by an approved type mixing faucet.
      4.   All sewage, sink waste and waste water from water closets,
lavatories and sinks operated in connection with food concessions or food
operations shall be disposed of to a public sewer or a sewage disposal system
approved by the County Health Officer and County Engineer.
   J.   Communication System: Licensee shall be required to establish a
communication system for public use where ordinary communications are not
available.
   K.   Other Conditions: Any applicant may be required to meet any other
condition prior to receiving a license to conduct a festival which is
reasonably calculated as necessary to protect the health, welfare and property
of local residents and persons attending a festival. (1973 Code §9.04.080)
5.07.10: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any licensee, employee or agent of person associated
with the licensee to do any of the following:
   A.   Conduct or operate a festival without first procuring a license to do
so.
   B.   Sell tickets to a festival without a license first having been
obtained.
   C.   Operate, conduct or carry on any festival in such a manner as to create
a public or private nuisance.
   D.   Exhibit, show or conduct within the place of festival any obscene,
indecent, vulgar or lewd exhibition, show, play, entertainment or exhibit no
matter by what name designated.
   E.   Allow any person on the premises of the licensed festival to cause or
create a disturbance in, around or near any place of a festival by offensive or
disorderly conduct.
   F.   Knowingly allow any person to consume, sell or be in possession of
intoxicating liquor while in a place of a festival, except where such
consumption or possession is expressly authorized under the terms of this
Chapter and under the laws of the State.
   G.   Knowingly allow any person at the licensed festival to use, sell or be
in possession of any narcotic or dangerous drug while in, around or near a
place of the festival.
Any of the above-enumerated violations shall constitute a criminal act and
shall be punishable pursuant to ordinances of the County and the laws of the
State; provided, however, that the County retains any and all civil remedies,
including the right of civil injunction, for the prevention of the violations
and for the recovery of money damages therefor. (1973 Code §9.04.130)
5.07.11: COMPLAINTS:
Any person may file a complaint with the Clerk of the Board of Commissioners or
may petition the Board of Commissioners to conduct a hearing concerning the
revocation of the license of any licensee. The Clerk of the Board of
Commissioners shall notice the petition for hearing in accordance with the
provisions of subsection
5.07.05A of this Chapter. (1973 Code §9.04.100)
5.07.12: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The County Board of Commissioners shall have the power to revoke any license or
to revoke and reinstate any license upon suitable conditions when the following
causes exist:
   A.   The licensee fails, neglects or refuses to pay to the County the fee
prescribed by this Chapter.
   B.   The licensee, his employee or agent fails, neglects or refuses to
fulfill any or all of the conditions imposed pursuant to this Chapter.
   C.   The licensee allows the festival to be conducted in a manner which
violates any law or regulation established by the ordinances of the County or
the laws of the State.
   D.   The licensee allows the festival to be conducted in a disorderly manner
or knowingly allows any person to remain on the premises of the festival while
under the influence of intoxicating liquor or any narcotic or dangerous drug.
   E.   The licensee, his employee or agent is convicted of any of the offenses
under Section
5.07.06 of this Chapter. (1973 Code §9.04.110)
Notice of intent to revoke any license shall be given, and the licensee shall
be entitled to a hearing. The Clerk of the Board of Commissioners shall give
notice, which notice shall set forth the cause for revocation and the time and
place at which the matter of revocation will be heard before the County Board
of Commissioners. The notice shall be mailed not later than ten (10) days prior
to the date set for hearing. The Board of Commissioners shall hear all
interested parties and may revoke a license only for one or more causes
enumerated by Section
5.07.06 of this Chapter. (1973 Code §9.04.120)
5.07.13: COMPLIANCE WITH GENERAL BUSINESS AND LICENSE PROVISIONS:
The provisions of Chapter 1 of this Title are required to be met for any
outdoor festival in addition to the requirements of this Chapter. (Ord. 311, 8-
13-87)
CHAPTER 8
ADULT CHARACTERIZED BUSINESSES
SECTION:
5.08.01: Definitions
5.08.02: Findings; Purpose
5.08.03: License Required; Additional Requirements; Appeal Of Denial Of License
5.08.04: Structure Housing Adult Characterized Business; General Restrictions;
Exception
5.08.05: Nonregulated Adult Characterized Businesses; Criteria
5.08.06: Work Card Required; Denial, Revocation Or Suspension; Appeal
5.08.07: Work Card; Term; Scope Of Work; Change Of Address Or Employment
5.08.08: Work Card Renewal; Replacement; Service Charge
5.08.09: Review Of Work Card Holders
5.08.10: Adult Interactive Cabaret
5.08.11: Outcall Entertainment
5.08.12: Adult Motion Picture Arcade; Restrictions
5.08.13: Adult Bookstore; Restrictions
5.08.14: Adult Revue; Restrictions
5.08.15: Nonconformance
5.08.16: Interpretation
5.08.01: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this section to section
5.08.15 of this chapter, inclusive, unless the context otherwise requires:
ADULT BOOKSTORE OR VIDEO STORE: Includes any establishment having as a
substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade books, magazines,
periodicals, pictures, drawings, photographs, films, negatives, slides, motion
pictures, recordings, videotapes, video discs, computer discs, instruments,
devices or paraphernalia or any other items or materials defined by Nevada
Revised Statutes 201.235 which are distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or
section devoted to the sale or display of such material.
ADULT CHARACTERIZED BUSINESS: Includes:
   A.   Any business where it is intended, for any form of consideration or
gratuity alone or in combination with an otherwise established fee, to employ
persons, whether as an employee or independent contractor, to perform business
activities, or be present in conjunction with the performance of a business
activity where the performance or presence involves the display of specified
anatomical areas or specified sexual activities. This definition also applies
to activities wherein patrons engage in the above described activities. An
adult characterized business includes, but is not limited to, adult bookstores,
adult video stores, adult motel or hotel, adult interactive cabaret, adult
motion picture arcade and adult motion picture theaters. This definition does
not include adult revues and brothels. Refer to chapter 3 of this title for
prostitution regulations.
   B.   Any business in which the preponderance of material available for sale,
rent or lease displays or describes specified anatomical areas or specified
sexual activities.
ADULT HOTEL OR MOTEL: Includes a hotel or motel which holds itself out to the
public through advertising as an establishment where material is presented
which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas and rents or allows subrentals of rooms for periods of ten (10) hours or
less.
ADULT INTERACTIVE CABARET: Includes any fixed place of business which offers to
patrons over the age of twenty one (21) the opportunity to view dancers whose
attire, costume, clothing or lack of attire, costume or clothing exposes
"specified anatomical areas" as defined in this section. The terms adult
cabaret and adult interactive cabaret are synonymous for all purposes of this
chapter.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE ARCADE: Includes any portion of an adult business to which
the public is permitted or invited where coin or slug operated or
electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture
machines, projectors, videocassettes, computer displays, slides, photographic
reproductions, or other image producing devices are maintained for ten (10) or
fewer persons per machine at any one time whether or not for remuneration, and
where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: Includes any enclosed building used for
presenting material which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons.
ADULT REVUE: Includes a show that has a theme with separate acts in which one
or more acts offer to patrons over the age of twenty one (21) the opportunity
to view dancers whose attire, costume, clothing or lack of attire, costume or
clothing exposes specified anatomical areas; in which the location of the adult
revue is within a structure housing an establishment with an unlimited gaming
license; and, the adult review is performed within an established and
designated showroom or showrooms in which the interior of the showroom is not
visible from any portion of the adjacent floor area during performances.
ARTERIAL: Includes the functional classification for transportation facilities
of either major or minor arterial as defined by the Lyon County road division.
BOARD: The Lyon County board of commissioners.
CHAPERON: Includes any person who, for a salary, fee, hire, or profit, and who
is not a licensed owner of any business licensed under this chapter, or is not
an outcall entertainer, protects or assists outcall entertainers while they are
providing outcall entertainment.
COMMENCE OPERATING: To engage in the operation of an adult characterized
business.
COMPLETED APPLICATION: An application and forms in which all the information
requested has been provided.
DANCER, ENTERTAINER OR PERFORMER: Includes any person male or female, or any
electronic reproduction of a male or female such as a holographic
representation, who dances, models or otherwise performs for an adult
interactive cabaret.
ENTERTAINMENT LOCATION: Includes a hotel or motel guestroom or accommodation,
or any other public lodging accommodation including recreational vehicle
parking facilities.
MODEL STUDIO: Includes any place, excluding those places used for art
instruction purposes associated with an art curriculum at an accredited
university, college or trade school, or private businesses used by licensed
artists where, for any form of consideration or gratuity, figure models who
display specified anatomical areas or perform specified sexual activities, are
provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or
similarly depicted by artists paying any consideration or gratuity for the
modeling.
OUTCALL ENTERTAINER: Includes a person who is sent or referred to an
entertainment location by an outcall entertainment referral service to
entertain an outcall entertainment patron at an entertainment location.
OUTCALL ENTERTAINMENT: Includes a visit by an outcall entertainer at an
entertainment location in response to a request to entertain an outcall
entertainment patron at the entertainment location.
OUTCALL ENTERTAINMENT PATRON: Includes a person who requests an entertainer to
entertain at an entertainment location and who either pays or agrees to pay the
fee of the outcall entertainment referral service, or a person who is
entertained by an outcall entertainer at an entertainment location.
OUTCALL ENTERTAINMENT REFERRAL SERVICE: Includes a business which for a fee
sends or refers an entertainer to an entertainment location in response to a
request to entertain an outcall entertainment patron at the entertainment
location.
SECURITY GUARD: Includes a person, who acts as a doorman or bouncer or performs
any function to secure or protect any interests of an adult characterized
business on premises or in an escort capacity.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: Includes the following areas of the human body:
   A.   Any less than completely and opaquely covered:
      1.   Human genitals;
      2.   Pubic region;
      3.   Buttocks; and
      4.   Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola.
   B.   Male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and
opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: Includes:
   A.   Human genitals clearly in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal, or
tumescence;
   B.   Acts of actual or simulated human masturbation, oral copulation, anal
oral copulation, sexual intercourse, bestiality, flagellation or torture in the
context of a sexual relationship, use of excretory functions in the context of
a sexual relationship or sodomy; any of the following depicted sexually
oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, sodomy, coprophagy, coprophilia,
cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism,
zooerasty;
   C.   Fondling or erotic touching of any human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus or female breast; or erotic lewd touching, fondling or other
contact with an animal by a human being; and
   D.   Any of the following: use of human or animal coitus or ejaculation,
masochism, sadism, beating or infliction of pain; human excretion, urination,
menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. (Ord. 477, 8-19-2004, eff. 9-25-2004)
5.08.02: FINDINGS; PURPOSE:
   A.   In adopting this chapter, the board recognizes and finds, based on the
experiences of other cities and counties, that the regulation of adult
characterized businesses is necessary because such establishments:
      1.   Have serious, objectionable operational characteristics,
particularly when several of the establishments are concentrated in an area.
      2.   Tend to be places where certain criminal activities, such as
solicitation of prostitution and violation of liquor laws, can more easily
occur.
      3.   Require regulation to protect the patrons and employees of the
establishments.
      4.   Are not compatible with residential and civic uses that are
frequented by juveniles.
      5.   Tend to be locations where the potential for the transmission of
sexually transmitted diseases is high.
   B.   It is the purpose of this chapter to:
      1.   Adopt specific licensing requirements for adult characterized
businesses;
      2.   Place location restrictions on these establishments;
      3.   Provide for a safe, healthy and aesthetically pleasing atmosphere
for residents and visitors to the area;
      4.   Ensure that the effects of adult characterized businesses will not
be experienced by juveniles;
      5.   Mitigate the effect of adult characterized businesses on surrounding
neighborhoods which can result in blight and reduced property values;
      6.   Prevent the clustering of adult characterized businesses in any one
area;
      7.   Limit the spread of sexually transmitted diseases and the commission
of public offenses such as prostitution, and trafficking in illegal narcotics;
      8.   Address the serious secondary effects of adult characterized
businesses such as low level maintenance of commercial businesses and parking
lots; and the interference with the enjoyment of residential lots due to noise,
vandalism, crime and litter;
      9.   Provide by regulation, sufficient alternative sites for the
establishment and operation of adult characterized businesses within the
county.
   C.   This chapter is not adopted for the purpose of regulating the content
of the material sold to or observed by the patrons of such establishments or
entertainment.
   D.   This chapter is not adopted for the purpose of regulating licensed
prostitution within Lyon County. Licensed prostitution is regulated in chapter
3 of this title. (Ord. 477, 8-19-2004, eff. 9-25-2004)
5.08.03: LICENSE REQUIRED; ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS; APPEAL OF DENIAL OF
LICENSE:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to commence operating an establishment as
an adult characterized business without first applying for and receiving a
license pursuant to this chapter and complying with the specific requirements
of this chapter.
   B.   An "adult revue" as defined in section
5.08.01 of this chapter does not require a license under this section.
   C.   A license issued to an adult characterized business is not transferable
to another location.
   D.   A license issued to an adult characterized business may not be
transferred to another business or licensee. A new application shall be
required for a new owner or operator.
   E.   In addition to the requirements for the issuance and renewal of a
business license enumerated in this title, the following are required before a
license may be issued or renewed for an adult characterized business:
      1.   The application must disclose in writing anyone having a five
percent (5%) or more ownership interest in the business or proposed business.
If the applicant is a partnership or corporation, each shareholder holding a
five percent (5%) or more ownership interest, must be disclosed. Each applicant
or applicants or shareholders holding a five percent (5%) interest, must be
over the age of twenty one (21). Additionally, each applicant or applicants, or
shareholders of a five percent (5%) or greater interest must state in writing
if they have:
         a.   Ever had any business license denied, revoked or charges filed
therefor, and if so, the application shall state the name of the business,
date, jurisdiction, and outcome of any hearing;
         b.   Ever owned or operated an adult characterized business or brothel
and if so, the name of the business and address, dates involved and position of
interest in the business; and
         c.   Been convicted of any felony crime, or a misdemeanor crime within
ten (10) years, of the application or renewal of a license, including the
following:
            (1)   Any felony or other crime which under the laws of Nevada
would amount to a felony.
            (2)   A crime pursuant to chapters 200, 201, 202, 203, 205 or 207
of the Nevada Revised Statutes, or a crime under the laws of another state
which would amount to a crime under one of the above listed chapters of Nevada
Revised Statutes.
            (3)   A crime of which fraud or intent to defraud was any element
whether committed in this State or another state.
            (4)   A gross misdemeanor or an equivalent conviction in another
state, or unlawful possession, use or distribution of controlled substances or
dangerous drugs.
      2.   The applicant or applicants must disclose in writing:
         a.   The names and addresses of all persons owning a five percent (5%)
or more interest in the business, including the name and address of the general
manager or managers of the business; and
         b.   If a corporation, the applicant or applicants must disclose in
writing the names and addresses of the officers and directors of the
corporation.
      3.   The application must include a site plan which shall identify, to
scale, the following:
         a.   All internal uses of the business;
         b.   The signs proposed for the business and its location on the
structure, and any on site or off street parking;
         c.   All properties within three thousand feet (3,000') of the
structure proposed to house an adult characterized business, the current uses
located on those properties, and the current zoning for those properties;
         d.   All streets within two thousand five hundred feet (2,500') of the
property on which the structure proposed to house an adult characterized
business is located and note if any streets are classified as an arterial;
         e.   Any internal building or structure requirements of this section
and any internal building or structure requirements specific to the type of
adult characterized business requested in the application;
         f.   External measurements on the site plan showing proximity to
Residentially zoned property;
         g.   The site plan will be prepared and certified by a registered
Nevada land surveyor or civil engineer licensed in Nevada.
   F.   The Sheriff will conduct an investigation of suitability.
      1.   The following are declared unsuitable for the issuance of a license
for an adult characterized business:
         a.   A person convicted of any of the crimes listed above;
         b.   A person who is under the age of twenty one (21);
         c.   A person who has failed to disclose, misstated or otherwise
attempted to mislead the Sheriff with respect to any material fact contained in
any application for a license;
         d.   A person who has concealed or refused to disclose any material
fact in any investigation by the Sheriff;
         e.   A person who has been identified as being a member or associate
of organized crime;
         f.   A person who has been placed and remains in the constructive
custody of any city, county, state or Federal law enforcement authority;
         g.   A person who has had a liquor license or work permit revoked or
committed any act which is grounds for revocation of a liquor license or work
permit or would have been grounds for revoking their liquor license or work
permit; (Ord. 519, 4-3-2008)
         h.   Any proposed business located within three thousand feet (3,000')
of any church, school, playground, residential areas, or any property zoned XX
Adult Use District. (Ord. 519, 4-3-2008; amd. Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
      2.   As part of the Sheriff's investigation, he may require the
submission of applicant's fingerprints.
         a.   Applicants for this license, if required by the Sheriff, must be
fingerprinted.
         b.   Applicants must provide a written authorization, along with their
application materials, allowing the submission of their fingerprints to the
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI). The authorization will allow the FBI to
conduct a national background check of the applicant.
         c.   This FBI background check shall be authorized under this section
as well as under Nevada Revised Statutes 239B.010(a).
   G.   Upon receipt of a completed application for a business license, the
County Clerk shall direct each owner of an adult characterized business, and
each officer and director of a corporation or shareholder having a five percent
(5%) or more interest listed as an owner of an adult characterized business
identified to present himself/herself to the Lyon County Sheriff's Office to
have taken thumb and finger print impressions. The Sheriff shall submit the
impressions to the central repository for Nevada records of criminal history
and the Federal Bureau of Investigation to determine if a criminal history
record exists for the applicant(s). The Sheriff may impose a reasonable fee for
fingerprinting and all charges by the State or Federal Bureau of Investigation
to carry out the provisions of this section.
   H.   Within twenty (20) days of the receipt of a completed application for a
business license, the Lyon County Clerk's Office shall place the application
for discussion and action on the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Board.
Along with the application, the Sheriff must also forward all information
pertaining to the applicant or applicants, and his recommendation for approval
or denial of the license application to the County Clerk's Office. This time
frame cannot be extended unless the applicant agrees.
   I.   At the hearing on the license application, the Board shall receive all
relevant evidence pertaining to the application. The applicant or their
representatives are entitled to present evidence. After receiving all evidence,
including the recommendation of the Sheriff, the Board shall close the hearing
and determine whether a license should be issued to the applicant. In
determining whether to approve or deny a license, the Board shall consider, at
a minimum, the following:
      1.   Whether the applicant has complied with all rules and regulations in
preparing and submitting the application.
      2.   The impact the adult characterized business would have on the area
in which it is to be located.
      3.   That locating an adult characterized business in the selected area
will not contribute to blight or reduced property values in the area.
      4.   The impact the adult characterized business will have on possible
criminal activity in that area.
All proceedings shall be conducted according to the provisions of Nevada
Revised Statutes chapter 241.
If the Board decides that additional evidence is necessary before they can make
a decision, the matter can be continued only until the next regular meeting.
The Board's decision shall be provided in writing to the applicant, Sheriff and
the Clerk within ten (10) days of the Board's action.
   J.   The decision of the Board constitutes a final administrative decision
for purpose of judicial review.
   K.   In the event that an application is denied, the applicant may file or
cause to be filed in the District Court a petition (mandamus) for judicial
examination of the validity of the denial of the license as provided in chapter
34 of the Nevada Revised Statutes. If the District Court has not decided the
validity of the denial within thirty (30) days after the petition is filed, a
temporary license shall be issued. The temporary license shall remain in effect
until the District Court has rendered its opinion concerning the validity of
the denial. The temporary license does not create a vested right or property
interest.
   L.   Separate and additional permits and licenses may be required, such as,
but not limited to, Health Department, Fire Department and Building Department.
(Ord. 519, 4-3-2008)
5.08.04: STRUCTURE HOUSING ADULT CHARACTERIZED BUSINESS; GENERAL RESTRICTIONS;
EXCEPTION:
   A.   The provisions of this section apply to all structures housing an adult
characterized business.
   B.   No product, picture, photograph, graphic or other representation
identifying products, entertainment or entertainers depicting specified
anatomical areas or specified sexual activities provided within shall be
displayed on the exterior of the building or within a display window or display
area. A display window or display area shall not be visible from an arterial.
This restriction is to protect a passerby, particularly minors, on the arterial
from viewing the display window or display area or drive-in movie screen.
   C.   A sign or signs complying with, and approved under, the provisions of
this code which identifies the name and address of an adult characterized
business is permitted.
   D.   Lighting outside of the structure housing an adult characterized
business shall be designed to minimize criminal activity and vandalism, and to
provide for the safety of patrons. A minimum of one foot-candle of light on the
sidewalk and parking area adjacent to and serving the adult characterized
business is required.
   E.   All doors used by the public to gain access to public areas located
within the adult characterized business shall remain unlocked during the entire
period in which the business is open to the public.
   F.   A permanent barrier, either on the exterior or interior of the
structure, shall be erected in front of each door used as a public entrance
leading into an adult characterized business to prevent the viewing of
products, entertainment or entertainers depicting specified anatomical areas or
specified sexual activities provided within the business when a door is opened.
   G.   No door or window in an adult characterized business that allows
viewing of products, entertainment or entertainers depicting specified
anatomical areas or specified sexual activities provided within the business
may be open during the entire period in which the business is open to the
public.
   H.   All windows must have an opaque covering that prevents viewing into the
interior of an adult characterized business. When a display window is used, the
opaque covering shall be behind the display and will completely block any
viewing into the interior of the business.
   I.   No loudspeaker or other amplified sound system may be installed on the
exterior of a structure housing an adult characterized business that transmits
sounds from the interior of the adult characterized business or advertises the
adult characterized business.
   J.   Suitable sound absorbing material shall be installed on the interior of
an adult characterized business to minimize the internal sound from affecting
adjacent uses and properties.
   K.   Separate restrooms for males and females are required, and any
restrooms devoted to use by one sex may not be occupied or used by the other
sex except for employees performing cleaning and maintenance of the restroom.
   L.   No portable structure may be used to house an adult characterized
business.
   M.   No alteration to a structure housing an adult characterized business
that affects the size or use of the adult characterized business may occur
unless notification and approval of the licensing authority occurs first. (Ord.
477, 8-19-2004, eff. 9-25-2004)
5.08.05: NONREGULATED ADULT CHARACTERIZED BUSINESSES; CRITERIA:
A business in which material defined in the definition of "adult bookstore or
video store" in section
5.08.01 of this chapter is found does not constitute an adult characterized
business regulated pursuant to sections 5.08.01 through 5.08.15 of this chapter
if:
   A.   The floor area devoted to material defined in the definition of "adult
bookstore or video store" in section
5.08.01 of this chapter, does not exceed seven percent (7%) of the total
display or retail floor area or two hundred (200) square feet, of the business,
whichever is less;
   B.   The floor area devoted to material defined in the definition of "adult
bookstore or video store" in section
5.08.01 of this chapter, is segregated by partition, separate internal
entrance, or otherwise obscured from casual observance by minors;
   C.   The floor area devoted to material defined in the definition of "adult
bookstore or video store" in section
5.08.01 of this chapter, is clearly signed to prohibit access by minors;
   D.   The floor area devoted to material defined in the definition of "adult
bookstore or video store" in section
5.08.01 of this chapter, is adequately staffed or otherwise controlled to
assure monitoring of minors who may seek access to floor area;
   E.   The business does not advertise or hold itself out to the public in any
way as being an adult characterized business, whether by window displays,
signs, or other means;
   F.   The business cannot be defined as an adult characterized business; and
   G.   The business cannot be combined with any other area or business to
result in an increase in the floor area devoted to this activity beyond the
maximum specified in subsection A of this section. (Ord. 477, 8-19-2004, eff.
9-25-2004)
5.08.06: WORK CARD REQUIRED; DENIAL, REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION; APPEAL:
   A.   No person, except a person licensed pursuant to section
5.08.03 of this chapter, shall work at or in an adult characterized business in
any capacity without a valid work card issued pursuant to this section, except
for those persons who have no contact with the public.
   B.   The sheriff or his designee shall review the application for a work
card for a person intending to work or working in an adult characterized
business and shall approve or deny the application.
      1.   Applicants for this work card must be fingerprinted.
      2.   Applicants must provide a written authorization, along with their
application materials, allowing the submission of their fingerprints to the
federal bureau of investigation (FBI). The authorization will allow the FBI to
conduct a national background check of the applicant.
      3.   This FBI background check shall be authorized under this section as
well as under Nevada Revised Statutes 239B.010(a).
   C.   A work card may not be issued to any person holding a work card
pursuant to section
5.03.14 of this title.
   D.   A work card shall be denied, revoked or suspended for the following
reasons:
      1.   Failure to disclose or to misstate or otherwise attempt to mislead
the sheriff with respect to any material fact contained in the application for
issuance of the work card.
      2.   Conviction of committing, attempting or conspiring to commit:
         a.   Any crime within the last two (2) years where larceny is an
element of the offense;
         b.   Receiving or possessing stolen property;
         c.   Embezzlement;
         d.   Prostitution;
         e.   Lewd or lascivious behavior.
      3.   Conviction of any felony or gross misdemeanor or a crime in another
state which, if committed in the state of Nevada, would be punishable as a
felony or gross misdemeanor.
      4.   Violation of any provision of sections 5.08.01 through 5.08.15 of
this chapter, inclusive, or any section of chapter 3 of this title.
      5.   Failure to comply with the child support requirements for
professional or occupational licenses set forth in chapter 425 of the Nevada
Revised Statutes.
   E.   If a work card is denied by the sheriff, the applicant shall be advised
in writing of the reason. The applicant may appeal that decision in writing to
the county manager no later than ten (10) days after receiving the reason for
the decision. A failure to appeal the decision of the sheriff within ten (10)
days constitutes an admission that the decision is well founded and precludes
further administrative or judicial review.
   F.   Upon appeal, the manager shall hold a hearing within thirty (30) days.
   G.   At the hearing, the manager shall take any testimony and evidence
deemed necessary and relevant. After the close of the evidence, the manager
shall review the testimony and evidence and shall announce his/her decision
sustaining or reversing the decision of the sheriff. In the event that the
manager decides that additional evidence is necessary before he/she can make a
decision, the matter can be continued for not more than fourteen (14) days. The
manager's decision shall be provided in writing to the applicant and the
sheriff within ten (10) days of the manager's action.
   H.   The decision of the manager constitutes a final administrative decision
for purpose of judicial review. (Ord. 519, 4-3-2008)
5.08.07: WORK CARD; TERM; SCOPE OF WORK; CHANGE OF ADDRESS OR EMPLOYMENT:
   A.   If an application for a work card is approved, the sheriff shall issue
a work card which has a term of two (2) years from the date of issuance.
   B.   A work card issued pursuant to this section shall include the full
legal name, current address, physical description and a photograph of the card
holder. The card must be kept in the personal possession of the card holder and
shown upon request of a peace officer or other county employee authorized to
enforce Lyon County codes.
   C.   A work card issued pursuant to this section is valid only for work in
an adult characterized business.
   D.   A work card automatically expires:
      1.   If not renewed within thirty (30) days after a change of home
address;
      2.   If the holder becomes employed at another adult characterized
business and does not notify the sheriff within thirty (30) days;
      3.   If the card holder is not employed in an adult characterized
business for a period of more than ninety (90) consecutive days, unless that
period is due to a serious health issue which is documented by a doctor
licensed in Nevada. (Ord. 477, 8-19-2004, eff. 9-25-2004)
5.08.08: WORK CARD RENEWAL; REPLACEMENT; SERVICE CHARGE:
   A.   A person desiring a renewal of a work card must pay a nonrefundable
service charge to defray any of the sheriff's expenses of reinvestigating the
holder's background.
   B.   If, in the opinion of the sheriff, the card holder requires
fingerprinting before the renewal of a work card, the applicant must pay an
additional service charge established by the sheriff for the fingerprinting.
   C.   A person desiring a replacement of a work card must pay a nonrefundable
service charge to defray the sheriff's expenses of reproducing the work card. A
replacement work card shall expire on the same date as the work card it
replaces. (Ord. 477, 8-19-2004, eff. 9-25-2004)
5.08.09: REVIEW OF WORK CARD HOLDERS:
   A.   The holder of a work card is subject to review at any time for
continued compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   The sheriff may refuse to renew a work card, and that work card may be
suspended or revoked by the sheriff any time when it appears to the
satisfaction of the sheriff that:
      1.   The holder of the work card has been convicted of an offense that
causes the sheriff to conclude that such a person is no longer a suitable or
qualified person for employment under the provisions of this chapter.
      2.   The holder of the work card has made a false statement in his
application for a work card.
      3.   The holder of the work card is no longer a suitable person to hold a
work card, after due consideration by the sheriff of the proper protection of
the public health, safety and good order and the general welfare of the
inhabitants of Lyon County.
   C.   A person whose work card has not been renewed or whose work card has
been suspended or revoked by the sheriff may appeal to the manager in the same
time and manner set forth in section
5.08.06 of this chapter.
   D.   If the sheriff has reasonable suspicion that a holder of a work card
has done an act or omission within subsection B2 of this section, he may notify
the current employer of the work card holder. (Ord. 477, 8-19-2004, eff. 9-25-
2004)
5.08.10: ADULT INTERACTIVE CABARET:
   A.   For purposes of obtaining and retaining a license to operate an adult
interactive cabaret, the licensee must have available at all times, for
presentation upon request of any law enforcement officer or other county
employee authorized to enforce Lyon County codes, the following information for
or relative to each person conducting business upon the premises of the
licensee:
      1.   Current, valid work card, except the licensee who is exempt from
obtaining a work card;
      2.   Full legal name, current address and telephone number, date of
birth, and social security number.
   B.   Each record enumerated in subsection A1 of this section shall be
maintained by the licensee for a period of three (3) calendar years.
   C.   The licensee must ensure that all persons working or providing services
upon the premises have a valid adult characterized business work card except
for those persons who have no contact with the public.
   D.   It shall be prima facie evidence that a business is an adult
interactive cabaret when one or more employees is present in such attire,
costume or clothing so as to expose to view specified anatomical areas.
   E.   The following activities are prohibited:
      1.   The display, exposure or causing of a public display or exposure,
with less than a full opaque covering, of any portion of a person's genitals,
pubic area or anus in a lewd and obscene fashion; and
      2.   The representation or implication that any beverage which contains
less than one-half of one percent (0.5%) of alcohol by volume is liquor, beer,
wine, spirits, gin, whiskey, champagne, cordials, ethyl alcohol, rum or any
form of these beverages and sell the same to the person to whom the claim,
representation or implication was made.
   F.   The following restrictions apply to an adult interactive cabaret:
      1.   No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall
advertise, or cause to be advertised, as an adult cabaret without a valid
license issued pursuant to this chapter.
      2.   No person under the age of twenty one (21) shall be employed in an
adult interactive cabaret that has a liquor license.
      3.   No person under the age of eighteen (18) shall be employed in an
adult interactive cabaret that does not have a liquor license.
      4.   An adult interactive cabaret licensee shall maintain and retain for
a period of three (3) years the legal names and aliases, addresses, identifying
information and ages of all persons performing on the premises.
      5.   No adult interactive cabaret licensee shall allow a performer under
the age of eighteen (18) upon the premises.
      6.   No adult interactive cabaret licensee shall serve, sell, distribute
or allow the consumption or possession of any intoxicating liquor, or any
beverage represented as containing any alcohol, upon the premises of the
licensee without a valid liquor license.
      7.   An adult interactive cabaret licensee shall conspicuously display
its licenses as required by this chapter.
      8.   The following restrictions apply to dance areas:
         a.   With the exception of a permanent barrier constructed to satisfy
the provisions subsection
5.08.04F of this chapter, dance areas may not be obscured by any design feature
or artificial barrier that restricts view from the common areas, including, but
not limited to, nontransparent curtains and/or screens, doors, and staircases.
         b.   All areas where dancing occurs shall be open to public access.
         c.   The dance area shall be a minimum of eighteen inches (18") above
the floor occupied by patrons.
         d.   A continuous aisle shall be maintained between the dance area and
the area occupied by patrons. The aisle must be marked by a fixed rail, a
minimum of thirty inches (30") in height, to be installed on the edge of the
aisle closest to the area occupied by patrons.
      9.   No movable stages are permitted.
      10.   No private booths or dance areas may be installed for the private
viewing by individual patrons of performers.
      11.   Access for performers to their dressing rooms that is distinct and
separate from the area occupied by patrons shall be maintained during business
hours.
      12.   Separate dressing rooms and restrooms for each gender of performers
shall be provided exclusively for that gender and not available for use by the
general public or patrons.
      13.   A separate entrance/exit to the business for the use of performers
shall be maintained which must not be used by patrons.
      14.   The following restrictions apply to performers or patrons:
         a.   At no time will a performer or patron expose any portion of their
pubic region, genitals, vulva or anus to view, nor may a male performer appear
in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
         b.   At no time will a performer or patron touch the other's genitals,
breast, anus or pubic area.
         c.   Performers or patrons shall not use any device, inanimate object
or animal to simulate any sexual acts such as masturbation, intercourse or
sodomy.
         d.   Performers or patrons at no time may agree to act (or act) as
escorts for money or solicit prostitution in any form on the premises of a
licensed establishment.
         e.   Performers are not permitted to leave the business with any
patron in exchange for any gift or compensation.
         f.   No outcall dancing is permitted from an interactive cabaret.
         g.   Performers will remain on the premises of the business for their
entire scheduled shift. Performers may only leave the business with the
approval of the on duty manager who must record the reason for the departure.
         h.   Performers may not work if grossly intoxicated or under the
influence of any controlled substance.
      15.   The adult interactive cabaret shall maintain a schedule of all
performers on duty at all times during business hours.
      16.   Any adult interactive cabaret which does not have a liquor license
issued by the county and which uses the words that imply the availability of
alcohol on the premises, such as "bar", "lounge" or "saloon" in any
advertisement or name, shall state in all such advertisements that alcohol is
not sold or allowed on the premises. In addition, the establishment must post
at each entrance door, and not more than five inches (5") above each entrance
doorway if no door is present during hours of operation, and in at least three
(3) places behind the bar, a sign with letters not less than three inches (3")
high stating:
   ALCOHOL IS NOT SOLD HERE
      17.   Prostitution or the solicitation of prostitution at any adult
interactive cabaret is not allowed.
      18.   No adult interactive cabaret may employ a security guard, or other
persons employed to prevent disturbances, to work on the premises unless such
person has obtained a work permit.
      19.   Sufficient lighting must be provided and equally distributed in and
about the parts of the premises which are open to and used by the patrons so
that all objects are plainly visible at all times to afford visual
identification of objects and persons. There is a presumption of sufficient
lighting when, on any part of the premises which is open to and used by
patrons, a program, menu or list printed in 8-point type is readable.
   G.   The following are the responsibility of the licensee:
      1.   It is the intent of Lyon County to make an adult cabaret licensee
responsible for conduct occurring on the business premises and to ensure that a
licensee will act as the eyes and ears of government for purposes of noticing
and correcting violations of this chapter to ensure the safety and well being
of its patrons.
      2.   It is the duty of the licensee to reasonably prevent disturbances,
fraudulent acts, prostitution and the solicitation of prostitution, and
violations of the adult interactive cabaret regulations as defined in this
chapter, upon the licensed premises. The holder of a business license to
operate an adult interactive cabaret is responsible for the acts of any
employees and independent contractors or subcontractors, while on the licensed
premises or while acting as an agent for that business, including, but not
limited to, attendants, servers, security personnel, managers and performers
and patrons.
      3.   If violations of this chapter are observed upon the premises by a
law enforcement officer, code enforcement officer, or other person authorized
to enforce county, state or federal laws, the licensee may be issued a notice
of possible violation by the sheriff or other authorized persons. A person who
is working on behalf of law enforcement is authorized to observe and report
violations. Upon receipt of a third violation within a ninety (90) day period,
the business license for the business must be reviewed by the board, who must
hear any testimony from the licensee or its representatives, at a duly noticed
meeting and may recommend license suspension or revocation proceedings. In the
event that the board decides that additional evidence is necessary before they
can make a decision, the matter can be continued only until the next stated
meeting of the board. The board's decision must be provided in writing to the
applicant and the sheriff within ten (10) days of their action. All proceedings
must be conducted according to the provisions of Nevada Revised Statutes
chapter 241. (Ord. 477, 8-19-2004, eff. 9-25-2004)
5.08.11: OUTCALL ENTERTAINMENT:
   A.   No outcall entertainer shall:
      1.   Provide outcall entertainment to a patron who is less than eighteen
(18) years of age;
      2.   Commit an act of prostitution; or
      3.   Solicit any fee, gratuity or tip from any outcall entertainment
patron in addition to the basic entertainment fee.
   B.   An outcall entertainer is required to obtain a work card. In addition
to the grounds that a work permit may be denied or revoked pursuant to section
5.08.07 of this chapter, the following grounds shall each be a basis for denial
or revocation:
      1.   Conviction of a crime of prostitution or any other crime of sexual
misconduct;
      2.   Commission of a criminal act while providing services to an outcall
entertainment patron; or
      3.   The applicant is less than twenty one (21) years of age.
   C.   The following restrictions on advertising apply:
      1.   No person shall advertise or cause to be advertised as an outcall
entertainment referral service without first obtaining and thereafter
maintaining a valid license pursuant to this chapter.
      2.   No licensee, manager, subcontractor, independent contractor or
employee of an outcall entertainment referral service shall, in any manner,
either directly or indirectly:
         a.   Advertise, display or disseminate:
            (1)   In any newspaper, magazine or other publication, or
            (2)   By radio or television broadcasting, or
            (3)   By telephone directory, or
            (4)   By telephone, fax or internet, or
            (5)   By handbill, pictorial, representation or other advertising,
any information or illustrations or pictures of any person or object that
contain any statement which implies or suggests to a reasonable, prudent person
or would give the public a basis to infer or believe that prostitution or any
other illegal act, product or service is offered or provided by any business
licensed under this chapter.
         b.   Advertise in any manner set forth in subsection C2a of this
section any statement which implies or suggests to a reasonable, prudent person
or would give the public a basis to infer or believe that outcall entertainers
have been medically examined or are free from contagious diseases.
   D.   The following restrictions are imposed on outcall entertainment:
      1.   No person, firm, partnership, corporation, or other entity shall
advertise, or cause to be advertised, as an outcall business without a valid
license issued pursuant to this chapter.
      2.   An outcall entertainment licensee shall maintain and retain for a
period of three (3) years the legal names and aliases, addresses, identifying
information and ages of all persons employed by the licensee.
      3.   An outcall entertainment licensee cannot employ a person who is
under the age of twenty one (21) years, or a person who does not have a valid
work permit or business license.
      4.   No outcall licensee shall serve, sell, distribute or possess any
intoxicating liquor, or any beverage represented as containing any alcohol,
during the course of the contract with an outcall entertainment patron without
a valid liquor license.
      5.   An outcall licensee shall conspicuously display all licenses
required by this chapter at the office of the licensee.
      6.   At no time shall a licensee or employee of a licensee expose any
portion of their pubic region, genitals, vulva and/or anus to view, nor shall a
male licensee or employee appear in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered, except in a private residence. This must
include all entertainment locations defined in section
5.08.01 of this chapter or any locations to which the public has access.
      7.   Licensees or their employees shall not work if grossly intoxicated
or under the influence of any controlled substance.
      8.   No licensee or employee shall fondle or caress any patron, and no
patron shall fondle or caress any outcall entertainer. At no time will a
licensee or employee touch either's genitals, breast, anus or pubic area.
      9.   Licensee or employees shall not simulate any sexual acts with a
patron or use any artificial device or inanimate object, animal or simulation
thereof, to simulate the same.
      10.   Licensees or employees shall at no time make dates with outcall
entertainment patrons while performing or solicit prostitution in any form.
      11.   The outcall licensee shall maintain at all times during the open
hours a schedule or list of all employees. This schedule or list must list all
employees on duty and their shift times. The list must be made available to law
enforcement on demand.
      12.   No outcall licensee shall employ a bodyguard, runner, security
guard, or other persons employed to prevent disturbances, handle money, or act
as an escort unless such person(s) has obtained a work card pursuant to section
5.08.06 of this chapter.
   E.   The following are responsibilities of an outcall entertainment
licensee:
      1.   The holder of a license for an outcall entertainment service is
responsible for the acts of its employees and independent contractors or
subcontractors, including, but not limited to, attendants, servers, security
personnel, managers and performers. A license for an outcall entertainment
service may be revoked for acts of such agent, employee or subcontractor which
violates any provision of this chapter. It is the duty of the licensee to
prevent disturbances, fraudulent acts, prostitution and the solicitation of
prostitution, and violations of the outcall entertainment regulations as
defined in sections 5.08.02 through 5.08.15 of this chapter, inclusive.
      2.   The owners or operators of any outcall entertainment service shall
ensure that all independent contractors and subcontractors, including, but not
limited to, attendants, servers, security personnel, managers and performers
must have a current business license and work card prior to contracting for
their services. The owner or operators must keep a copy of each individual
business license and work card on file for every independent contractor or
subcontractor not acting as a regular employee. (Ord. 477, 8-19-2004, eff. 9-
25-2004)
5.08.12: ADULT MOTION PICTURE ARCADE; RESTRICTIONS:
In addition to the restrictions enumerated in sections 5.08.02 through 5.08.15
of this chapter, inclusive, the following must be required to operate an adult
motion picture arcade:
   A.   Enclosures may not be less than five feet (5') nor exceed six feet (6')
in height at any point; and must be configured in such a manner that there is
an unobstructed view from a manager's station to the motion picture arcade
area; and must have a minimum opening of thirty six inches (36") wide, and the
opening may not be blocked completely at any time by a door, wall, curtain or
other partition. A partial blocking of the enclosure may be allowed providing
that the door, wall, curtain or other partition creating the partial blocking
is not less than eighteen inches (18") from the enclosure's floor at any one
point nor forty eight inches (48") from the enclosure's floor at any one point.
The manager must be able to visually monitor the booths, when occupied, at all
times to ensure that only one person occupies a visual viewing area at any
time. Electronic monitoring of the arcade is permitted to satisfy the
continuous monitoring requirement.
   B.   A minimum one-half inch (1/2") solid barrier must be constructed
between each viewing area. Such barrier must be maintained and not compromised
in any fashion.
   C.   No more than one person may use an individual viewing area at any one
time. The arcade area must be continuously monitored at all times when patrons
are in the booths or the arcade area. A sign no less than two inches (2") in
height must be posted above the entrance to each enclosure stating the
following:
   NO MORE THAN ONE PERSON MAY
   OCCUPY THIS ENCLOSURE
   D.   Each viewing booth must be maintained in a clean condition and free of
any debris. (Ord. 477, 8-19-2004, eff. 9-25-2004)
5.08.13: ADULT BOOKSTORE; RESTRICTIONS:
In addition to the restrictions enumerated in this chapter, the following must
be required to operate an adult bookstore: The public area must be lighted with
a minimum of thirty (30) foot- candle lighting when measured five feet (5')
from the floor. (Ord. 477, 8-19-2004, eff. 9-25-2004)
5.08.14: ADULT REVUE; RESTRICTIONS:
Adult revues must comply with the following provisions:
   A.   Subsection
5.08.10E1 of this chapter,
   B.   Subsections 5.08.10F9, F14a through F14e and F14h of this chapter,
   C.   No outcall dancing is permitted from an adult revue. (Ord. 477, 8-19-
2004, eff. 9-25-2004)
5.08.15: NONCONFORMANCE:
   A.   All adult characterized businesses legally established prior to
September 25, 2004, which do not comply with the provisions of this chapter,
must be deemed nonconforming and may continue to operate, provided that any
preexisting adult business will further be subject to the provisions of
subsection B of this section. No legally established adult business may be
deemed nonconforming solely by virtue of the subsequent creation or expansion
of any other use or regulatory zone.
   B.   An adult characterized business licensee not in conformance with the
provisions of section
5.08.02 of this chapter through this section shall have a period of one year
from September 25, 2004, to conform to the requirements enumerated below
unless, by application to the board, a further time is allowed by the board
based upon undue hardship.
      1.   For an adult bookstore, compliance with subsections
5.08.03C through F; section
5.08.04; subsection
5.08.06A; section
5.08.12 of this chapter, if an adult motion picture arcade is located on the
business premises; and section
5.08.13 of this chapter.
      2.   For an adult interactive cabaret, compliance with subsections
5.08.03C through F; sections
5.08.04,
5.08.06 and
5.08.10 of this chapter.
      3.   For an adult outcall entertainment service, compliance with
subsections
5.08.03C through F; sections
5.08.04,
5.08.06 and
5.08.11 of this chapter.
      4.   For an adult motion picture arcade, compliance with subsections
5.08.03C through F; sections
5.08.04,
5.08.06 and
5.08.12 of this chapter.
      5.   For all other adult characterized businesses, compliance with
subsections 5.08.03C through F; sections
5.08.04 and
5.08.06 of this chapter. (Ord. 477, 8-19-2004, eff. 9-25-2004)
5.08.16: INTERPRETATION:
If any section of this chapter or portion thereof is for any reason held
invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such
holding shall not invalidate the remaining parts of this chapter. (Ord. 477, 8-
19-2004, eff. 9-25-2004)
CHAPTER 9
LOCKSMITHS AND SAFE MECHANICS
SECTION:
5.09.01: Definitions
5.09.02: License Required; Application; Investigation
5.09.03: Work Permit Required; Application
5.09.04: Investigation; Issuance Of Work Permit
5.09.05: Grounds For Denial
5.09.06: Unlawful Acts
5.09.07: Penalties
5.09.01: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
BOARD: The Lyon County board of commissioners.
KEY: A mechanical device used for operating a lock and includes, but is not
limited to:
   A.   A change key or a key designed to operate a specific lock;
   B.   A manipulation key or a key designed so that when variously positioned
in the keyways of locks will operate the locks;
   C.   A master key or a key designed to operate a series of locks which are
individually operated by change keys;
   D.   A tryout key or a key that will operate a series of locks in a larger
series of locks.
LOCK: A mechanical device furnished with a spring and a bolt or with a similar
contrivance used for fastening a door, strong box, or other object and opened
by means of a key or combination.
LOCKSMITH: A person whose occupation consists, in whole or in part, of:
   A.   Making, repairing or adjusting locks; or
   B.   Operating locks by mechanical means other than those intended by the
manufacturers of the locks.
SAFE MECHANIC: A person whose occupation consists in whole or in part of
repairing, operating, adjusting, or changing combinations on safes or vaults.
SHERIFF'S OFFICE: The Lyon County sheriff's office. (Ord. 549, 5-19-2011)
5.09.02: LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION; INVESTIGATION:
   A.   License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to do business as
a locksmith or safe mechanic in the county without first obtaining a license
for such business from the board.
   B.   Application For License: Applications for such license shall be made on
forms supplied by the clerk's office. Upon receipt of the complete application,
the clerk's office shall request the sheriff to conduct an investigation of the
applicant's criminal history and character. No license shall be issued to any
person who has been convicted of a felony, crime of theft, any crime which
larceny is an element of the offense, or whose character is determined to be
unsuitable for that of a locksmith.
   C.   Permit Issuance Procedure And Fee: The licensing procedure and fees
shall be as stated in chapter 1 of this title. (Ord. 549, 5-19-2011)
5.09.03: WORK PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION:
   A.   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to operate as a
locksmith or safe mechanic in the capacity of either an owner or employee of a
business within the boundaries of Lyon County unless that person first obtains
a work permit from the sheriff.
   B.   Additional Permits, Licenses Required: The work permit required by this
section shall be in addition to any similar permit issued by an incorporated
town or city within the county and in addition to any general business license
issued by the county. (Ord. 549, 5-19-2011)
5.09.04: INVESTIGATION; ISSUANCE OF WORK PERMIT:
   A.   Upon receipt of an application for a work permit, the sheriff shall
conduct an investigation to determine the suitability of the applicant to
operate as a locksmith or safe mechanic.
   B.   Upon completion of the investigation the sheriff shall issue or renew a
work permit if no grounds exist to deny the permit.
   C.   Any change of address must be reported to the sheriff within ten (10)
days after such change.
   D.   A work permit is valid for five (5) years after the date of issuance
and may be renewed upon application, background investigation, and
determination by the sheriff of the suitability of the applicant for renewal.
(Ord. 549, 5-19-2011)
5.09.05: GROUNDS FOR DENIAL:
   A.   The sheriff shall deny a work permit for any of the reasons listed
below:
      1.   Has been convicted of any of the following crimes:
         a.   Any crime where larceny is an element of the offense;
         b.   Receiving or possessing stolen property;
         c.   Embezzlement;
         d.   Possession of burglary tools;
         e.   Theft;
         f.   Burglary.
      2.   Has a character deemed to be unsuitable for that of a locksmith or
safe mechanic. (Ord. 549, 5-19-2011)
5.09.06: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate as a locksmith or safe
mechanic within the boundaries of Lyon County without a work permit.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any work permit holder to operate as a
locksmith or safe mechanic without the work permit in their personal
possession.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for a work permit holder to fail to show his/her
work permit upon request of a peace officer or other county employee authorized
to enforce Lyon County codes. (Ord. 549, 5-19-2011)
5.09.07: PENALTIES:
Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall be cause for
revocation of business license, a five hundred dollar ($500.00) civil penalty
and applicable misdemeanor violations. (Ord. 549, 5-19-2011)
CHAPTER 10
MARIJUANA AND MEDICAL MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTS
SECTION:
5.10.01: Marijuana And Medical Marijuana Licensing
5.10.02: Definitions
5.10.03: Application
5.10.04: Denial Conditions
5.10.05: Business License Division Determination; Denial
5.10.06: Appeal Of The Business License Division Denial
5.10.07: Medical Marijuana License Fees
5.10.08: Marijuana License Fees (Recreational Marijuana Establishments)
5.10.09: Fees; Disbursement
5.10.10: Public Display Required
5.10.11: Renewal Procedure
5.10.12: Prohibited Acts
5.10.13: Penalty For Violation
5.10.14: Transferability
5.10.01: MARIJUANA AND MEDICAL MARIJUANA LICENSING:
   A.   Any license required by this chapter is a separate and distinct license
from all other County licenses, and is in addition to any other license
required for conducting or carrying on any other business in connection with or
separate from the activities licensed by this chapter.
   B.   It is unlawful within the County, outside an incorporated city, for a
marijuana establishment or medical marijuana establishment to acquire, possess,
cultivate, manufacture, process, package, deliver, transfer, transport, supply,
dispense or sell marijuana for any purpose without first making application and
securing a marijuana license or medical marijuana license to do so. (Ord. 598,
3-1-2018)
5.10.02: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings
set out in this section, unless the context otherwise clearly indicates:
AGENT: A person authorized by the applicant or licensee to act and speak for
him or her.
BUSINESS LICENSE DIVISION: The Lyon County Business License Division of County
Commissioners.
CULTIVATION FACILITY: Has the meaning ascribed to it in Nevada Revised Statutes
453A.056.
DUAL LICENSEE: Means a person or group of persons who possess a current, valid
registration certificate issued by the State of Nevada Division of Public and
Behavioral Health to operate a medical marijuana establishment pursuant to
chapter 453A of Nevada Revised Statutes and a license issued by the Department
of Taxation to operate a marijuana establishment under chapter 453D of Nevada
Revised Statutes.
EDIBLE MARIJUANA PRODUCTS: Has the meaning ascribed to it in Nevada Revised
Statutes 453A.101.
FACILITY FOR THE PRODUCTION OF EDIBLE MARIJUANA PRODUCTS OR MARIJUANA INFUSED
PRODUCTS: Has the meaning ascribed to it in Nevada Revised Statutes 453A.105.
INDEPENDENT TESTING LABORATORY: Has the meaning ascribed to it in Nevada
Revised Statutes 453A.107.
MARIJUANA: Has the meaning ascribed to it by Nevada Revised Statutes 453.096.
MARIJUANA CULTIVATION FACILITY: Means an entity licensed to cultivate, process,
and package marijuana, to have marijuana tested by a marijuana testing
facility, and to sell marijuana to retail marijuana stores, to marijuana
product manufacturing facilities, and to other marijuana cultivation
facilities, but not to consumers.
MARIJUANA DISTRIBUTOR: Means an entity licensed to transport marijuana from a
marijuana establishment to another marijuana establishment.
MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENT: Means a marijuana cultivation facility, a marijuana
testing facility, a marijuana product manufacturing facility, a marijuana
distributor, or a retail marijuana store. This term may also be referred to and
known as a "recreational marijuana establishment".
MARIJUANA INFUSED PRODUCTS: Has the meaning ascribed to it by Nevada Revised
Statutes 453A.112.
MARIJUANA PRODUCT MANUFACTURING FACILITY: Means an entity licensed to purchase
marijuana, manufacture, process, and package marijuana and marijuana products,
and sell marijuana and marijuana products to other marijuana product
manufacturing facilities and to retail marijuana stores, but not to consumers.
MARIJUANA PRODUCTS: Means products comprised of marijuana or concentrated
marijuana and other ingredients that are intended for use or consumption, such
as, but not limited to, edible products, ointments, and tinctures.
MARIJUANA TESTING FACILITY: Means an entity licensed to test marijuana and
marijuana products, including for potency and contaminants.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA COOPERATIVE: An association of persons who voluntarily
cooperate to cultivate or distribute medical marijuana to its members,
including any nonprofit community organization or collective owned and managed
by the people who use its services to facilitate or coordinate transactions
between members.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY: Has the meaning ascribed to it by Nevada Revised
Statutes 453A.115.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENT: Has the meaning ascribed to it by Nevada
Revised Statutes 453A.116.
MEDICAL USE OF MARIJUANA: Has the meaning ascribed to it in Nevada Revised
Statutes 453A.120.
PHYSICIAN: Has the meaning ascribed to it in Nevada Revised Statutes 0.040.
RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENT: See definition of "marijuana
establishment".
RETAIL MARIJUANA STORE: Means an entity licensed to purchase marijuana from
marijuana cultivation facilities, to purchase marijuana and marijuana products
from marijuana product manufacturing facilities and retail marijuana stores,
and to sell marijuana and marijuana products to consumers. (Ord. 598, 3-1-2018)
5.10.03: APPLICATION:
   A.   Application for a license provided by this chapter shall be made to the
Business License Division in writing, on the forms provided by the County.
   B.   Each application shall:
      1.   Be filed with the Business License Division;
      2.   Be accompanied by the present annual license fee;
      3.   Include the name and address of the applicant, and of any other
person having an interest in the business to be licensed. If the applicant is a
partnership, the application shall include the names and addresses of all
partners and any other person(s) having a financial interest in the business.
If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall include the names and
addresses of all officers, directors and stockholders having more than three
percent (3%) of the issued stock, the designated agent or resident manager, and
the principal place of business of the corporation. If it is a corporation
whose stock is sold to the general public, the stockholders need not be listed;
      4.   Include the name, address and telephone number of all individual(s)
who will actively manage the business for which the license is sought. At least
one such manager must be on site when business is being conducted;
      5.   Specify the location of the premises for which the license is
sought, and the name of the owner(s), agents, lessee or assignee of the
premises where the business is to be operated;
      6.   Specify which type of marijuana or medical marijuana establishment
license is being requested. The Business License Division may issue licenses
for the following types of establishments:
         a.   Marijuana Establishments (Recreational Marijuana Establishments):
            (1)   Marijuana cultivation facility;
            (2)   Marijuana testing facility;
            (3)   Marijuana product manufacturing facility;
            (4)   Marijuana distributor; or
            (5)   Retail marijuana store.
         b.   Medical Marijuana Establishments:
            (1)   Medical marijuana cultivation facility;
            (2)   Medical marijuana production facility for edible marijuana
products or marijuana infused products;
            (3)   Medical marijuana dispensary; or
            (4)   Medical marijuana independent testing laboratory.
      7.   Include a copy of the special use permit granted by the Business
License Division of County Commissioners for the marijuana or medical marijuana
establishment as applicable;
      8.   Include a copy of the medical marijuana establishment registration
certificate, or provisional certificate issued by the State of Nevada Division
of Public and Behavioral Health, or license issued by the Department of
Taxation;
      9.   Be signed by all persons who shall conduct or have an interest in
the business activities for which a marijuana or medical marijuana license is
required. In the case of corporations, clubs or organizations with members, the
application shall be verified by the president or secretary or the person who
shall actively manage or conduct the business or activity for which a marijuana
or medical marijuana license is required;
      10.   Include an attestation regarding excluded felony offenses, signed
by each owner, officer and Business License Division member of the proposed
marijuana or medical marijuana establishment affirming that each person has not
been convicted of any excluded felony offenses as defined in Nevada Revised
Statutes 453A.104, and affirming that each person understands that any
falsification, omission or concealment of a material fact may be cause for
disqualification from consideration for the proposed marijuana or medical
marijuana establishment;
      11.   Be sworn to as to the truthfulness of the information contained
therein.
   C.   There shall be a maximum processing time of thirty (30) working days
for any application for a marijuana or medical marijuana license from the date
of a complete application submittal.
   D.   In the case of a corporate licensee, any and all changes in the
officers, directors or stockholders, or stockholders owning in the aggregate
more than three percent (3%) of the stock of such corporation, shall be
reported to the Business License Division within thirty (30) days of the
appointment or election of such officers and directors, or acquisition by such
stockholder(s), as the case may be, and such officers, directors and
stockholder(s) shall be required to qualify for a license as required in this
chapter. A list of all shareholders shall be submitted to Lyon County on an
annual basis.
   E.   In the case of a partnership licensee, the partnership contract must be
submitted with the application. Any change in the partners or other persons
with a financial interest in the business shall be reported to the Business
License Division within fourteen (14) working days of the change, and if the
change involves the addition of a person not previously investigated, that
person shall be required to qualify for a license as required by this chapter.
   F.   A financial compilation shall be submitted annually to Lyon County
along with a list of any persons receiving more than three percent (3%) of the
disbursements from the entity.
   G.   An approved marijuana or medical marijuana license shall expire and
become void one calendar year following the date of issuance of the license by
the Business License Division of County Commissioners unless revoked or renewed
in accordance with the provisions described in this chapter. (Ord. 598, 3-1-
2018)
5.10.04: DENIAL CONDITIONS:
   A.   In conformity with the policies of this chapter, the following persons
are declared not to be qualified to hold a marijuana or medical marijuana
establishment license under the provisions of this chapter:
      1.   A person who does not possess, or who does not have a reputation for
possessing a good moral character;
      2.   A person under the age of twenty one (21) years;
      3.   A person who has ever been convicted of a felony involving a crime
of a sexual nature involving children or a heinous crime; has made any
intentional false statement or omission in the registration form or any crime
involving unlawful possession, use or sale of a controlled substance, sexual
abuse or assault, violence, or who has been convicted within the past ten (10)
years of any other felony, unless the Business License Division finds, upon
examination of the circumstances of the crime and the applicant's criminal
history, that the applicant does not present, and is not likely to present in
the future, a threat to County safety, morals and welfare, and will likely
operate a lawful marijuana or medical marijuana establishment in compliance
with the letter and intent of all County ordinances;
      4.   A person who the Business License Division determines is not a
suitable person to receive or hold a license, after due consideration for the
protection of the public health, safety, morals, good order and general welfare
of the inhabitants of the County, outside an incorporated city; has ever been
convicted of a felony involving a crime of a sexual nature involving children
or a heinous crime; has made any intentional false statement or omission in the
registration form;
      5.   A person whose license issued under this chapter has been revoked
for cause;
      6.   A person who, at the time of application for renewal of any license
issued under this chapter, would not be eligible for such license upon a first
application;
      7.   A co-partnership, unless all of the members of such co- partnership,
and any other person having a financial interest in the business, are qualified
to obtain a license;
      8.   A publicly held corporation, if the designated agent or resident
manager would not be eligible to receive a license under this chapter; and a
non-publicly held corporation, if any of its officers would not be eligible to
receive a license under this chapter, for any reason other than citizenship and
residence or its designated resident manager would not be eligible to receive a
license under this chapter;
      9.   A corporation, unless it is incorporated in the State, or unless it
is a foreign corporation which is qualified under the State laws to transact
business in the State;
      10.   A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or
agent, unless the manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required
of an individual licensee;
      11.   A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which a
license is sought, or who does not have a lease thereof for the full period for
which the license is to be used; the manager or his/her agent must be on site
when business is being conducted;
      12.   A person who, in the previous year, has failed to comply with any
applicable local ordinance, including, but not limited to, a town or city's
business license ordinance; or
      13.   A person who has not obtained a special use permit, if required,
for the operation of a marijuana or medical marijuana establishment or has had
a special use permit or State license revoked. (Ord. 598, 3-1-2018)
5.10.05: BUSINESS LICENSE DIVISION DETERMINATION; DENIAL:
   A.   In conformity with the policy of this chapter, the following persons
are declared not to be qualified to hold a license under the provisions of this
chapter:
      1.   A person who is under the age of twenty one (21) years;
      2.   A person who has been convicted within the past ten (10) years of:
         a.   A felony crime involving the sale of or furnishing or possession
of with intent to sell or to furnish any narcotic, hallucinogenic or dangerous
drug, or conspiracy to so sell, furnish or possess;
         b.   A felony or gross misdemeanor crime involving the use of any
deadly or dangerous weapon;
         c.   A felony or gross misdemeanor crime involving theft, embezzlement
or misappropriation of funds, or possession of stolen property;
         d.   A felony crime involving perjury, bribery or fraud;
         e.   A felony crime involving assault, battery, sexual assault,
stalking or harassment, or other physical violence;
      3.   A person who is presently on probation for any of the crimes listed
in subsection A2 of this section; or
      4.   A person who, at the time of application for renewal of a marijuana
or medical marijuana establishment agent card would not be eligible for the
license upon a first application.
      5.   For any other good and sufficient reason.
   B.   An applicant otherwise barred by the provisions of subsection A of this
section may be found suitable, if on review of the denial of a license, the
Business License Division finds upon examination of the circumstances of the
crime or the revocation, as the case may be, and upon examination of the
applicant's criminal history, that the applicant does not present, and is not
likely to present in the future, a threat to public safety, morals and welfare,
and will likely abide by all applicable regulations. (Ord. 598, 3-1-2018)
5.10.06: APPEAL OF THE BUSINESS LICENSE DIVISION DENIAL:
   A.   Appeal Of Denial Of Application: A written notice of appeal from the
denial of a license or permit may be filed with the Business License Department
not later than ten (10) business days after the applicant receives certified
mail notice of the denial. Upon receipt of the notice of appeal, the Business
License Department shall schedule a hearing before the Board of County
Commissioners. Notice of the date, time and place of the hearing shall be
served upon the applicant not later than ten (10) business days before the time
specified of the hearing by delivering the notice to him or by certified mail
to his last known address. The applicant must appear at the hearing, the Board
of County Commissioners may sustain the Business License Division's decision or
order that the license be issued. The decision by the Board of County
Commissioners must be in writing or orally expressed in the official record of
its public meeting and must include findings of fact. (Ord. 598, 3-1-2018)
5.10.07: MEDICAL MARIJUANA LICENSE FEES:
   A.   The license fees required to be paid to obtain or renew a medical
marijuana establishment license shall be as follows:
      1.   Fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) for initial issuance and a
seven thousand five hundred dollar ($7,500.00) annual renewal fee for a medical
marijuana dispensary establishment with five thousand dollars ($5,000.00)
nonrefundable for the initial application and two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00) nonrefundable each year thereafter.
      2.   Five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for initial issuance and a two
thousand five hundred dollar ($2,500.00) annual renewal fee for a medical
marijuana cultivation establishment with two thousand dollars ($2,000.00)
nonrefundable for the initial application and one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
nonrefundable each year thereafter.
      3.   Five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for initial issuance and a two
thousand five hundred dollar ($2,500.00) annual renewal fee for a medical
marijuana production facility with two thousand dollars ($2,000.00)
nonrefundable for the initial application and one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
nonrefundable each year thereafter.
      4.   Two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for initial issuance
and a one thousand two hundred fifty dollar ($1,250.00) annual renewal fee for
a medical marijuana independent testing laboratory with one thousand two
hundred fifty dollars ($1,250.00) nonrefundable for the initial application and
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) nonrefundable each year thereafter.
   B.   The license fees specified in subsection A of this section shall be
payable in advance for at least one year. Failure to pay the medical marijuana
license fee within ten (10) working days of the due date shall result in the
mandatory assessment of a late fee of twenty five percent (25%) of the annual
fee within thirty (30) days of the due date, or shall be grounds for revocation
of the license.
   C.   In addition to the fees specified in subsection A of this section,
every medical marijuana establishment, as a condition of the granting of a
medical marijuana establishment license or renewal, shall pay no later than ten
(10) working days following the first day of each month, a monthly business
license fee to Lyon County, equivalent to two percent (2%) of the total value
of all medical marijuana or medical marijuana products that were produced,
manufactured, sold or distributed by the medical marijuana establishment for
the previous month. (Ord. 598, 3-1-2018)
5.10.08: MARIJUANA LICENSE FEES (RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTS):
   A.   The license fees required to be paid to obtain or renew a marijuana
establishment license (recreational marijuana) shall be as follows:
      1.   Fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) for initial issuance and a
seven thousand five hundred dollar ($7,500.00) annual renewal fee for a retail
marijuana store, with five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) nonrefundable for the
initial application and two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00)
nonrefundable each year thereafter.
      2.   Five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for initial issuance and a two
thousand five hundred dollar ($2,500.00) annual renewal fee for a marijuana
cultivation facility, with two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) nonrefundable for
the initial application and one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) nonrefundable each
year thereafter.
      3.   Five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for initial issuance and a two
thousand five hundred dollar ($2,500.00) annual renewal fee for a marijuana
product manufacturing facility, with two thousand dollars ($2,000.00)
nonrefundable for the initial application and one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
nonrefundable each year thereafter.
      4.   Two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for initial issuance
and a one thousand two hundred fifty dollar ($1,250.00) annual renewal fee for
a marijuana testing laboratory, with one thousand two hundred fifty dollars
($1,250.00) nonrefundable for the initial application and seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) nonrefundable each year thereafter.
      5.   Two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for initial issuance
and a one thousand two hundred fifty dollar ($1,250.00) annual renewal fee for
a marijuana distributor, with one thousand two hundred fifty dollars
($1,250.00) nonrefundable for the initial application and seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) nonrefundable each year thereafter. This fee is waived if the
applicant for the marijuana distributor license possesses a valid Lyon County
license for a marijuana or medical marijuana establishment or a Lyon County
wholesale delivery liquor license.
   B.   The license fees specified in subsection A of this section shall be
payable in advance for at least one year. Failure to pay the marijuana license
fee within ten (10) working days of the due date shall result in the mandatory
assessment of a late fee of twenty five percent (25%) of the annual fee within
thirty (30) days of the due date, or shall be grounds for revocation of the
license.
   C.   In addition to the fees specified in subsection A of this section,
every marijuana establishment, as a condition of the granting of a marijuana
establishment license or renewal, shall pay no later than ten (10) working days
following the first day of each month, a monthly business license fee to Lyon
County, equivalent to two percent (2%) of the total value of all marijuana or
marijuana products that were produced, manufactured, sold or distributed by the
marijuana establishment for the previous month. (Ord. 598, 3-1-2018)
5.10.09: FEES; DISBURSEMENT:
The two percent (2%) monthly business license fees collected by virtue of this
chapter shall be delivered by the licensee or authorized agent to the County
Treasurer, and shall be kept by the Treasurer in the General Fund for the sole
use and benefit of the County, and shall be paid out by order of and under the
direction of the Business License Division of County Commissioners in the same
manner as other General Fund disbursements are made. The County Treasurer shall
transmit a copy of the payment receipt along with a copy of each return form
for each payment to the Community Development Department and Lyon County
Sheriff's Office on a monthly basis. (Ord. 598, 3-1-2018)
5.10.10: PUBLIC DISPLAY REQUIRED:
During all of the period of time for which a license has been issued
authorizing the operation of a marijuana or medical marijuana establishment,
the license shall be posted and at all times displayed in a conspicuous place
in the facility where such business is carried on so that all persons visiting
such place may readily see and read the same. (Ord. 598, 3-1-2018)
5.10.11: RENEWAL PROCEDURE:
   A.   Application for renewal of licenses shall be made by petition to the
Business License Division by filing the same with the Business License
Division, together with all fees. Applications for renewal shall be made at
least ten (10) working days before the annual license expiration date. County
staff shall work with applicants to pro-rate annual license fees in order to
achieve a common annual renewal date for all licenses of July 1st of each year.
   B.   A financial compilation shall be provided with all renewal
applications.
   C.   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the procedures
set forth in this chapter for the initial application and issuance of marijuana
or medical marijuana licenses shall not apply to the renewal of licenses
previously issued to the same applicant. With respect to such renewal of
licenses, the Business License Division shall cause the reissuance or
cancellation of such license renewals in the manner following:
      1.   Upon receipt of a completed request for renewal of a license along
with the applicable renewal fees, the Planning Director or his designee shall
schedule the renewal request for the next available Business License Division
meeting, and present his recommendations for or against the renewal of each
such license. No existing license required under this chapter shall lapse or be
revoked when presentation to the Business License Division of the request for
renewal is delayed solely due to administrative reasons.
      2.   Any licensee whose license renewal has been disapproved by the
Business License Division shall be notified of such in writing, in the manner
provided in this chapter. The licensee may avail himself of the procedures set
forth in this chapter.
      3.   Renewal of licenses under this chapter must be for a minimum of one
calendar year.
      4.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no existing
license required under this chapter shall lapse or be revoked when renewal is
delayed solely due to the notice and agenda requirements of Nevada's Open
Meetings Law, or due to administrative delay. (Ord. 598, 3-1-2018)
5.10.12: PROHIBITED ACTS:
It is unlawful for any licensed operation, licensee or employee, agent and/or
contractor of any licensee to:
   A.   Acquire, possess, deliver, transfer, transport, supply, sell, or
dispense any marijuana to any person, unless in compliance with all
requirements of this chapter and State law.
   B.   Acquire, possess, deliver, transfer, transport, supply, sell, or
dispense any marijuana to or from any person or source located outside the
State of Nevada.
   C.   Do any act that violates any licensing requirement established pursuant
to chapter 453A or 453D of the Nevada Revised Statutes.
   D.   Fail to comply with all requirements of the conditions of the special
use permit. (Ord. 598, 3-1-2018)
5.10.13: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION:
   A.   Persons found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this chapter
are guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine of not less than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by
imprisonment in the County Jail for not more than six (6) months, or by both
such fine and imprisonment. Nothing herein contained shall be construed as
limiting any prosecution for acts related to a violation of the Uniform
Controlled Substances Act as set forth in chapter 453 of the Nevada Revised
Statutes.
   B.   In addition to any criminal punishment as may be imposed, any violation
of this chapter may result in the revocation of any license issued pursuant to
this chapter and result in the forfeiture of any and all property as described
in Nevada Revised Statutes 453.301. The civil penalties provided for hereunder
are intended to be cumulative and in addition to any criminal fines or
punishments imposed. (Ord. 598, 3-1-2018)
5.10.14: TRANSFERABILITY:
Licenses shall not be in any manner transferable or assignable, nor shall any
person other than as named in the license be authorized to conduct the
business, unless such transfer is approved by the State of Nevada and Lyon
County Business License Division of Commissioners. (Ord. 598, 3-1-2018)
TITLE 6
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
CHAPTER 1
PUBLIC NUISANCES
SECTION:
6.01.01: General Provisions
6.01.02: Nuisances Enumerated
6.01.03: Determination Of Public Nuisance
6.01.04: Judicial Proceedings Not A Bar To Abatement
6.01.05: Notice Required
6.01.06: Contents Of Notice
6.01.07: Abatement By Owner Or Occupant Or By Board Action
6.01.08: Proceedings For Removal And Abatement
6.01.09: Abatement By Designated Officers
6.01.10: Collection Suit And Criminal Prosecution Not Precluded
6.01.11: Penalty
6.01.01: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
Each and all of the several acts and things prohibited and made unlawful by
this chapter are hereby deemed and declared to be nuisances within Lyon County.
(Ord. 511, 7-5-2007)
6.01.02: NUISANCES ENUMERATED:
Unsafe and unsanitary structures, accumulation, maintenance and existence of
refuse are declared to be public nuisances.
   A.   Any building or structure which is unfit for use or habitation, or
which is unsafe or unsanitary, or a fire menace, or a danger to life or health,
is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
   B.   Any person who shall maintain or use, or who shall permit to remain
upon any premises owned or occupied by him in the county, any building or
structure which is unfit for use or habitation, or which is unsafe, or
unsanitary, or a fire menace, or a danger to life or health, shall be deemed
guilty of maintaining a nuisance.
   C.   The accumulation, maintenance, and existence of, including, but not
limited to: weeds; grasses; brush; leaves; thistles; debris; refuse; rubbish;
glass or metal containers; trash; filth; garbage, whether animal or vegetable;
offal; rags; cesspools; scrapped or abandoned materials of all kinds, including
bricks, cement, concrete, glass, plaster, wood and wood shavings, rubber, paper
or wire; dismantled, abandoned or temporarily inoperative motors, machinery,
equipment, automobiles, vehicles, trailers and the parts, materials or cast off
articles therefrom upon any yard, lot, parcel or premises within view of any
place of residence including, but not limited to, any neighboring residence,
public road, street or thoroughfare and exposed to open view from such
residence, public road, street, alley or thoroughfare is unlawful and hereby
declared to be a public nuisance.
   D.   Any violation of chapter 487.290 of the Nevada Revised Statutes is
declared to be a public nuisance.
   E.   Any land use violation as defined in title 10 of this code is declared
to be a public nuisance. (Ord. 511, 7-5-2007)
6.01.03: DETERMINATION OF PUBLIC NUISANCE:
The office of the district attorney, code enforcement officer or any other
officer designated by the board of county commissioners is hereby authorized
and empowered to determine the existence of a public nuisance as declared in
section
6.01.02 of this chapter. The above referenced officers are concurrently
authorized and empowered to prepare, sign and serve criminal misdemeanor
citations for public nuisance violations in addition to any penalty proscribed
in section
6.01.11 of this chapter. (Ord. 511, 7-5-2007)
6.01.04: JUDICIAL PROCEEDINGS NOT A BAR TO ABATEMENT:
Any judicial proceeding, or court action pursuant to section
6.01.03 of this chapter shall not waive or impair any right to proceed with,
and may be in addition to, the abatement and removal of a public nuisance as
declared in section
6.01.02 of this chapter or with any right to collect the expense of such
abatement and removal of such nuisance in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter. (Ord. 511, 7-5-2007)
6.01.05: NOTICE REQUIRED:
Whenever the persons authorized pursuant to section
6.01.03 of this chapter determine that a public nuisance exists or is being
maintained as declared in section
6.01.02 of this chapter, he shall give notice of such determination in the
following manner:
   A.   By leaving such notice at the residence of the owner or occupant of the
yard, lot, parcel or premises upon which such nuisance exists or is being
maintained with someone of suitable age; or
   B.   By mailing such notice to the last known address of the owner or
occupant of the yard, lot, parcel, or premises upon which such nuisance exists
or is being maintained; or
   C.   If there be no person occupying the yard, lot, parcel or premises upon
which the nuisance exists or is being maintained, or if the address of the
owner thereof is unknown, by posting a copy of the notice in a conspicuous
place upon the yard, lot, parcel or premises where the nuisance exists or is
being maintained. (Ord. 511, 7-5-2007)
6.01.06: CONTENTS OF NOTICE:
The notice of the determination of the existence or maintenance of a public
nuisance pursuant to section
6.01.05 of this chapter shall state:
   A.   The nature and character of the nuisance.
   B.   The location of the nuisance.
   C.   The period of time allowed after delivery, mailing or posting of the
notice for the removal or abatement of the nuisance. (Ord. 511, 7-5-2007)
6.01.07: ABATEMENT BY OWNER OR OCCUPANT OR BY BOARD ACTION:
   A.   Upon the determination of a public nuisance as declared in section
6.01.02 of this chapter, such nuisance shall be abated within a period of not
more than thirty (30) days after delivery, mailing or the posting of the notice
required in section
6.01.05 of this chapter.
   B.   Whenever the owner or occupant of the yard, lot, parcel or premises
upon which a nuisance has been determined to exist or is being maintained shall
fail to or refuse to remove or abate such nuisance within the time set forth
above, the board of county commissioners may provide for the removal and
abatement of such nuisance in the manner provided in section
6.01.08 of this chapter. (Ord. 511, 7-5-2007)
6.01.08: PROCEEDINGS FOR REMOVAL AND ABATEMENT:
   A.   Whenever the persons authorized pursuant to section
6.01.03 of this chapter determine that a public nuisance exists or is being
maintained as declared in section
6.01.02 of this chapter, and the owner or occupant of the yard, lot, parcel or
premises upon which such nuisance exists or is being maintained, fails or
refuses to remove or abate such nuisance, after the notice provided in section
6.01.05 of this chapter has been given, the board shall issue its order
directing the owner or occupant of the yard, lot, parcel or premises upon which
such nuisance exists or is being maintained, to appear in not less than ten
(10) days before the board and show cause for the reason, if any, why the
nuisance should not be removed or abated by the board at the cost and expense
of such person.
   B.   All orders for the removal or abatement of any nuisance shall be served
upon the same persons and in the same manner provided for giving the notice of
the maintenance of and existence of a nuisance in section
6.01.05 of this chapter.
   C.   Every person appearing before the board pursuant to any order made by
the board shall be given an opportunity to present evidence that either the
nuisance has been abated or removed, or the determination of such nuisance by
persons authorized pursuant to section
6.01.03 of this chapter was erroneous.
   D.   Upon the failure of any person to appear at the time set forth in any
order of the board made pursuant to this section, or upon the conclusion of any
hearing after an appearance made pursuant to such order, the board shall:
      1.   Enter its order that there is no nuisance as determined by the
persons authorized pursuant to section
6.01.03 of this chapter; or
      2.   Enter its order that a nuisance exists or is being maintained only
as part of the yard, lot, parcel or premises and order its removal or abatement
as to that part in the manner provided herein; or
      3.   Order the nuisance to be removed or abated and set a period of time
to be allowed for removal or abatement of such nuisance. (Ord. 511, 7-5-2007)
6.01.09: ABATEMENT BY DESIGNATED OFFICERS:
   A.   Whenever an order has been made pursuant to subsection
6.01.08D2 or D3 of this chapter and the owner or occupant of the yard, lot,
parcel or premises fails or refuses to comply with such order, the persons
authorized pursuant to section
6.01.03 of this chapter are hereby authorized to remove, abate or contract for
the removal or abatement of such nuisance.
   B.   The costs and expenses incurred by persons authorized pursuant to
section
6.01.03 of this chapter in the removal or abatement of any nuisance pursuant to
any order made in accordance with subsection
6.01.08D2 or D3 of this chapter shall be paid by the owner or occupant of the
yard, lot, parcel or premises upon which such nuisance has been found to exist.
If not paid, such costs and expenses may be recovered by the following special
tax assessment procedure:
      1.   Once the persons authorized pursuant to section
6.01.03 of this chapter have abated the nuisance he shall file a report of the
proceedings and an accurate account of the costs involved in abating the
nuisance with the county clerk.
      2.   The county clerk shall thereafter set the account and report for a
hearing by the board of county commissioners. Prior to the hearing, the county
clerk shall post a copy of the report and account and give proper notice of the
time and place of hearing.
      3.   The board of county commissioners shall thereafter consider the
report and account at the time set for hearing, together with any objections or
protests by any person interested therein who presents a written or oral
protest or objection to the report and account. At the conclusion of the
hearing, the board of county commissioners shall either approve or disapprove
the report and account as submitted, or as modified or corrected by the board.
The amount so approved shall be liens upon the respective lots or premises
affected and the board shall adopt a resolution assessing said amounts as liens
upon the respective parcels of land as they are shown upon the last available
assessment roll, and determining that such matters as set forth in section
6.01.02 of this chapter did constitute a public nuisance. It shall be the duty
of the persons authorized pursuant to section
6.01.03 of this chapter or their authorized representatives to see that such
lien is filed.
      4.   Thereafter the county assessor shall make an assessment roll and
levy a special assessment upon the said premises and against the person
chargeable therewith, and after such levy he shall transfer the assessment roll
to the county clerk/treasurer who shall thereupon record the same in his
office. The special assessment shall constitute a lien upon the premises
assessed and shall remain such until paid. Such assessment shall be due and
payable upon recording, and if not paid when due it shall be the duty of the
county clerk/treasurer to sell the property. The assessment shall be due in one
sum and shall not be divided into installments.
      5.   As an alternative remedy, the costs and expenses of nuisance removal
may be recovered in a civil action to be instituted by the board against such
owner or occupant. (Ord. 511, 7-5-2007)
6.01.10: COLLECTION SUIT AND CRIMINAL PROSECUTION NOT PRECLUDED:
Nothing herein contained in this chapter shall prevent the maintenance of a
suit by Lyon County against any of the persons herein in this chapter mentioned
to collect the expense of such abatement or removal or the criminal prosecution
under this code, of any person creating, maintaining, causing or committing a
nuisance, or owning or in possession, charge or control of the real property
upon which a nuisance is created, maintained, caused or committed. The
alternative remedies set forth in this chapter may be pursued by the board of
county commissioners or the Lyon County office of the district attorney
separately or concurrently. (Ord. 511, 7-5-2007)
6.01.11: PENALTY:
The penalty for provisions of this chapter shall be as prescribed in section
1.04.01 of this code. (Ord. 511, 7-5-2007)
CHAPTER 2
HAZARDOUS WASTE MANAGEMENT
SECTION:
6.02.01: Short Title
6.02.02: Findings Of Fact
6.02.03: Purpose
6.02.04: Interpretation And Scope
6.02.05: Definitions
6.02.06: Obligations Of Safety And Care
6.02.07: Professional Assistance For County Determinations
6.02.08: Hazardous Waste Permit
6.02.09: Insurance Requirements
6.02.10: Hazardous Wastes Management Plan
6.02.11: Responsibilities Of Permittee
6.02.12: Hazardous Waste Siting
6.02.13: Inspections
6.02.14: Records Kept
6.02.15: Disclaimer Of Liability
6.02.16: Enforcement And Penalties
6.02.01: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter may be referenced as the LYON COUNTY HAZARDOUS WASTES ORDINANCE.
(Ord. 328, 4-6-1989)
6.02.02: FINDINGS OF FACT:
The Board of Lyon County Commissioners finds and declares:
   A.   Hazardous wastes present in the community may pose acute and chronic
health hazards to individuals who live and work in Lyon County. Many hazardous
wastes present a serious health risk over long periods of time.
   B.   Mishandling of these substances can result in widespread and serious
contamination of soil, air and surface and ground water.
   C.   Environmental cleanup of soil and water contaminated with hazardous
wastes can cost many times more than the cost of properly containing and
handling the hazardous wastes which can cause pollution. Such cleanup very
probably would exceed the County's financial capabilities, necessitating
control of hazardous waste to minimize potential financial disaster.
   D.   It is the responsibility of all businesses and persons to fully protect
their workers and the public from hazardous wastes they handle.
   E.   It is technically and economically feasible to design manufacturing and
commercial facilities in such a way that the release of hazardous wastes is
eliminated or minimized.
   F.   Many State and Federal programs have solved one type of pollution by
redirecting the contamination to another part of the environment rather than
eliminating the hazard. The County, however, has the responsibility and the
authority to plan to protect human health and the environment from all
significant adverse effects resulting from the use and handling of hazardous
wastes. (Ord. 328, 4-6-1989)
6.02.03: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect human health and life, the
environment and property by placing on the handlers of hazardous wastes the
obligation to prevent releases, emissions or discharges of all hazardous
wastes. (Ord. 328, 4-6-1989)
It is the intent of the Board of Lyon County Commissioners that this chapter
shall recognize the County's responsibilities and its right to act to protect
public health, life and the environment from contamination by hazardous wastes.
This chapter shall condition all handling of hazardous wastes by placing an
obligation on the handler to prevent and/or control its emissions, discharges
and releases.
Further, it is the intent of the board of Lyon County commissioners to require
that hazardous wastes handlers monitor emissions into the environment and keep
records on the effectiveness of hazardous wastes management practices as a
means of enforcing their obligation. (Ord. 328, 4-6-1989)
6.02.04: INTERPRETATION AND SCOPE:
   A.   Conflicts With Other Laws: Whenever any provision of this chapter
conflicts with the county building code, fire code, this code or any other law,
statute, rule or regulation, the stricter shall prevail. (Ord. 328, 4-6-1989;
amd. Ord. 486, 5-5-2005)
   B.   Existing Operations: A hazardous waste handler already operating a
facility on the effective date hereof shall be required to comply with the
terms of this chapter within sixty (60) days. (Ord. 328, 4-6-1989)
6.02.05: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
BUSINESS: An employer, self-employed individual, trust, firm, joint stock
company, corporation, partnership, association, city, district and the state of
Nevada or any department or agency thereof. For the purpose of this chapter, a
"business" shall include both for profit and nonprofit business.
CONTROL: To mitigate, pretreat, remove or otherwise lessen the impact of an
emission, discharge or release of a hazardous waste into the environment.
COUNTY: Lyon County, Nevada.
DISCHARGE: Includes, but is not limited to, any spilling, leaking, pumping,
pouring, emitting, emptying or dumping of a hazardous waste into the
environment.
DISCLOSURE FORM: The written request for information prepared by the Lyon
County department of safety and emergency management and the Lyon County
planning department. The term includes the hazardous waste permit application
form required by the county.
EMIT: To discharge or release into the atmosphere or into the environment.
ENVIRONMENTAL AUDIT: The efforts undertaken to outline the handling of
hazardous waste. An environmental audit is a precursor to and part of the
hazardous wastes management plan required hereby.
FACILITY: Any building, structure, installation, equipment, pipe or pipeline,
or any of the foregoing that are related by nature of contiguity, ownership or
industrial process and used for the handling of hazardous wastes.
HANDLE: To generate, treat, manufacture, produce, store, use, discharge,
release, transfer, dispose of, incinerate, recycle or emit in any fashion a
hazardous waste.
HANDLER: An entity which generates, treats, manufactures, produces, stores,
uses, discharges, releases, transfers, transports, disposes of, incinerates,
recycles or emits in any fashion a hazardous waste. An entity which otherwise
would be a "handler" who conducts any such activity pursuant to a preemptive
state or federal law or regulation is not a "handler" for the purposes of this
chapter.
HAZARDOUS WASTE: The following substances, when handled off site and being
handled for disposal:
   A.   The substances as listed in the then current edition of "RCRA Hazardous
Waste";
   B.   Any substance containing five (5) or more parts per million of
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs);
   C.   The substances defined in Nevada Revised Statutes 459.430 and NAC
444.8565;
   D.   High-level radioactive wastes;
   E.   Low-level radioactive wastes; and
   F.   Incinerator ash, unless it be shown that the ash does not contain any
substance defined herein as "hazardous waste".
LOAD: The amount of hazardous waste transported by one truck, one towed
trailer, one railroad car or any other single vehicle to a hazardous waste
area.
MONITOR: To perform a test, sample or otherwise check a discharge or handling
activity to ensure compliance with standards set pursuant to any provision of
this chapter or any other law, rule or regulation regarding the handling of
hazardous wastes.
OFF-SITE: The substance is being handled at a site other than the location
where the substance was generated.
OFFICER: Any representative of Lyon County whose official duties include
hazardous waste control.
PERMIT: The hazardous waste permit required pursuant to this chapter.
RELEASE: Any spilling into, leaking into, pumping into, pouring into, emitting
into, emptying into, discharging into, injecting into, escape into, leaching
into, dumping into or onto or in any way disposing into the environment or any
abandonment of hazardous wastes.
REMOVE:
   A.   The cleanup or removal of released hazardous wastes or environmental
media contaminated by released hazardous wastes;
   B.   Such actions as may be necessary to monitor, assess or evaluate the
release of the hazardous wastes; or
   C.   The taking of other such actions as may be necessary to mitigate damage
to the public health and the environment.
STORAGE: When the substance has remained in Lyon County for more than thirty
(30) days.
UNAUTHORIZED RELEASE: The release, discharge or emission of a hazardous waste
in quantities as set in the hazardous waste management plan (HWMP). (Ord. 355,
5-2-1991)
6.02.06: OBLIGATIONS OF SAFETY AND CARE:
   A.   General Obligations: No person or business shall use or handle
hazardous wastes in a manner which:
      1.   Violates any provision of this chapter, or any other local, Federal
or State Statute, code, rule or regulation relating to hazardous wastes;
      2.   Harms or poses a significant risk of harm to the public health or
adverse impact to the environment.
   B.   Specific Obligations: Any person handling or intending to handle a
hazardous waste shall obtain and keep current a hazardous waste permit. A
separate permit is required for each place or location where hazardous wastes
will be handled. Ordinarily, such permit will be issued pursuant to this Code
controlling planning and zoning 1 . In the event that the handler does not have
a fixed place or location where hazardous wastes will be handled, he is
required to obtain a permit for nonspecific location prior to handling any
hazardous waste pursuant to the County's health and safety police powers rather
than land use control authority. The permit for nonspecific location will be
applied for, issued and controlled the same as a permit for a specific site.
(Ord. 328, 4-6-89)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 15 of this Code.
6.02.07: PROFESSIONAL ASSISTANCE FOR COUNTY DETERMINATIONS:
   A.   Whenever the approval or satisfaction of the County may be required by
this Chapter for the design, monitoring, testing or other technical submittal
by an applicant or permit holder, the County may, in its discretion, at such
applicant's or permit holder's sole cost or expense, retain a suitably
qualified independent engineer, chemist, toxicologist or industrial hygienist,
or other appropriate consultant, acceptable to the County, for the purpose of
evaluating and rendering a professional opinion regarding the adequacy of such
submittal to achieve the purposes of this Chapter.
   B.   Prior to the County retaining any said independent expert, the County
shall consult with the applicant/permit holder regarding the expert to be
retained by County, the scope of the work to be done by said expert and a
reasonable estimate of the cost to be borne by the applicant/permittee. In the
event that a disagreement exists between the County staff and the applicant/
permittee regarding the expert to be utilized, the scope of the work to be done
by said expert or the cost to be assessed against applicant/permittee, the
issue shall be heard and decided by the County Commissioners. The County and
the applicant/permittee shall use their best efforts to cooperate and act
reasonably. The County shall be entitled to rely on such evaluation and/or
opinion of such consultant in making the relevant determinations provided for
in this Chapter.
   C.   When County, in its discretion, reasonably determines that a
professional consultant shall be retained, an applicant or permit holder shall
forthwith deposit with the County such sum as may be necessary to pay for the
services of the expert. No new application shall be processed further until
such deposit is made. In the event that a consultant's services are required to
evaluate an existing hazardous waste permit, such permit shall be suspended ten
(10) days after request for deposit, unless and until the necessary deposit is
made. (Ord. 328, 4-6-89)
6.02.08: HAZARDOUS WASTE PERMIT:
   A.   Permit Required: As of the effective date hereof, a permit is required
for all new facilities where hazardous wastes will be handled prior to the
construction of the facility.
   B.   Application for Permit; Procedures for Approval and Revocation:
      1.   An applicant for a hazardous waste permit shall first pay to the
County a filing fee set by resolution of the Board of Lyon County Commissioners
and in a sum sufficient to reimburse the County for all expenses which the
County shall incur in processing the application.
      2.   The application shall:
         a.   Be in a form prepared by the Lyon County Zoning Administrator and
the Lyon County Emergency Management Director and approved by the Board of Lyon
County Commissioners.
         b.   Not be accepted for filing until it is complete, and all
investigations which may be required are complete.
      3.   After the application is accepted for filing by the Lyon County
Planning Department, the County shall proceed as follows:
         a.   If the hazardous waste permit is to be considered in conjunction
with an application for a special use permit or variance of land use or a
zoning change, the hazardous waste permit process must be completed before the
special use permit/variance/ zoning change application is accepted for filing;
provided, however, if the applicant wishes to proceed simultaneously with the
hazardous waste permit application and the land use application, the County
will accept both applications for filing if the applicant formally waives, in
writing, the provisions of NRS 278.315(2) or any other applicable statute, rule
or regulation limiting the period of time within which the County may consider
and process the land use application.
         b.   The application shall be placed on the agenda of the next
available meeting of the Lyon County Planning Commission for consideration and
adoption of a recommendation to the Board of Lyon County Commissioners.
If, in the discretion of the Planning Commission or at the request of the Board
of Lyon County Commissioners, it shall appear that the Lyon County Planning
Commission should hold a hearing in the area of the County which would be most
affected by the hazardous waste permit, the Planning Commission is authorized
hereby to hold such a hearing.
         c.   The application, together with the recommendation of the Lyon
County Planning Commission, shall be forwarded to the Board of Lyon County
Commissioners for public hearing and decision.
         d.   The Board of Lyon County Commissioners may approve the hazardous
waste permit application as requested, with modifications or conditions, or may
deny the application. Since it is the intention of Lyon County that hazardous
wastes be regulated as a "pervasively regulated industry", denial of a permit
application may be based upon any reasonable finding of the County that
issuance of the permit would not be in the best interests of the County or any
of the residents thereof for reasons of health, safety, general welfare or any
other similar good and sufficient reason.
         e.   Any hazardous waste permit issued pursuant to this Chapter shall
be subject to continuing review and may be terminated at any time if the permit
holder fails to comply with the terms of this Chapter and/or any special
conditions or modifications. In addition to continuing review, every hazardous
waste permit shall be subject to automatic annual review to determine if the
permit should be continued, modified or revoked. No person or entity issued a
permit hereunder shall acquire any property right or other right to renewal or
continuation of the permit. Nonuse of a permit for six (6) months shall result
in automatic revocation.
If, in the opinion of the Lyon County Zoning Administrator, the office of the
District Attorney, the Board of Lyon County Commissioners or the Lyon County
Emergency Management Director, any hazardous waste permit should be revoked
pursuant to this Chapter, Lyon County shall so notify the permit holder by
legal notice setting forth the basis for the requested revocation together with
notification of the date for a revocation hearing before the Board of Lyon
County Commissioners.
At the conclusion of the public hearing on revocation, the Board of County
Commissioners may revoke the hazardous waste permit, reinstate the hazardous
waste permit, with additional conditions or modifications, or reinstate the
permit without additional conditions or modifications.
   C.   Investigation Costs: All applicants for hazardous wastes permits shall
deposit, in advance, in addition to the application fee, all estimated costs of
processing the application including any travel costs or other expenses
necessary in the County's sole discretion to reasonably investigate the
applicant or the proposed operation.
   D.   Nontransferability of Permit; Expiration: If a handler changes its
operations and begins the use of a new hazardous waste or if a new handler of
hazardous wastes occupies a facility where another handler formerly operated,
then that handler is required to apply for a permit.
Every permit granted hereunder expires automatically with any majority change
of ownership or significant change in management of the hazardous wastes
handler entity. (Ord. 328, 4-6-89)
6.02.09: INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   General Requirements: All applicants/permittees for hazardous wastes
permits issued or renewed after the effective date hereof shall be required to
provide liability insurance adequate to insure the public against the risks
reasonably to be anticipated as a result of the handling of hazardous wastes.
Lyon County shall be named expressly as an additional insured on all such
policies. The amount and type of insurance to be required shall be determined
by the County after evaluation of the risks to be insured against.
All liability policies shall be for a minimum of one year "tail" to cover later
claims. The one-year policy and the "tail" shall be renewed annually.
   B.   Costs for Analysts or Consultants: In the event that the County finds
it necessary to retain an independent analyst to assist the County to determine
the level of insurance to be required, the applicant shall deposit, in advance,
the estimated cost of obtaining such analyst or consultant.
   C.   Qualifications of Insurance Companies: All insurance shall be written
by companies authorized by the Nevada Insurance Commissioner to write policies
of that type in the State of Nevada.
   D.   Types of Insurance Required: The insurance to be required may include,
but is not limited to:
      1.   General liability.
      2.   Sudden and accidental.
      3.   Nonsudden and accidental.
      4.   Environmental pollution.
      5.   Off-premises damages.
      6.   SIIS.
      7.   Additional industrial health insurance.
      8.   Closure expense insurance.
   E.   Termination or Cancellation of Insurance: Any hazardous wastes permit
issued or renewed pursuant to this Chapter shall become void upon the lapse,
termination or cancellation of the insurance required hereunder.
   F.   Other Assurance Methods: With approval of the County Commissioners, the
applicant/permittee may provide the coverage required through comparable means
of financial assurance such as bonds or letters of credit, etc. (Ord. 328, 4-6-
89)
6.02.10: HAZARDOUS WASTES MANAGEMENT PLAN:
Each applicant for a permit pursuant to this Chapter shall file a hazardous
wastes management plan (HWMP) which shall set forth the applicant's methods for
safe handling and control of hazardous wastes. Said plan must be filed at the
time of application for permit. The HWMP may be amended at any time with the
consent of the Board of Lyon County Commissioners. Those hazardous wastes
handlers that frequently initiate significant changes in handling of hazardous
wastes should indicate that information in the plan or file an amended plan.
The HWMP shall be a public record, and shall consist of:
   A.   The Environmental Audit: Hazardous wastes handlers shall provide the
County with an environmental audit of each hazardous waste they handle.
Included in an environmental audit are:
      1.   A list of all hazardous wastes that will be handled at the facility.
The list shall include applicable reportable quantities;
      2.   General descriptions of all processes that produce wastewaters, air
emissions or other hazardous wastes;
      3.   Diagrams showing the flow of all hazardous wastes through each step
of this process;
      4.   General descriptions of all treatment processes for hazardous
wastes, including information on their efficiency in removing or destroying
hazardous contaminants, unless Federal law prohibits such disclosure; and
      5.   Estimates of the type and volume of hazardous wastes that will be
incorporated into final products, discharged into the sewer, released into the
air and/or transformed into hazardous wastes.
   B.   Control of Emissions, Discharges and Releases: The HWMP shall indicate
the measures employed to control emissions, discharges and releases of each
hazardous waste by:
      1.   Showing that the handler has, or within reasonable time will obtain
an applicable State/Federal permit or license (so long as that permit or
license specifically covers each hazardous waste and its harm or potential for
harm).
      2.   Explaining how the handler complies with existing laws, statutes,
standards or regulations that do not require a permit or license but do
specifically cover the handling of each hazardous waste and specifically
require its control.
      3.   Documenting measures that will be employed to control the hazardous
waste in such a manner as to present the least acute or chronic hazard or risk
to public health and/or least damage to the environment including, but not
limited to:
         a.   The best available control technologies (BACT), or
         b.   Changes in process and manufacturing strategies to reduce
handling of the hazardous waste if there are no laws, statutes, standards and
regulations relating to its handling and control.
      4.   Demonstrating the adequacy of:
         a.   Contingency plans for spills and unauthorized emissions,
discharges and releases of the hazardous waste.
         b.   Employee training and equipment for proper handling of hazardous
materials and in response to all emergencies involving the hazardous waste.
         c.   Adequate standards for construction of storage areas for the
hazardous wastes.
      5.   If applicable, demonstrating that the environmental fate of the
hazardous waste is such that it presents no harm or potential of harm to human
health or to the environment.
No effort outlined above shall be approved by the County if it results in
increased risk or hazard of harm to the health or safety of persons involved in
handling the hazardous waste or otherwise employed at the facility or the
public or the environment.
   C.   Monitoring Plan: For each hazardous waste used, the handler shall
document the efforts used to verify that the hazardous wastes are controlled in
accord with all other elements of the HWMP:
      1.   These efforts shall include, but are not limited to:
         a.   Sampling of emissions discharges and releases.
         b.   Self-inspections of storage, manufacturing and transportation
operations.
         c.   Testing of emergency procedures.
      2.   These efforts shall take place in such manner as to:
         a.   Include sampling, self-inspections and monitoring at those times
during the production process when the highest volume discharges and the
highest probable concentrations of contamination are likely to occur.
         b.   Monitor, inspect or sample for all hazardous wastes used in the
manufacturing process which have any potential for appearing in wastewater
discharge.
         c.   Include periodic random sampling, monitoring or inspection. (Ord.
328, 4-6-89)
6.02.11: RESPONSIBILITIES OF PERMITTEE:
   A.   Compliance with HWMP: All permit holders shall handle and control
hazardous wastes in accordance with the provisions of the hazardous wastes
management plan (HWMP) approved by the County.
   B.   Records Kept: Records of monitoring, inspections and sampling results
produced pursuant to a monitoring plan that is a part of an HWMP approved by
the County shall be kept and made available for inspection at all times.
   C.   Unauthorized Release of Hazardous Wastes:
      1.   As soon as any hazardous waste handler has knowledge of any
unauthorized release, that handler shall report the incident to the County
immediately and, in all cases, within one hour after the release is discovered.
Any emergency variation from the HWMP on file shall be immediately reported to
the County. The notification, as required hereunder, shall be reported to the
Lyon County Sheriff's office which will notify the appropriate County
personnel.
      2.   In the event of an unauthorized release, the County may require:
         a.   That the hazardous wastes handler conduct monitoring to establish
whether there is environmental contamination as a result of the release;
         b.   Removal of the hazardous wastes and contaminated media; and/or
         c.   That the hazardous waste handler pay the costs of a consultant of
the County's choosing to evaluate testing and removal activities.
   D.   Closure Plan: As part of the application for a hazardous waste permit,
the applicant shall file a plan satisfactory to the County for ultimate closure
of the facility. The closure plan shall include:
      1.   A detailed plan for decontamination and restoration of the facility
site, including description of methods to be used, estimates of costs, verified
by independent consultants, and any other data which would assist the County in
determining the efficacy of the closure plan; and
      2.   An irrevocable letter of credit, irrevocable bond or other
irrevocable surety acceptable to County in a sum sufficient to effect the
decontamination and restoration proposed in the detailed plan.
The permittee shall implement its closure plan when it permanently ceases
operations under the hazardous waste permit or when operations have ceased for
a period of six (6) months, which time shall be deemed to be a permanent
cessation of operations unless it be shown to the satisfaction of the County
that the cessation is temporary and that the operations will resume at some
reasonable time satisfactory to the County.
A permittee may not escape responsibility for implementing the closure plan by
sale or other disposition of the facility. Any subsequent permittee holding a
hazardous waste permit for the same site also is responsible for implementing
the closure plan at the time of ultimate closure. (Ord. 355, 5-2-91)
6.02.12: HAZARDOUS WASTE SITING:
   A.   Stationary Facilities: A stationary facility for the handling of
hazardous waste, other than in tanks or portable containers, shall not be
constructed within the areas designated by Nevada Administrative Code 444.3456
in effect on July 22, 1987.
A stationary facility for the handling of hazardous waste in tanks or portable
containers is exempt from the specific siting requirements of this subsection
A. Said permit application will be reviewed applying the general requirements
and standards set forth in NRS 278.020.
   B.   Portable Facilities: A portable facility for the handling of hazardous
wastes will be reviewed applying the general requirements and standards set
forth in NRS 278.020. (Ord. 328, 4-6-89)
6.02.13: INSPECTIONS:
   A.   Authority: The County may conduct inspections at its discretion to
ascertain compliance with this Chapter and may cause to be corrected any
conditions which constitute any violations of this Chapter or of any other
statute, code, rule or regulation affecting the use and handling of hazardous
waste.
   B.   Entry Powers: For the purpose of investigating or enforcing the
provisions of this Chapter, the County may enter the facilities or premises of
a hazardous waste handler at all reasonable times to inspect the same;
provided, that if the facilities or premises are occupied, the County's
representative(s) shall first present proper credentials and request entry, and
further provided, that if such facility or premises is unoccupied, the County
shall first make a reasonable effort to contact the user and request entry,
except in emergency circumstances. If such entry is refused, the County shall
have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry.
   C.   Inspections Are Discretionary; Nonliability for Damage: All inspections
specified herein to be performed by the County are discretionary with the
County, and nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as requiring the County
to conduct any such inspection nor shall any actual inspection made imply a
duty to conduct any other inspection. Furthermore, nothing in this Chapter
shall be construed to hold the County or any officer, employee or
representative of the County responsible for any damage to persons or property
by reason of any failure to make an inspection or reinspection.
   D.   Special Inspections:
      1.   In addition to the inspections specified above, the County may
require the employment by the handler of special inspectors or consultants to
conduct an environmental audit monitoring or to otherwise determine compliance
with the provisions of this Chapter.
      2.   The special inspector or consultant shall be a qualified person who
shall demonstrate expertise and independence to the satisfaction of the County.
      3.   The report of the special inspection shall include an evaluation of
the facility and recommendations consistent with the provisions of this
Chapter, if appropriate. A copy of the report shall be filed with the County at
the same time that it is submitted to the permit holder.
      4.   The permit holder shall, within thirty (30) days of the report, file
with the County a plan to implement all recommendations, or demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the County why such recommendations shall not be implemented.
   E.   Substituted Inspections: An inspection by an employee of any other
public agency may be deemed by the County as an acceptable substitute for any
inspection required by this Chapter. (Ord. 328, 4-6-89)
6.02.14: RECORDS KEPT:
All records required by this Chapter shall be maintained by the permit holder
for a period of not less than five (5) years. These records shall be made
available to the County during normal working hours and upon reasonable notice.
Nothing in this Section alters or lessens responsibility to maintain records
required under other laws. (Ord. 328, 4-6-89)
6.02.15: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of protection required by this Chapter is considered reasonable for
regulatory purposes. The standards set forth herein are minimum standards, and
this Chapter does not imply that compliance will ensure that there will be no
unauthorized discharge of a hazardous waste. This Chapter shall not create
liability on the part of the County or any officer or employee thereof for any
damages that result from reliance on this Chapter or any administrative
decision lawfully made hereunder. All hazardous wastes handlers are advised to
determine to their own satisfaction the level of protection in addition to that
required by this Chapter necessary or desirable to ensure that there is no risk
or damage to public health or the environment. Mere compliance with this
Chapter does not release the handler from civil liability to others for damages
resulting from his use of hazardous waste. (Ord. 328, 4-6-89)
6.02.16: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Any hazardous waste handler who intentionally or negligently violates
any of the provisions of this Chapter may:
      1.   Be denied a hazardous waste permit by the County; or
      2.   Have a hazardous waste permit revoked.
      3.   Have the hazardous waste permit suspended pending a formal hearing
before the Board of County Commissioners or a designated hearing officer. The
suspension may be ordered by an enforcement officer if the alleged violation
threatens the health or safety of any person.
      4.   Be subject to the following penalties:
         a.   Administrative Penalties: Upon a finding by the County
Commissioners that a hazardous waste handler has violated any provision of this
Chapter, the County Commissioners may levy an administrative fine of up to five
hundred dollars ($500.00) per day for each violation.
         b.   Civil Penalties: Any hazardous waste handler who intentionally or
negligently violates any provision of this Chapter or fails to comply with any
order issued hereunder shall be liable for a civil penalty up to five hundred
dollars ($500.00) per day for each violation which shall be assessed and
recovered in a civil action brought in the name of the County by the District
Attorney. In any civil action brought pursuant hereto, in which the County
prevails, the court shall determine and impose reasonable costs, including all
attorney fees permissible under Nevada law, incurred by the County in the
investigation and prosecution of the action.
         c.   Criminal Penalties: Any person or business which intentionally
violates any provision of the Chapter shall be subject to the criminal
penalties prescribed by Nevada statute for misdemeanor offenses.
   B.   Remedies under this Chapter are in addition to and do not supersede or
limit any and all other remedies, civil or criminal.
   C.   Acceptance by a permittee of a use permit granted pursuant to this
Chapter shall signify acceptance by the permittee of the penalty provisions of
this Chapter as if by contract or otherwise with County. (Ord. 328, 4-6-89)
CHAPTER 3
INFECTIOUS WASTE MANAGEMENT
SECTION:
6.03.01: Short Title
6.03.02: Findings of Fact
6.03.03: Purpose
6.03.04: Interpretation and Scope
6.03.05: Definitions
6.03.06: Obligations of Safety and Care
6.03.07: Professional Assistance for County Determinations
6.03.08: Infectious Waste Permit
6.03.09: Insurance Requirements
6.03.10: Infectious Waste Management Plan
6.03.11: Infectious Waste Facilities Siting
6.03.12: Disclaimer of Liability
6.03.13: Enforcement and Penalties
6.03.01: SHORT TITLE:
This Chapter may be referenced as the LYON COUNTY INFECTIOUS WASTES ORDINANCE.
(Ord. 329, 4-6-89)
6.03.02: FINDINGS OF FACT:
The Board of Lyon County Commissioners finds and declares:
   A.   Infectious wastes present in the community pose acute and chronic
health hazards to individuals who live and work in Lyon County.
   B.   Mishandling of these substances can result in widespread and serious
contamination of soil, air and surface and ground water.
   C.   Environmental cleanup of soil and water contaminated with infectious
wastes can cost many times more than the cost of properly containing and
handling the infectious wastes which can cause pollution. Such cleanup very
probably would exceed the County's financial capabilities, necessitating
control of infectious waste to minimize potential financial disaster.
   D.   It is the responsibility of all businesses and persons to fully protect
their workers and the public from infectious wastes they handle.
   E.   The County has the responsibility and the authority to plan to protect
human health and the environment from all significant adverse effects resulting
from the use and handling of infectious wastes. (Ord. 329, 4-6-1989)
6.03.03: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect human health and life, the
environment and property by placing on the handlers of infectious wastes the
obligation to prevent releases, emissions or discharges of all infectious
wastes.
It is the intent of the Board of Lyon County Commissioners that this chapter
shall recognize the County's responsibilities and its right to act to protect
public health, life and the environment from contamination by infectious
wastes. This chapter shall condition all handling of infectious wastes by
placing an obligation on the handler to prevent and/or control its emissions,
discharges and releases.
Further, it is the intent of the Board of Lyon County Commissioners to require
that infectious wastes handlers monitor emissions into the environment and keep
records on the effectiveness of infectious wastes management practices as a
means of enforcing their obligation. (Ord. 329, 4-6-1989)
6.03.04: INTERPRETATION AND SCOPE:
   A.   Conflicts With Other Laws: Whenever any provision of this chapter
conflicts with title 15, chapter 239 of this Code, or any other law, statute,
rule or regulation, the stricter shall prevail. (Ord. 329, 4-6-1989; amd. 1991
Code)
   B.   Existing Operations:
      1.   An infectious waste handler already operating a facility on the
effective date hereof shall be required to file an infectious waste management
plan within thirty (30) days.
      2.   All existing infectious wastes handlers shall be required to comply
with the terms of this chapter whenever any existing special use permit,
variance or other similar permit is renewed.
      3.   Existing infectious wastes handlers who presently are not required
to hold a special use permit or other such permit shall be required to comply
with the terms of this chapter within eight (8) years after its effective date.
(Ord. 329, 4-6-1989)
6.03.05: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
BUSINESS: An employer, self-employed individual, trust, firm, joint stock
company, corporation, partnership, association, city, district and the State of
Nevada or any department or agency thereof. For the purpose of this chapter a
business shall include both for profit and nonprofit business.
CONTROL: To mitigate, pretreat, remove or otherwise lessen the impact of an
emission, discharge or release of an infectious waste into the environment.
COUNTY: Lyon County, Nevada.
DISCHARGE: Includes, but is not limited to, any spilling, leaking, pumping,
pouring, emitting, emptying or dumping of an infectious waste into the
environment.
DISCLOSURE FORM: The written request for information prepared by the Lyon
County Department of Safety and Emergency Management and the Lyon County
Planning Department. The term includes the infectious waste permit application
form required by County.
EMIT: To discharge or release into the atmosphere, or through the atmosphere,
into the environment.
ENVIRONMENTAL AUDIT: The efforts undertaken to outline the handling of
infectious waste. An environmental audit is a precursor to and part of the
infectious wastes management plan required hereby.
FACILITY: Any building, structure, installation, equipment, pipe or pipeline or
any of the foregoing that are related by nature of contiguity, ownership, or
industrial process and used for the handling of infectious wastes.
HANDLE: To generate, treat, manufacture, produce, store, use, discharge,
release, transfer, dispose of, incinerate or emit in any fashion an infectious
waste.
HANDLER: An entity which generates, treats, manufactures, produces, stores,
uses, discharges, releases, transfers, transports, disposes of, incinerates or
emits in any fashion an infectious waste. An entity which otherwise would be a
"handler" who conducts any such activity pursuant to a pre-emptive State or
Federal law or regulation is not a "handler" for the purposes of this Chapter.
(Ord. 329, 4-6-89)
INFECTIOUS WASTE: Includes:
   A.   Equipment, instruments, utensils, blood and fomites of a disposable
nature from the patients or the rooms of patients suspected of having a
communicable disease;
   B.   Laboratory wastes such as pathological specimens (e.g. all tissues,
specimens of blood elements, excreta and secretions obtained from patients or
laboratory animals) and disposable fomites (any substance that may harbor or
transmit pathogenic organisms attendant thereto);
   C.   Surgical operating room pathologic specimens, blood and disposable
fomites attendant thereto and similar disposable materials from out-patient
areas and emergency rooms;
   D.   Dangerous drugs; and
   E.   Any other medical waste which may have been exposed to contagious or
infectious disease. (Ord. 331, 7-6-89)
LOAD: The amount of infectious waste transported by one truck, one towed
trailer, one railroad car or any other single vehicle to an infectious waste
area.
MONITOR: To perform a test, sample or otherwise check a discharge or handling
activity to ensure compliance with standards set pursuant to any provision of
this Chapter or any other law, rule or regulation regarding the handling of
infectious wastes.
OFFICER: Any representative of Lyon County whose official duties include
infectious waste control.
OFF-SITE: The substance is being handled at a site other than the location
where the substance was generated.
PERMIT: The infectious waste permit required pursuant to this Chapter.
RELEASE: Any spilling into, leaking into, pumping into, pouring into, emitting
into, emptying into, discharging into, injecting into, escape into, leaching
into, dumping into or onto or in any way disposing into the environment or any
abandonment of infectious wastes.
REMOVE:
   A.   The cleanup or removal of released infectious wastes or environmental
media contaminated by released infectious wastes;
   B.   Such actions as may be necessary to monitor, assess or evaluate the
release of the infectious wastes; or
   C.   The taking of other such actions as may be necessary to mitigate damage
to the public health and the environment.
STORAGE: Retention of infectious waste material by handler.
UNAUTHORIZED RELEASE: The release, discharge or emission of an infectious waste
that does not comply with this chapter and applicable Nevada or Federal law.
USER: Any business or person that, for business purposes, generates, produces,
manufactures, utilizes, treats, stores, transports or otherwise handles
infectious wastes subject to the permit requirements of this chapter. (Ord.
329, 4-6-1989)
6.03.06: OBLIGATIONS OF SAFETY AND CARE:
   A.   General Obligations: No person or business shall use or handle
infectious wastes in a manner which:
      1.   Violates any provisions of this chapter or any other local, Federal
or State Statute, code, rule or regulation relating to infectious wastes.
      2.   Harms or poses a significant risk of harm to the public health or
adverse impact to the environment.
   B.   Specific Obligations: Any person handling or intending to handle an
infectious waste shall obtain and keep current an infectious waste use permit.
A separate permit is required for each place or location where infectious
wastes will be handled. Ordinarily, such use permit will be issued pursuant to
this Code controlling planning and zoning 1 . In the event that the handler
does not have a fixed place or location where infectious wastes will be
handled, he is required to obtain a use permit for nonspecific location prior
to handling any waste pursuant to the County's health and safety police powers
rather than land use control authority. The use permit for nonspecific location
will be applied for, issued and controlled the same as a use permit for a
specific site. (Ord. 329, 4-6-1989)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 15 of this Code.
6.03.07: PROFESSIONAL ASSISTANCE FOR COUNTY DETERMINATIONS:
   A.   Whenever the approval or satisfaction of the County may be required by
this chapter for the design, monitoring, testing or other technical submittal
by an applicant or permit holder, the County may, in its discretion, at such
applicant's or permit holder's sole cost or expense, retain a suitably
qualified independent engineer, chemist, toxicologist or industrial hygienist
or other appropriate consultant, acceptable to the County, for the purpose of
evaluating and rendering a professional opinion regarding the adequacy of such
submittal to achieve the purposes of this chapter.
   B.   Prior to the County retaining any said independent expert, the County
shall consult with the applicant/permit holder regarding the expert to be
retained by County, the scope of the work to be done by said expert and a
reasonable estimate of the cost to be borne by the applicant/permittee. In the
event that a disagreement exists between the County staff and the applicant/
permittee regarding the expert to be utilized, the scope of the work to be done
by said expert or the cost to be assessed against applicant/permittee, the
issue shall be heard and decided by the County Commissioners. The County and
the applicant/permittee shall use their best efforts to cooperate and act
reasonably. The County shall be entitled to rely on such evaluation and/or
opinion of such consultant in making the relevant determinations provided for
in this chapter.
   C.   When County, in its discretion, reasonably determines that a
professional consultant shall be retained, an applicant or permit holder shall
forthwith deposit with the County such sum as may be necessary to pay for the
services of the expert. No new application shall be processed further until
such deposit is made. In the event that a consultant's services are required to
evaluate renewal of an existing infectious waste use permit, such permit shall
be suspended until the necessary deposit is made. (Ord. 329, 4-6-1989)
6.03.08: INFECTIOUS WASTE PERMIT:
   A.   Permit Required: As of the effective date hereof, a permit is required
for all new facilities where infectious wastes will be handled prior to the
construction of the facility.
   B.   Application for Permit; Procedures for Approval and Revocation:
      1.   An applicant for an infectious waste permit shall first pay to the
County a filing fee set by resolution of the Board of Lyon County
Commissioners. The filing fee shall be in a sum sufficient to reimburse the
County for all expenses which the County shall incur in processing the
application.
      2.   The application shall:
         a.   Be in a form prepared by the Lyon County Zoning Administrator and
the Lyon County Emergency Management Director and approved by the Board of Lyon
County Commissioners.
         b.   Not be accepted for filing until it is complete and all
investigations which may be required are complete.
      3.   After the application is accepted for filing by the Lyon County
Planning Department, County shall proceed as follows:
         a.   If the infectious waste permit is to be considered in conjunction
with an application for a special use permit or variance of land use or a
zoning change, the infectious waste permit pro- cess must be completed before
the special use permit/variance/ zoning change application is accepted for
filing; provided, however, if the applicant wishes to proceed simultaneously
with the infectious waste permit application and the land use application, the
County will accept both applications for filing if the applicant formally
waives, in writing, the provisions of NRS 278.315(2) or any other applicable
statute, rule or regulation limiting the period of time within which the County
may consider and process the land use application.
         b.   The application shall be placed on the agenda of the next
available meeting of the Lyon County Planning Commission for consideration and
adoption of a recommendation to the Board of Lyon County Commissioners.
If, in the discretion of the Planning Commission or at the request of the Board
of Lyon County Commissioners, it shall appear that the Lyon County Planning
Commission should hold a hearing in the area of the County which would be most
affected by the infectious waste permit, the Planning Commission is authorized
hereby to hold such a hearing.
         c.   The application, together with the recommendation of the Lyon
County Planning Commission, shall be forwarded to the Board of Lyon County
Commissioners for public hearing and decision.
         d.   The Board of Lyon County Commissioners may approve the infectious
waste permit application as requested, with modifications or conditions, or may
deny the application. Since it is the intention of Lyon County that infectious
wastes be regulated as "a pervasively regulated industry", denial of a permit
application may be based upon any reasonable finding of the County that
issuance of the permit would not be in the best interests of the County or any
of the residents thereof for reasons of health, safety, general welfare or any
other similar good and sufficient reason.
         e.   Any infectious waste permit issued pursuant to this Chapter shall
be subject to continuing review and may be terminated at any time if the permit
holder fails to comply with the terms of this Chapter and/or any special
conditions or modifications. In addition to continuing review, every infectious
waste permit shall be subject to automatic annual review to determine if the
permit should be continued, modified or revoked. No person or entity issued a
permit hereunder shall acquire any property right or other right to renewal or
continuation of the permit. Nonuse of a permit for six (6) months shall result
in automatic revocation.
If, in the opinion of the Lyon County Zoning Administrator, the office of the
District Attorney, the Board of Lyon County Commissioners or the Lyon County
Emergency Management Director, any infectious waste permit should be revoked,
those officers shall so notify the permit holder by legal notice, together with
notification of the date for a revocation hearing before the Board of Lyon
County Commissioners. The infectious waste permit shall be in a state of
suspension from the date of notification to the date of the revocation hearing,
and the permit holder shall not conduct any infectious waste operations during
such suspension. The revocation hearing shall be set for the first available
time and date and shall take precedence over other Board of Lyon County
Commissioners' agenda times, except for other public hearing previously
noticed.
At the conclusion of the public hearing on revocation, the Board of County
Commissioners may revoke the infectious waste permit, reinstate the infectious
waste permit with additional conditions or modifications or reinstate the
permit without additional conditions or modifications.
   C.   Investigative Costs: All applicants for infectious waste use permits
shall deposit, in advance, all costs of processing the application including
any travel costs or other expenses necessary in the County's sole discretion to
reasonably investigate the applicant or the proposed operation.
   D.   Nontransferability of Permit; Expiration: If a handler changes its
operations and begins handling a new infectious waste or if a new handler of
infectious wastes occupies a facility where another handler formerly operated,
then that handler is required to apply for a permit.
Every permit granted hereunder expires automatically with any significant
majority change of ownership or significant change in management of the
hazardous wastes handler entity. (Ord. 329, 4-6-89)
6.03.09: INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   General Requirements: All applicants for infectious waste use permits
issued or renewed after the effective date hereof shall be required to provide
liability insurance or other financial surety adequate to insure the public
against the risks reasonably to be anticipated as a result of the handling of
infectious wastes. Lyon County shall be named expressly as an additional
insured on all such policies.
The amount and type of insurance to be required shall be determined by the
County after evaluation of the risks to be insured against. All liability
policies shall be for a minimum of one year with a one year "tail" to cover
later claim. The one-year policy and the "tail" shall be renewed annually.
   B.   Costs for Analysts or Consultants: In the event that the County finds
it necessary to retain an independent analyst to assist the County to determine
the level of insurance to be required, the applicant shall deposit, in advance,
the estimated cost of obtaining such analyst or consultant.
   C.   Qualifications of Insurance Companies: All insurance shall be written
by companies authorized by the Nevada Insurance Commissioner to write policies
of that type in the State of Nevada.
   D.   Types of Insurance Required: The insurance to be required may include,
but is not limited to:
      1.   General liability.
      2.   Sudden and accidental.
      3.   Nonsudden and accidental.
      4.   Environmental pollution.
      5.   Off-premises damages.
      6.   SIIS.
      7.   Additional industrial health insurance.
      8.   Closure expense insurance.
   E.   Termination or Cancellation of Insurance: Any infectious wastes use
permit issued or renewed pursuant to this Chapter shall become void upon the
lapse, termination or cancellation of any insurance policy required hereunder.
(Ord. 329, 4-6-89)
6.03.10: INFECTIOUS WASTE MANAGEMENT PLAN:
   A.   General Requirements: Lyon County requires that each handler establish
an infectious waste management plan (IWMP), which plan must be filed at the
time of application for permit. A responsible person at the facility shall
prepare a comprehensive document that outlines policies and procedures for the
management of infectious waste (including infectious wastes with multiple
hazards). This requirement shall be consistent with the standard of the Joint
Commission on Accreditation of Hospitals (JCAH) which specifies a system "to
safely manage hazardous materials and wastes". This plan shall include the
following elements:
      1.   Waste management options.
      2.   Designation.
      3.   Segregation.
      4.   Packaging.
      5.   Storage.
      6.   Handling and transport.
      7.   Treatment.
      8.   Disposal.
      9.   Staff training.
      10.   Contingency planning.
Various options are available for the development of an infectious waste
management system. Management options for an individual facility shall be
selected on the basis of what is most appropriate for that particular facility.
Factors such as location, size and budget shall be taken into consideration.
The selected options shall be incorporated into a documented infectious waste
management plan. Therefore, a specific person at the generating facility shall
be responsible for implementation of the plan. This person shall have the
responsibility as well as the authority to make sure that the provisions of the
management plan are being followed.
In addition to the overall infectious waste management plan, handlers shall
specify detailed instructions for research and clinical laboratories within the
facility where infectious waste is generated.
   B.   Selection of Waste Management Options:
      1.   In an infectious waste management system, there are a number of
areas in which alternative options are available (e.g., treatment techniques
for the various types of infectious waste, types of treatment equipment,
treatment sites, various waste handling practices, etc.). Selection of
available options at a facility shall be determined by factors such as the
nature of the infectious waste, the quantity of infectious waste generated, the
availability of equipment for treatment on-site and off-site, regulatory
constraints and cost considerations.
Since treatment methods vary with waste type, the waste shall be evaluated and
categorized with regard to its potential to cause disease. Such characteristics
as chemical content, density, water content, bulk, etc., influence waste
treatment decisions. Facilities may use a combination of treatment techniques
for the different components of the infectious waste stream, e.g., steam
sterilization for laboratory cultures and incineration for pathological waste.
      2.   The quantity of each category of infectious waste handled at the
facility may also influence the method of treatment. If a selected option is
not suitable for treatment of all wastes, then other options shall be included
in the infectious waste management plan.
      3.   Handlers shall comply with all Federal, State and local regulations
pertaining to the transport of infectious waste and ensure that the waste is
being handled and treated properly at any off-site treatment facility.
   C.   Designation of Infectious Waste: The first element of an infectious
waste management plan is to specify which wastes are to be managed as
infectious waste. Lyon County has designated seven (7) categories of wastes as
infectious; however, other potentially contaminated wastes shall be evaluated
on an individual basis by an authorized responsible person or committee. The
following categories of waste are designated as infectious waste:
Waste Category Examples*
Waste Category                    Examples*
                                  Refers to Centers for Disease Control
Isolation wastes                  (CDC), Guidelines for Isolation
                                  Precautions in Hospitals, July 1983
                                  Specimens from medical and
                                  pathology laboratories
                                  Cultures and stocks of infectious agents
Cultures and stocks of            from clinical, research and industrial
infectious agents and             laboratories; disposable culture dishes
associated biologicals            and devices used to transfer, inoculate
                                  and mix cultures
                                  Wastes from production of biologicals
                                  Discarded live and attenuated vaccines
Human blood and blood             Waste blood, serum, plasma and blood
products                          products
                                  Tissues, organs, body parts, blood and
Pathological waste                body fluids removed during surgery,
                                  autopsy and biopsy
                                  Contaminated hypodermic needles,
Contaminated sharps               syringes, scalpel blades, Pasteur
                                  pipettes and broken glass
Contaminated animal carcasses,    Contaminated animal carcasses, body parts
carcasses, body parts and bedding and bedding of animals that were
                                  intentionally exposed to pathogens
 
* These materials are examples of wastes covered by each category. The
categories are not limited to these materials. An additional infectious waste
category consists of miscellaneous contaminated wastes. Wastes from patients
known to be infected with blood-borne diseases should be managed as infectious
waste (for example, dialysis waste from known hepatitis B patients).
 
Miscellaneous                       
Contaminated Wastes                Examples
                                   Soiled dressings, sponges, drapes, lavage
Wastes from surgery and autopsy    tubes, drainage sets, underpads and surgical
                                   gloves
Miscellaneous laboratory wastes    Specimen containers, slides and cover slips;
                                   disposable gloves, lab coats and aprons
Dialysis unit wastes and lab coats Tubing, filters, disposable sheets, towels,
                                   gloves, aprons
                                   Equipment used in patient care, medical
Contaminated equipment             laboratories, research and in the production
                                   and testing of certain pharmaceuticals
 
   D.   Infectious Waste Segregation: Infectious waste shall be separated from
the general waste stream to assure that these wastes receive appropriate
handling and treatment. Infectious waste shall be segregated from the general
waste stream at the point of generation (i.e., the point at which the material
becomes a waste).
Provision shall be made for infectious waste with multiple hazards. These
wastes shall be segregated from the general infectious waste stream when
additional or alternative treatment is required, or in cases where the wastes
are regulated under Federal or State rules.
Infectious waste shall be discarded directly into containers or plastic bags
which are clearly identifiable and distinguishable from the general waste
stream. Containers shall be marked with the universal biological hazard symbol.
Red or orange plastic bags shall be used to identify infectious waste.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b3e37bf04674f7b3738d62883ef5a27ed6aa631/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2329.gif]
 
The symbol is fluorescent orange or orange-red. The background may be any color
that provides sufficient contrast for the symbol to be clearly defined.
   E.   Packaging:
      1.   Lyon County requires:
         a.   Selection of packaging materials that are appropriate for the
type of waste:
            (1)   Plastic bags for many types of solid or semi-solid infectious
waste.
            (2)   Puncture-resistant containers for sharps.
            (3)   Bottles, flasks or tanks for liquids.
         b.   Use of packaging that maintains its integrity during storage and
transport.
         c.   Use of plastic bags that are impervious, tear resistant and
distinctive in color or markings.
         d.   Closing the top of each bag by folding or tying as appropriate
for the treatment or transport.
         e.   Placement of liquid wastes in capped or tightly stoppered bottles
or flasks.
         f.   No compaction of infectious waste or packaged infectious waste
before treatment.
      2.   Infectious waste shall be packaged in order to protect waste
handlers and the public from possible injury and disease that may result from
exposure to the waste. Infectious waste shall be contained from the point of
origin up to the point at which it is no longer infectious. Therefore, the
integrity of the packaging shall be preserved through handling, storage,
transportation and treatment.
      3.   The following factors shall be considered in selecting appropriate
packaging:
         a.   Waste type.
         b.   Handling and transport of the packaged waste (before treatment).
         c.   Treatment technique.
         d.   Special considerations for plastic bags.
         e.   Package identification.
   To provide adequate waste containment, packaging shall be appropriate for
the type of waste. For example, liquid infectious waste shall be placed in
capped or tightly stoppered bottles or flasks. Containment tanks shall be used
for large quantities of liquid waste. Solid or semi-solid wastes such as
pathological wastes, animal carcasses and laboratory wastes may be placed in
plastic bags.
      4.   Sharps shall be placed directly into impervious, rigid and puncture-
resistant containers to eliminate the hazard of physical injury. Clipping of
needles is not approved, unless the clipping device effectively contains needle
parts which might otherwise become airborne and pose a hazard.
      Authorized containers for sharps are glass, metal, rigid plastic, wood
and heavy cardboard; containers shall be compatible with selected treatment
processes. Sharps containers shall be marked with the universal biohazard
symbol and sealed before handling.
   F.   Storage:
      1.   Lyon County requires:
         a.   Minimizing storage time.
         b.   Proper packaging that ensure containment of infectious waste and
the exclusion of rodents and vermin.
         c.   Limited access to storage area.
         d.   Posting of universal biological hazard symbol on storage area
door, waste containers, freezers or refrigerators.
      2.   Infectious waste shall be treated as soon as possible after
generation. If treatment is not available because of insufficient capacity,
malfunction or unavailability of personnel, waste may be stored under
refrigeration for not more than three (3) days.
      3.   The packaging shall provide containment of the waste throughout the
waste management process. In addition, the packaging shall deter rodents and
vermin and other such vectors in disease transmission.
      4.   Storage temperature and duration must be controlled to prevent
microbial growth and odors typically associated with wastes containing decaying
organic matter.
      5.   The storage area shall be a specially designated area located at or
near the treatment site. The storage area shall have limited access that
restricts the entry of unauthorized personnel. It shall be kept free of rodents
and vermin. In addition,the universal biohazard lablel shall be posted where
appropriate (e.g., doors, waste containers, refrigerators and freezers).
   G.   Handling and Transport:
      1.   General Requirements:
         a.   Lyon County requires:
            (1) Avoidance of mechanical loading devices which may rupture
packaged wastes.
            (2) Frequent disinfection of carts used to transfer wastes within
the facility.
            (3) Placement of all infectious waste into rigid or semi-rigid
containers before transport off-site.
            (4) Transport of infectious waste in closed, leakproof trucks or
dumpsters.
         b.   If the waste is to be moved within the facility for treatment or
storage, packaging shall effectively contain the waste. If necessary, multiple
packaging shall be used to preserve the integrity of the bags and to ensure
containment of the waste. Placing single-bagged waste within a rigid or semi-
rigid container such as a bucket, box or carton is authorized. Plastic bags may
be used as liners for such containers. Another authorized practice is double-
bagging, that is, placing the sealed plastic bag within another bag which is
subsequently sealed. Containers of sharps and liquids may be placed within
other containers (e.g., boxes) for ease of handling. The containers shall be
covered with secure lids during transport and storage. Lids may be opened
during the treatment process.
      2.   Plastic Bags:
         a.   Whenever plastic bags of infectious waste are handled and
especially when they are transferred, care shall be exercised to prevent
tearing of the bags. Plastic bags containing infectious waste shall not be
transported through a chute or dumbwaiter. Mechanical devices shall not be used
for transport or loading of plastic bags containing these wastes. Authorized
practices for handling plastic bags include loading by hand, transporting the
loaded dumpster to minimize handling and placing the plastic bags within rigid
or semi-rigid containers before handling and transport.
         b.   Two (2) different criteria shall be used to judge the suitability
of a plastic bag: its thickness and its durability, as evaluated by the ASTM
dart test. Therefore, procurement shall be based on one or both of these
standards. The important consideration is the selection of tear-resistant
plastic bags that maintain their integrity (at least until the waste is
treated) and, thus, prevent dispersal of infectious agents into the
environment.
      3.   Transporting Off-Site: When infectious waste is transported off-site
for treatment, plastic bags, single or double, shall be placed within rigid or
semi-rigid containers to maintain the integrity of the packaging and prevent
spillage. Depending on the management system, these containers may be recycled
or disposed of. Recycled containers (such as heavy plastic barrels) which are
used repeatedly for transport and treatment of bagged waste shall be
disinfected after each use.
      4.   Compaction of Waste: Infectious waste shall not be compacted prior
to treatment because compacting may actually disperse the infectious waste by
destroying the integrity of the packaging. In addition, compaction may
interfere with the effectiveness of the treatment process.
      5.   Containers Appropriate for Type of Process: Containers to be
incinerated shall be combustible. Containers used in steam sterilization shall
allow steam penetration and evacuation of air. Packaging technique shall be
suitable for the application processes.
      6.   Package Identification: Packaged infectious waste shall be easily
identifiable. This shall be accomplished by the use of containers with the
distinctive red or orange color that indicates biohazardous material and the
use of the universal biohazard symbol on all infectious waste packages and
containers. The identification system shall include clear labelling to indicate
all hazards that are present in the waste.
      The use of appropriate hazard symbols shall be in accordance with
municipal, State and Federal regulations.
      7.   Requirements for Safe Transport: There are two (2) factors which
shall be satisfied to ensure safe transport of infectious waste both within the
facility and to the treatment facility:
         a.   Proper packaging is required to ensure containment of the waste.
         b.   Mechanical devices shall not be used to transfer or load
infectious waste to avoid rupturing of the packaging and dissemination of the
waste.
Carts are acceptable for moving packaged infectious waste within the facility.
Carts shall be disinfected frequently, and carts used to transport infectious
waste shall not be used for other materials prior to decontamination.
   H.   Treatment of Infectious Waste: For the purposes of this Chapter, Lyon
County defines "treatment" as any method, technique or process designed to
change the biological character or composition of waste.
   Lyon County requires:
      1.   Establishing standard operating procedures for each process used for
treating infectious waste.
      2.   Monitoring of all treatment processes to assure efficient and
effective treatment.
      3.   Use of biological indicators to monitor treatment (other indicators
may be used; provided, that their effectiveness has been successfully
demonstrated).
The purpose of treating infectious waste is to reduce the hazard associated
with the presence of infectious agents. Treatment shall reduce or eliminate
pathogens (present in the waste) so that waste no longer poses a hazard to
persons who may be exposed to it.
   I.   Disposal of Treated Waste: Infectious waste which has been effectively
treated is no longer biologically hazardous and may be mixed with and disposed
of as ordinary waste; provided, the waste does not pose other hazards that are
subject to Federal, State or local regulations.
   Needles and syringes shall be rendered nonusable before disposal; treated
sharps may be ground up, incinerated or compacted; for aesthetic reasons, body
parts shall not be recognizable when disposed of.
   J.   Staff Training: Training is required to maintain personnel awareness of
the potential hazards posed by infectious wastes and to reinforce waste
management policies and procedures that are detailed in the infectious waste
management plan.
   K.   Contingency Planning: As part of the infectious waste management plan,
all handlers shall prepare contingency plans to deal with spills and
unauthorized emission discharges and releases of infectious waste.
(Ord. 329, 4-6-89)
6.03.11: INFECTIOUS WASTE FACILITIES SITING:
   A.   Any generator of infectious waste may build and operate an infectious
waste treatment facility, including an appropriate infectious waste
incinerator, in conjunction with any hospital, laboratory, clinic or similar
facility; provided, any such infectious waste treatment facility shall have a
capacity not greater than that required to treat or incinerate the infectious
waste generated at that hospital, laboratory, clinic, etc.
   B.   Other than set forth above, any stationary facility for the treatment,
incineration or disposal of infectious waste, including treatment, incinerator
or disposal in tanks, is subject to the siting criteria set forth in NAC
444.8456.
   C.   A portable facility for the treatment, incineration or transfer of
infectious waste is subject to the siting requirements and considerations set
forth in NRS 278.020. (Ord. 329, 4-6-89)
6.03.12: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of protection required by this Chapter is considered reasonable for
regulatory purposes. The standards set forth herein are minimum standards, and
this Chapter does not imply that compliance will ensure that there will be no
unauthorized discharge of an infectious waste. This Chapter shall not create
liability on the part of the County or any officer or employee thereof for any
damages that result from reliance on this Chapter or any administrative
decision lawfully made hereunder. All infectious wastes handlers are advised to
determine to their own satisfaction the level of protection in addition to that
required by this Chapter necessary or desirable to ensure that there is no risk
or damage to public health or the environment. Mere compliance with this
Chapter does not release the handler from civil liability to others for damages
resulting from his use of infectious waste. (Ord. 329, 4-6-89)
6.03.13: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Any infectious waste handler who intentionally or negligently violates
any of the provisions of this Chapter may:
      1.   Be denied an infectious waste use permit by the County; or
      2.   Have an infectious waste use permit revoked.
      3.   Be ordered by an enforcement officer to cease operations forthwith
or have the infectious waste use permit suspended pending a formal hearing
before the Board of County Commissioners or a designated hearing officer.
      4.   Be subject to the following penalties:
         a.   Administrative Penalties: Upon a finding by the County that an
infectious waste handler has violated any provision of this Chapter, the County
may levy an administrative fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day for
each violation.
         b.   Civil Penalties: Any infectious waste handler who intentionally
or negligently violates any provision of this Chapter or fails to comply with
any order issued hereunder shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed
five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day for each violation which shall be
assessed and recovered in a civil action brought in the name of the County by
the District Attorney. In any civil action brought pursuant hereto, in which
the County prevails, the court shall determine and impose reasonable costs,
including all attorney fees permissible under Nevada law, incurred by the
County in the investigation and prosecution of the action.
         c.   Criminal Penalties: Any person or business which intentionally
violates any provision of the Chapter shall be subject to the criminal
penalties prescribed by Nevada statute for misdemeanor offenses.
   B.   Remedies under this Chapter are in addition to and do not supersede or
limit any and all other remedies, civil or criminal.
   C.   Acceptance by a permittee of a use permit granted pursuant to this
Chapter shall signify acceptance by the permittee of the penalty provisions of
this Chapter as if by contract or otherwise with the County. (Ord. 329, 4-6-89)
CHAPTER 4
BUSINESSES HANDLING HAZARDOUS AND TOXIC MATERIALS 1
SECTION:
6.04.01: Findings Of Fact; Purpose
6.04.02: Definitions
6.04.03: Specific Obligations
6.04.04: Emergency Notification
6.04.05: Siting Criteria
6.04.06: Compliance With Other Regulations
6.04.07: Inspections
6.04.08: Violations And Penalties
 
Notes
1 1. See chapters 1, 2 and 3 of this title for waste disposal regulations.
6.04.01: FINDINGS OF FACT; PURPOSE:
The U.S. government has adopted comprehensive requirements through the adoption
of laws and regulations requiring businesses to report to local officials and
fire officials certain information regarding extremely hazardous substances,
hazardous chemicals and toxic chemicals being handled by them.
Lyon County and various Fire Departments located within the County have limited
resources. The information required is necessary to Lyon County and the various
Fire Departments to allow them to properly plan for emergencies.
In order to ensure compliance, Lyon County, through the adoption of the
provisions of this chapter, intends to monitor and enforce compliance with the
existing Federal reporting requirements. (Ord. 330, 4-6-1989)
6.04.02: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
BUSINESS: An employer, self-employed individual, trust, firm, joint stock
company, corporation, partnership, association, city, district and the State of
Nevada, or any department or agency thereof. For the purpose of this chapter, a
"business" shall include both for profit and nonprofit businesses.
COUNTY: Lyon County, Nevada.
DISCHARGE: Includes, but is not limited to, any spilling, leaking, pumping,
pouring, emitting, emptying or dumping of a hazardous material into the
environment.
EMERGENCY RESPONSE PLAN: A written plan setting forth the following:
   A.   Identification of facilities and hazardous materials transportation
routes;
   B.   Emergency response procedures, on site and off site;
   C.   Designation of a facility coordinator(s) to implement the plan;
   D.   Emergency notification procedures;
   E.   Methods for determining the occurrence of a discharge and the probable
affected area and population;
   F.   Description of industry emergency equipment and facilities and the
identity of persons responsible for them;
   G.   Evacuation plans;
   H.   Description and schedules of a training program for emergency response
to chemical emergencies; and
   I.   Methods and schedules for exercising emergency response plans.
EXTREMELY HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES: Those substances in quantities above the
threshold planning quantities as listed by Federal Environmental Protection
Agency as extremely hazardous substances in the Federal register, including any
amendments or updates to said lists.
FACILITY: Any building, structure, installation, equipment, pipe or pipeline or
any of the foregoing that are related by nature of contiguity, ownership or
industrial process and used for the handling of hazardous materials.
HANDLE: To generate, treat, manufacture, produce, store, use, discharge,
release, transfer, dispose of, incinerate or emit in any fashion a hazardous
material.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL: All substances meeting the criteria of "extremely hazardous
substance", "hazardous substances" or "toxic chemicals".
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES: The following substances, when held in quantities
requiring notification under SARA Title III, sections 311 and 312.
   A.   Those substances and chemicals in the OSHA Hazard Communication
Standard;
   B.   Those substances which meet the performance- based classification
criteria for hazard determination under the OSHA Hazard Communication Standard;
and
   C.   Federal environmental list of hazardous substances as defined in the
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Conservation and Liability Act (CERCLA).
MATERIAL SAFETY DATA SHEETS: A. Chemical identity (by OSHA definition as
defined by OSHA in the Standard).
   B.   Physical and chemical characteristics.
   C.   Physical hazards.
   D.   Health hazards, including signs and symptoms of exposure and any
medical conditions generally recognized as being aggravated by exposure to the
chemical.
   E.   Primary route(s) of exposure.
   F.   The OSHA PEL, ACGIH TLV and any other exposure limit used or
recommended by the chemical manufacturer, importer or employer preparing the
MSDS.
   G.   Whether it is deemed under the Standard to be a carcinogen.
   H.   Any generally applicable precautions for safe handling and use known to
the person preparing the MSDS.
   I.   Any generally applicable control measures known to the person preparing
the MSDS.
   J.   Emergency and first aid procedures.
   K.   Date of preparation or latest revision.
   L.   The name, address, and telephone number of a responsible party who can
provide additional information on the chemical and appropriate emergency
procedures if necessary.
TOXIC CHEMICALS: Chemicals specified by Congress in the Emergency Planning and
Community Right-to-Know Act and held in amounts requiring notification under
SARA Title III, section 313. (Ord. 330, 4-6-89)
6.04.03: SPECIFIC OBLIGATIONS:
Any business handling extremely hazardous substances, hazardous substances and
toxic chemicals shall, during March of each year, provide, in writing, to the
Lyon County Safety Officer and all Fire Departments serving the area in which
the facility is located the following information:
   A.   Material safety data sheets for all extremely hazardous substances,
hazardous substances and toxic chemicals located at facilities within the
County.
   B.   An emergency response plan.
All information required shall be kept current by the responsible business. In
the event that there is no change in the required information, the person may
so indicate, in writing, in lieu of filing new material safety data sheets or
an emergency response plan. (Ord. 354, 5-2-1991)
6.04.04: EMERGENCY NOTIFICATION:
   A.   If a facility handles a hazardous material, it must immediately notify
Lyon County if there is a release of a listed hazardous material that exceeds
the reportable quantity for that substance as established by SARA title III,
section 304.
   B.   Emergency notification shall be given as soon as practicable, but in no
event longer than one hour after the release is discovered. Notice of a release
may be made by telephone, radio or in person and shall be made to the Lyon
County Sheriff's Office Dispatch Center and the Lyon County Safety Officer.
   C.   The emergency notification shall include:
      1.   The chemical name;
      2.   An indication of whether the substance is an extremely hazardous
substance;
      3.   An estimate of the quantity released into the environment;
      4.   The time and duration of the release;
      5.   The medium into which the release occurred;
      6.   Any known or anticipated acute or chronic health risks associated
with the emergency and, where appropriate, advice regarding medical attention
necessary for exposed individuals;
      7.   Proper precautions such as evacuation; and
      8.   The name and telephone number of a contact person.
In the event all of the above required information is not immediately
available, the responsible party shall make the immediate notification of the
available information, with the remainder of the information being provided
immediately when it becomes available. (Ord. 330, 4-6-1989)
6.04.05: SITING CRITERIA:
All handlers of hazardous materials shall comply with the applicable
requirements of the zoning and special use permit requirements 1 . (Ord. 330,
4-6-1989)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 15 of this Code.
6.04.06: COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER REGULATIONS:
The obligations of all businesses required under this chapter shall be in
addition to any other requirements established by law, ordinance or regulation
by any Federal, State or local entity. Compliance with this chapter shall not
relieve the responsible party or entity from any other requirements. (Ord. 330,
4-6-1989)
6.04.07: INSPECTIONS:
The Lyon County Emergency Management Director is hereby authorized to enter and
inspect all businesses for compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Said
inspection shall include the right to inspect and copy all records and
documents relating to receiving, shipping, storage and use of hazardous
materials in Lyon County. (Ord. 356, 5-16-1991)
6.04.08: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
All violations of this chapter shall be punishable as for a misdemeanor under
State law. In addition, any violation shall be considered a substantial
violation of the business license 1 , special use permit 3 , or hazardous waste
permit 4 of the responsible business. (Ord. 330, 4-6-1989)
 
Notes
1 2. See title 5, chapter 1 of this Code.
3 3. See subsection
  15.230.01C of this Code.
4 4. See chapter 2 of this title.
CHAPTER 5
MEDICAL CARE ELIGIBILITY STANDARDS
SECTION:
6.05.01: Definitions
6.05.02: Director of County Welfare Department
6.05.03: Medical Care Eligibility Requirements and Restrictions
6.05.04: Extent of County Medical Care
6.05.05: Fraud
6.05.06: Rules and Regulations
6.05.07: Denial of Medical or Financial Assistance; Appeals
6.05.01: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this Section:
COMMISSIONERS: The Board of Lyon County Commissioners.
DIRECTOR: The Director of the Lyon County Welfare Department.
WELFARE DEPARTMENT: The Lyon County Department of Welfare. (Ord. 357, 5-16-91)
6.05.02: DIRECTOR OF COUNTY WELFARE DEPARTMENT:
A Director shall be appointed by the Commissioners who, under the direct
supervision of the Commissioners, shall discharge all those duties and
administer all such programs as the Commissioners may, from time to time,
delegate to the Director. Such duties and administrative responsibilities shall
be restricted to those which, under the various laws of the State pertaining to
welfare matters, are made the responsibility of the counties and which can be
lawfully delegated by the Board of County Commissioners to appointed or elected
officials of such counties. The Director shall serve at the will of the
Commissioners and at a salary to be fixed by them.
The Director is expressly authorized to exercise those powers and perform those
duties granted to the Commissioners under NRS 428.070 in the performance of his
duties delegated in this Section. (Ord. 357, 5-16-91)
6.05.03: MEDICAL CARE ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   General Requirements: A person is eligible for County medical care if:
      1.   He is in need of medical care;
      2.   Does not have sufficient funds, as determined in accordance with the
provisions of this Chapter, to pay for all or part of his medical care;
      3.   Is not eligible for a State or Federal medical care program or
private medical insurance.
   B.   Income Test: A person does not have sufficient funds if his average net
monthly income and number of persons dependent upon that income are as set
forth in the following schedule:
Number of Persons Dependent Upon Schedule of Monthly Net
Income of Patient or Responsible Net Income
Responsible Relative
1                                Less than $438.00
2                                Less than 588.00
3                                Less than 738.00
4                                Less than 888.00
5                                Less than 1,138.00
6                                Less than 1,288.00
 
   For each additional person over 6, there shall be added $150.00 to the above
limit of income.
   C.   Computation of Income: For the purpose of the foregoing table, the
following deductions for regular monthly payments shall be allowed on:
      1.   Existing medical bills.
      2.   Purchase of prosthetic devices prescribed by a physician.
      3.   Medical and hospital insurance premiums.
      4.   The cost of living away from home for any member of the family due
to illness, to be allowed on an individual basis and calculated upon the
difference between the cost so incurred and the cost which would have been
incurred if the person remained at home.
      5.   Alimony and child support; provided, that such payment is paid to a
person not included as one of the "persons dependent on income of patient or
responsible relative" in the above table.
      6.   Funeral expenses not to exceed one thousand five hundred dollars
($1,500.00) for any one funeral.
      7.   Necessary costs for child care required to maintain employment.
      8.   Necessary expenses of employment.
      9.   Involuntary deductions from income, such as income tax, social
security contributions and retirement fund payments.
      10.   For self-employed persons, deductions of expenses incurred in the
conduct of business as allowed by Federal income tax laws.
   D.   Other Eligibility Factors: If a person does not meet the income test in
subsection B of this Section, he may be eligible if it is determined by the
Director that he does not have sufficient funds to pay for all or part of his
medical care by reason of the following other factors:
      1.   Nature of the disability; effect of the disability, if any, on
future income production.
      2.   Estimated length of hospitalization.
      3.   Estimated elapsed time before employed person may return to work.
   E.   Effect of Property Ownership: Even if a person does meet other tests
for eligibility, he may be ineligible if he owns property; except, that he may:
      1.   Own a personally occupied residence having an assessed valuation not
in excess of the amount to be set forth in the rules and regulations to be
adopted pursuant to Section 6.05.06 of this Chapter.
      2.   Own personal property with a quick sale or cash value not in excess
of the amount to be set forth in the rules and regulations to be adopted
pursuant to Section 6.05.06 of this Chapter.
      3.   As herein provided, a lien in favor of the Welfare Department on
real property so owned by the person may be imposed as a condition to
certification of an applicant for medical care at County expense. (Ord. 357, 5-
16-91)
6.05.04: EXTENT OF COUNTY MEDICAL CARE:
Medical care shall be rendered to eligible persons to the extent and subject to
the conditions set forth in this Section.
   A.   Care Facilities: Medical care, as is necessary for the health and
safety of an eligible person, shall be provided at South Lyon Community
Hospital (formerly known as Lyon Health Center) and may be rendered at places
other than South Lyon Community Hospital only upon approval of the Welfare
Department.
   B.   Reimbursement to County: As a condition of such care, an eligible
person shall reimburse the County in accordance with the following rules:
      1.   The applicant or other responsible party will be required to
reimburse the Welfare Department for that portion of the medical expenses that
fall within his financial ability;
      2.   If a person who has received care acquires property or otherwise
ceases to be eligible, the cost of care shall be a charge against him to the
extent such cost exceeds his eligibility;
      3.   The County shall render to a person who has been provided care in a
County hospital a statement setting forth the charges upon which its claim for
reimbursement is based; and
      4.   No interest or carrying charge shall be charged in connection with
any debt incurred for County hospital care.
   C.   Liens:
      1.   Lien Imposed; Exceptions: If it is determined by the Welfare
Department to be in the best interest of the County, a lien against the
property of the eligible person or responsible relative may be required. Such a
lien shall not be enforced against the home of the eligible person or his
responsible relative:
         a.   During his lifetime or that of his spouse.
         b.   During the lifetime of any dependent adult child who resides in
the home and who is incapable of self-support because of mental or physical
disability.
      2.   Release of Lien: Any lien taken by the County for County hospital
care shall be released immediately when the amount owing the County for that
care is paid.
      3.   Transfer of Lien: If a person against whose home a lien has been
imposed for County hospital care desires to acquire a different home, the
County may release its lien against the original home and transfer it to the
new home if its security will not thereby be impaired.
      4.   Home Improvements; Additions to Lien: If the person desires to
borrow money for the purpose of making improvements to his home, using his home
as security, the County may subordinate its lien to the mortgage or other
security interest given for the loan if its security will not thereby be
impaired.
   D.   Responsible Relatives: The cost of care rendered to a person is a
charge against the responsible relative of that person in accordance with the
following rules:
      1.   A responsible relative is a spouse, parent, adult children and adult
brothers and sisters of that person to whom aid is rendered; and
      2.   The cost of such care shall not be a charge against a responsible
relative who is a recipient of public assistance or is eligible for a Federal
or State medical care program.
   E.   Installment Payments: If the Director deems it appropriate, a person
against whom the cost of care is a charge may pay in installments in such
amounts and at such intervals as approved by the Director; except, that the
term of such installment arrangement shall not exceed three (3) years. (Ord.
357, 5-16-91)
6.05.05: FRAUD:
In cases where it appears the applicant or responsible relative has conveyed
away substantial property prior to application or any time thereafter, the
Welfare Department shall determine as soon as possible whether such transfer
was for a fair and adequate consideration and whether or not the transfer in
effect makes the person a public charge. In such a case, the County may then
proceed against responsible relatives or other parties involved to recover the
expenses incurred by the County. (Ord. 357, 5-16-91)
6.05.06: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The Welfare Department shall have the duty and the right to establish such
other rules and regulations or to amend existing rules and regulations as it
may, from time to time, find necessary in order to give the provisions of this
Chapter full force and effect. Such new rules and regulations shall have the
force and effect of law when their adoption is ordered by the Commissioners and
placed on file with the Clerk thereof. (Ord. 357, 5-16-91)
6.05.07: DENIAL OF MEDICAL OR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE; APPEALS:
   A.   Notice of Denial: A person who is denied medical or financial
assistance and his representative must be notified, in writing, within fifteen
(15) days from the date of denial by personal service or certified mail setting
forth the factual basis for the denial and the applicable regulation.
   B.   Appeals:
      1.   A person may appeal the denial within thirty (30) days of the date
written notice was served or mailed, to the commissioners, and shall have the
right to be represented in such appeal by his counsel or agents.
      2.   A person aggrieved by the final decision of the commissioners may,
within thirty (30) days after the date on which the written notice of the
decision is served or mailed, petition the district court to review the
decision. The court shall review the decision on the record of the case before
the commissioners, a copy of which must be certified as correct by the chairman
of the commissioners and filed with the court as part of its answer to the
petition. The procedure set forth in Nevada Revised Statutes 428.093 shall
govern the review by the district court of the petition of the aggrieved party.
(Ord. 357, 5-16-1991)
TITLE 7
POLICE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
ANIMALS AND ANIMAL SERVICES
SECTION:
7.01.01: Definitions
7.01.02: Jurisdiction
7.01.03: Animal Services Officer
7.01.04: Dogs; Licensing Requirements; Tags, Permits And Fees
7.01.05: Prohibited Acts And Conditions
7.01.06: Impoundment Of Dogs On Private Property
7.01.07: Rabies Control
7.01.08: Businesses That Sell Or Board Dogs For Profit Or Act As A Breeder
7.01.09: Disposition Of Revenue
7.01.10: Penalty
7.01.01: DEFINITIONS:
ADEQUATE FEED: The provision at suitable intervals for the species, of a
quantity of wholesome foodstuff for the species, physical condition and age,
sufficient to maintain an adequate level of nutrition in the animal, such
foodstuff to be served in a clean receptacle, dish or container.
ADEQUATE SHELTER: A physical structure or place suitable for maintaining the
health and life of an animal.
ADEQUATE WATER: An adequate supply of clean, fresh, potable water provided at
suitable intervals for the species, physical condition and age of the animal
provided at least once every twelve (12) hours.
ANIMAL SERVICES OFFICER: The person or persons hired by Lyon County for the
purpose of enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and state laws
relating to animals and animal control.
AT LARGE: Any place off the premises of the owner or person having custody and
control of a dog and not accompanied by and under the control of the owner or
any other responsible person by physical restraint or signal command or voice
command.
BIG GAME ANIMAL: Any species of prong horned antelope, bear, deer, mountain
goat, mountain lion, bighorn sheep or elk which runs free in the wild.
BOARD: The board of county commissioners for Lyon County.
BREEDER: A dealer, operator, or other person who is responsible for the
operation of a commercial establishment engaged in the business of breeding
dogs or cats for sale or trade. The term does not include a person who breeds
dogs or cats as a hobby.
COUNTY: Lyon County, a political subdivision of the state of Nevada.
DEALER: A person who, for compensation or profit, buys, sells, breeds, trades
or imports cats or dogs for resale.
ESTRAY HORSE: Any horse running at large upon public or private lands in the
county whose owner is unknown in the section where the animal is found.
KENNEL:
Breeder's Kennel: Any enclosure, premises, building, structure, lot or area
where more than three (3) dogs of a recognized registered breed over six (6)
months of age are kept, harbored or maintained as follows:
   A.   For breeding;
   B.   For showing in recognized dog shows, field or obedience trials;
   C.   For working or hunting; or
   D.   For improving the variety or breed in temperament or conformation with
a view to exhibition in shows or trials or for use as working dogs in hunting.
Commercial Kennel: Any enclosure, premises, building, structure, lot or area
where more than three (3) dogs over six (6) months of age are kept, harbored or
maintained for commercial purposes.
LICENSED VETERINARIAN: A doctor of veterinary medicine currently licensed in
Nevada to practice veterinary medicine.
OPERATOR: A person responsible for the operation of:
   A.   A cattery 1 , kennel or commercial establishment engaged in the
business of selling animals; or
   B.   An animal shelter 2 .
OWNER: Any person owning, keeping or harboring a dog or any other animal
regulated by this chapter.
POUND: Any facility designated by the board for receiving and holding dogs or
any other animal regulated by this chapter.
RABIES CONTROL AUTHORITY: The person(s) designated by the board to administer
the rabies control provisions of this chapter.
SERVICE ANIMAL: An animal which has been or is being trained to provide a
specialized service to a person with a disability.
VICIOUS OR DANGEROUS TENDENCIES: An animal possesses vicious or dangerous
tendencies if the animal has bitten, attempted to bite, injured or attempted to
injure any person or other animal.
WILD HORSE: Any horse, mare or colt which is unbranded and unclaimed and lives
on public land. (Ord. 475, 3-18-2004, eff. 4-9-2004; amd. Ord. 563, 1-7-2013)
 
Notes
1 1. As defined in NRS 574.
2 2. As defined in NRS 574.
7.01.02: JURISDICTION:
The terms of this chapter shall apply in all unincorporated areas within Lyon
County. (Ord. 475, 3-18-2004, eff. 4-9-2004)
7.01.03: ANIMAL SERVICES OFFICER:
   A.   Authority: The animal services officer is empowered to:
      1.   Enforce all provisions of this chapter, including the power to issue
misdemeanor citations for violations of this chapter and related matters.
      2.   Take into custody and safely keep any animal(s) found to be in
violation of the provisions of this chapter.
      3.   Remove from any property any animal(s) when necessary for the
protection of the animal(s) or the general public.
   B.   Interference With Animal Services Officer: No person shall interfere
with or resist any animal services officer while engaged in the performance of
their duties pertaining to the enforcement of this chapter.
   C.   Consult With State Veterinarian: In the performance of his/her duties,
the animal services officer and his/her authorized representative will consult
with the state veterinarian or their representatives concerning the type and
method of use of all drugs to be utilized. (Ord. 475, 3-18-2004, eff. 4-9-2004)
7.01.04: DOGS; LICENSING REQUIREMENTS; TAGS, PERMITS AND FEES:
   A.   License Requirements: All dogs over the age of six (6) months in Lyon
County and owned by a resident of Lyon County shall be licensed, except for
dogs being used for the purpose of herding livestock or the protection of
livestock against predators on farm or ranch property designated as greenbelt
by the assessor, and dogs that are being temporarily housed in kennels or
animal shelters or in animal hospitals operated by a licensed veterinarian.
      1.   Dog Licenses:
         a.   License And Tag: Upon presentation of a certificate of rabies
vaccination and the payment of the license fee, the Lyon County animal services
division or a designated representative shall issue to the owner a license
receipt and metallic tag for each dog licensed. The metallic tags shall be worn
by the licensed dog on a visible collar. Show dogs while being shown and
working dogs while in the field are exempt from wearing the tag.
No penalty shall be imposed if:
            (1)   The license is obtained within thirty (30) days of expiration
of current license.
            (2)   The license is obtained within thirty (30) days after moving
into the county.
            (3)   The license is obtained within thirty (30) days after a
change of ownership.
If the license is not purchased within such time period, the owner shall pay,
in addition to the regular license fee, a penalty of one hundred percent
(100%).
         b.   License Fees: The fees for dog licenses and tags, other than dogs
housed in a kennel, shall be set by resolution of the board of Lyon County
commissioners. The fees shall be for each full year (12 months). At no time can
the expiration date of the license sold extend past the date that the rabies
expired.
   B.   Animal Services Tags, Permits And Fees:
      1.   Every person, firm or corporation owning, operating or maintaining a
commercial kennel or any business involving the keeping of any animal including
the keeping of animals for the purpose of breeding, for the purpose of medical
treatment, for the purpose of care for hire, for sale or for the purpose of
grooming shall first obtain a license from Lyon County to operate said business
or commercial kennel, as provided for in this title and title 5 of this code,
but the granting of said license shall be subject to the approval, denial, or
revocation by the animal services supervisor. Such business license shall at
all times be subject to the planning and zoning regulations of Lyon County.
Such licenses must be renewed annually and exempt that person from having to
obtain other licenses required in this chapter.
      2.   No person shall keep more than three (3) canine animals over six (6)
months of age at any place, or on any premises, or in any one residence without
first obtaining a permit from the animal services supervisor. Such permit fee
shall be set by the board of commissioners, and is in addition to the license
fee required, per year per dog kept over three (3) in number. License fees for
service dogs and dogs owned by persons classified as senior citizens shall be
waived. Such permit shall at all times be subject to the planning and zoning
regulations of Lyon County.
      3.   The animal services supervisor in approving, denying or revoking any
license and permit required in subsections B1 and B2 of this section shall
consider the following:
         a.   The animal services supervisor shall determine if the person
requesting a license or permit can keep or maintain any animal or animals so as
to not create a public nuisance.
         b.   The animal services supervisor shall determine if the person
requesting a license or permit can keep or maintain the animal or animals in
compliance with all the requirements of this chapter and all other ordinances
of Lyon County, and the laws of the state of Nevada.
Every person must hold a license for every dog he or she owns, keeps, harbors
or possesses. The owner of any dog over the age of six (6) months shall, within
thirty (30) days after obtaining the dog or first bringing said dog into Lyon
County, obtain and continuously maintain for said dog a current and valid
animal services tag issued by the Lyon County animal services department.
   C.   Impoundment And Redemption Provisions 1 :
      1.   Authority To Impound: The animal services officer or his authorized
representatives and every peace officer, while on duty, are authorized to take
up, seize and impound:
         a.   Subject to the provisions of this chapter, all dogs found
trespassing on private property or running at large on any street, alley,
court, park, school playground, right of way or private street open for use to
the general public.
         b.   All dogs in the county which are endangering private or public
property, public safety, themselves or other animals.
      2.   Notice Of Impoundment; Disposition Of Unclaimed Dogs:
         a.   Where the identity of the owner of an impounded dog is
discovered, such owner shall be given notice of the impoundment. Seven (7) days
after written notice is mailed, or actual notice is given, the impounded dog
may be destroyed in a humane manner under the direction of the animal services
officer; provided however, any such dog authorized for destruction may be
released for adoption in accordance with applicable law.
         b.   In the event the identity of the owner of an impounded dog cannot
be ascertained and notice given, then such dog may be disposed of pursuant to
this subsection C five (5) days after impoundment.
      3.   Reclaiming Impounded Dogs:
         a.   The owner or person entitled to the custody or possession of any
impounded dog may, at any time before the disposition thereof, reclaim or
redeem such animal by complying with the provisions of this chapter and
regulations hereunder and by paying to the animal services officer all charges
imposed for the impounding of the dog and any license fees due as set forth by
the fee schedule.
      4.   Regulations For Costs; Disposition:
         a.   Lyon County is authorized to set forth reasonable regulations for
charging owners or persons having the care, custody or possession of dogs
impounded under this chapter for all costs and maintenance incurred by the
county. (Ord. 475, 3-18-2004, eff. 4-9-2004)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  7.01.06 of this chapter.
7.01.05: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
   A.   Vicious Or Dangerous Animals:
      1.   It is the responsibility of any person having care or custody of any
animal in Lyon County to make himself aware of the propensities of any animal
in his care or custody.
      2.   An animal is known by the person having care or custody to possess
vicious or dangerous propensities if the particular animal has bitten, or
attempted to bite, injured or attempted to injure a person or animal and such
fact was personally observed by the person having care and custody or the
person having care and custody has been informed of such facts by other
persons.
      3.   It is unlawful for any person to have care or custody of any animal
in Lyon County which is known to possess vicious or dangerous tendencies unless
the following conditions are met:
         a.   At no time shall such animal leave the private property confines
of the person having care or custody of the animal unless it is muzzled,
leashed, and under the effective control of an adult.
         b.   The private property shall be adequately and properly posted with
conspicuous warning signs, with a list of names and telephone numbers of
handlers of said animal, if applicable.
         c.   The animal shall be kept, confined or housed within an enclosure
that is adequate to ensure the animal's retention and comfort and of a size to
permit the animal to stand upright; that is high enough so that the animal
cannot bite, harm, or injure anyone by overreaching the top of the fence or
other enclosure. The animal shall be kept upon the private property in a manner
that will prevent it from biting or injuring any person lawfully upon the
property who is not provoking or teasing the animal.
      4.   Every person having the care or custody of any animal in Lyon County
known to said person to possess vicious or dangerous tendencies who fails to
keep said animal as required by the above subsection and thereby allows the
same to either injure any person or escape and run at large in any place or
manner liable to endanger the safety of any person, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
      5.   Any person may lawfully kill any animal known to possess vicious or
dangerous tendencies found running at large when reasonably necessary to
protect his or her own safety or the safety of other persons or animals.
   B.   Animals; Noises; Nuisances:
      1.   It is unlawful for any person to own, keep, harbor or possess any
animal, which, by loud or frequent habitual barking, yelping, braying or other
noise, causes annoyance to the neighborhood or to any person in the vicinity.
It is the duty of the animal services supervisor or officers, upon complaint,
to determine the cause of the disturbance and then take appropriate action.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for the owner or person having custody of any
dog to permit, either wilfully or through failure to exercise due care or
control of such dog to excrete any solid waste upon any sidewalk, public street
or public park; or to excrete any solid waste upon any real property under the
control of or in the possession of any other person; or upon the floor of any
common hall or in any common area in any apartment house, tenement house, hotel
or other multiple dwelling; or upon any entranceway, stairway, or wall
immediately abutting on a public sidewalk; or upon the floor of any theater,
shop, store, office building or other building used in common by the public; or
upon the floor or stairway of any depot or station or public waiting room; or
upon any floor, stairway, entranceway, office, lobby, foyer or patio used in
common by the public; provided further that no violation of this section shall
occur if the owner of the offending animal promptly and voluntarily removes the
dog waste.
   C.   Deprivation Of Sustenance Or Shelter: It shall be unlawful to deprive
any animal of necessary sustenance, food, drink, or shelter, or expose to the
elements of the weather and to the extreme of heat or cold, or refuse to obtain
veterinarian medical care for illness, injury, disease or infirmity, or
wilfully instigate, engage in, or in any way further an act of cruelty to any
animal, or any act to produce such cruelty.
   D.   Abandoning Animals: It is unlawful for any person owning, possessing or
having the care, custody, and control of any animal, living or dead, to abandon
the same in a public street, road, alley or any other public place, or upon his
or her property or the property of another. An animal is considered abandoned
when not claimed on or by a specified date after having been boarded, groomed,
trained, handled or cared for by any person or veterinarian. Any animal
impounded pursuant to this section must be held by animal services for a period
of five (5) days unless otherwise provided for.
   E.   Uncared For Animals: Whenever the animal services officers find that
any animal is, or will be, without proper care, the animal services officers
may take up such animal for protective care; and in the event of sickness or
injury of the animal, where the owner or keeper is unknown, the animal services
officers may after a reasonable time take any action to prevent further undue
pain and suffering, including immediate destruction of the animal in humane
manner.
   F.   Poisoning Animals: It shall be unlawful for any person unjustifiably to
administer any poisonous drug or substance with intent that the same shall be
taken by an animal, whether such animal be the property of himself or another,
or whether said drug or substance be exposed upon such person's property, the
private property of another, or any public place; provided, that nothing herein
shall be construed to prevent or restrict the animal services officers, or
health officer in the exercise and performance of the powers and duties as set
forth.
   G.   Endangering Animals: It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully
throw, drop or place, or cause to be thrown, dropped or placed upon any road,
highway, street, alley or public place, or upon the private property of himself
or another, any glass, nails, pieces of metal or other substance or device
calculated to wound, disable or injure any animal.
   H.   Transporting Or Enclosing Animals In Vehicles: It shall be unlawful for
any person to carry or enclose, or cause to be carried or enclosed, in or upon
any vehicle or conveyance, any animal in a cruel or inhumane manner.
   I.   Confining Animals In Motor Vehicles: No person having charge or custody
of an animal, as owner or otherwise, shall place or confine such animal or
allow such animal to be placed or confined or to remain in a motor vehicle
under such conditions or for such period of time as may endanger the health or
well being of such animal due to heat, cold, lack of food or such other
circumstances as may reasonably be expected to cause suffering, disability or
death.
      1.   Authority Of Officer: An officer of the Lyon County sheriff's
department, or the animal services department, or any animal services officer
who finds an animal in a motor vehicle in violation of this chapter may break
and enter the motor vehicle, if necessary, to remove the animal. The officer
removing the animal shall take the animal to the animal services department or
to a veterinarian clinic for safekeeping and shall, in the event the person
having custody of the animal cannot be contacted, leave in a prominent place in
the motor vehicle a written notice bearing his name and office and the address
where the animal may be claimed by the owner thereof. The animal will be
surrendered to the owner if the owner claims the animal within seven (7) days
from the time the animal was removed from the vehicle and pays all reasonable
charges that have accrued for the maintenance of the animal. If the owner fails
to claim the animal within seven (7) days after its removal from the motor
vehicle, the animal services department will make reasonable efforts to contact
the owner and give notice where the animal is in custody and that the owner
upon payment of the reasonable maintenance charges may reclaim it. In the event
the owner cannot be contacted, or expresses no interest in reclaiming the
animal within seven (7) days after contact or efforts to contact, the animal
services department may dispose of the animal in any reasonably humane manner.
   J.   Running At Large Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person who owns,
harbors or keeps or who has possession, charge, custody, or control of any dog
to cause, permit, suffer or allow the dog to stray, run, or to be at large, in
or on any public highway, street, alley, sidewalk, park, place or school
ground, or upon any lot or land whether public or private, other than that of
the owner.
This section does not apply to any dog performing under the immediate direction
and control of the person responsible for the dog or an agent or employee of
that person.
The county officer may tranquilize a dog at large to aid in its capture. If
safe capture cannot be made using tranquilization, the county officer may use
any reasonable means necessary, including destruction of the animal, to capture
the animal.
   K.   Breeding Wolves And Wolf Hybrids: It is unlawful to breed wolves or
wolf hybrids for sale or profit within the unincorporated area of the county,
except as otherwise provided in chapter 7 of this title.
   L.   Feeding And Watering Big Game Animals, Estray And Wild Horses: It is
unlawful for a person to feed and/or water any big game animal, estray horse or
wild horse within one thousand five hundred feet (1,500') of the highway right
of way of U.S. Highways 50, 95, 95A, 208, 341, 342 and 339 unless the area is
securely fenced to prevent the animals from wandering into the highway right of
way.
   M.   Fighting: It is unlawful for any person to own, keep, or use, or be in
any manner connected with or financially interested in the management of, or to
receive money or other thing of value for the admission of any person to, a
property, house, apartment, condominium, pit, or place procured or permitted to
be used or occupied for baiting or fighting of animals; or to instigate,
promote, arrange, or carry on a fight between animals, or do any act as
assistant, umpire, principal, spectator or otherwise in a fight between
animals, or in aid of or calculated to encourage or further any fight between
animals.
   N.   Injury And Overwork: It is unlawful for any person to overdrive,
overload, torture or cruelly beat, or unjustifiably injure, maim, mutilate, or
kill any animal whether belonging to himself or to another, and whether on or
off the premises of the owner of the animal.
   O.   Enclosures And Restraints: It is unlawful to confine or overcrowd an
animal in any cage, coop, crate, box or any enclosure in a cruel or inhumane
manner, or so as to produce torture. It shall further be unlawful to restrict
any animal by leash, cord, or chain of a length which causes cruelty or torture
to the animal.
   P.   Cruel And Unusual Uses: It is unlawful for any owner, operator, or
agent of any rodeo, rodeo event of any type irrespective of its name, carnival,
fair, or amusement park to use any live animal as or for a target or in any
cruel or unusual manner.
   Q.   Horse Tripping: It is unlawful for any person to intentionally trip or
fell any equine animal by the legs or by any means whatsoever for the purpose
of entertainment or sport. (Ord. 516, 2-7-2008)
7.01.06: IMPOUNDMENT OF DOGS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
   A.   Impoundment By Property Owner: Any dog found doing damage to or
trespassing upon private property in the county may be taken up by the owner of
such property or his representative at his own risk and delivered forthwith to
the animal services center or held until the animal services officer or
authorized representatives can take the dog.
   B.   Impoundment By Animal Services Officer: The animal services officer is
authorized to impound as permitted by law any animal kept or found on the
owner's property, found to be in violation of this title, or found to be in
violation of Nevada law.
      1.   The animal services officer shall leave written notice of
impoundment on the premises from which the animal was taken. (Ord. 475, 3-18-
2004, eff. 4-9-2004)
7.01.07: RABIES CONTROL:
   A.   Rabies Control Authority: The appointed rabies control authority in the
county is Lyon County animal services, and appointed animal services officer
(s).
   B.   Vaccination Against Rabies:
      1.   An owner of a dog, cat or ferret shall maintain the dog, cat or
ferret currently vaccinated against rabies in accordance with NAC 441A.435.
      2.   If the owner of a dog, cat or ferret violates this section, the
rabies control authority may impound the dog, cat or ferret.
      3.   The only proof of vaccination against rabies acceptable to the
county is a certificate of vaccination against rabies issued in accordance with
NAC 441A.440.
   C.   Quarantine Of Biting Animals:
      1.   The rabies control authority shall cause a dog, cat, or ferret,
regardless of vaccination against rabies, which has bitten a person to be
quarantined and observed for ten (10) days following the bite under the
supervision of a licensed veterinarian or other person designated by the rabies
control authority. The observation must be within an enclosure or with
restraints deemed adequate by the rabies control authority to prevent direct
contact with a person or animal.
      2.   The dog, cat or ferret must be examined by a licensed veterinarian
at the first sign of illness during the ten (10) days of observation. Any
illness must be reported immediately to the rabies control authority. If signs
of rabies develop during the ten (10) days of observation the dog, cat or
ferret must be euthanized and its head removed and shipped under refrigeration
for examination at the laboratory of the department of agriculture.
      3.   If, after a reasonable effort is made to locate the owner of an
unwanted or stray dog or cat, the owner is unknown or cannot be located, or if
the owner agrees, the unwanted or stray dog or cat which has bitten may be
euthanized and the head submitted for laboratory examination without a period
of quarantine.
      4.   Wolf hybrids must immediately be quarantined within an enclosure or
with restraints deemed adequate by the rabies control authority to prevent
direct contact with a person or animal for a period of one hundred eighty (180)
days, under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian or other person
designated by the rabies control authority.
      5.   A bat, raccoon, skunk, fox, feral ferret, feral dog, feral cat or
wild or exotic animal that is rabies susceptible species, which has bitten a
person must be euthanized immediately without a period of quarantine and the
head submitted for laboratory examination.
      6.   Animal services is not required to return or release any animal
after the quarantine period, and may for good cause, humanely destroy the
animal.
   D.   Quarantine Of Animals In Close Contact With Animals Known Or Suspected
Of Having Rabies:
      1.   Except as otherwise provided in this section, a wild or exotic
animal that is rabies susceptible, in close contact with an animal suspected or
known to have rabies, must be euthanized immediately without a period of
quarantine and the head submitted for laboratory examination. The rabies
control authority may exempt a rare or valuable animal from the provisions of
this section.
      2.   Unless the owner of the animal objects, a dog or cat which has not
been vaccinated pursuant to NAC 441A.435 and which is considered by the rabies
control authority to have been in close contact with an animal suspected or
known to have rabies must be euthanized immediately without a period of
quarantine and the head submitted for laboratory examination. If the owner of
the animal objects, the dog or cat must be immediately vaccinated against
rabies and quarantined within an enclosure or with restraints deemed adequate
by the rabies control authority to prevent direct contact with a person or
animal for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days, under the supervision of
a licensed veterinarian or other person designated by the rabies control
authority. The dog or cat must be revaccinated one month before release.
      3.   A dog, cat, or ferret which has been vaccinated pursuant to NAC
441A.435 and which is considered by the rabies control authority to have been
in close contact with an animal suspected or known to have rabies, must be:
         a.   Immediately revaccinated, or
         b.   Upon the request of the owner of the dog, cat or ferret,
euthanized immediately without a period of quarantine and the head submitted
for laboratory examination.
      4.   A domesticated animal of a rabies susceptible species, other than a
dog, cat or ferret which is considered by the rabies control authority to have
been in close contact with an animal suspected or known to have rabies, must be
managed according to the discretion of the rabies control authority.
      5.   Wolf hybrids must immediately be quarantined within an enclosure or
with restraints deemed adequate by the rabies control authority to prevent
direct contact with a person or animal for a period of one hundred eighty (180)
days, under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian or the person designated
by the rabies control authority.
      6.   As used in this section, "in close contact with an animal suspected
or known to have rabies" means, within the past one hundred eighty (180) days,
to have been bitten, mouthed or mauled by, or closely confined on the same
premises with an animal either suspected or known to have rabies.
   E.   Party Responsible For Payment Of Quarantined Animal: The owner of an
animal quarantined pursuant to the provisions of this chapter is responsible
for all costs of quarantine, veterinary care, examination, euthanasia and
disposal.
   F.   Rabies Control Reporting Requirements: The rabies control authority
shall report all cases, suspected cases or carriers of rabies in accordance
with NAC 441A.225 through 441A.260. (Ord. 475, 3-18-2004, eff. 4-9-2004)
7.01.08: BUSINESSES THAT SELL OR BOARD DOGS FOR PROFIT OR ACT AS A BREEDER:
It is unlawful for any business to keep or board any dog for sale or profit or
to act as a breeder within the unincorporated area of the county without first
obtaining a permit from Lyon County animal services.
   A.   Application: The owner of the business shall submit an application to
Lyon County animal services on a form prescribed by the county.
   B.   Inspection: Prior to issuing the permit, Lyon County animal services
may inspect the business to see if the location is suitable for the proposed
business operation. For the purposes of enforcing Nevada Revised Statutes
574.360 to 574.440, inclusive, as those provisions apply to breeders, a
representative of Lyon County may enter and inspect the premises specified on
the permit at any reasonable hour.
   C.   Fee: The permit fee shall be set by the Lyon County board of
commissioners.
   D.   Term Of Permit: The term of the permit for a breeder is for one year.
The term of any other permit is for the length of operation of the business.
The permit is nontransferable. The permit issued by Lyon County for a breeder
must specify the address of the premises at which the person may act as a
breeder.
   E.   Grandfathering Provision: Any business keeping or boarding dogs for
sale or profit in existence in Lyon County prior to July 1, 2004, shall be
granted a permit without charge by the county if the owner applies for the
permit no later than October 1, 2004. Any owner who fails to apply for the
permit by that date is subject to the provisions of this section.
   F.   Suspension, Revocation Or Denial Of Permit: Any permit issued or
requested pursuant to this section may be suspended, revoked or denied for good
cause. Good cause shall include, but is not limited to, the following:
      1.   Failure to pay business license fees within thirty (30) days of
their due date;
      2.   Failure to update the business license or this permit;
      3.   Failure to have a current business license;
      4.   Failure to maintain other licenses required by federal, state or
local law necessary to legally conduct the operation;
      5.   Failure to keep the enterprise free of unsanitary conditions,
excessive noise, disturbances and other conditions on or about the premises
which cause, or tend to cause, a nuisance or which injuriously affect the
public health, safety and welfare;
      6.   Any act in the operation of the business which is unlawful or
prohibited by federal, state or local law, including violations of Nevada
Revised Statutes 574.360 to 574.440, inclusive, as those provisions apply to
breeders;
      7.   Any fraudulent practices or misrepresentations in the operation of
the business;
      8.   Any concealment or misrepresentation in procuring a license;
      9.   Revocation or suspension of the business license;
      10.   Two (2) or more violations of this chapter;
      11.   Two (2) or more violations of federal, state or local law relating
to the treatment of animals.
   G.   Suspension Of Animal Services Permit: If a permit holder violates any
of the provisions contained in subsections F1 through F11 of this section,
animal services may suspend the permit, pending board action on revocation,
under the following conditions:
      1.   Contents Of Notice: Animal services shall notify the permit holder
of the violation. The notice shall contain:
         a.   The name and address of the permit holder;
         b.   The violation which has occurred;
         c.   That the permit holder has five (5) days, excluding weekends and
holidays, from the receipt of the notice to remedy the violation; and
         d.   That if the permit holder fails to remedy the violation the
permit will be suspended.
      2.   Second Notice: If the permit holder fails to remedy the violation,
animal services shall send a second notice which shall contain:
         a.   The name and address of the permit holder;
         b.   The violation which has occurred;
         c.   The date the suspension will be in effect; and
         d.   A notice of revocation and hearing as provided in subsection H1
of this section.
      3.   Service Date: The date the permit holder is deemed to receive the
notice shall be determined as follows:
         a.   If the permit holder is personally served, the date of service;
         b.   If animal services posts the notice at the location, the date
posted; and
         c.   If animal services sends the notice by certified mail, return
receipt requested, the date of delivery as evidenced by the return receipt.
      4.   Appeal: Any permit holder whose permit is suspended may appeal the
decision in writing to the county manager. The appeal shall be filed with the
county manager's office within forty eight (48) hours of the notice of
suspension. The county manager shall review the suspension and may, at his
discretion, hold a hearing on the matter. The county manager shall issue a
decision in writing on the appeal within fourteen (14) days of the filing of
the appeal.
   H.   Revocation Of The Permit: Unless otherwise specified in this chapter,
the board may revoke any permit issued under this chapter, under the following
conditions:
      1.   Notice Of Revocation And Hearing: The board shall serve upon the
permit holder a notice of revocation and hearing. The notice shall include:
         a.   The name and address of the permit holder;
         b.   The cause(s) of the revocation;
         c.   The date and time of the revocation hearing; and
         d.   That the permit holder may submit evidence in opposition to the
revocation.
This notice shall be served upon the permit holder at least forty eight (48)
hours prior to the time specified for hearing. The notice shall be deemed
received in accord with subsection G3 of this section.
      2.   Hearing Of Revocation: In order to revoke a permit under this
chapter, the board shall conduct a hearing to determine whether to revoke the
permit. The board shall allow any interested party, including the permit
holder, to testify or otherwise submit evidence in favor of or opposition to
the revocation. The board shall consider all the evidence presented and cause
to have entered in the minutes its findings, stating specifically any causes
for revocation found by the board. The board shall then enter its order in the
minutes.
      3.   Notice Of Revocation: If the board revokes the permit, the permit
holder shall be served notice of revocation following the hearing. The
revocation shall be effective upon receipt of the notice, as specified in
subsection G3 of this section.
   I.   Impounding Animals: At any time after suspension or revocation of the
permit as provided hereunder, animal services may impound any animals that are
in danger, constitute a nuisance, are a threat to the public, or are held in
violation of this chapter. Any costs associated with the impounding and keeping
of the animals is the responsibility of the permit holder.
   J.   Powers Not Limited: Nothing in this section limits the powers conferred
on the county or animal services by local, state or federal law. (Ord. 563, 1-
7-2013)
7.01.09: DISPOSITION OF REVENUE:
All monies collected under this chapter, unless otherwise provided by the
board, shall be used to improve, keep up and/or maintain the county animal
shelter or to defray the cost of implementing this chapter. (Ord. 475, 3-18-
2004, eff. 4-9-2004)
7.01.10: PENALTY:
The violation of any section of this chapter is (as prescribed for) a
misdemeanor. (Ord. 475, 3-18-2004, eff. 4-9-2004)
CHAPTER 2
MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES
SECTION:
7.02.01: Fireworks
7.02.02: Unsafe Discharge Of Weapons In Lyon County
7.02.03: Interference With Police Dogs
7.02.04: Political Signs
7.02.05: Consumption Of Cannabis Or Cannabis Products In A Public Place
Prohibited
7.02.01: FIREWORKS:
It is unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, discharge or set off any
rocket, squib, firecracker or other fireworks of any description within the
County.
The penalty for provisions of this section shall be as prescribed in section
1.04.01 of this Code. (1973 Code §10.20.010)
7.02.02: UNSAFE DISCHARGE OF WEAPONS IN LYON COUNTY:
   A.   Definitions: As used in this section, the following definitions apply:
    FIREARM: As used in this chapter, is defined by Nevada Revised Statutes
202.253.
   PEACE OFFICER: As used in this chapter, is defined by Nevada Revised
Statutes chapter 289.
   B.   Unsafe Discharge Of Firearms:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm, gun,
pistol, rifle, shotgun or other firearm contrary to Nevada Revised Statutes.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any gun, pistol,
rifle, shotgun, black powder firearm, or other firearm within five hundred feet
(500') of any: a) school property; or b) property located within Lyon County
with the following zoning designations that are developed as described in
section
15.300.06 of this Code, or any subsequent successor zoning ordinance or Lyon
County Code with the following zoning designations: (Ord. 584, 2-18-2016, eff.
3-3-2016)
         a.   Suburban Residential Districts; (Ord. 584, 2-18-2016, eff. 3-3-
2016; amd. Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
         b.   Nonresidential Districts;
      3.   Exceptions:
         a.   This section shall not apply to peace officers in the discharge
of official duties;
         b.   Person lawfully discharging a firearm in protection of life or in
self-defense as defined in Nevada law;
         c.   Persons shooting in any regularly established and authorized
rifle range, gun club, or shooting gallery, or participating in a historical
reenactment organization;
         d.   Agricultural real property as defined by Nevada Revised Statutes
chapter 361A.
   C.   Penalties: Any person violating the terms of this section is guilty of
a misdemeanor. In addition to any other penalty allowed by law, the court may
require the person convicted to complete a court approved firearm safety
course. (Ord. 584, 2-18-2016, eff. 3-3-2016)
7.02.03: INTERFERENCE WITH POLICE DOGS:
It is unlawful for any person to wilfully aggravate, annoy, harm or otherwise
interfere or attempt any such act with any dog used by a law enforcement agency
in the performance of the functions or duties of any such agency. Any person
violating any provision of this section shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor. (Ord. 295, 12-5-1985)
7.02.04: POLITICAL SIGNS:
   A.   Time Limits: Political signs shall be removed by the candidate within
thirty (30) days after the applicable election.
   B.   Prohibited Locations: Political signs are not allowed on Lyon County
property or Lyon County rights of way. This includes the right of way on either
side of a paved or unpaved county road, right of way for future county road,
and all other county property regardless of whether it is used or occupied.
      1.   Political signs erected in these areas are a violation of law and
may be removed by Lyon County without notice. When practicable, the county will
provide a seven (7) day notice (which may be served by telephoning the
violating party or posting the sign with a violation warning) prior to removing
signs. Removed signs will be retained for thirty (30) days and then destroyed.
   C.   Compliance: All political signs shall comply with other local, state
and federal law.
   E.   Civil Penalties: Any person who violates the provisions of this section
shall be subject to a five hundred dollar ($500.00) fine and the person
responsible for the violation shall be liable for the costs of removing any
sign not in compliance with this section. (Ord. 435, 3-5-1998, eff. 3-27-1998;
amd. Ord. 626, 3-17-2022)
7.02.05: CONSUMPTION OF CANNABIS OR CANNABIS PRODUCTS IN A PUBLIC PLACE
PROHIBITED:
   A.   Pursuant to the authority established by Section 12.9 of Assembly Bill
341 of the 81st (2021) Session of the Nevada Legislature, it is unlawful for
any person to consume cannabis or any cannabis product in a public place. For
the purpose of this subsection, a person consumes cannabis or a cannabis
product if such a substance is ingested or inhaled.
   B.   As used in this section, "cannabis product" has the meaning ascribed to
it in NRS 678A.120. (Ord. 625, 3-17-2022)
CHAPTER 3
MINORS
SECTION:
7.03.01: Curfew
7.03.02: Possession Or Consumption Of Liquor
7.03.03: Parental Responsibility For Minors
7.03.01: CURFEW:
   A.   Age And Hour Restrictions: Except as otherwise provided herein, it is
unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to frequent the
streets, alleys or other public or unoccupied grounds or places in Lyon County
between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
Sundays through Thursdays and between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00)
midnight and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on weekends. This subsection shall be
construed as establishing a curfew on Friday night, commencing at twelve
o'clock (12:00) A.M. Saturday; and Saturday night, commencing at twelve o'clock
(12:00) A.M. Sunday.
   B.   Exceptions: Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to
apply to any child or children who are in the company of a parent, parents,
guardian or guardians nor to any child or children whose lawful employment
makes it necessary for them to be upon the streets, alleys or other public or
unoccupied grounds or public places during the nighttime as aforesaid.
   C.   Responsibility Of Parents And Guardians: It is unlawful for any parent,
parents, guardian or guardians or any other person having the legal care,
custody or control of any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to allow
or permit any such child or minor to loiter about or frequent any streets,
alleys or other public or unoccupied grounds or public places in the county
between the hours set forth in subsection A of this section unless there is a
reasonable, proper and lawful necessity therefor.
   D.   Violations And Penalties: Any adult person violating the terms of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor, and any minor violating the provisions of
this section shall be adjudicated pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes chapter
62. (Ord. 327, 2-2-1989)
7.03.02: POSSESSION OR CONSUMPTION OF LIQUOR:
   A.   Possession: It is unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one
(21) years to have in his possession any container including, but not
restricted to, any can, bottle or jug or other receptacle containing alcoholic
beverages including, but not restricted to, spirituous, malt or fermented
liquors or wines.
The possession of alcoholic beverages by any person under the age of twenty one
(21) does not include the following types of possession:
      1.   Possession for an established religious purpose;
      2.   Possession in the presence of the person's parent, spouse or legal
guardian who is twenty one (21) years of age or older;
      3.   Possession in accordance with a prescription issued by a person
statutorily authorized to issue prescriptions; or
      4.   The selling, handling, serving or transporting of alcoholic
beverages by a person in the course of his lawful employment by a licensed
manufacturer, wholesaler or retailer of alcoholic beverages.
   B.   Consumption: It is unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one
(21) years to consume an alcoholic beverage, including but not restricted to,
spirituous, malt or fermented liquors or wines.
The consumption of alcoholic beverages by any person under the age of twenty
one (21) does not include the following types of consumption:
      1.   Consumption for an established religious purpose; or
      2.   Consumption in accordance with a prescription issued by a person
statutorily authorized to issue prescriptions.
   C.   Violation: Any person violating the terms of this section is guilty of
a misdemeanor. (Ord. 493, 8-4-2005, eff. 8-25-2005)
7.03.03: PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY FOR MINORS:
   A.   Definitions: As used in this section, unless the context otherwise
requires, the terms specified herein have the meanings ascribed to them:
    LEGAL GUARDIAN: A person appointed guardian or given custody of a minor by
a district court of the state, but does not include a person appointed guardian
or given custody of a minor under Nevada Revised Statutes chapter 62.
   MINOR: A person who is above the age of eleven (11) years but not yet
nineteen (19) years of age. (1973 Code §10.32.010)
   B.   Violations And Presumptions: The parent or legal guardian of an
unemancipated minor residing with such parent or legal guardian shall be
presumed, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, to have failed to
exercise proper parental responsibility, and said minor shall be deemed to have
committed the acts described below with the knowledge and permission of the
parent or guardian, in violation of this section upon the occurrence of the
events described in subsections B1, B2 and B3 of this section:
      1.   An unemancipated minor residing with said parent or legal guardian
shall either be adjudicated to be in violation of any ordinance, law or statute
prohibiting wilful and malicious acts causing injury to a person or property or
shall have incurred nonjudicial sanctions from another official agency
resulting from an admission of guilt or violation of any ordinance, law or
statute prohibiting wilful and malicious acts causing injury to a person or
property; and
      2.   The parent or legal guardian shall have received a written notice
hereof, either by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, or by
personal service, with a certificate of personal service returned from the
county sheriff's office following said adjudication or nonjudicial sanction;
and
      3.   If, at any time within one year following receipt of the notice set
forth in subsection B2 of this section, said minor is either adjudicated to be
in violation of any ordinance, law or statute, as described in subsection B1 of
this section, or shall have incurred nonjudicial sanctions from another
official agency resulting from an admission of guilt of violation of any
ordinance, law or statute as described in subsection B1 of this section. (1973
Code §10.32.020)
   C.   Penalty: Any person convicted of any violation of the provisions of
this section shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. (1973 Code §10.32.030)
CHAPTER 4
AID TO VICTIMS OF SEXUAL ASSAULT
SECTION:
7.04.01: Fund Created for Counseling and Medical Expenses
7.04.02: Conditions for Receipt of Funds
7.04.03: Reports Required
7.04.01: FUND CREATED FOR COUNSELING AND MEDICAL EXPENSES:
Pursuant to the provisions of NRS sections 217.280 to 217.350, inclusive, there
is hereby created a fund to pay for the counseling and medical expenses of
victims of sexual assault and their spouses when the following requirements are
met:
   A.   That the offense was committed in Lyon County.
   B.   That the medical, psychological, psychiatric and marital counseling
will be made available only at the Lyon County Health Center or from other
facilities having a contract with the Board of County Commissioners.
   C.   That the total cost for such treatment shall not exceed one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00). (Ord. 260, 2-24-83)
7.04.02: CONDITIONS FOR RECEIPT OF FUNDS:
As a condition for providing the above services, the victim must have reported
the sexual assault within three (3) days after its occurrence to the law
enforcement agency involved and must file an application for treatment with the
Board of County Commissioners within sixty (60) days thereafter. (Ord. 260, 2-
24-83)
7.04.03: REPORTS REQUIRED:
Any psychologist, psychiatrist or counselor rendering services provided herein
can be required to make periodic reports to the Board of County Commissioners
that his services relate only to the sexual assault. A failure to so do will
result in termination of funding. (Ord. 260, 2-24-83)
CHAPTER 5
PARADES AND ASSEMBLAGES
SECTION:
7.05.01: Purpose
7.05.02: Permits
7.05.01: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public safety and lessen traffic
problems in Lyon County. (Ord. 455, 1-18-2001, eff. 2-9-2001)
7.05.02: PERMITS:
   A.   Permit Required: It is unlawful for any person to sponsor, organize or
hold a parade or outdoor assemblage requiring the closure of or interference
with a county road or right of way within the unincorporated areas of Lyon
County without first securing a parade permit.
   B.   Permit Process: An application and permit for temporary occupancy of
Lyon County right of way may be obtained from the office of the county manager.
If the planned event includes the closure of a state highway, a permit must
also be obtained from the Nevada department of transportation. Prior to
returning the application to the county manager for consideration and holding
the event, approval must be obtained from:
      1.   The sheriff's department;
      2.   The fire district with jurisdiction over the area; and
      3.   Lyon County public works, road division.
   C.   Permit Granted: The county manager, after approval from the sheriff's
department, fire district and public works road division, may approve the
permit if the county manager determines that the event will not be detrimental
to the health, safety and traffic in Lyon County. After approval, the event
described in the application may be held on the date and time specified,
subject to the terms and conditions of the permit and application.
   D.   Condition Of Rights Of Way; Damage: The applicant is responsible for
the condition of Lyon County roads or rights of way used in the parade or
outdoor assemblage and those persons shall leave the road or right of way in
the same condition as prior to the event. The applicant shall pay for any
damage to the road or right of way occurring during the event.
   E.   Penalty: The penalty for violations of provisions of this chapter shall
be as prescribed in section
1.04.01 of this code. (Ord. 455, 1-18-2001, eff. 2-9-2001)
CHAPTER 6
GRAFFITI
SECTION:
7.06.01: Definition
7.06.02: Graffiti Prohibited
7.06.03: Entrance by Sheriff's Officers and Investigation
7.06.04: Removal of Graffiti
7.06.01 DEFINITION:
As used in this Chapter, "graffiti" means markings made of ink, paint, spray
paint, chalk, dye or other similar substances. (Ord. 364, 3-5-92, eff. 3-27-92)
7.06.02: GRAFFITI PROHIBITED:
A person shall not place graffiti upon any wall, rock, bridge, building, fence,
gate, or other structure, tree, or other real or personal property either
publicly or privately owned, without the permission of the owner thereof or the
operator or agency responsible for the property. (Ord. 364, 3-5-92, eff. 3-27-
92)
7.06.03: ENTRANCE BY SHERIFF'S OFFICERS AND INVESTIGATION:
Upon having reasonable grounds to believe there exists graffiti upon private
property, which graffiti is visible from any area open to the public, a
Sheriff's officer may, at any reasonable hour, enter upon the private property
for the purpose of inspecting and documenting the existence and nature of the
graffiti and determining the ownership of the premises upon which the graffiti
is located. (Ord. 364, 3-5-92, eff. 3-27-92)
7.06.04: REMOVAL OF GRAFFITI:
Graffiti shall be removed by any one of the following methods:
   A.   If the graffiti is applied by a juvenile, the parents or legal guardian
of the juvenile shall be responsible for the removal of the graffiti; or
   B.   If the Sheriff determines that the graffiti is so located on a public
or privately owned structure on public or privately owned real property within
the County so as to be capable of being viewed by a person using any public
right of way in the County, he or his designated representative may provide for
the removal at County expense without reimbursement from the property owner
upon whose property the graffiti has been applied if:
      1.   The painting or repair is confined to removing or obliterating the
graffiti, only;
      2.   The structure is owned by a public entity other than the County, and
removal of the graffiti is authorized with the consent of the public entity
having jurisdiction over the structure; or
      3.   The structure is privately owned, the removal by the County may be
authorized only after securing the consent and waiver of liability from the
owner. (Ord. 364, 3-5-92, eff. 3-27-92)
CHAPTER 7
RESTRICTED ANIMALS
SECTION:
7.07.01: Purpose
7.07.02: Definitions
7.07.03: Ownership And Possession Of Restricted Animals
7.07.04: Permit Applicant Qualifications
7.07.05: Permit Application
7.07.06: Breeding
7.07.07: Permit Fee
7.07.08: Term Of Permit
7.07.09: Suspension Or Revocation Of Permit
7.07.10: Inspection Of Facilities
7.07.11: Grandfathering Provision
7.07.12: Animal Identification And Record Keeping
7.07.13: Communicable Disease Testing Requirements For Primates
7.07.14: Care Requirements For All Restricted Animals
7.07.15: General Housing Requirements For All Restricted Animals
7.07.16: Specific Housing And Care Requirements For Felines
7.07.17: Specific Housing And Care Requirements For Canines
7.07.18: Specific Housing And Care Requirements For Gorillas, Orangutans, And
Chimpanzees
7.07.19: Specific Housing And Care Requirements For Gibbons And Siamangs
7.07.20: Specific Housing And Care Requirements For Baboons
7.07.21: Specific Housing And Care Requirements For Macaques
7.07.22: Housing And Care Requirements For Bears
7.07.23: Specific Housing And Care Requirements For American Black, Asiatic
Black, Sun, Sloth, And Speckled Bears
7.07.24: Specific Housing And Care Requirements For Brown Bears
7.07.25: Specific Housing And Care Requirements For Hyenas And Binturongs
7.07.26: Specific Housing And Care Requirements For Wolverines
7.07.27: Specific Housing And Care Requirements For Pachyderms
7.07.28: Specific Housing And Care Requirements For Kangaroo And Wallaby
7.07.29: Specific Housing And Care Requirements For African Buffalo
7.07.30: Specific Housing And Care Requirements For Venomous Snakes
7.07.31: Housing Requirements For Animals Not Specifically Mentioned
7.07.32: Transporting Restricted Animals
7.07.33: Escape And Liability For Escape
7.07.34: Seizure
7.07.35: Disposition
7.07.01: PURPOSE:
The ownership and possession of restricted animals, as defined by this chapter,
is regulated to protect the health and safety of the public and to promote the
welfare of these animals. (Ord. 475, 3-18-2004, eff. 4-9-2004)
7.07.02: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the meanings
set forth in this section.
APPLICANT: A person, corporation, partnership, or other legal entity that
applies for a permit under this chapter.
BREEDER: A person, corporation, partnership, or other legal entity that meets
permit qualifications and has been granted approval to breed animals restricted
under this chapter.
GOVERNMENTAL AGENCY: Any agency, board, commission and/or any political
subdivision of the state of Nevada which receives and expends public funds
whether federal, state or local.
PERMIT: A document issued by animal services which authorizes a permittee to
possess and maintain the specific restricted animals identified on the permit.
PERMITTEE: A person, corporation, partnership, or other legal entity that
applies for and is granted a permit under this chapter.
PUBLIC ZOO: A permanent cultural institution which owns and maintains captive
wild animals that represent more than a token collection and, under the
direction of a professional staff, provides its collection with appropriate
care and exhibits them in an aesthetic manner to the public on a regularly
scheduled basis. They shall further be defined as having as their primary
business the exhibition, conservation, and preservation of the earth's fauna in
an educational and scientific manner. Public zoos must be accredited by the
American Zoo and Aquarium Association (AZA). Public zoos shall hold a USDA
class C exhibitor's license.
REHABILITATION SANCTUARY FACILITY: A facility where abused, neglected,
unwanted, impounded, abandoned, orphaned, injured or displaced restricted
animals will be provided care for his or her lifetime.
RESEARCH FACILITY: A university, college, governmental research agency, or
other institution that engages in scientific or public health research.
RESTRICTED ANIMAL BROKER/DEALER: A person, corporation, partnership, or other
legal entity who acts as a broker or dealer in a transaction involving the
buying and/or selling of restricted species, or who is in the business of
transporting restricted species. (Ord. 475, 3-18-2004, eff. 4-9-2004)
7.07.03: OWNERSHIP AND POSSESSION OF RESTRICTED ANIMALS:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person, corporation, or other legal entity to
import, transfer, sell, purchase, breed or possess an animal classified as
restricted unless that person, corporation, partnership, or other legal entity
holds a restricted animal permit or is exempt from holding a permit under this
chapter and under the provisions of Nevada Revised Statutes 571 and 503 and NAC
441A, 503, and 504.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person, corporation, partnership, or other legal
entity to sell, transfer, deliver or give an animal classified as restricted to
any other person, corporation, partnership, or other legal entity unless the
other person, corporation, partnership, or other legal entity holds a
restricted animal permit or is exempt from holding a permit under this chapter
and under the provisions of Nevada Revised Statutes 571 and 503 and NAC 441S,
503, and 504.
   C.   The following animals are classified as restricted and inherently
dangerous to humans:
      1.   Order Primates:
Family Pongidae: All species, including orangutans, chimpanzees and gorillas.
Family Hytobatidae: All species, including gibbons and siamangs.
Family Cercopithecidae: All species of genus Macaca (macaques), genus Papio
(mandrills, drills, and baboons), and genus Theropithecus (gelada baboon).
      2.   Order Carnivora:
Family Canidae: Includes genus Canis (all species, including wolves, jackals,
dingos, and hybrids), Chrysocyon brachyurus (maned wolf); Cuyon alpinus (red
dog or dhole), Lycaon pictus (African hunting dog), Canis latrans (coyotes,
including hybrids).
Family Ursidae: All species of bears.
Family Mustelidae: Gulo gulo (wolverine).
Family Hyaenidae: All species of hyenas.
Family Viverridae: Binturong.
Family Felidae: Includes genus Leo or Panthera or Neofelis (all species,
including lions, tigers, jaguars, leopards and hybrids), Acinonym jubatus
(cheetah), Felis concolor (all subspecies of cougars), Unica unica (snow
leopard), and all wildcats, including, but not limited to, jungle cat, margay,
caracal, serval, lynx, bobcat, clouded leopard, ocelot and hybrids.
      3.   Order Proboscidea:
Family Elephantidae: All species of elephants.
      4.   Order Perissodactyla:
Family Rhinocerotidae: All species, including rhinoceroses, zebra, tapir,
hybrids.
      5.   Order Artiodactyla:
Family Hippopotamidae: All species of Hippopotamus amphibus (hippopotamus).
Family Bovidae: African buffalo (Syncerus caffer), wild bovidae, giraffe.
      6.   Order Marsupalia: Kangaroos, wallabies, Tasmanian devils.
      7.   Order Crocodylians: All species including crocodiles and alligators.
      8.   Order Serpentes: Snakes; all species of venomous snakes.
Family Boidae: All species, including pythons and boa constrictors.
      9.   Order Lacertilia: Lizards; all venomous lizards.
      10.   Class Chelonia: Turtles and tortoises; all species of venomous
turtles and tortoises. (Ord. 475, 3-18-2004, eff. 4-9-2004)
7.07.04: PERMIT APPLICANT QUALIFICATIONS:
Applicants for a permit to possess a restricted animal shall meet the following
minimum qualifications. If the applicant is a corporation, partnership or other
legal entity, the applicant must designate an individual who represents the
organization and meets the following minimum qualifications:
   A.   Applicant or designee must be at least eighteen (18) years of age.
   B.   Applicant or designee must have at least two (2) years' experience in
the care and handling of the animal family for which the applicant is applying.
   C.   Applicant or designee shall not have been convicted of any violation of
any state or federal wildlife regulations within three (3) years of the date of
application, or any offense involving cruelty to animals.
   D.   Public zoos, research facilities, and governmental agencies as defined
herein and animals specifically trained to assist handicapped persons are
exempted from holding a permit. Permanent exempted facilities shall be required
to submit information outlined in subsections 7.07.05A, B, C, F and G of this
chapter annually. (Ord. 475, 3-18-2004, eff. 4-9-2004)
7.07.05: PERMIT APPLICATION:
The applicant shall submit the following to animal services for each permit,
permit amendment, or permit renewal. Any false statements made by applicant on
the permit application will render such application null and void, and subject
applicant to the penalties provided by law.
   A.   Name, complete street address, and phone number. If the applicant is a
corporation, partnership or other legal entity, the individual designated to
represent the organization must also provide this information. The applicant,
permittee, or designee must notify animal services in writing of any change of
address or name fourteen (14) days prior to the change.
   B.   Location where the restricted animal(s) will be housed. Facilities for
holding permitted restricted animal(s) must be located on the premises on which
the permittee resides, or shall have a full time caretaker to supervise the
care and security of the facilities.
   C.   Current animal inventory, including the common and scientific name,
sex, age and source of each animal, any permanent identification on the animal,
and identification of animals that have injured and/or killed a human being.
The permittee must notify animal services within twenty four (24) hours of the
addition or death of a restricted animal listed on the inventory.
   D.   A copy of current USDA, USDI or NDOW or other permits if applicable
approving the possession of species listed on the animal inventory.
   E.   A signed statement by a veterinarian accredited by the USDA that he/she
is the veterinarian of record and which includes the veterinarian's printed
name, address, phone number, and license number. The veterinarian shall certify
that he/she has observed each of the applicant's animals at least once during
the prior year and that they have been appropriately immunized, housed, and
cared for.
   F.   A plan for the quick and safe recapture of the animal(s), or if
recapture is impossible, for the destruction of any animal held under the
permit.
   G.   A plan for the emergency evacuation of the facility holding the
restricted animals, to be updated within thirty (30) days of any structural
changes to the facility.
   H.   A letter of recommendation on letterhead stationery and signed in blue
ink by the owner of a facility in good standing where the applicant gained his/
her experience. The letter must include the printed name and address of the
owner and detailed information regarding the applicant's knowledge and
experience related to the species listed on the permit application.
   I.   Proof of liability insurance in the amount determined by animal class
as designated in table 1 below. The insurance amount shall not be in aggregate
for the ownership of different species but will be maintained in the highest
amount for the class of animal owned.
   TABLE 1
Class 1    Class 2    Class 3
$70,000.00 $50,000.00 $7,000.00
Class 1                    Class 2                   Class 3
$70,000.00                 $50,000.00                $7,000.00
                           Order Primates:
Order Carnivora:           Family Pongidae, family   Order Carnivora:
Family Urisdae: All        Hytobatidae, and family   Family Canidae: All
species of bears           Cercopithecidae: All      species
                           species
Order Proboscidea:         Order Carnivora:          Order Carnivora:
Family Elephantidae: All   Family Mustelidae:        Family Hyaenidae: All
species                    Wolverine                 species
Order Carnivora:           Order Carnivora:
Family Felidae: Leopard,   Family Felidae: Serval,   Order Carnivora:
jaguar, black and spotted  lynx and hybrids, margay, Family Viverridae:
leopard, tiger, mountain   jungle cats, wildcat,     Binturong
lion, cheetah, lion, snow  bobcat
leopard
Order Perissodactyla:      Order Artiodactyla:       Order Perissodactyla:
Family Rhinocerotidae:     Family Bovidae: Buffalo,  Family Rhinocerotidae:
Rhinoceroses               wild bovidae, giraffe     Zebra, tapir, hybrids
Order Artiodactyla:        Order Artiodactyla:       Order Marsupalia:
Family Hippopotamidae: All Family Hippopotamidae:    Kangaroo, wallaby,
species except pigmy       Pigmy hippopotamus        Tasmanian devil
hippopotamus
Order Crocodylians:
All species of crocodiles                            
and alligators
Order Serpentes:
Snakes and family Boidae:
All species, including                               
pythons and boa
constrictors
Order Lacertilia:
Lizards: All species of                              
venomous lizards
Class Chelonia:
Turtles and tortoises: All                           
species of venomous
turtles and tortoises
 
   (Ord. 475, 3-18-2004, eff. 4-9-2004)
7.07.06: BREEDING:
   A.   Applicants desiring to breed restricted animals shall include with the
application a written plan detailing the reason for breeding, why the progeny
are necessary, and the proposed lawful disposition of any offspring. Approval
will be granted only if the breeding will not result in unneeded or uncared for
restricted animals. Nonintended breeding may be the basis for denial and/or
revocation of the permit. Persons or facilities accredited by the American Zoo
and Aquarium Association (AZA), the species survival program (SSP), or in
possession of a valid USDA permit are exempt.
   B.   Animals housed at a rehabilitation/sanctuary facility shall not be
allowed to breed or produce offspring. (Ord. 475, 3-18-2004, eff. 4-9-2004)
7.07.07: PERMIT FEE:
   A.   The permit application shall be set by resolution of the Lyon County
board of commissioners.
   B.   Permit fees shall be held by the county in a trust fund for the care of
and housing of restricted animals that are impounded under the provisions of
this chapter. (Ord. 475, 3-18-2004, eff. 4-9-2004)
7.07.08: TERM OF PERMIT:
   A.   Permits issued by animal services under the provisions of this chapter
shall be valid for a term of one year from the date of issue unless the permit
has been revoked for violations of this chapter.
   B.   Permittee has no property interest in the permit or expectation of
renewal. The county is not responsible for any costs incurred by permittee if
the permit is revoked or not renewed. (Ord. 475, 3-18-2004, eff. 4-9-2004)
7.07.09: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
   A.   Good Cause: Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be suspended
or revoked for good cause. Good cause shall include, but is not limited to, the
following:
      1.   Failure to maintain other licenses required by federal, state or
local law necessary to legally conduct the operation;
      2.   Failure to keep the location free of unsanitary conditions,
excessive noise, disturbances and other conditions on or about the premises
which cause, or tend to cause, a nuisance or which injuriously affect the
public health, safety and welfare;
      3.   Any act in the keeping of the animals which is unlawful or
prohibited by federal, state or local law;
      4.   Any fraudulent practices or misrepresentations in the keeping of the
animals;
      5.   Any concealment or misrepresentation in procuring the permit;
      6.   Two (2) or more violations of this chapter;
      7.   Two (2) or more violations of federal, state or local law relating
to the treatment of animals.
   B.   Notice Of Suspension/Revocation: The board may suspend or revoke any
permit under this chapter in the same manner and with the same notice as
required by title 5, chapter 1 of this code, to suspend or revoke a business
license.
   C.   Suspension Of Restricted Animal Permit: If a permit holder violates any
of the provisions contained in subsections A1 through A5 of this section,
animal services may suspend the permit, pending board action on revocation,
under the following conditions:
      1.   Animal services shall notify the permit holder of the violation. The
notice shall contain:
         a.   The name and address of the permit holder;
         b.   The violation which has occurred;
         c.   That the permit holder has five (5) days, excluding weekends and
holidays, from the receipt of the notice to remedy the violation; and
         d.   That if the permit holder fails to remedy the violation the
permit will be suspended.
      2.   If the permit holder fails to remedy the violation, animal services
shall send a second notice which shall contain:
         a.   The name and address of the permit holder;
         b.   The violation which has occurred;
         c.   The date the suspension will be in effect; and
         d.   A notice of revocation and hearing as provided in subsection E1
of this section.
      3.   The date the permit holder is deemed to receive the notice shall be
determined as follows:
         a.   If the permit holder is personally served, the date of service;
         b.   If animal services posts the notice at the location, the date
posted; and
         c.   If animal services sends the notice by certified mail, return
receipt requested, the date of delivery as evidenced by the return receipt.
   D.   Appeal: Any permit holder whose permit is suspended may appeal the
decision in writing to the county manager. The appeal shall be filed with the
county manager's office within forty eight (48) hours of the notice of
suspension. The county manager shall review the suspension and may, at his
discretion, hold a hearing on the matter. The county manager shall issue a
decision in writing on the appeal within fourteen (14) days of the filing of
the appeal.
   E.   Revocation Of The Permit: Unless otherwise specified in this chapter,
the board may revoke any permit issued under this chapter, under the following
conditions:
      1.   Notice Of Revocation And Hearing: The board shall serve upon the
permit holder a notice of revocation and hearing. The notice shall include:
         a.   The name and address of the permit holder;
         b.   The cause(s) of the revocation;
         c.   The date and time of the revocation hearing; and
         d.   That the permit holder may submit evidence in opposition to the
revocation.
This notice shall be served upon the permit holder at least forty eight (48)
hours prior to the time specified for hearing. The notice shall be deemed
received in accord with subsection C3 of this section.
      2.   Hearing Of Revocation: In order to revoke a permit under this
chapter, the board shall conduct a hearing to determine whether to revoke the
permit. The board shall allow any interested party, including the permit
holder, to testify or otherwise submit evidence in favor of or opposition to
the revocation. The board shall consider all the evidence presented and cause
to have entered in the minutes its findings, stating specifically any causes
for revocation found by the board. The board shall then enter its order in the
minutes.
      3.   Notice Of Revocation: If the board revokes the permit, the permit
holder shall be served notice of revocation following the hearing. The
revocation shall be effective upon receipt of the notice, as specified in
subsection C3 of this section.
   F.   Impounding Animals: At any time after suspension or revocation of the
permit as provided hereunder, animal services may impound any animals that are
in danger, constitute a nuisance, are a threat to the public, or are held in
violation of this chapter. Any costs associated with the impounding and keeping
of the animals is the responsibility of the permit holder.
   G.   Powers Not Limited: Nothing in this section limits the powers conferred
on the county or animal services by local, state or federal law. (Ord. 475, 3-
18-2004, eff. 4-9-2004)
7.07.10: INSPECTION OF FACILITIES:
   A.   Before any permit is issued by animal services for the possession of a
restricted animal, an inspection of all animal facilities and records related
to such animals shall be conducted by animal services for the purpose of
ensuring compliance with the regulations of this chapter.
   B.   Any person, corporation, partnership, or other legal entity possessing
an animal restricted under this chapter shall, during normal business hours and
at all reasonable times, allow animal services to inspect all animals,
facilities and records relating to such animals for the purpose of ensuring
compliance with the regulations of this chapter.
   C.   Inspection fees may be set by resolution of the Lyon County board of
commissioners. (Ord. 475, 3-18-2004, eff. 4-9-2004)
7.07.11: GRANDFATHERING PROVISION:
   A.   An applicant who legally possessed the restricted animal within the
unincorporated area of Lyon County prior to July 1, 2004, and who provides
proof of any and all required approvals from federal, state and/or local
agencies to maintain the animal(s) by July 1, 2004, will be granted a permit
and will not be subject to the care and housing provisions set forth in
sections 7.07.15 through 7.07.30 of this chapter except under the following
circumstances:
      1.   Change in the location at which the animals are kept;
      2.   Lapse in approvals from federal, state and/or local agencies; or
      3.   Conviction of any animal cruelty, neglect, import, export or
possession violations.
   B.   An applicant holding an approved permit pursuant to this section shall
comply with the care and housing provisions of this chapter for any new species
which are added to the animal inventory.
   C.   An applicant applying for a restricted animal permit under this
provision shall submit a permit application and annual permit renewal
applications with the following information and the permit fee:
      1.   Name, complete street address, and phone number. If the applicant is
a corporation, partnership, or other legal entity, the individual designated to
represent the organization must also provide this information. The applicant,
permittee or designee must notify animal services in writing of any change of
address or name fourteen (14) days prior to the change.
      2.   Location where the restricted animal(s) will be housed.
      3.   Current animal inventory, including the common and scientific name,
sex, age and source of each animal, any permanent identification on the animal,
and identification of animals that have injured and/or killed a human being.
The permittee must notify animal services within twenty four (24) hours of the
death of a restricted animal listed on the inventory.
      4.   Copies of current federal, state and local permits (as required)
allowing the possession of species listed on the animal inventory at the
current location.
      5.   A signed statement by a veterinarian accredited by the USDA that he/
she is the veterinarian of record and which includes the veterinarian's printed
name, address, phone number, and license number. The veterinarian shall certify
that he/she has observed each of the applicant's animals at least once during
the prior year and that they have been appropriately immunized, housed, and
cared for.
      6.   A plan for the quick and safe recapture of the animal(s), or if
recapture is impossible, for the destruction of any animal held under the
permit.
      7.   A plan for the emergency evacuation of the facility holding the
restricted animal(s), to be updated within thirty (30) days of any structural
changes to the facility.
      8.   Proof of liability insurance in the amount determined by animal
class as designated in table 1, subsection
7.07.05I of this chapter. The insurance amount shall not be in aggregate for
the ownership of different species but will be maintained in the highest amount
for the class of animal owned. (Ord. 475, 3-18-2004, eff. 4-9-2004)
7.07.12: ANIMAL IDENTIFICATION AND RECORD KEEPING:
   A.   Each permitted restricted animal shall be individually identified by
the use of an injectable microchip, tattoo, or other permanent identification
system. Owners may request approval to implant the microchip or tattoo when the
animal is next placed under anesthesia or sedation.
   B.   Permittees shall maintain a written log for each restricted animal in
their possession, which documents each animal's healthcare.
   C.   Permittee shall provide and maintain all documentation required by this
provision, including all health records, for at least three (3) years from the
date issued. (Ord. 475, 3-18-2004, eff. 4-9-2004)
7.07.13: COMMUNICABLE DISEASE TESTING REQUIREMENTS FOR PRIMATES:
All primates shall be TB tested by a licensed veterinarian in accordance with
state law. All medical records and results of such testing shall be maintained
by permittee and made available for inspection by animal services personnel.
Any test results indicating a positive reaction to a TB (tuberculosis) test
must be reported immediately to the Nevada department of agriculture, the Lyon
County health department and Lyon County animal services. (Ord. 475, 3-18-2004,
eff. 4-9-2004)
7.07.14: CARE REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL RESTRICTED ANIMALS:
   A.   No person, corporation, partnership, or other legal entity shall
maintain any restricted animal(s) in captivity in any unsanitary or unsafe
condition or in a manner which results in the maltreatment or neglect of such
animal(s).
   B.   Drinking water shall be provided at all times in clean containers, or
as required to maintain the health of the animal. Pools shall be cleaned as
needed to ensure good water quality. Enclosures shall provide adequate drainage
of surface water.
   C.   Animals shall be fed at least once per day or as directed by a
veterinarian. Food provided shall be unspoiled and not contaminated. It shall
be of a type and quantity sufficient to meet the nutritional requirements of
animal(s) to which it is provided.
   D.   Fecal and food waste shall be removed from cages daily and stored or
disposed of in a manner which prevents noxious odors or insect pests. Hard
floors shall be scrubbed and disinfected weekly.
   E.   All restricted animals shall be provided with behavioral enrichment
objects or exercise apparatus appropriate to their age and species to promote
physical and psychological well being. Such devices may include, but not be
limited to, ropes, bars, branches, boxes, balls, and foraging items. (Ord. 475,
3-18-2004, eff. 4-9-2004)
7.07.15: GENERAL HOUSING REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL RESTRICTED ANIMALS:
   A.   All facilities must be surrounded by a perimeter fence (secondary)
barrier of at least eight feet (8') in height and a minimum of four feet (4')
from the cage holding the animal(s), or such other fencing, building, or other
protection of the enclosure where the animal(s) is kept sufficient to prevent
unauthorized public entry or direct physical contact between the animal(s) and
the public.
   B.   With the exception of reptiles, all cages shall be well braced and
securely fastened to the floor or in the ground and shall utilize metal clamps
or braces of equivalent strength as that prescribed for cage construction.
   C.   All cage entrances shall have double safety doors, one of which only
opens to the inside. These doors must remain locked at all times when
unattended with locks of sufficient strength to prevent the animal(s) from
breaking open the door.
   D.   All cages shall be constructed with a den, nest box, or other connected
housing unit that can be closed off and locked with the animal(s) inside to
allow for the safe servicing and cleaning of the open area. In lieu of a nest
box, a divided cage with a door between the two (2) compartments may be used.
   E.   All outdoor cages shall provide adequate shelter from inclement weather
conditions, shade from the sun and provide adequate ventilation at all times to
maintain the health and comfort of the animal(s). A system of ventilation must
provide fresh air by means of windows, doors, vents or air conditioning, and be
designed to minimize drafts, odors and condensation of moisture. If the ambient
temperature reaches eighty five degrees Fahrenheit (85°F) or greater, air
conditioning, evaporative cooling, exhaust fans and vents, or other auxiliary
ventilation must be provided.
   F.   Cages shall be sufficiently strong to prevent escape and to protect the
caged animal(s) from injury. The mesh size or distance between bars shall be
sufficiently small to prevent the escape of the animal(s) being held.
   G.   Restraint by tethering or chaining cannot be used as means to hold a
restricted animal in captivity, except for elephants within a perimeter fence
or trained elephants under the immediate supervision of a qualified trainer or
handler.
   H.   All restricted animals for which specific housing and care requirements
are not provided for in this chapter shall be humanely confined in the manner
provided for in this section and in accord with comparable caging requirements
found in this chapter. (Ord. 475, 3-18-2004, eff. 4-9-2004)
7.07.16: SPECIFIC HOUSING AND CARE REQUIREMENTS FOR FELINES:
   A.   Specifications: All cages shall be constructed of and covered at the
top with 9-gauge steel chainlink or equivalent, with tension bars and metal
clamps to prevent the escape of the animal; provided that animals may be held
in facilities without a top where the sides of the enclosure are a minimum of
ten feet (10') with an additional top cantilever of two feet (2') turned inward
and outward at a forty five degree (45°) angle. Framework for all enclosures
shall be erected and be of a material sufficiently strong to allow for the
proper installation and maintenance of tension of the chainlink or equivalent.
   B.   Minimum Strength: All cages for wildcats shall be constructed as above
except that the minimum strength shall be of 111/2-gauge steel chainlink or
equivalent.
   C.   Minimum Cage Requirements:
1. Lions, tigers, cheetahs or hybrids thereof:
 Single animal          20 feet by 15 feet by 8 feet high (or 300 square feet)
 Each additional animal Increase cage size by 50 percent (or 150 square feet)
 Accessories            Elevated shelf or shelves large enough to accommodate
                         any and all animals in enclosure
2. Jaguars, leopards, cougars, snow leopards, clouded leopards, or hybrids
thereof:
 Single animal          20 feet by 7 feet by 8 feet high (or 200 square feet)
 Each additional animal Increase cage size by 50 percent (or 70 square feet)
 Accessories            Elevated shelf or shelves large enough to accommodate
                         any and all animals in enclosure
3. Wildcats or hybrids thereof:
 Single animal          8 feet by 7 feet by 7 feet high (or 80 square feet)
 Each additional animal Increase cage size by 50 percent (or 40 square feet)
 Accessories            Elevated shelf or shelves large enough to accommodate
                         any and all animals in enclosure
 
(Ord. 475, 3-18-2004, eff. 4-9-2004)
7.07.17: SPECIFIC HOUSING AND CARE REQUIREMENTS FOR CANINES:
   A.   Specifications: All enclosures shall be constructed of and be covered
at the top with 111/2-gauge steel chainlink or equivalent, with tension bars
and metal clamps to prevent the escape of the animal; provided that animals may
be held in facilities without a top where the sides of the enclosure are a
minimum of seven feet (7') with an additional top extension of two feet (2')
turned inward at a forty five degree (45°) angle.
   B.   Concrete Footings Or Horizontal Apron: All vertical enclosure fencing
shall have either a concrete footing of sufficient depth to prevent the animal
(s) from digging out or a buried horizontal apron made of 111/2-gauge chainlink
or equivalent attached to the bottom of the vertical fencing and extending a
minimum of three feet (3') inward.
   C.   Minimum Cage Requirements:
1. Wolves, named wolves, African hunting dogs, or hybrids thereof:
 Single animal          7 feet by 20 feet by 7 feet high (or 200 square feet)
 Each additional animal Increase cage size by 50 percent (or 70 square feet)
 Accessories            A sheltered retreat or den(s) shall be provided to
                         accommodate any and all animals in enclosure
2. Jackals, dingos, dholes, or hybrids thereof:
 Single animal          7 feet by 15 feet by 7 feet high (or 150 square feet)
 Each additional animal Increase cage size by 50 percent (or 75 square feet)
 Accessories            A sheltered retreat or den(s) shall be provided to
                         accommodate any and all animals in enclosure
 
(Ord. 475, 3-18-2004, eff. 4-9-1004)
7.07.18: SPECIFIC HOUSING AND CARE REQUIREMENTS FOR GORILLAS, ORANGUTANS, AND
CHIMPANZEES:
   A.   Cage Construction Materials: Cage construction materials including the
top shall consist of steel bars, two inch (2") galvanized pipe, masonry block
or their strength equivalent.
   B.   Minimum Cage Sizes:
1. Gorilla:
 Single animal          20 feet by 15 feet by 8 feet high (or 300 square feet)
 Each additional animal Increase cage size by 50 percent (or 150 square feet)
2. Orangutan:
 Single animal          20 feet by 7 feet by 7 feet high (or 200 square feet)
 Each additional animal Increase cage size by 50 percent (or 70 square feet)
                         Each cage shall have elevated perching areas that will
 Accessories            accommodate all animals in the enclosure
                         simultaneously
3. Chimpanzee:
 Single animal          20 feet by 7 feet by 9 feet high (or 200 square feet)
 Each additional animal Increase cage size by 50 percent (or 70 square feet)
                         Each cage shall have elevated perching areas that will
 Accessories            accommodate all animals in the enclosure
                         simultaneously. Each cage shall have a horizontal
                         climbing structure
 
(Ord. 475, 3-18-2004, eff. 4-9-2004)
7.07.19: SPECIFIC HOUSING AND CARE REQUIREMENTS FOR GIBBONS AND SIAMANGS:
   A.   Cage Construction Materials: Cage construction materials shall consist
of and be covered at the top with not less than 9-gauge steel chainlink or
equivalent.
   B.   Minimum Cage Size:
 
Single animal          8 feet by 15 feet by 8 feet high or (120 square feet)
Each additional animal Increase cage size by 25 percent (or 30 square feet)
                       Each cage shall have elevated perching areas that will
                       accommodate all animals in the enclosure simultaneously.
Accessories            Each cage shall have hanging ropes, swings, or other
                       apparatus to allow animals to brachiate the length of
                       the enclosure
 
(Ord. 475, 3-18-2004, eff. 4-9-2004)
7.07.20: SPECIFIC HOUSING AND CARE REQUIREMENTS FOR BABOONS:
   A.   Cage Construction Materials: Cage construction materials shall consist
of and be covered at the top with not less than 9-gauge steel chainlink or
equivalent.
   B.   Minimum Cage Size:
 
Single animal          7 feet by 12 feet by 8 feet high (or 120 square feet)
Each additional animal Increase cage size by 50 percent (or 60 square feet)
Accessories            Each cage shall have elevated perching areas that will
                       accommodate all animals in the enclosure simultaneously
 
(Ord. 475, 3-18-2004, eff. 4-9-2004)
7.07.21: SPECIFIC HOUSING AND CARE REQUIREMENTS FOR MACAQUES:
   A.   Cage Construction Materials: Cage construction materials shall consist
of and be covered at the top with not less than 9-gauge steel chainlink or
equivalent.
   B.   Minimum Cage Size:
 
Single animal          8 feet by 7 feet by 8 feet high (or 80 square feet)
Each additional animal Increase cage size by 50 percent (or 40 square feet)
                       Each cage shall have elevated perching areas that will
Accessories            accommodate all animals in the enclosure simultaneously.
                       Each cage shall have a horizontal climbing structure
 
(Ord. 475, 3-18-2004, eff. 4-9-2004)
7.07.22: HOUSING AND CARE REQUIREMENTS FOR BEARS:
In addition to other requirements of this chapter, each cage/enclosure shall be
equipped with a pool large enough to accommodate at least two (2) animals
simultaneously. The pool shall be designed such that it can be readily drained
and cleaned to maintain good water quality. (Ord. 475, 3-18-2004, eff. 4-9-
2004)
7.07.23: SPECIFIC HOUSING AND CARE REQUIREMENTS FOR AMERICAN BLACK, ASIATIC
BLACK, SUN, SLOTH, AND SPECKLED BEARS:
   A.   Cage Construction: Cage construction shall consist of and be covered at
the top with not less than 9-gauge steel chainlink or equivalent with tension
bars and metal clamps to prevent the escape of the animal. Framework for all
enclosures shall be erected and be of a material sufficiently strong enough to
allow for the proper installation and maintenance of tension of the chainlink
or equivalent.
   B.   Minimum Cage Size:
 
Single animal          20 feet by 15 feet by 8 feet high (or 300 square feet)
Each additional animal Increase cage size by 50 percent (or 150 square feet)
                       Each cage shall be equipped with a climbing structure,
Accessories            elevated shelf or shelves large enough to accommodate
                       any and all animals in enclosure and at least 2 claw
                       logs
 
(Ord. 475, 3-18-2004, eff. 4-9-2004)
7.07.24: SPECIFIC HOUSING AND CARE REQUIREMENTS FOR BROWN BEARS:
   A.   Cage Construction: Cage construction shall consist of and be covered at
the top with not less than 5-gauge steel chainlink or equivalent with tension
bars and metal clamps to prevent the escape of the animal. Framework for all
enclosures shall be erected and be of a material sufficiently strong enough to
allow for the proper installation and maintenance of tension of the chainlink
or equivalent.
   B.   Minimum Cage Size:
 
Single animal          20 feet by 20 feet by 7 feet high (or 400 square feet)
Each additional animal Increase cage size by 50 percent (or 200 square feet)
                       Each cage shall be equipped with a climbing structure,
Accessories            elevated shelf or shelves large enough to accommodate
                       any and all animals in enclosure and at least 2 claw
                       logs
 
(Ord. 475, 3-18-2004, eff. 4-9-2004)
7.07.25: SPECIFIC HOUSING AND CARE REQUIREMENTS FOR HYENAS AND BINTURONGS:
   A.   Cage Construction: Cage construction shall consist of and be covered at
the top with not less than 9-gauge steel chainlink or equivalent with tension
bars and metal clamps to prevent the escape of the animal. Framework for all
enclosures shall be erected and be of a material sufficiently strong enough to
allow for the proper installation and maintenance of tension of the chainlink
or equivalent.
   B.   Minimum Cage Size:
 
Single animal          7 feet by 20 feet by 7 feet high (or 200 square feet)
Each additional animal Increase cage size by 50 percent (or 70 square feet)
Accessories            Each cage shall have either a den or elevated platform
 
(Ord. 475, 3-18-2004, eff. 4-9-2004)
7.07.26: SPECIFIC HOUSING AND CARE REQUIREMENTS FOR WOLVERINES:
   A.   Cage Construction: Cage construction shall consist of and be covered at
the top with not less than 9-gauge steel chainlink or equivalent with tension
bars and metal clamps to prevent the escape of the animal. Framework for all
enclosures shall be erected and be of a material sufficiently strong enough to
allow for the proper installation and maintenance of tension of the chainlink
or equivalent.
   B.   Minimum Cage Size:
 
Single animal          7 feet by 7 feet by 6 feet high (or 70 square feet)
Each additional animal Increase cage size by 50 percent (or 50 square feet)
Accessories            Each cage shall have either a den or elevated platform
 
(Ord. 475, 3-18-2004, eff. 4-9-2004)
7.07.27: SPECIFIC HOUSING AND CARE REQUIREMENTS FOR PACHYDERMS:
   A.   Construction Materials: Construction materials of enclosure shall
consist of steel bars, masonry block, steel reinforced concrete or equivalent.
B. Elephants And Rhinoceros:
   Single animal             Minimum enclosure size shall be 1,500 square
                               feet
   Each additional animal    Increase enclosure by 50 percent
                               A pool shall be provided with a minimum surface
   Accessories for elephants area of 300 square feet and a minimum depth of 5
                               feet
C. Hippopotamus:
   Single animal             Minimum enclosure size shall be 700 square feet
   Each additional animal    Increase enclosure by 50 percent
                               A pool shall be provided with a minimum surface
   Accessories               area of 300 square feet and a minimum depth of 5
                               feet
 
(Ord. 475, 3-18-2004, eff. 4-9-2004)
7.07.28: SPECIFIC HOUSING AND CARE REQUIREMENTS FOR KANGAROO AND WALLABY:
   A.   Construction Materials: Construction materials of enclosure shall
consist of wood or natural substrate. The surface of the paddock shall be
natural substrate. Walls of the enclosure shall be secured to buried concrete,
or if walls are constructed of 11-gauge nonrusting chainlink or welded wire,
they shall be buried deep enough in the dirt to prevent escape by digging.
   B.   Minimum Enclosure Size:
 
Single kangaroo        20 feet by 7 feet by 8 feet high (or 200 square feet)
Single wallaby         20 feet by 7 feet by 6 feet high (or 200 square feet)
Each additional animal Increase size by 50 percent (or 70 square feet)
Accessories            A refuge shelter area shall be provided
 
(Ord. 475, 3-18-2004, eff. 4-9-2004)
7.07.29: SPECIFIC HOUSING AND CARE REQUIREMENTS FOR AFRICAN BUFFALO:
   A.   Construction Materials: Construction materials of enclosure shall
consist of steel bars, masonry block steel reinforced concrete or equivalent.
   B.   Minimum Enclosure Size:
 
Single animal          700 square feet
Each additional animal Increase size by 25 percent
 
(Ord. 475, 3-18-2004, eff. 4-9-2004)
7.07.30: SPECIFIC HOUSING AND CARE REQUIREMENTS FOR VENOMOUS SNAKES:
   A.   Labeled Containers: All venomous snakes shall be kept in a locked
exhibit or container, which shall be located within a locked building, compound
or enclosure. Each container or exhibit shall be labeled with the:
      1.   Common and scientific name of the species and the subspecies;
      2.   Number of animals contained inside;
      3.   Warning "Poisonous";
      4.   Appropriate antivenin to be used for the species in the cage.
   B.   Posted Information: The following shall be clearly and conspicuously
posted in the building housing these snakes and shall be submitted to animal
services as part of the permit application:
      1.   Emergency procedures for animal escape;
      2.   Location of nearest, most readily available source of appropriate
antivenin;
      3.   A written plan from a hospital stating how a venomous bite should be
treated.
   C.   Handling Device: A handling device shall be conspicuously located in
the building housing these snakes. The names, telephone numbers and addresses
of two (2) trained handlers shall be submitted to animal services as part of
the permit application.
   D.   Size Of The Perimeter Of The Enclosure:
 
Each snake less than 6 feet long 11/2 times the length of the snake
Each snake over 6 feet long      Twice the length of the snake
Accessories                      Each enclosure shall have hiding places
 
   E.   Transportation: If a venomous snake is transported or removed from its
primary enclosure, the snake shall be kept in a fully enclosed container with a
secure lid, which has air holes or other means of ventilation. The container
shall be clearly marked "Poisonous" and contain the common and scientific
names.
   F.   Notification Of Bite: The permittee shall telephonically notify animal
services within two (2) hours of any bite on a human, and within one week shall
provide a written report of the incident to animal services. (Ord. 475, 3-18-
2004, eff. 4-9-2004)
7.07.31: HOUSING REQUIREMENTS FOR ANIMALS NOT SPECIFICALLY MENTIONED:
   A.   For restricted animals whose housing requirements are not specifically
mentioned in this chapter, a housing plan shall be submitted by the permittee,
which is approved by two (2) licensed veterinarians. This plan must be
submitted with the permit application and, once approved, shall serve as the
specific housing requirement for the animal or animals.
   B.   All costs associated with the submission of a housing plan to the
county shall be the responsibility of the permittee. (Ord. 475, 3-18-2004, eff.
4-9-2004)
7.07.32: TRANSPORTING RESTRICTED ANIMALS:
   A.   USDA licensees and registrants (under the animal welfare act) are
exempt from this section provided they comply with the provisions of 9 CFR
subchapter A, and all USDA, APHIS, animal care policies regarding the transport
of animals and the requirements of traveling exhibitors.
   B.   Enclosures used to transport live restricted animals shall comply with
the following:
      1.   Shall be designed and constructed to protect the health and ensure
the safety and comfort of the animal(s) therein.
      2.   Shall be of sufficient strength to withstand the rigors of normal
transportation.
      3.   Shall be free of interior protrusions that could injure the animal
(s).
      4.   Shall provide sufficient breathable air.
      5.   Shall allow the animal(s) to be fed and watered without opening the
enclosure.
      6.   Shall provide easy accessibility for emergency removal of the animal
(s).
      7.   Shall provide sufficient space for the animal(s) to stand up, lie
down, turn around and make all normal postural adjustments.
      8.   Shall provide supplemental heating when the ambient temperature
falls below fifty degrees (50°), unless a veterinarian's statement is attached
to the enclosure certifying that the animal(s) therein is acclimated to a lower
temperature.
      9.   Shall provide auxiliary cooling (by means of fans, vents, air
conditioning, evaporative cooling, etc.) when the ambient temperature rises
above eighty five degrees (85°).
   C.   Restricted animals may be kept in transport enclosures for a period of
time not to exceed forty eight (48) hours. (Ord. 475, 3-18-2004, eff. 4-9-2004)
7.07.33: ESCAPE AND LIABILITY FOR ESCAPE:
   A.   Permittee shall immediately notify animal services of any escape of a
restricted animal.
   B.   Permittee shall be liable for any costs incurred resulting from the
escape of a restricted animal.
   C.   Neither the county, animal services, nor any agency, officer, official
employee or agent thereof shall be liable for any restricted animal that
expires, or is injured or destroyed during recapture; nor is liable for any
damage or injury caused by a restricted animal held under a permit issued
pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 475, 3-18-2004, eff. 4-9-2004)
7.07.34: SEIZURE:
   A.   Animal services or any law enforcement agency may take possession of a
restricted animal, including, and not limited to, all equipment and vehicles
necessary for the impoundment of the restricted animal, for a violation of this
chapter which endangers the health and safety of the public or the animal.
   B.   The owner of the restricted animal shall be liable for any and all
costs incurred by the seizure of a restricted animal until the final
disposition is determined by the owner or a court of competent jurisdiction.
   C.   The owner of the restricted animal, if the owner can be found, shall be
given a notice of the reasons for the taking, the location where the restricted
animal will be housed, and the owner's liability for the costs of shelter and
care of the restricted animal. If the owner cannot be found after a reasonable
search, a notice shall be posted on the property from which the restricted
animal was seized. If the identity and address of the owner is later
determined, the notice must immediately be delivered to the owner.
   D.   Upon proof of notification, a court of competent jurisdiction may,
after providing an opportunity for a hearing, order the restricted animal be
placed in a facility which meets the provisions of this chapter or humanely
destroyed.
   E.   The owner of the restricted animal may provide written permission to
animal services for the restricted animal to be humanely destroyed or for
animal services to pursue such disposition as it sees fit. (Ord. 475, 3-18-
2004, eff. 4-9-2004)
7.07.35: DISPOSITION:
   A.   Animal services may allow owners of unpermitted restricted animals who
do not qualify for a permit to possess the restricted animal or whose permit is
revoked for violating the provisions of this chapter to transfer the restricted
animal to a permitted or approved recipient.
   B.   The owner of unpermitted restricted animals shall notify animal
services prior to said transfer taking place.
   C.   Each day of possession of the unpermitted restricted animal constitutes
a separate violation. (Ord. 475, 3-18-2004, eff. 4-9-2004)
CHAPTER 8
FALSE ALARM REDUCTION
SECTION:
7.08.01: Definitions
7.08.02: Duties Of The Alarm User
7.08.03: Duties Of The Alarm Company
7.08.04: Prohibited Acts
7.08.05: Enforcement Of Provisions
7.08.06: Appeals
7.08.07: Confidentiality
7.08.08: Government Immunity
7.08.01: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them:
ALARM ADMINISTRATOR: A person or persons designated by the county to
administer, control and review false alarm reduction efforts and administers
the provisions of this chapter.
ALARM COMPANY: A person subject to the licensing requirements, and/or a company
engaged in selling, leasing, installing, servicing or monitoring alarm systems.
ALARM SIGNAL: A detectable signal; audible or visual, generated by an alarm
system, to which law enforcement is requested to respond.
ALARM SYSTEM: Any single device or assembly of equipment designed to signal the
occurrence of an illegal or unauthorized entry or other illegal activity
requiring immediate attention and to which law enforcement is requested to
respond, but does not include motor vehicle or boat alarms, fire alarms,
domestic violence alarms, or alarms designed to elicit a medical response.
ALARM USER: Any person, corporation, partnership, proprietorship, governmental
or educational entity or any other entity owning, leasing or operating an alarm
system, or on whose premises an alarm system is maintained for the protection
of such premises.
AUTOMATIC DIAL PROTECTION DEVICE: An automatic dialing device or an automatic
telephone dialing alarm system and shall include any system which, upon being
activated, automatically initiates to the Lyon County sheriff office a recorded
message or code signal indicating a need for law enforcement response.
CANCELLATION: The process where a deputy response is terminated to an alarm
site before a deputy arrives at the scene.
COUNTY: The county of Lyon or its agent.
DUAL ACTIVATION PANIC DEVICE: A device installed by alarm companies for
accounts requiring the function of a silent holdup/robbery alarm capability.
The device should require that two (2) buttons be depressed together, one
button that is recessed and must be pushed and held, two (2) bill traps wired
in parallel or any device that requires two (2) actions to be activated to
activate a signal of a robbery or holdup in progress.
FALSE ALARM: The activation of an alarm system through mechanical or electronic
failure, malfunction, improper installation, or the negligence of the alarm
user, his/her employees or agents, and signals activated to summon law
enforcement personnel unless law enforcement response was canceled by the
user's alarm company before law enforcement personnel arrive at the alarm
location. An alarm is false within the meaning of this chapter when, upon
inspection by the Lyon County sheriff office, evidence indicates that no
unauthorized entry, robbery, or other such crime was committed or attempted in
or on the premises which would have activated a properly functioning alarm
system. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a false alarm shall not include an alarm
which can reasonably be determined to have been caused or activated by
unusually violent conditions of nature nor does it include other extraordinary
circumstances not reasonably subject to control by the alarm user.
HOLDUP ALARM: A silent alarm signal generated by the manual activation of a
device intended to signal a robbery in progress. The term has the same meaning
as "robbery alarm".
LOCAL ALARM: An alarm system that emits a signal at an alarm site that is
audible or visible from the exterior of a structure and is not monitored by a
remote monitoring facility, whether installed by an alarm company or user.
PANIC ALARM: An audible alarm signal generated by the manual activation of a
device intended to signal a life threatening or emergency situation, requiring
a deputy's response.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY: A person capable of appearing at the alarm site upon
request, who has access to the alarm site and the code to the alarm system.
ROBBERY ALARM: A silent alarm signal generated by the manual activation of a
device intended to signal a robbery in progress. The term has the same meaning
as "holdup alarm".
RUNAWAY ALARM: An alarm system that produces repeated alarm signals that do not
appear to be caused by separate human action. The Lyon County sheriff office
may in its discretion discontinue deputy responses to alarm signals from what
appears to be a runaway alarm.
SIA CONTROL PANEL STANDARD CP-01: The American National Standard Institute
approved Security Industry Association (SIA) CP-01 control panel standard, as
may be updated from time to time, that details recommended design features for
security system control panels and their associated arming and disarming
devices to reduce false alarms. Control panels built and tested to this
standard by a nationally recognized testing organization, will be marked to
state: "Design evaluated in accordance with SIA CP-01 Control Panel Standard
Features for False Alarm Reduction".
VERIFY: An attempt by the monitoring company, or its representative, to contact
the alarm site and/or alarm user by telephone and/or other electronic means,
whether or not actual contact with a person is made, to attempt to determine
whether an alarm signal is valid, before requesting law enforcement dispatch,
in an attempt to avoid an unnecessary alarm dispatch request. (Ord. 589, 9-1-
2016)
7.08.02: DUTIES OF THE ALARM USER:
   A.   Maintain the premises and the alarm system in a method that will reduce
or eliminate false alarms.
   B.   Ensure that a responsible party will make a reasonable effort to
respond to the alarm system's location within thirty (30) minutes when notified
by the Lyon County sheriff office.
   C.   Not manually activate an alarm for any reason other than an occurrence
of an event that the alarm system was intended to report.
   D.   Make all attempts necessary to prevent/stop runaway alarms. Multiple
alarms caused by a single technical malfunction in a single alarm system for a
period up to twelve (12) hours shall constitute as only one false alarm. After
twelve (12) hours, the alarm user may be assessed civil penalties for each
additional false alarm activation. (Ord. 589, 9-1-2016)
7.08.03: DUTIES OF THE ALARM COMPANY:
   A.   Responsibilities: Any person engaged in the alarm business in the
county, shall comply with the following:
      1.   Obtain and maintain the required state, and/or county license(s).
      2.   Provide name, address, and telephone number of the user or a
designee, who can be called in an emergency, twenty four (24) hours a day; and
contact a responsible party who will respond.
      3.   Provide the most current contact information for the alarm user to
the alarm administrator when requested for false alarm civil penalty(ies).
   B.   CP-01 Requirement: Upon enactment of this chapter, alarm installation
companies shall, on all new and upgraded installations, use only alarm control
panel(s) that meets SIA control panel standard CP-01.
   C.   Dual Recess Button Requirement: Upon enactment of this chapter, alarm
installation companies shall, on all new and upgraded installation, install
only dual recess button robbery/holdup devices for appropriate applications of
commercial accounts. This requirement is not intended for the use of panic
alarms.
   D.   Operation Of System: Prior to activation of the alarm system, the alarm
company must provide instructions explaining the proper operation of the alarm
system to the alarm user, and how to prevent false alarms. In addition, provide
written information of how to obtain service from the alarm company for the
alarm system.
   E.   Notification Of Chapter And Applicable Civil Penalty(ies): Prior to
activation of the alarm system, the alarm company must provide the alarm user
with information on how to gain access to this chapter and appropriate civil
penalty(ies) for false alarms.
   F.   Monitoring Company Requirements: An alarm company performing monitoring
services shall:
      1.   Utilize enhanced call verification by attempting to verify, by
calling the alarm site and/or alarm user by telephone, to determine whether an
alarm signal is valid before requesting dispatch. Telephone verification shall
require, at a minimum that a second call be made to a different number, if the
first attempt fails to reach a responsible party. Enhanced call verification
shall not be used in the cases of: a panic alarm; a robbery/holdup alarm; or a
crime in progress which has been verified by video and/or audible means. The
telephone number(s) and responsible party name(s) attempted shall be provided
to the sheriff dispatch operator.
      2.   Provide alarm user contact information, when available, to the
communications center to facilitate dispatch and/or cancellations.
      3.   Communicate any and all available information about the location and
nature of the alarm.
      4.   Communicate a cancellation to the law enforcement communications
center as soon as possible following a determination that response is
unnecessary.
      5.   Keep a record of the date and time each notification and activation
of an alarm system is received and the date, time and method by which the
responsible party was notified. Such records shall be retained for twelve (12)
months and be released to the Lyon County sheriff office upon request.
   G.   False Statement Prohibited: No alarm company or any employee of an
alarm company will make a false statement to the alarm administrator.
   H.   Installer/Service Repair Person Activity On Alarm Signal: No alarm
salesperson, alarm service person or alarm installer shall activate an alarm
signal that results in a false alarm. (Ord. 589, 9-1-2016)
7.08.04: PROHIBITED ACTS:
   A.   It shall be a violation to activate an alarm system for the purpose of
summoning law enforcement when no burglary, robbery, or other crime dangerous
to life or property is being committed or attempted on the premises, or
otherwise to cause a false alarm.
   B.   It shall be a violation to install, maintain, or use an audible alarm
system which can sound continually for more than fifteen (15) minutes.
   C.   It shall be a violation to install, maintain, or use an automatic dial
protection device that reports, or causes to be reported, any recorded message
to the Lyon County sheriff office.
   D.   It shall be a violation to make false statements on the alarm permit
application and may be grounds for nonissuance of an alarm permit. (Ord. 589,
9-1-2016)
7.08.05: ENFORCEMENT OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   False Alarm Penalties: Civil penalties for false alarms in a twelve
(12) month period may be assessed against an alarm user. The amount of civil
penalties shall be established by the county board of commissioners and may be
subsequently amended by resolution of the county board of commissioners.
   B.   Other Civil Penalty(ies): Violations through the entirety of this
chapter may be enforced through the assessment of civil penalty(ies) as
established by resolution of the county board of commissioners.
   C.   Cancellations: If cancellation of sheriff response occurs, prior to the
sheriff arrival at the scene, the response is not considered a false alarm for
the purpose of a civil penalty and no penalty will be assessed.
   D.   Civil Noncriminal Violation: A violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter shall constitute a civil violation only and shall not constitute a
misdemeanor crime or infraction.
   E.   Payment Of Civil Penalty(ies): Civil penalty(ies) shall be paid within
thirty (30) days from the date of the invoice.
   F.   Notice To Alarm Users Of False Alarms And Potential Suspension:
      1.   The alarm administrator shall notify the alarm user in writing after
the first false alarm. The notice shall include:
         a.   The amount of payment required for the civil penalty.
         b.   The fact that the sheriff response will be suspended after six
(6) false alarms in a twelve (12) month period (excluding duress, holdup,
robbery and panic alarms).
         c.   A description of the appeals procedure available to the alarm
user.
   G.   Suspension Of Law Enforcement Response; Delinquent Account: The failure
of an alarm user to make payment of any civil penalty(ies) assessed under this
chapter within thirty (30) days from the date of the invoice may result in
discontinuance of law enforcement response to alarm signals that may occur at
the alarm system site until payment is received.
      1.   The alarm administrator shall notify the alarm user, the alarm
installation company or monitoring company in writing thirty (30) days before
an alarm response is to be suspended. Suspension of alarm response does not
apply to duress, robbery, holdup and panic alarms. The notice of suspension
must also include the amount of the civil penalty amount for each false alarm,
and a description of the appeals procedure available to the alarm user and the
alarm installation company or monitoring company.
   H.   Suspension Of Law Enforcement Response; Excessive False Alarms:
      1.   After an alarm system site has accumulated six (6) false alarm
responses in a twelve (12) month period, the alarm administrator shall notify
the alarm user and the alarm installation company or monitoring company in
writing thirty (30) days before an alarm response is to be suspended.
Suspension of alarm response does not apply to duress, robbery, holdup and
panic alarms. The notice of suspension must also include the amount of the
civil penalty amount for each false alarm, and a description of the appeals
procedure available to the alarm user and the alarm installation company or
monitoring company.
   I.   Reinstatement Of Suspended Sites For Excessive False Alarms: A person
whose alarm system site has been suspended, may obtain reinstatement of the
response by the alarm administrator if the person submits to the alarm
administrator:
      1.   A reinstatement fee.
      2.   Sufficient articulation in writing, addressing proactive measures to
be implemented, preventing false alarms in the future.
      3.   Certification from an alarm installation company, stating that the
alarm has been inspected and/or repaired on cases where repetitive, obvious
malfunctioning of the system occurred.
   J.   Reinstatement Of Response: The sheriff's office shall reinstate its
response to an alarm system site as soon as practical, after receiving notice
of reinstatement from the alarm administrator.
   K.   Additional Suspension Of Service: If an alarm system site is reinstated
after suspension, the sheriff's office may again suspend response if it is
determined that two (2) false alarms have occurred within sixty (60) days after
the reinstatement date.
   L.   Exceptions: Government entities, including, but not necessarily limited
to, the city, county, state, federal and school districts are exempt from
payment for all civil penalties for alarm systems on property under their
control. (Ord. 589, 9-1-2016)
7.08.06: APPEALS:
   A.   Appeals Process: Assessments of civil penalty(ies) and other
enforcement decisions made under this chapter may be appealed by filing a
written notice of appeal with the alarm administrator within ten (10) days
after the date of notification of the assessment of civil penalty(ies) or other
enforcement decision. The failure to give notice of appeal within this time
period shall constitute a waiver of the right to contest the assessment of
penalty(ies) or other enforcement decision. Appeals shall be heard through an
administrative process established by the sheriff's office. The hearing
officer's decision is subject to review in the district court by proceedings in
the nature of certiorari.
   B.   Appeal Standard: The hearing officer shall review an appeal from the
assessment of civil penalty(ies) or other enforcement decisions using a
preponderance of the evidence standard. Notwithstanding a determination that
the preponderance of the evidence supports the assessment of civil penalty(ies)
or other enforcement decision, the hearing officer shall have the discretion to
dismiss or reduce civil penalty(ies) or reverse any other enforcement decision
based on:
      1.   Evidence that a false alarm was caused by an act of nature;
      2.   Evidence that a false alarm was caused by action of the telephone
company;
      3.   Evidence that a false alarm was caused by a power outage;
      4.   Evidence that an alarm was not a false alarm; or
      5.   Multiple alarms occurring in a twenty four (24) hour period may be
considered as one false alarm to allow the alarm user time to take corrective
action, unless the false alarms are directly caused by the alarm user. (Ord.
589, 9-1-2016)
7.08.07: CONFIDENTIALITY:
In the interest of public safety, all information contained in and gathered
through no response records, applications for appeals and any other alarm
records shall be held in confidence and exempted from any public records
disclosure by all employees and/or representatives of the county. (Ord. 589, 9-
1-2016)
7.08.08: GOVERNMENT IMMUNITY:
This chapter is not intended to, nor will it, create a contract, duty or
obligation, either expressed or implied, of response. Any and all liability and
consequential damage resulting from the failure to respond to a notification is
hereby disclaimed and governmental immunity as provided by law is retained. The
alarm user acknowledges that the Lyon County sheriff office's response may be
influenced by factors such as: the availability of sheriff units, priority of
calls, weather conditions, traffic conditions, emergency conditions, staffing
levels and prior response history. (Ord. 589, 9-1-2016)
TITLE 8
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL TRAFFIC PROVISIONS
SECTION:
8.01.01: Definitions
8.01.02: Compliance with Provisions; Interpretation
8.01.03: Certain Persons Prohibited from Driving
8.01.04: Obedience to Sheriff
8.01.05: Government and Public Works Vehicles
8.01.06: Animals or Bicycles
8.01.07: Accidents
8.01.08: Persons Under Influence of Liquor or Drugs
8.01.01: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Title, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings
indicated in this Section: (1973 Code §11.08.010)
ALLEY:        Any street less than thirty feet (30') in width and which primarily furnishes
              access to the rear entrances of abutting property.
AUTHORIZED    A vehicle of any Fire Department, Sheriff's patrol and such ambulance and
EMERGENCY     emergency vehicles of municipal departments, county or public service
VEHICLE:      corporations as are designated or authorized by the State.
BICYCLE:      Every device having two (2) tandem wheels, which device is propelled by human
              power and upon which any person may ride.
BOULEVARD:    A through street or highway.
              A non-criminal violation of any provision of this code that is not punishable
CIVIL         as a misdemeanor. Unless a different penalty is expressly provided by this code
INFRACTION:   or a different penalty is provided for a particular offense in the Nevada
              Revised Statutes, the monetary penalty for a civil infraction is a civil
              penalty of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) per offense.
COMMERCIAL    A vehicle of a type used or maintained for the transportation of persons for
VEHICLE:      hire, compensation or profit or designed, used or maintained primarily for the
              transportation of property.
              A.   That portion of a street ordinarily included within the prolongation or
              connection of the boundary lines of sidewalks at intersections where the
CROSSWALK:    intersecting streets meet at approximately right angles except the prolongation
              of any such lines from any alley across the street, or
              B.   Any portion of a street distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by
              lines or other markings on the surface.
DRIVER:       A person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle.
              A building or other place wherein the business of storing or safekeeping
GARAGE:       vehicles which belong to drivers or members of the public, is conducted for
              compensation.
HIGHWAY:      For a definition of "highway", see definition of "street" herein.
              The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curb
INTERSECTION: lines or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of two (2) or more highways
              which join one another at an angle, whether or not one highway crosses the
              other.
              That space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during
LOADING ZONE: the loading or unloading of passengers or materials, so marked or indicated by
              adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times.
MOTOR         Every vehicle which is self-propelled but not operated on rails.
VEHICLE:
              Every motor vehicle equipped with a seat or saddle for the use of the driver
MOTORCYCLE:   and designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in contact with the
              ground, including a power cycle but excluding a tractor.
              A device consisting of a series of chambers or baffle plates or other
              mechanical design, for the purpose of receiving exhaust gas from an internal
MUFFLER:      combustion engine and is effective in reducing noise, but does not include such
              a device equipped with an apparatus which permits the exhaust gas to be
              discharged directly into the air without passing through such device.
OFFICIAL      All signs, signals, markings and devices not inconsistent with this Title
TRAFFIC SIGNS placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction
AND SIGNALS:  for the purpose of guiding, directing, warning or regulating traffic.
OPERATOR:     Every individual who operates a vehicle as the owner thereof or who has control
              of a vehicle.
              A person who holds the legal title to a vehicle or, in the event a vehicle is
              the subject of an agreement for the conditional sale or lease thereof with
OWNER:        right or agreement and with an immediate right of possession vested in the
              conditional vendee or lessee or in the event a mortgager of a vehicle is
              entitled to possession, then such conditional vendee or lessee or mortgager
              shall be deemed the owner for the purpose of this Title.
              The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, upon a street otherwise
PARK or       than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or
PARKING:      discharging passengers or in obedience to traffic regulations, signs or signals
              or an involuntary stopping of the vehicle by reason of cause beyond the control
              of the operator of the vehicle.
              Any mechanical device or meter not inconsistent with this Title, placed or
              erected for the regulation of parking by authority of this Title. Each parking
PARKING       meter installed shall indicate by proper legend the legal parking time
METER:        established by the County and, when operated, shall at all times indicate the
              balance of legal parking time and at the expiration of such period, shall
              indicate illegal or overtime parking.
PARKING METER Any restricted street upon which parking meters are installed and in operation.
DISTRICT:
              Any space within a parking meter district, adjacent to a parking meter and
PARKING METER which is duly designated for the parking of a single vehicle by lines painted
SPACE:        or otherwise durably marked on the curb or on the surface of the street
              adjacent to or adjoining the parking meter.
PEDESTRIAN:   A person who goes or travels on foot.
PNEUMATIC     A tire inflated or capable of inflation with compressed air.
TIRE:
PRIVATE ROAD  A road or driveway not open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular
or DRIVEWAY:  travel.
REPAIR SHOP:  A place where vehicles are repaired, rebuilt, reconditioned, repainted or in
              any way maintained for the public at a charge.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the highway.
ROADWAY:      That portion of a street or highway between the regularly established curb
              lines or that part improved and intended to be used for vehicular travel.
              A vehicle of the trailer type so designed and used in conjunction with a motor
SEMI-TRAILER: vehicle that some part of its own weight and that of its own load rests upon or
              is carried by another vehicle.
SIDEWALK:     That portion of a street between the curb lines and the adjacent property
              lines.
STREET or     A way or place of whatever nature open to the use of the public as a matter of
HIGHWAY:      right for the purpose of vehicular travel and shall be deemed to include a
              roadway or driveway upon grounds owned by public or semi-public institutions.
THROUGH       A street or highway or portion thereof at the entrance to which vehicular
STREET or     traffic from intersecting highways or streets is required by law to stop before
THROUGH       entering or crossing the same.
HIGHWAY:
TRAFFIC:      Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other conveyances, either
              singly or together, while using any street for purposes of travel.
TRAFFIC-      Any device, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which
CONTROL       traffic is alternately directed to stop and to proceed.
SIGNAL:
TRAILER:      A vehicle without motive power designed for carrying property or passengers
              wholly on its own structure and for being drawn by a motor vehicle.
              A device upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported upon
VEHICLE:      a highway, except a device which is operated upon rails or tracks. (1973 Code
              §§ 11.08.010 - 11.08.260; 11.08.280 - 11.08.380; 1991 Code; Ord. 633, 1-3-2023)
 
8.01.02: COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS; INTERPRETATION:
   A.   Compliance with Provisions:
      1.   No person shall fail to comply with the provisions of this Title.
      2.   No owner, lessor or lessee of a motor vehicle or any person
employing or otherwise directing the driver of a motor vehicle shall permit the
operation of a motor vehicle upon a street or highway when such vehicle is
equipped otherwise than is required or permitted by this Title or by the laws
of the State. (1973 Code §11.04.010)
   B.   Conflicts with State Law: Whenever the provisions of this Title are in
conflict with the provisions of NRS title 43 as, from time to time, amended,
the provisions of NRS title 43 shall prevail. (1973 Code §11.72.010)
8.01.03: CERTAIN PERSONS PROHIBITED FROM DRIVING:
   A.   Minors: No person shall cause or knowingly permit his child or ward
under the age of sixteen (16) years to drive a motor vehicle upon any street or
alley within the County when such minor is not authorized hereunder or is in
violation of any provision of this Title. (1973 Code §11.16.030)
   B.   Unlicensed Drivers: No person shall authorize or knowingly permit a
motor vehicle owned by him or under his control to be driven upon any street or
alley within the County by any person who is not authorized hereunder or is in
violation of any provisions of this Title. (1973 Code §11.16.040)
   C.   License Revoked or Suspended: Whenever the Department of Motor Vehicles
of Nevada has suspended or revoked the license of any operator or chauffeur,
such operator or chauffeur shall not operate a vehicle on the streets or alleys
within the County during the period of suspension or revocation. (1973 Code
§11.16.050)
8.01.04: OBEDIENCE TO SHERIFF:
Officers of the Sheriff's Department are authorized to direct all traffic by
voice, hand or signal in conference with traffic laws; provided, that in the
event of fire or other emergency, Sheriff's officers may direct traffic as
conditions may require, notwithstanding provisions of traffic laws. No person
shall refuse or fail to comply with any lawful order, signal or direction of
any Sheriff's officer of the County. (1973 Code §§11.040.020, 11.04.030; 1991
Code)
8.01.05: GOVERNMENT AND PUBLIC WORKS VEHICLES:
   A.   The provisions of this Title are applicable to the drivers of all
vehicles owned or operated by the United States, the State or any county, city,
town, district or any other political subdivision, subject to such specific
exceptions as are set forth in this Title with reference to authorized
emergency vehicles.
   B.   The provisions of this Title shall not apply to persons, teams, motor
vehicles and other equipment while actually engaged in work upon the surface of
a street or highway but shall apply to such persons and vehicles when traveling
to or from such work. (1973 Code §11.04.040)
8.01.06: ANIMALS OR BICYCLES:
Every person riding a bicycle or an animal upon a roadway and every person
driving an animal shall be subject to the provisions of this Title applicable
to the driver of a vehicle, except those provisions of this Title which by
their nature can have no application. (1973 Code §11.04.050)
8.01.07: ACCIDENTS:
   A.   Duty When Striking Person or Occupied Vehicle:
      1.   Whenever any vehicle strikes any person or collides with an occupied
vehicle, the driver of such vehicle and all persons in such vehicle who have or
assume authority over such driver shall immediately cause such vehicle to stop
and shall render to the person struck or the occupant of the vehicle collided
with all necessary assistance.
He shall also give to the occupant of such vehicle or person struck the number
of his vehicle, the name and address of the owner thereof and the name and
address of such driver and of such passenger in the vehicle at the time of such
striking or collision.
      2.   Every driver shall, within twenty four (24) hours, make or cause to
be made a full report of such collision, with all details and circumstances
thereof, to the Sheriff's Department. (1973 Code §11.36.010)
   B.   Duty When Striking Unoccupied Vehicle or Animal: Whenever any vehicle
strikes an unoccupied vehicle or animal or any other object of any nature
whatsoever, the driver of such vehicle and all persons in such vehicle who have
or assume authority over such driver shall immediately cause such vehicle to
stop and shall ascertain the name of the owner of the vehicle or animal or
other object so struck and the license number of any such vehicle and shall
immediately make a full report of such collision, with all details and
circumstances thereof, to the Sheriff's Department. (1973 Code §11.36.020)
8.01.08: PERSONS UNDER INFLUENCE OF LIQUOR OR DRUGS:
   A.   Driving Vehicles or Animals:
      1.   Prohibitions: No person, while intoxicated or under the influence of
intoxicating liquor or stimulating or stupefying drugs, shall drive or conduct
any vehicle or ride any animal on any street, highway or alley in the County.
(1973 Code §11.52.010)
         a.   It is unlawful for any person who is under the influence of
intoxicating liquor to drive or be in actual physical control of a vehicle
within the County.
         b.   It is unlawful for any person who is an habitual user of or under
the influence of any narcotic drug as defined in NRS 453.020, dangerous drug as
defined in NRS 454.220 or hallucinogenic drug as defined in NRS 454.460 or any
person who inhales, ingests, applies or otherwise uses any chemical, poison or
organic solvent or any compound or combination of any chemical, poison or
organic solvent to a degree which renders him incapable of safely driving or
steering a vehicle to drive or steer a vehicle within the County. The fact that
any person charged with a violation of this subsection A1b is or has been
entitled to use such drug under the laws of this State shall not constitute a
defense against any charge of violating this subsection. (1973 Code §11.52.030)
      2.   Clinical Tests; Presumptions of Driving While Intoxicated:
         a.   Presumptions: In any criminal prosecution for a violation of
subsection A1a above relating to driving a vehicle while under the influence of
intoxicating liquor, the amount of alcohol in the defendant's blood at the time
alleged as shown by chemical analyses of the defendant's blood, urine, breath
or other bodily substances shall give rise to the following presumptions:
            (1)   If there was, at that time, five one-hundredths percent
(0.05%) or less by weight of alcohol in the defendant's blood, it shall be
presumed that the defendant was not under the influence of intoxicating liquor.
            (2)   If there was, at that time, in excess of five one-hundredths
percent (0.05%) but less than ten one-hundredths percent (0.10%) by weight of
alcohol in the defendant's blood, such fact shall not give rise to any
presumption that the defendant was or was not under the influence of
intoxicating liquor, but such fact may be considered with other competent
evidence in determining the guilt or innocence of the defendant.
            (3)   If there was, at that time, ten one-hundredths percent
(0.10%) or more by weight of alcohol in the defendant's blood, it shall be
presumed that the defendant was under the influence of intoxicating liquor.
The provision of this subsection A2a shall not be construed as limiting the
introduction of any other competent evidence bearing upon the question whether
or not the defendant was under the influence of intoxicating liquor. (1973 Code
§11.52.040)
         b.   Admissibility of Evidence; Availability of Test Information: If a
person refuses to submit to a chemical test as provided for in subsection A2d
hereof, evidence of such refusal shall be admissible in any criminal action
arising out of acts alleged to have been committed while such person was
driving a vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor.
If a person submits to such a test, full information concerning such test shall
be made available, upon his request, to him or his attorney. (1973 Code
§11.52.050)
         c.   Choice of Person to Administer Test: A person arrested for
driving a vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor shall be
permitted, upon his request and at his expense, reasonable opportunity to have
a qualified person of his own choosing administer a chemical test or tests for
the purpose of determining the alcoholic content of his blood.
The failure or inability to obtain such a test or tests by such person shall
not preclude the admission of evidence relating to the refusal to submit to a
test or relating to a test taken upon the request of a Sheriff's deputy.
A test obtained under the provisions of this subsection may not be substituted
for or stand in lieu of the test required by subsection A2d hereof. (1973 Code
§11.52.060)
         d.   Implied Consent; Exceptions from Blood Test:
            (1)   Except as provided in paragraph (4) hereof and in accordance
with the provisions of NRS 484.383, any person who drives a vehicle upon a
street, road or highway in the County is deemed to have given his consent to a
chemical test of his blood, urine, breath or other bodily substance for the
purpose of determining the alcoholic content of his blood when such test is
administered at the direction of a Sheriff's deputy having reasonable grounds
to believe that such person was driving a vehicle while under the influence of
intoxicating liquor and after such person was arrested for any offense
allegedly committed while such person was driving a vehicle under the influence
of intoxicating liquor.
            (2)   Such person shall be informed that his failure to submit to
such test will result in the suspension of his privilege to drive a vehicle for
a period of six (6) months, as provided in NRS 484.383.
            (3)   Any person who is dead, unconscious or otherwise in a
condition rendering him incapable of refusal shall be deemed not to have
withdrawn his consent, and any such test may be administered whether or not
such person is informed, as required in paragraph (2) above.
            (4)   A person may refuse to submit to a blood test if means are
reasonably available to perform a breath or urine test and may refuse to submit
to a blood or urine test if means are reasonably available to perform a breath
test. (1973 Code §11.52.070)
   B.   Intoxicated Person in Vehicle: No person, while intoxicated or under
the influence of intoxicating liquor, shall be in or about any motor vehicle on
any street, highway or alley in the County. (1973 Code §11.52.020)
CHAPTER 2
TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNS, SIGNALS AND MARKINGS
SECTION:
8.02.01: Uniform System
8.02.02: Obedience to Traffic-Control Signs and Signals
8.02.03: Unauthorized Signs or Signals
8.02.04: Interference with Signs Prohibited
8.02.01: UNIFORM SYSTEM:
   A.   The County Sheriff, with the assistance of the electrical engineer,
subject to the approval of the County Commissioners, may determine the
character or type and place or erect upon the streets and highways traffic-
control signals at places where he shall deem necessary for the safe and
expeditious control of traffic. So far as practicable, all such traffic-control
signals shall be uniform as to type and location.
   B.   The County Sheriff, with the assistance of the County Engineer, shall
cause to be erected and maintained signs designating railway grade crossings
and such other signs, markings and traffic-control signals as may be deemed
necessary to direct and regulate traffic and carry out the provisions of this
Title and such additional signs as may be appropriate to give notice of parking
and other regulations. (1973 Code §11.28.010; 1991 Code)
8.02.02: OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNS AND SIGNALS:
No driver of any vehicle or the person in charge of any animal or any
pedestrian shall disobey the instructions of any official traffic sign or
signal placed in accordance with the provisions of this Title unless otherwise
directed by a deputy sheriff. (1973 Code §11.28.030)
8.02.03: UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS OR SIGNALS:
No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any street or
highway any unofficial sign, signal or device which purports to be or is an
imitation of or resembles an official traffic sign or signal or which attempts
to direct the movement of traffic or which hides from view or interferes with
the effectiveness of any official traffic sign or signal, and no person shall
erect or maintain upon any street or highway any traffic or highway sign or
signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising. (1973 Code §11.28.040)
Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the erection of the name
of an organization authorized to erect the same by the appropriate public
authority. (1973 Code §11.28.040; amd. 1991 Code)
Every prohibited sign, signal or device is a public nuisance, and the County
Sheriff shall remove the same or cause it to be removed without notice. (1973
Code §11.28.040)
8.02.04: INTERFERENCE WITH SIGNS PROHIBITED:
No person shall deface, injure, knock down or remove any official traffic sign
or signal placed or erected as provided in this title. (1973 Code §11.28.050)
CHAPTER 3
RULES OF THE ROAD
SECTION:
8.03.01: Driver's Signals
8.03.02: Right-Of-Way
8.03.03: Turning Movements
8.03.04: Through Streets; Stop Intersections
8.03.05: Speed Restrictions
8.03.06: Driving On Right Side Of Roadway And On Roadways Laned For Traffic
8.03.07: Overtaking And Passing Vehicles
8.03.08: Restrictions On Driving
8.03.09: Zones Of Quiet
8.03.10: Operation Of Vehicles On County Or Private Property
8.03.11: Reckless Or Careless Driving
8.03.12: Racing; Squealing Tires
8.03.13: Transporting Liquor
8.03.14: Unlawful To Possess Or Consume Marijuana In Vehicle On Highway
8.03.01: DRIVER'S SIGNALS:
   A.   Signals Required:
      1.   The driver of any vehicle upon a street or highway, before starting,
stopping or turning from a direct line, shall first see that such movement can
be made in safety and, if any pedestrian may be affected by such movement,
shall give a clearly audible signal by sounding the horn.
      2.   Whenever the operation of any other vehicle may be affected by such
movement, the driver of any vehicle shall give a signal as required in
subsection B of this Section, plainly visible to the driver of such vehicle, of
the intention to make such a movement.
The signal required in subsection B of this Section shall be given either by
means of the hand and arm in the manner therein specified or by an approved
mechanical or electrical signal device, which has been approved by the statutes
of the State. (1973 Code §11.20.220)
   B.   Method of Giving Signals:
      1.   All signals required by hand and arm shall be given from the left
side of a vehicle in the following manner, and such signals indicate as
follows:
         a.   Left Turn: Hand and arm extended horizontally beyond the side of
the vehicle.
         b.   Right Turn: Hand and arm extended upward beyond the side of the
vehicle.
         c.   Stop or Sudden Decrease of Speed: Hand and arm extended downward
beyond the side of the vehicle.
      2.   In a closed vehicle, the signals shall be given by a proper
signalling device indicating the same signals as required by the hand and arm.
      3.   Any signal of intention to turn right or left shall be given
continuously during the last one hundred feet (100') traveled by the vehicle
before turning.
      4.   No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle
without first giving the appropriate signal to the driver of any vehicle
immediately to the rear when there is opportunity to give such signal. (1973
Code §11.20.230)
8.03.02: RIGHT OF WAY:
   A.   The driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection shall yield the
right of way to a vehicle which has entered the intersection from a different
street or highway. (1973 Code § 11.20.010)
   B.   When two (2) vehicles enter an intersection from different streets or
highways at the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield
the right of way to the driver of the vehicle on the right. (1973 Code
§11.20.020)
   C.   Subsections A and B of this Section shall not apply to vehicles
approaching each other from opposite directions, when the driver of one such
vehicle is intending to or is making a left turn. (1973 Code §11.20.030)
The driver of a vehicle within an intersection preparatory to a turn to the
left shall yield the right of way to any vehicle which has approached or is
approaching the intersection from the opposite direction and which is so close
as to constitute a hazard at any time during the turning movement and shall
continue to yield the right of way to such approaching vehicles until such time
as the left turn can be made with reasonable safety. (1973 Code §11.20.040)
8.03.03: TURNING MOVEMENTS:
   A.   Right and Left Turns: The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an
intersection shall do as follows:
      1.   Right Turns: Approach for a right turn shall be made in the lane for
traffic nearest to the right-hand side of the highway, and the right turn shall
be made as closely as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the street
or highway.
      2.   Left Turns: 1
         a.   Approach for a left turn shall be made in the lanes for traffic
to the right of and nearest to the center line of the street or highway. The
left turn shall be made by passing to the right of such center line where it
enters the intersection and, upon leaving the intersection, by passing to the
right of the center line of the highway then entered.
         b.   Approach for a left turn from a two-way street into a one-way
street shall be made in the lane for traffic to the right of and nearest to the
center line of the highway or street. The left turn shall be made by passing to
the right of such center line where it enters the intersection and, upon
leaving the intersection, by passing to the right of the center line of the
highway then entered.
         c.   The County Sheriff may, by placing markers, buttons or signs
within intersections, require and direct that a course be traveled by vehicles
turning left different from that specified in this subsection, and it is
unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to make a left turn otherwise than as so
directed and required by such markers, buttons or signs. (1973 Code §11.20.170)
   B.   U Turns: The driver of a vehicle shall not turn such vehicle around so
as to proceed in the opposite direction except at an intersection. (1973 Code
§11.20.180)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  8.03.02C of this Chapter.
8.03.04: THROUGH STREETS; STOP INTERSECTIONS:
   A.   The driver of any vehicle who has stopped, as required by law, at the
entrance to a through street or highway shall yield the right of way to other
vehicles which have entered the intersection from the through street or which
are approaching so closely on the through street or highway as to constitute an
immediate hazard. Such driver, having so yielded, may proceed and the drivers
of all other vehicles approaching the intersection on the through street or
highway shall yield the right of way to the vehicle so proceeding into or
across the through street or highway. (1973 Code §11.20.050)
   B.   Stop Streets: No driver of any vehicle shall fail to stop in obedience
to any sign erected in accordance with the provisions of subsection
8.02.01B of this Title except where directed to proceed by a Sheriff's officer
or traffic-control signal. The stop required by this Section shall be made
before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection. (1973 Code
§11.28.090)
8.03.05: SPEED RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Maximum Speed Limits: No person shall drive a vehicle upon a street,
highway or alley in excess of the speed indicated as follows:
      1.   Fifteen Miles Per Hour:
         a.   When passing a school building or the grounds thereof during the
school period or while children are going to or leaving or playing about said
school.
         b.   When turning a corner from one street or highway into another or
on going through any street intersection within the County, except when
traveling along a through street or boulevard.
         c.   In public parks within the County.
         d.   In all alleys within the County.
         e.   When approaching or upon a curve or other part of a street or
highway, in the event the driver's view is obstructed, within a distance of one
hundred feet (100') along the street or highway in the direction in which such
driver is proceeding.
      2.   Twenty-Five Miles Per Hour: Upon any through street, boulevard or
highway.
      3.   Thirty-Five Miles Per Hour: Upon any through street, boulevard or
highway marked and signed by the County Sheriff, with the approval of the
County Commissioners, when the marking and signing indicate the allowance of
such speed. (1973 Code §11.24.020)
   B.   Minimum Speed Limit: No person shall drive a vehicle upon a street or
highway within the County at such a slow speed as to impede or block the normal
and reasonable movement of traffic, except when reduced speed is necessary for
safe operation. (1973 Code §11.24.030)
   C.   Restricted Speed Zones:
      1.   Authority: In order to protect life, limb and property and to
facilitate the orderly movement of vehicular traffic upon the streets and
highways of the County, the County Commissioners may establish restricted speed
zones.
      2.   Signs Posted: After the establishment of any restricted speed zone,
the County Sheriff shall cause to be placed upon the street and highway where
such restricted speed zone has been established, appropriate signs or signals
giving notice thereof.
      3.   Obedience to Signs and Signals: No driver of any vehicle shall
disobey the instructions of any sign or signal placed in accordance with the
provisions of this subsection unless otherwise directed by a deputy sheriff.
(1973 Code §11.24.040)
8.03.06: DRIVING ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY AND ON ROADWAYS LANED FOR TRAFFIC:
   A.   Upon all streets, alleys or highways of sufficient width, other than
one-way streets or alleys, the driver of a vehicle shall drive upon the right
half of the street or highway except when the right half is out of repair and
for such reason impassable or when overtaking and passing other vehicle subject
to the limitations set forth in subsection
8.03.07B of this Chapter. (1973 Code §11.20.080)
In driving upon the right half of a highway, the driver shall drive as closely
as practicable to the right-hand edge or curb of the highway except when
overtaking or passing another vehicle or when placing a vehicle in position to
make a left turn. (1973 Code §11.20.090)
   B.   In driving upon a one-way street or alley, the driver shall drive as
closely as practicable to the right-hand edge or curb of the street or alley
except when overtaking or passing or traveling parallel with another vehicle or
when placing a vehicle in position to make a left turn. (1973 Code §11.20.100)
   C.   No two (2) or more vehicles shall travel side by side on any street.
(1973 Code §11.20.110)
   D.   No person driving, riding, propelling or in charge of any vehicle
proceeding correctly along the right side of any street or highway shall cross
over to the left side in the center or middle of a block, but shall proceed to
the nearest street intersection and make a complete turn, keeping at all times
in the right side of the street in the channel of traffic.
Under the meaning and intent of this subsection, an alley shall not be
construed to be a street. (1973 Code §11.20.120)
   E.   Whenever any street or highway has been divided into clearly marked
lanes for traffic, drivers of vehicles shall obey the following regulations:
      1.   A vehicle shall normally be driven in the lane nearest the right-
hand edge or curb of the street or highway when such lane is available for
travel except when overtaking another vehicle or in preparation for a left
turn.
      2.   A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practicable entirely within a
single lane and shall not be moved from such lane until the driver has first
ascertained that such movement can be made with safety.
      3.   The County Sheriff may designate right-hand lanes for slow-moving
traffic and inside lanes for traffic moving at the speed indicated for the
street under this Title. When such lanes are signposted or marked to give
notice of such designations, a vehicle may be driven in any lane allocated to
traffic movement in the direction such vehicle is proceeding. When traveling
within such inside lanes, vehicles shall be driven at approximately the maximum
speed authorized in such lanes, and speed shall not unnecessarily be decreased
so as to block, hinder or retard traffic. (1973 Code §11.20.130)
8.03.07: OVERTAKING AND PASSING VEHICLES:
   A.   Passing Vehicles: Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions
shall pass each other to the right, each giving to the other at least one-half
(1/2) of the main traveled portion of the roadway, whenever possible. (1973
Code §11.20.140)
   B.   Overtaking Vehicles: Except as otherwise provided in subsection A of
this Section, the following rules shall govern the overtaking and passing of
vehicles:
      1.   The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not
again drive to the right side of the street or highway until safely clear of
such overtaken vehicle.
      2.   The driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in
favor of the overtaking vehicle on suitable and audible signal and shall not
increase the speed of his vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking
vehicle.
      3.   In the event vehicles on a street or highway are moving in two (2)
or more substantially continuous lines, the provisions of subsections B1 and B2
hereof shall not be considered as prohibiting the vehicles in one such line
overtaking or passing the vehicles in another such line either upon the right
or the left nor shall the provisions of subsections B1 and B2 hereof be
construed to prohibit a driver overtaking and passing upon the right of another
vehicle which is making or about to make a left turn.
      4.   The driver of a vehicle shall not drive to the left side of the
center line of a street or highway in overtaking and passing another vehicle
proceeding in the same direction unless such left side is clearly visible and
is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such
overtaking and passing to be completely made without impeding the safe
operation of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction or any vehicle
overtaken. (1973 Code §11.20.150)
   C.   Passing or Overtaking School Buses: The driver of any vehicle upon a
street or highway, when meeting or overtaking from either direction any school
bus equipped with signs and signals required by law which has stopped on the
street or highway for the purpose of receiving or discharging children and is
displaying a flashing red light signal visible from the front and rear, shall
bring his vehicle to a stop immediately and shall not proceed past the school
bus until the flashing red signal ceases operation.
The driver of a vehicle need not stop upon meeting or passing a school bus when
the school bus is stopped at an intersection or a place where traffic is
controlled by a traffic officer or an official traffic signal. (1973 Code
§11.20.160)
8.03.08: RESTRICTIONS ON DRIVING:
   A.   Backing:
      1.   No person shall ride, drive or propel or cause to be ridden, driven
or propelled in, upon or along any street any vehicle in the backward direction
if, by so doing, the free and uninterrupted passage of another vehicle is
impeded, and in no event shall a person drive a vehicle back across or into a
street intersection.
      2.   The driver of a vehicle parked diagonally and backing away from the
curb into a traffic lane shall exercise unceasing vigilance and, in all events,
the approaching car shall have the right of way. (1973 Code §11.20.190)
   B.   Following too Closely: The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow
another vehicle closer than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard to the
speed of such vehicle and the traffic upon and the condition of the street or
highway. (1973 Code §11.20.200)
   C.   Emerging from Alley, Driveway, Etc.:
      1.   The driver of a vehicle entering a public street or highway from a
private road, private driveway or public alley shall yield the right of way to
all vehicles approaching on such public street or highway. (1973 Code
§11.20.060)
      2.   The operator of a vehicle merging from an alley or private driveway
shall completely stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto the
sidewalk area extending across such alley or private driveway. (1973 Code
§11.20.210)
   D.   Driving Through Funeral Processions: No vehicle shall be driven or
propelled through or across any funeral procession passing through the streets
of the County. Any such vehicle, upon meeting any funeral procession, shall
come to a full stop until the funeral procession has fully and completely
passed the vehicle.
This subsection shall not apply to vehicles of the fire or sheriff's
departments or other authorized emergency vehicles. (1973 Code §11.56.030)
8.03.09: ZONES OF QUIET:
   A.   Every street or highway within two hundred feet (200') of a hospital
building is declared to be a "zone of quiet".
   B.   The County Sheriff is hereby authorized to declare any portion of a
street, highway or alley within two hundred feet (200') of a sick chamber a
"zone of quiet" for temporary purposes.
   C.   No person shall sound gongs, whistles, horns, sirens or make
unnecessary noise or itinerate music in any "zone of quiet". (1973 Code
§11.56.020)
8.03.10: OPERATION OF VEHICLES ON COUNTY OR PRIVATE PROPERTY:
   A.   Operation Of Vehicles On County Property: It is unlawful for any person
to operate a vehicle upon property belonging to the County without the
authorization of the County Commissioners. (1973 Code §11.20.240; amd. 1991
Code)
   B.   Operation Of Vehicles On Private Property: It is unlawful for any
person to operate a vehicle upon any private property within the County without
the express permission of the owner or occupier of such private property. (1973
Code §11.20.250)
   C.   Exceptions: Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the
operation of a vehicle upon any area designated by the County or the owner or
occupier of private property as a driveway, parking lot or other area to which
access by vehicle is commonly permitted. (1973 Code §11.20.260)
8.03.11: RECKLESS OR CARELESS DRIVING:
No person shall drive a vehicle upon a street, highway or alley in violation of
the provisions of this section. (1973 Code §11.24.010)
   A.   Reckless Driving: Any person who drives any vehicle in the County in
wilful or wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property is guilty of
reckless driving.
   B.   Careless Driving: It is unlawful for any person to drive or operate a
vehicle of any kind or character in a careless manner in the County or in other
than a careful and prudent manner or at a rate of speed greater than is
reasonable and proper, having due regard for the traffic on and the surface and
width of the street or highway or at such a rate of speed as to endanger the
life, limb or property of any person; provided, that the speed of vehicle shall
not exceed that provided for in this chapter, and provided further, that the
mere fact that a vehicle is operated within the speed restriction contained in
this title will not constitute prima facie evidence that the vehicle was
operated in a lawful manner. (1973 Code §11.56.050)
8.03.12: RACING; SQUEALING TIRES:
   A.   Racing: No driver of any vehicle shall engage in a speed contest with
another driver of any type motor-driven vehicle. (1973 Code §11.24.050)
   B.   Squealing Tires: No person, in operating a motor vehicle within the
County, shall so accelerate the same as to cause audible noise by the tire
friction on the pavement or cause the tires of such vehicle to leave skid marks
upon the pavement except when such acceleration is reasonably necessary to
avoid a collision. (1973 Code §11.24.060)
8.03.13: TRANSPORTING LIQUOR:
No person shall carry in his vehicle an open container of alcoholic beverage on
any street, alley or public parking lot in the County. (1973 Code §11.52.020)
8.03.14: UNLAWFUL TO POSSESS OR CONSUME MARIJUANA IN VEHICLE ON HIGHWAY:
It is unlawful:
   A.   For the registered owner of a motor vehicle, or the driver if the
registered owner is not then present, or passengers in the vehicle, to keep
marijuana or used marijuana paraphernalia in a motor vehicle when the vehicle
is upon a highway, unless it is:
      1.   In the trunk of the vehicle;
      2.   In some other area of the vehicle not normally occupied or directly
accessible by the driver or passengers if the vehicle does not have a trunk or
in a locked container not readily accessible;
      3.   In a package, container, or receptacle that has not been opened or
the seal broken or contents partially removed. A utility compartment or glove
compartment is deemed to be within the area occupied by the driver and
passengers.
   B.   To consume marijuana in any manner including, but not limited to,
smoking or ingesting in a motor vehicle when the vehicle is upon the public
highway; or
   C.   To place marijuana in a container specifically labeled by the
manufacturer of the container as containing a nonmarijuana substance and to
then violate subsection A of this section.
   D.   There is a rebuttable presumption that it is a violation of this
section if the original container of marijuana is incorrectly labeled and there
is a subsequent violation of subsection A of this section.
   E.   As used in this section, "marijuana" or "marihuana" means all parts of
the plant Cannabis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin
extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt,
derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. The term
does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the
stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound,
manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks,
except the resin extracted therefrom, fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized
seed of the plant which is incapable of germination.
   F.   As used in this section, "highway" means the entire width between the
boundary lines of every way dedicated to a public authority when any part of
the way is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular traffic,
whether or not the public authority is maintaining the way.
   G.   As used in this section, "locked container" means a secure container
that is fully enclosed and locked by a padlock, key lock, combination lock or
similar locking devices (excludes center consoles).
   H.   Any violation of this section is a misdemeanor, except for subsection B
of this section which is punished as provided in Nevada Revised Statutes
453D.400(2). (Ord. 592, 6-1-2017, eff. 6-16-2017)
CHAPTER 4
PARKING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
8.04.01: Application of Provisions
8.04.02: No Parking Places
8.04.03: Method of Parking
8.04.04: General Parking Restrictions
8.04.05: Time Limit Parking
8.04.06: Special Parking Areas
8.04.07: Loading and Unloading
8.04.08: Permit Required for Certain Vehicles
8.04.09: Overlength Vehicles
8.04.10: Signs Posted; Obedience
8.04.01: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   The provisions of this Chapter prohibiting the stopping, standing or
parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times herein
specified except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with
the direction of a Sheriff's deputy or official traffic-control device.
   B.   The provisions of this Chapter imposing a time limit on standing or
parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more
restrictive provisions hereof or of any other ordinance of the County or
statute of the State prohibiting or limiting the standing or parking of
vehicles in specified places or at specified times. (1973 Code §11.32.200)
8.04.02: NO PARKING PLACES:
It is unlawful for the driver of a vehicle or for the owner of a vehicle to
permit the driver thereof to stop, stand or park such vehicle, whether attended
or unattended, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with the directions of a Sheriff's deputy or traffic-control signal,
in any of the following places:
   A.   Within an intersection.
   B.   On a crosswalk.
   C.   On a sidewalk.
   D.   Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire station.
   E.   Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant.
   F.   In front of a private driveway.
   G.   Alongside or opposite any street or highway excavation or obstruction
when such stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
   H.   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or
curb of any street or highway.
   I.   In any line of traffic so as to obstruct such traffic.
   J.   Between the curb or edge of roadway and property line.
   K.   Within twenty feet (20') of any intersection of two (2) streets.
   L.   Within three feet (3') of an intersection of a street and an alley.
(1973 Code §11.32.010)
8.04.03: METHOD OF PARKING:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to stand or park a vehicle in a roadway
other than parallel with the edge of the roadway, headed in the direction of
traffic and with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle within eighteen inches
(18") of the curb line or edge of the roadway, or where angle parking is so
allowed, except as provided in this Section.
   B.   It is lawful to back a vehicle to the curb only for such time as shall
be necessary to load or unload merchandise or material and then only if ample
space is left in the roadway for traffic to pass such a vehicle. (1973 Code
§11.32.060)
8.04.04: GENERAL PARKING RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Filling Vehicles with Gasoline:
      1.   It is unlawful:
         a.   For the driver of any vehicle to stand or park the same upon any
street or highway for the purpose of introducing gasoline or other product of
petroleum into such vehicle.
         b.   For any person to introduce gasoline or other product of
petroleum into any vehicle while the same is standing or parked upon any street
or highway.
      2.   It is lawful to so introduce gasoline or other fuel into a vehicle
from a container not exceeding five (5) gallons in capacity in the event the
fuel supply in the vehicle has become exhausted. (1973 Code §11.32.040)
   B.   Alleys:
      1.   It is unlawful for any person to park any vehicle in any public
alley of the County except those vehicles that come within the provisions of
Section
8.04.03 of this Chapter. (1973 Code §11.32.070)
      2.   It is unlawful for any person to park any vehicle in any alley
within the boundaries of the business district for a longer period of time than
shall be necessary to load or unload goods, wares or merchandise from or to any
business establishment in such district at any time without first obtaining a
permit from the County Sheriff. It is unlawful to park such a vehicle in such a
manner as to obstruct the movements of other vehicles through such alley. (1973
Code §11.32.080)
   C.   All Night Parking: It is unlawful for the owner, driver or any person
in charge of a motor vehicle to cause or permit the same to be or remain parked
at the curb at any time between four o'clock (4:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00)
A.M. of the same day signed and posted to that effect. (1973 Code §11.32.090)
   D.   Preference to Vehicle in Process of Parking: Whenever a space is vacant
next to a curb, sufficient only for the parking of one vehicle, and any vehicle
has stopped in the line of traffic for the purpose of backing into said space,
such vehicle shall have the preferential right to such parking space over any
following vehicle. (1973 Code §11.32.120)
   E.   Leaving Child or Others in Parked Car:
      1.   It is unlawful for any person to leave standing or parked any
vehicle when the doors thereof are locked and in which there is a person who
cannot readily escape therefrom.
      2.   It is unlawful for any person to leave a child of tender years
unattended in any standing or parked vehicle. (1973 Code §11.32.130)
   F.   Crest of Hill: When standing upon any perceptible grade, the front
wheels of such vehicle shall be turned to the curb of the right-hand side of
the highway or street. (1973 Code §11.32.150)
   G.   Parking Vehicle for Sale: No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon
any street for the purpose of displaying such vehicle for sale by sign or
otherwise. (1973 Code §11.32.140)
   H.   Set Brakes; Stop Motor: No person having control or charge of a motor
vehicle shall allow such vehicle to stand on any street or highway unattended
without first effectively setting the brakes thereon and stopping the motor.
(1973 Code §11.32.150)
   I.   Opening Doors into Traffic: No person shall open the door of a motor
vehicle on the side available to moving traffic unless and until it is
reasonably safe to do so, and no person shall leave a door open upon the side
of a vehicle available to moving traffic for a period of time longer than
necessary to load or unload passengers. (1973 Code §11.32.190)
   J.   Leaving Parked Vehicle Running: It is unlawful for any person to leave
unattended upon any public street or highway or alley any motor vehicle while
any part of its machinery is running or is in motion except for the purpose of
operating refrigeration equipment of said vehicle or a trailer or semi-trailer
connected therewith. (1973 Code §11.32.160)
8.04.05: TIME LIMIT PARKING:
   A.   One-Hour Parking: When signs, authorized by action of the County
Commissioners, are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall stop, stand
or park any vehicle upon any street for a period of time longer than one hour.
The provisions of this subsection shall be subject to the application of
special or more restrictive provisions contained in this Title and relating to
the parking of vehicles. (1973 Code §11.32.100)
   B.   Seventy Two Hour Parking: No person shall park a vehicle upon any
street, with the exception of U. S. Highway 40, for more than seventy two (72)
hours. (1973 Code §11.32.110)
8.04.06: SPECIAL PARKING AREAS:
Such areas as the County Commissioners shall designate as "special parking
areas", the County Sheriff shall cause to be appropriately marked by green
paint placed and maintained upon the entire curb surface within such area or
areas.
It is unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle in any area
designated as a "special parking area" when such area is duly marked and signed
between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. of
any day except Sundays and legal holidays specified by the laws of the State.
(1973 Code §11.32.180)
8.04.07: LOADING AND UNLOADING:
   A.   Loading Zones: When areas are designated by the County Commissioners as
"loading zones" and have been appropriately marked with yellow paint placed and
maintained upon the entire curb surface along such area, it is unlawful for any
person to stop or stand a vehicle except for the purpose of loading or
unloading passengers or materials to the establishment for which the area was
designated.
   B.   Loading and Unloading Passengers and Materials:
      1.   The loading or unloading of passengers shall not consume more than
three (3) minutes, and the loading or unloading of materials shall not consume
more than twenty (20) minutes unless permission is obtained from the County
Sheriff authorizing the standing of a vehicle for a longer period while
unloading or loading materials.
      2.   Where a proper sign is erected in front of a hotel, the loading or
unloading of passengers and their luggage shall not consume more than twenty
(20) minutes.
      3.   The loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial
deliveries and to the delivery or pickup of express and parcel-post packages
and United States mail.
      4.   The loading or unloading of passengers shall include the loading or
unloading of personal baggage. (1973 Code §11.32.170)
8.04.08: PERMIT REQUIRED FOR CERTAIN VEHICLES:
   A.   Vending Vehicles: No person shall stand or park any vehicle, wagon or
pushcart from which goods, wares, merchandise, fruits, vegetables or foodstuffs
are sold, displayed, solicited or offered for sale or bartered or exchanged or
any lunchwagon or eating car or vehicle on any portion of any street within the
County without first obtaining a written permit to do so from the County
Commissioners which shall designate the specific location in which such
vehicle, wagon or pushcart shall stand. The provisions of this subsection shall
not apply to persons delivering such articles from a store or other fixed place
of business or distribution upon order of or by agreement with a customer.
   B.   Vehicles for Hire:
      1.   No person shall park or stand any vehicle or wagon used or intended
to be used in the transportation of persons or property for hire on any street
while awaiting patronage for such vehicle or wagon without first obtaining a
permit to do so from the County Commissioners which shall designate the
specific location where such vehicle may stand, and such location shall be
signed indicating that it has been reserved for the use of the particular named
person. When so signed, it is unlawful for any person other than the person
designated to park or stand a vehicle in such space.
      2.   It is unlawful for the owner or person in charge of any vehicle used
in carrying passengers, freight, baggage or merchandise for hire to permit such
vehicle to stand or remain in front of any place of business without first
obtaining the written consent of the tenant of such place of business.
   C.   Conditions of Permit; Revocation: Whenever any permit is granted under
the provisions of this Section and a particular location has been designated,
no person shall park or stand any vehicle, wagon or pushcart on any location
other than as designated in such permit. In the event the holder of any such
permit is convicted in any court of competent jurisdiction for violating any of
the provisions of this Section, such permit shall be forthwith revoked by the
County Commissioners upon the filing of the record of such conviction with the
County Commissioners. No permit thereafter shall be issued to such person until
six (6) months have elapsed from the date of such revocation. (1973 Code
§11.32.140)
8.04.09: OVERLENGTH VEHICLES:
It is unlawful for the driver of any vehicle or of any vehicle and trailer
having an overall length of twenty one feet (21') to stand or park the same at
any time on any street or highway or alley in a residential area for more than
one hour after a request to move the same has been made by the property owner
or the Sheriff's Department. This Section shall not apply to such a vehicle
parked immediately in front of the property of the owner or agent of the owner.
(1973 Code §11.32.030)
8.04.10: SIGNS POSTED; OBEDIENCE:
In such areas as are designated by the County Commissioners as "no parking" or
"no stopping" areas, the County Sheriff shall cause such areas to be
appropriately marked by red paint placed and maintained upon the entire curb
surface within such area.
It is unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle in any area
designated as a "no parking" or "no stopping" area. A bus may stop in such a
red zone when the same has been authorized, marked or signed as a bus stop, and
a taxi or other vehicle for the transportation of persons or property for hire
may stop in certain red zones, as provided in this Title, and utility vehicles
and authorized emergency vehicle of the County may stop in such a red zone if
such vehicle is there in line of duty. (1973 Code §11.32.050)
CHAPTER 5
PEDESTRIANS
SECTION:
8.05.01: Right of Way
8.05.02: Pedestrian's Use of Roadways
8.05.03: Playing Games in Streets
8.05.01: RIGHT OF WAY:
The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right of way to a pedestrian crossing a
roadway within any marked crosswalk or within any unmarked crosswalk at an
intersection except as otherwise provided in this Chapter.
Whenever any vehicle has stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any unmarked
crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway, the
driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not overtake and
pass such stopped vehicle.
When traffic-control signals are not in place or not in operation, the driver
of a vehicle shall yield the right of way, slowing down or stopping if need be
to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk when the
pedestrian is upon that half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling
or when a pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the
roadway as to be in danger. (1973 Code §11.68.010)
8.05.02: PEDESTRIAN'S USE OF ROADWAYS:
   A.   Use Right Half of Crosswalk: Pedestrians shall move, whenever
practicable, upon the right half of crosswalks. (1973 Code §11.68.040)
   B.   Crossing at Other Than Crosswalks: Every pedestrian crossing a roadway
at any point other than within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked
crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the right of way to all vehicles upon
the roadway.
The provisions of this subsection shall not relieve the driver of a vehicle
from the duty to exercise due care for the safety of any pedestrian upon a
roadway.
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than a route at right
angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb, except in a
marked crosswalk. (1973 Code §11.68.020)
   C.   Crossing at Controlled Intersections: At intersections where traffic is
controlled by a traffic-control signal device or by Sheriff's officers,
pedestrians shall not cross the roadway against a red or stop signal. (1973
Code §11.68.030)
   D.   Suddenly Leaving Curb: No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or
other place and walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close that
it is impossible for the driver to yield.
   E.   Soliciting Rides or Business:
      1.   No pedestrian shall loiter in a crosswalk for the purpose of
soliciting a ride, employment or business. (1973 Code §11.68.010)
      2.   No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a
ride from the driver of any vehicle. (1973 Code §11.68.050)
8.05.03: PLAYING GAMES IN STREETS:
No person shall engage in any sport, amusement or occupation likely to impede
the passage of vehicles upon any street. (1973 Code §11.56.010)
CHAPTER 6
VEHICLE EQUIPMENT AND CONDITION
SECTION:
8.06.01: State Registration Required
8.06.02: Brakes
8.06.03: Horns and Warning Devices
8.06.04: Lights
8.06.05: Mufflers and Exhaust Systems
8.06.06: Tires
8.06.07: Obstructing Driver; Riding on Unlawful Part of Vehicle
8.06.08: Vehicle Weight and Load
8.06.09: Prohibited Acts and Conditions
8.06.01: STATE REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to operate or for the owner thereof knowingly to
permit the operation of any motor vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer upon any
street, highway or alley unless the same has been registered and has attached
thereto and conspicuously displayed thereon the number of plate currently
assigned thereto by the Motor Vehicle Department of the State, unless such
vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer is exempted from such registration by the laws
of the State. (1973 Code §11.40.010)
8.06.02: BRAKES:
Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, when operated within the County,
shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop
and hold such vehicle, including means which shall be effective to apply the
brakes to at least two (2) wheels. (1973 Code § 11.40.020)
No person shall operate any vehicle within the County which is incapable at all
times and under all conditions of loading of being stopped on a dry, smooth,
level street free from loose material upon application of the service brake or
of being decelerated at such a sustained rate as is specified by the statutes
of the State. (1973 Code §11.40.020; 1991 Code)
8.06.03: HORNS AND WARNING DEVICES:
   A.   No person shall operate upon the streets or alleys of the County any
vehicle which is not equipped with a horn in good working order and capable of
emitting sound audible under normal conditions from a distance of not less than
two hundred feet (200').
Every person operating a vehicle shall, when reasonably necessary to insure
safe operation, give audible warning with his horn, and it is unlawful to
otherwise use such horn.
No horn shall emit an unreasonable loud or harsh sound or a whistle.
   B.   No person shall use upon a vehicle any siren, whistle, bell or red
light except on emergency equipment of the County or other governmental agency
or other emergency equipment authorized by the State.
Any authorized emergency vehicle may be equipped with a siren, whistle or bell
capable of emitting sound audible under normal conditions from a distance of
not less than five hundred feet (500'). It is unlawful to use such siren except
when such vehicle is operated in response to an emergency call or in the
immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, in which
event, the driver of such vehicle shall sound such siren or electric warning
device when necessary to warn pedestrians and other drivers of the approach
thereof. (1973 Code §11.40.030)
8.06.04: LIGHTS:
No person shall operate upon any street or highway any vehicle that is not
equipped with the lighting equipment required by the laws of the State. It is
unlawful:
   A.   For any person driving or in charge of a vehicle to fail to display
lights in compliance with the laws of the State.
   B.   For any person to operate upon any street or highway any vehicle that
is equipped with lighting equipment that is not in conformity with the
requirements of the laws of the State. (1973 Code §11.40.040)
8.06.05: MUFFLERS AND EXHAUST SYSTEMS:
   A.   General Requirements: No person shall ride, drive or propel, or cause
or permit to be ridden, driven or propelled, any motor vehicle in, upon or
along any street or highway nor operate, or cause or permit to be operated, the
motor in any such vehicle in any street or other public place if such motor
vehicle or the motor in such vehicle is not provided with a good and sufficient
muffler properly attached thereto or if the exhaust from the motor in such
vehicle is ejected otherwise than through such muffler or if the exhaust is
ejected toward the surface of the street or ground. (1973 Code §11.40.050)
   B.   Modified Exhaust Systems: No person shall modify the exhaust system of
a motor vehicle in a manner which will amplify or increase the noise emitted by
the motor of such vehicle above that emitted by the muffler originally
installed on the vehicle.
The original muffler shall comply with all of the requirements of the original
equipment. (1973 Code §11.40.060)
   C.   Exhaust Pipes on Diesel-Powered Vehicles: No person shall operate any
vehicle powered by a diesel engine within the County unless the extreme end of
the exhaust pipe therefrom terminates at a point above the top of the cab or
body of such vehicle, whichever is higher.
This subsection shall not apply to diesel-powered automobiles, new diesel
pickups or vehicles converted from gasoline to diesel-powered engines. (1973
Code §11.40.070)
8.06.06: TIRES:
No person shall ride, drive or propel, or cause or permit to be ridden, driven
or propelled, along or upon any pavement or top-dressed street any vehicle or
traction engine, any tire of which is not a pneumatic tire or that has a sharp
or uneven surface or to any tire or wheel to which is attached cleats or spikes
or uneven surfaces or any device that will cause damage to the paving,
macadamizing or top-dressing of such street. (1973 Code §11.48.020)
8.06.07: OBSTRUCTING DRIVER; RIDING ON UNLAWFUL PART OF VEHICLE:
   A.   No driver of any vehicle shall drive the same when such vehicle is so
loaded or when there are in the front seat of such vehicle such number of
persons as to obstruct the view of the driver to the front or sides or
interfere with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle
or when any person is riding on the outside of any vehicle.
   B.   No person shall ride and no person driving a motor vehicle shall
knowingly permit any person to ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not
designed or intended for the use of passengers or in any position as to
interfere with the driver's or operator's view. This provision does not apply
to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of his duty or to persons
riding completely within or upon vehicle bodies in space intended for any load
on the vehicle. (1973 Code §11.56.040)
8.06.08: VEHICLE WEIGHT AND LOAD:
   A.   Weight Restrictions: No traction engine, trailer or motor or other
vehicle shall be operated upon any highway, street or alley within the County
nor shall any object be moved over or upon any such street, alley or highway
upon wheels, rollers or otherwise in excess of a total weight of eighteen
thousand (18,000) pounds per axle, including vehicle, object or contrivance and
load, without first obtaining from the County Engineer a permit so to do.
This subsection shall not apply to the following streets:
   Interstate 80
   U.S. Highway 40
   U.S. Highway 95A
   U.S. Highway 50
   State Route 3
   State Route 17
   State Route 22
   (1973 Code §11.48.010)
   B.   Projecting Loads: Whenever the load of any vehicle extends more than
four feet (4') beyond the rear of the bed or body thereof, there shall be
displayed at the end of such load, in such position as to be clearly visible at
all times from the rear of such load, a red flag no less than twelve inches
(12") both in length and width. Between one-half (1/2) hour after sunset and
one-half (1/2) hour before sunrise, there shall be displayed at the end of any
such load a yellow or red light plainly visible under normal atmospheric
conditions at least two hundred feet (200') from the rear of such vehicle.
(1973 Code §11.48.070)
8.06.09: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
   A.   Driving on Newly Laid Pavement: No person shall ride or drive any
vehicle or horse over or across any pavement newly laid or repaired, across or
around which there has been placed a barrier or at or near which there is a
person or a sign stating that the street or highway is closed.
The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to the persons actually
engaged in the paving or repair of such street or highway. (1973 Code
§11.56.070)
   B.   Depositing Injurious Materials in Roadway: No person shall throw,
deposit or place in or upon any public street any nails, tacks, crockery, scrap
iron, tin, wire, bottles, glass, thorns, thorny clippings, thorny branches of
bushes or any other article or thing likely to puncture or injure the tire of
any vehicle or, by such acts, to litter the street or highway with rubbish.
(1973 Code §11.56.060)
   C.   Leaking Loads: It is unlawful for any person to drive or move any
vehicle on any street or highway unless such vehicle is so constructed or
loaded as to prevent its contents from dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise
escaping therefrom. (1973 Code §11.48.050)
   D.   Transferring Loads: It is unlawful to transfer merchandise from one
vehicle to another upon any street except in the event that one such vehicle
has been damaged or become disabled and cannot be removed from the street with
safety until the same has been unloaded. (1973 Code §11.48.060)
   E.   Oil or Gasoline Dripping on Street: It is unlawful for any person
owning or operating any vehicle, machinery or apparatus using gasoline or other
product of petroleum to drain or permit to drip or run from the crankcase or
gear case or from any other part of the vehicle or machinery any gasoline, oil
or other petroleum product, upon any street or highway. (1973 Code §11.48.030)
   F.   Repairing Vehicle on Street: No person shall construct or cause to be
repaired any vehicle or any part of any vehicle upon any street or highway or
alley, except for minor repairs. (1976 Code § 11.48.040)
CHAPTER 7
BICYCLES
SECTION:
8.07.01: Operation of Bicycles
8.07.02: Lights and Reflectors
8.07.01: OPERATION OF BICYCLES:
   A.   Riding on Bicycles: No person shall carry upon any bicycle upon any
street, highway or alley a number of persons greater than that for which such
bicycle is designed and equipped. (1973 Code §11.60.020)
   B.   Riding on the Right: Every person operating a bicycle upon a street,
highway or alley shall ride as near to the right-hand side of the roadway as
practicable and shall exercise due care when passing a standing vehicle or a
vehicle proceeding in the same direction. (1973 Code §11.60.030)
   C.   Riding on Sidewalks Prohibited: No person shall operate a bicycle upon
any sidewalk within the County. (1973 Code §11.60.040)
   D.   Riding in a Group: No persons shall operate bicycles upon any street,
highway or alley in a group of more than two (2) bicycles abreast of one
another. (1973 Code §11.60.050)
   E.   Clinging to Vehicles: No person operating a bicycle upon any street,
highway or alley shall attach such bicycle or himself to any moving vehicle.
(1973 Code §11.60.060)
   F.   Parking: No person shall park or stand a bicycle upon any street or
sidewalk, other than in a bicycle rack or against a building or at the curb in
such a manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic. (1973
Code §11.60.070)
8.07.02: LIGHTS AND REFLECTORS:
No person shall operate any bicycle upon a street or highway after sundown and
before sunrise unless such bicycle is equipped with a lamp emitting a white
light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of three
hundred feet (300') in front of such bicycle and with a red reflector on the
rear. (1973 Code §11.60.010)
CHAPTER 8
MOTORCYCLES
SECTION:
8.08.01: Driver's License Required
8.08.02: Operation of Motorcycles
8.08.03: Equipment
8.08.04: Safety Gear
8.08.05: Delivery of Driver's License on Request
8.08.06: Violation and Penalty
8.08.01: DRIVER'S LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   Except for a nonresident who is at least sixteen (16) years of age and
is authorized by the state of his residency to drive a motorcycle, a person
shall not drive a motorcycle upon a street or highway within the County unless
such person holds a valid motorcycle driver's license issued pursuant to NRS
chapter 486 or a driver's license issued pursuant to NRS chapter 483 endorsed
to authorize the holder to drive a motorcycle. (1973 Code §11.64.010)
   B.   No person shall authorize or knowingly permit a motorcycle owned by him
or under his control to be driven upon any highway by any person who is not
authorized by NRS chapter 486 to drive a motorcycle. (1973 Code §11.64.020)
8.08.02: OPERATION OF MOTORCYCLES:
   A.   Rights and Duties of Driver: A person driving a motorcycle upon a
highway is entitled to all the rights and subject to all the duties applicable
to the drivers of motor vehicles as provided by law, except those provisions
which by their nature can have no application. (1973 Code §11.64.170)
   B.   Riding on Motorcycles: A person driving a motorcycle shall ride only
upon the permanent and regular set attached thereto.
A person shall not drive a motorcycle with the seat for the driver so
positioned that the driver, when sitting astride the seat with the motorcycle
in a stopped and upright position, cannot reach the ground with both feet
simultaneously. (1973 Code §11.64.040)
   C.   Carrying Passengers: A motorcycle shall not be driven upon a highway
while carrying more than one person unless such motorcycle is designed by the
manufacturer to carry more than one person. A passenger shall ride:
      1.   Behind the driver and astride the permanent or regular seat which
was designed for two (2) persons;
      2.   Astride another seat firmly attached at the rear of the driver; or
      3.   In a sidecar attached.
Every such motorcycle designed for transporting a passenger shall be equipped
with footrests adjusted to fit such passenger. (1973 Code §11.64.030)
   D.   Use of Traffic Lanes: Every motorcycle, when being driven on the
highway, is entitled to full use of the traffic lane it is occupying, and a
person shall not drive another motor vehicle in a manner which would deprive
any such motorcycle of such use. (1973 Code §11.64.180)
   E.   Driving Between Vehicles; Riding Abreast:
      1.   A person, except a Sheriff's officer in the performance of his duty,
shall not drive a motorcycle between moving or stationary vehicles occupying
adjacent traffic lanes.
      2.   Except as provided in subsection E3 hereof, a person shall not drive
a motorcycle abreast of or overtake or pas another vehicle within the same
traffic lane.
      3.   Motorcycles may, with the consent of the drivers, be operated no
more than two (2) abreast in a single traffic lane. (1973 Code §11.64.190)
8.08.03: EQUIPMENT:
   A.   Handlebars:
      1.   Height of Handlebars: A person shall not drive a motorcycle equipped
with handlebars which are more than fifteen inches (15") in height above the
uppermost portion of the driver's seat when such seat is depressed by the
weight of the driver. (1973 Code §11.64.050)
      2.   Use of Handlebars: The driver of a motorcycle shall drive with one
hand on each handlebar at all times, except when such driver is making an arm
signal for a turn. (1973 Code §11.64.060)
   B.   Wheel Fenders: A person shall not drive a motorcycle unless the wheels
are protected by fenders to prevent the throwing of rocks, dirt, water or other
substances to the rear. (1973 Code §11.64.070)
   C.   Lights and Signal Devices:
      1.   General Requirements:
         a.   Every motorcycle upon a highway or street of this County at any
time from one-half (1/2) hour after sunset to one-half (1/2) hour before
sunrise and at any other time when, because of insufficient light or
unfavorable atmospheric conditions, persons and vehicles on the highway or
street are not clearly discernible at a distance of one thousand feet (1,000')
ahead, shall display lighted lamps and illuminating devices as respectively
required in this Chapter.
         b.   Every motorcycle upon a highway shall be equipped with stop
lights and turn signals to be lighted in the manner prescribed for the use of
such devices. (1973 Code §11.64.100)
      2.   Headlamps: Every motorcycle shall be equipped with at least one and
not more than two (2) headlamps. Every such headlamp shall be located at a
height of not more than fifty four inches (54") nor less than twenty four
inches (24") from the ground, as measured from the center of the lamp to the
level ground upon which such motorcycle stands without a load. (1973 Code
§11.64.130)
      3.   Taillamps: Every motorcycle shall be equipped with at least one
taillamp mounted on the rear which, when lighted as required by this Chapter,
shall emit a red light plainly visible from a distance of five hundred feet
(500') to the rear. Such lamp shall be wired to be lighted whenever the
headlamp is lighted. (1973 Code §11.64.110)
      4.   Reflectors: Every motorcycle shall carry on the rear at least one
reflector which shall be mounted at a height not less than twenty inches (20")
nor more than sixty inches (60") from the ground as measured from the center of
the reflector to the level ground upon which such motorcycle stands without a
load. Each such reflector shall be of a size and character and so mounted as to
be visible at night from all distances within three hundred feet (300') when
directly in front of lawful upper beams of headlamps. (1973 Code §11.64.140)
      5.   Turn Signals: Every motorcycle manufactured after January 1, 1972,
shall be equipped with electric turn signal lamps. Such lamps shall be located
on the front and rear and shall indicate an intention to turn by flashing
lights in the direction toward which the turn is to be made.
The lamps showing to the front shall be mounted on the same level and as widely
spaced laterally as practicable and, when signaling, shall emit white or amber
light or any shade of light between white and amber.
The lamps showing to the rear shall be mounted on the same level and as widely
spaced laterally as practicable and, when signaling, shall emit red or amber
light or any shade of light between red and amber. (1973 Code §11.64.120)
   D.   Brakes: Every motorcycle shall be equipped with brakes adequate to
control the stopping and holding as prescribed in NRS 484.593 and 484.595.
(1973 Code §11.64.150)
   E.   Mirrors: Every motorcycle shall be equipped with two (2) mirrors, each
containing a reflection surface not less than three inches (3") in diameter,
with one mirror mounted on each handlebar in positions enabling the driver to
view clearly the highway for a distance of two hundred feet (200') to the rear.
(1973 Code §11.64.160)
   F.   Muffler: Every motorcycle driven on a highway shall be equipped with an
effective and operating muffler. (1973 Code §11.64.200)
8.08.04: SAFETY GEAR:
   A.   Safety Gear Required: Except as provided in this subsection, when any
motorcycle is being driven on a street, highway or alley within the County, the
driver and passenger shall wear protective headgear securely fastened on the
head and protective glasses, goggles or face shields, which headgear, glasses,
goggles and face shields shall meet standards adopted by the Department of
Motor Vehicles of the State, in accordance with the provisions of NRS 486.231
(1).
When a motorcycle is equipped with a transparent windscreen meeting standards
adopted by the Department of Motor Vehicles of the State adopted in accordance
with the provisions of NRS 486.231 (1), the driver and passenger shall not be
required to wear glasses, goggles or face shields.
When a motorcycle is being driven in a parade authorized by the County, the
driver and passenger shall not be required to wear the protective devices
provided for in this subsection. (1973 Code §11.64.080)
   B.   Sale of Safety Gear: A person shall not sell, offer for sale or
distribute any protective headgear, glasses, goggles or face shields for use by
any drivers or passengers of motorcycles or transparent windscreens for
motorcycles unless such equipment is of a type and specification meeting the
standards therefor adopted by the Department of Motor Vehicles of the State.
The provisions of this subsection shall not prohibit the sale of protective
headgear, glasses, goggles or face shields which comply with the rules and
regulations adopted by the United States Department of Transportation. (1973
Code §11.64.090)
8.08.05: DELIVERY OF DRIVER'S LICENSE ON REQUEST:
Every person driving a motorcycle shall manually deliver his license to drive a
motorcycle to any Sheriff's officer or court upon request therefor by such
officer or court. (1973 Code §11.64.210)
8.08.06: VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
Any person violating any provisions of this Chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor
and shall be punished as provided in Title 1, Chapter 4 of this Code. (1973
Code §11.64.220)
CHAPTER 9
TAXICABS
SECTION:
8.09.01: Restrictions Regarding Convicted Persons
8.09.02: Fingerprints Required
8.09.01: RESTRICTIONS REGARDING CONVICTED PERSONS:
No convicted person shall drive or operate a taxicab within the County; and no
taxicab owned by or registered to any convicted person shall be driven or
operated within the County.
"Convicted person", as used in this Section, is defined in the same manner as
the same term is defined in NRS 207.080. (1973 Code §11.56.080)
8.09.02: FINGERPRINTS REQUIRED:
Every person applying for a taxicab license or permit to drive shall be
fingerprinted. (1973 Code §11.56.090)
CHAPTER 10
ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
SECTION:
8.10.01: Enforcement of Provisions
8.10.02: Use of Radar
8.10.03: Citations
8.10.04: Failure to Appear
8.10.05: Arrests
8.10.06: Illegally Parked Vehicles
8.10.07: Prima Facie Proof
8.10.08: Reports on Violations
8.10.01: ENFORCEMENT OF PROVISIONS:
The officers of the Sheriff's Department shall enforce the provisions of this
Title. (1973 Code §11.04.020)
8.10.02: USE OF RADAR:
It is lawful for the Sheriff's Department to use radar equipment for the
detection of speed violators and for the control and regulation of traffic
within the County. (1973 Code §11.24.070)
8.10.03: CITATIONS:
The County Sheriff or peace officer in this State shall provide suitable,
serially numbered forms for notifying violators of this Title and identifying
the violation as either a criminal violation or a civil infraction. (1973 Code
§11.12.010; amd. Ord. 633, 1-3-2023)
8.10.04: FAILURE TO APPEAR:
No person shall fail to appear before the justice court after having
represented in writing to a Sheriff's deputy of the County that he would so
appear to answer to a charge of having violated any provision of this Title.
(1973 Code §11.12.030)
8.10.05: ARRESTS:
Whenever any person is arrested for any violation of this Title, the arrested
person shall be taken without unnecessary delay before a justice of the peace
within the County who is nearest or most accessible with reference to the place
where the arrest is made in any of the following cases:
   A.   When the person arrested fails to exhibit his driver's license or other
satisfactory evidence of his identity.
   B.   When the person arrested refuses to give his written promise to appear
in court. (1973 Code §11.12.020)
8.10.06: ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLES:
   A.   Notice of Violation: Whenever any motor vehicle without a driver is
found parked or stopped in violation of any of the restrictions imposed by this
Title or other provisions of this Code, the deputy sheriff finding such vehicle
shall take its registration number and may take other information displayed on
the vehicle which may identity its user and shall conspicuously affix to such
vehicle a notice in writing on a form provided by the County Sheriff for the
driver to answer to the charge against him at a place and during the hours
specified in the notice. (1973 Code §11.12.040)
   B.   Failure to Comply With Notice: If a violator of the restrictions on
stopping, standing or parking vehicles imposed by this Title does not appear in
response to a notice affixed to such vehicle at the place and during the hours
specified in the notice within ten (10) days from the date of the affixing of
such notice, he shall be guilty of violating the provisions of this Title
regardless of the disposition of the charge for which the notice was affixed.
(1973 Code §11.12.050)
   C.   Violations Declared a Nuisance; Impoundment and Redemption of Vehicles:
Any vehicle of any kind or description whatever found parked at a place or in a
manner prohibited or declared to be unlawful for this Title or in violation of
the restrictions on stopping, standing or parking imposed by this Title or
other sections of this Code is declared to constitute a nuisance and may be
impounded by any deputy sheriff.
The impounded vehicle shall only be surrendered to the duly identified owner or
to the duly authorized agent of such owner upon the payment to the garage or
repair shop of the towing and storage charges, which sum is declared to be the
pound fee covering the same. (1973 Code §11.12.060)
8.10.07: PRIMA FACIE PROOF:
In any proceeding for the violation of any of the provisions of this Title or
of any of the restrictions imposed by this Title, the registration plate or
number thereon displayed on the vehicle involved shall be received as prima
facie evidence that the registered owner of such vehicle was then operating the
same.
If, at any hearing or proceeding, the registered owner of such vehicle
testifies under oath that he was not operating the vehicle at the time of the
alleged violation of this Title and subjects himself to an examination as to
who, at the time, was operating such vehicle and reveals the name of the person
or shows that such vehicle was stolen, then the prima facie evidence arising
from the registration plate or number thereon shall be overcome and the burden
of proof shifted. (1973 Code §11.12.070)
8.10.08: REPORTS ON VIOLATIONS:
The County Sheriff shall cause to be kept a full report of every case in which
a person is charged with violations of any provisions of this Title, and in the
event such person is convicted or that his bail is forfeited, an abstract
thereof shall be sent forthwith by the justice of the peace to the Motor
Vehicle Department of the State. (1973 Code §11.12.080)
CHAPTER 11
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS IN WEED HEIGHTS AREA
SECTION:
8.11.01: Purpose
8.11.02: Scope and Interpretation
8.11.03: Definitions
8.11.04: Traffic-Control Devices
8.11.05: Speed Restrictions
8.11.06: Reckless Driving
8.11.07: Driving Under Influence of Liquor or Drugs
8.11.08: Injurious Materials on Roadways
8.11.09: Enforcement of Provisions
8.11.10: Violation and Penalty
8.11.01: PURPOSE:
The Board of County Commissioners has found and determined that the area of the
County hereinafter described in this Chapter and commonly known as Weed
Heights, consists, in part, of a private housing unit owned by the Anaconda
Copper Company. The area of the County encompasses a number of roads, highways
and streets owned and maintained by the Anaconda Copper Company. The roads,
highways and streets are ways open to the public, generally, as well as to the
residents of that area of the County and the employees of the Anaconda Copper
Company. The public health, safety and welfare requires the establishment of
traffic regulations within that area of the County for the proper control and
regulation of the heavy volume of vehicular traffic along and upon the roads,
highways and streets. (1973 Code §21.28.010)
8.11.02: SCOPE AND INTERPRETATION:
   A.   Scope of Provisions: This Chapter shall be effective in that area of
the County commonly known as Weed Heights and shall encompass those certain
roads, streets and highways shown on the map of the area designated "Weed
Heights - Unincorporated - Lyon County, Nevada", a copy of the map being
attached to Ordinance 87 and by this reference made a part hereof, said map
encompassing portions of Sections 17 and 20, Township 13 North, Range 25 East,
M.D.B. & M. (1973 Code §21.28.150)
   B.   Conflicts with Other Provisions: Nothing contained in this Chapter
shall be deemed to diminish the applicability of any existing State statute or
County ordinance pertaining to the geographical area encompassed by this
Chapter, it being the intention of the Board of County Commissioners that this
Chapter shall supplement and be in addition to all laws, statutes and
ordinances otherwise applicable to the area. (1973 Code §21.28.160)
8.11.03: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
following definitions and meanings:
DRIVER: Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Every vehicle which is self-propelled but not operated upon
rails.
MOTORCYCLE: Every motor vehicle equipped with a seat or saddle for the use of
the driver and designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in contact
with the ground, including a power cycle but excluding a tractor.
PERSON: Every natural person, firm, corporation, association or copartnership.
TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICE: Every sign, signal, marking and device placed or
erected pursuant to a minute order of the Board of County Commissioners for the
purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic under the provisions of this
Chapter.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a highway, except device moved by human power or used
exclusively upon stationary rails.
WAY OPEN TO THE PUBLIC: Any road, alley, lane, parking area or other place
adapted to and fitted for travel that is in common use by the public with the
consent, express or implied, of the owner or owners of the area. (1973 Code
§21.28.030)
8.11.04: TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES:
   A.   Placement and Maintenance: The Board of County Commissioners shall,
from time to time, by minute order, place and maintain such traffic-control
devices upon the roads, streets and highways within the geographical area
encompassed by this Chapter as are deemed necessary to indicate and to carry
out the provisions hereof and to regulate, warn or guide traffic. (1973 Code
§21.28.130)
Whenever traffic-control devices are placed in position approximately
conforming to the requirements of this Chapter, such devices shall be presumed
to have been so placed by the official act or direction of the Board of County
Commissioners unless the contrary is established by competent evidence.
   B.   Obedience to Traffic-Control Devices: it is unlawful for any driver to
disobey the instructions of any traffic-control device placed in accordance
with the provisions of this Chapter unless, at the time, otherwise directed by
a peace officer.
No person shall be convicted under the provisions of this subsection if, at the
time and place of the alleged violation, the traffic-control device is not in
proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant
person. Whenever a particular provision of this Chapter does not state that
such traffic-control devices are required, such provision shall be effective
even though no traffic-control devices are erected or in place.
   C.   Damage to Traffic-Control Devices Prohibited: It is unlawful to attempt
to or to alter, deface, injure, knock down or remove any traffic-control device
placed or erected under the provisions of this Chapter. (1973 Code §21.28.040)
8.11.05: SPEED RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Basic Speed Restrictions: It is unlawful for any person to drive or
operate a vehicle of any kind or character:
      1.   At a rate of speed greater than is reasonable or proper, having due
regard for the traffic, service and width of the road, street or highway; or
      2.   At such a rate of speed as to endanger the life, limb, or property
of any person; or
      3.   At a rate of speed greater than that posted by the Board of County
Commissioners for the particular portion of road, street or highway being
traversed. (1973 Code §21.28.050)
   B.   Duty of Driver to Decrease Speed: The fact that the speed of a vehicle
is lower than the prescribed limits does not relieve a driver from the duty to
decrease speed when approaching or crossing an intersection, when approaching
and going around a curve, when approaching a hill crest, when traveling upon
any narrow or winding road, street or highway or when special hazards exist or
may exist with respect to pedestrians or other traffic or by reason of weather
or other road, street or highway conditions, then speed shall be decreased as
may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person, vehicle or other
conveyance on or entering a highway. (1973 Code §21.28.060)
8.11.06: RECKLESS DRIVING:
It is unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle in wilful or wanton
disregard of the safety of persons or property. A violation of this Section
constitutes reckless driving. (1973 Code §21.28.070)
8.11.07: DRIVING UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF LIQUOR OR DRUGS:
   A.   Prohibited:
      1.   It is unlawful for any person who is under the influence of
intoxicating liquor to drive or be in actual physical control of a vehicle
within the geographical area encompassed by the provisions of this Chapter.
      2.   It is unlawful for any person who is under the influence of a
controlled substance, as defined in NRS chapter 453 or any person who inhales,
ingests, applies or otherwise uses any chemical, poison or organic solvent or
any compound or any combination of any chemical, poison or organic solvent to a
degree which renders him incapable of safely driving or steering a vehicle
within the geographical area encompassed by the provisions of this Chapter.
(1973 Code §21.28.080)
   B.   Prosecutions for Driving Under Influence of Liquor:
      1.   Presumptions: In any criminal prosecution for violation of
subsection A of this Section relating to driving a vehicle while under the
influence of intoxicating liquor, the amount of alcohol in the defendant's
blood at the time alleged as shown by chemical analysis of the defendant's
blood, urine, breath or other bodily substance shall give rise to the following
presumptions:
         a.   If there was, at that time, five one-hundredths percent (.05%) or
less by weight of alcohol in the defendant's blood, it shall be presumed that
the defendant was not under the influence of intoxicating liquor.
         b.   If there was, at that time, in excess of five one-hundredths
percent (.05%) but less than ten one-hundredths percent (.10%) by weight of
alcohol in the defendant's blood, such fact shall not give rise to any
presumption that the defendant was or was not under the influence of
intoxicating liquor, but such fact may be considered with other competent
evidence in determining the guilt or innocence of the defendant.
         c.   If there was, at that time, ten one-hundredths percent (.10%) or
more by weight of alcohol in the defendant's blood, it shall be presumed that
the defendant was under the influence of intoxicating liquor.
The provisions of this subsection shall not be construed as limiting the
introduction of any other competent evidence bearing upon the question whether
or not the defendant was under the influence of intoxicating liquor. (1973 Code
§21.68.090)
      2.   Chemical Tests:
         a.   Except as provided in subsections B2d and B2e of this Section,
any person who drives a vehicle upon a road, highway or street in the
geographical area encompassed by the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed
to have given his consent to chemical test of his blood, urine, breath or other
bodily substance for the purpose of determining the alcoholic content of his
blood when such test is administered at the direction of a peace officer having
reasonable grounds to believe that such person was driving a vehicle while
under the influence of intoxicating liquor and after such person was arrested
for any offense allegedly committed while such person was driving a vehicle
under the influence of intoxicating liquor.
         b.   Such person shall be informed that his failure to submit to such
test will result in the suspension of his privilege to drive a vehicle for a
period of six (6) months.
         c.   Any person who is dead, unconscious or otherwise in a condition
rendering him incapable of refusal shall be deemed not to have withdrawn his
consent, and any such test may be administered whether or not such person is
informed that his failure to submit to such test will result in the suspension
of his privilege to drive a vehicle for a period of six (6) months.
         d.   Any person who is afflicted with hemophilia or with a heart
condition requiring the use of an anticoagulant, as determined by a physician,
is exempt from any blood test which may be required pursuant to this
subsection.
         e.   A person may refuse to submit to a blood test if means are
reasonably available to perform a breath or urine test and may refuse to submit
to a blood or urine test if means are reasonably available to perform a breath
test. (1973 Code §21.28.100)
      3.   Procedures: All matters pertaining to any person suspected of
driving under the influence of intoxicating liquor, as provided in this
Section, shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of NRS sections
484.379 to 484.393, inclusive, the same being incorporated herein by reference.
(1973 Code §21.28.110)
8.11.08: INJURIOUS MATERIALS ON ROADWAYS:
   A.   Deposits Prohibited: No person shall throw or deposit upon any road,
street or highway in the geographical area encompassed by the provisions of
this Chapter any glass bottle, glass, nails, tacks, wire, cans or any other
substance likely to injure any person, animal or vehicle upon such road, street
or highway.
Any person who throws any destructive or injurious material or permits any
destructive or injurious material to be thrown or dropped upon any road, street
or highway within the geographical area encompassed by this Chapter shall
immediately remove the same or cause it to be removed.
   B.   Accidents; Removal of Glass and Debris: Any person removing a wrecked
or damaged vehicle from a road, street or highway within the geographical area
encompassed by the provisions of this Chapter shall remove any glass or other
injurious substance dropped upon such road, street or highway from such
vehicle. (1973 Code §21.28.120)
8.11.09: ENFORCEMENT OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   The Walker River Township Justice Court shall have exclusive
jurisdiction over all prosecutions arising under the provisions of this
Chapter.
   B.   All prosecutions for violation of this Chapter shall be conducted in
accordance with the applicable provisions of the Nevada Revised Statutes. (1973
Code § 21.28.140; amd. Ord. 633, 1-3-2023)
8.11.10: VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform
any act required by this Chapter. Any person convicted of violating any
provision of Sections 4 or 5 is guilty of a civil infraction and shall be
punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Any person
convicted of violating Sections 6 and 7 of this Chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punished in accordance with Nevada Revised Statutes
for violation of a misdemeanor. (1973 Code §21.28.030; amd. Ord. 633, 1-3-2023)
TITLE 9
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
EXCAVATIONS AND ENCROACHMENTS
SECTION:
9.01.01: Title
9.01.02: Definitions
9.01.03: Permit Required; Exceptions
9.01.04: Permit Application
9.01.05: Permit Fees
9.01.06: Encroachments Allowed
9.01.07: Street Cuts; Requirements Prior to Issuance
9.01.08: Excavations Unimproved
9.01.09: Lyon County Right-of-Way Use Permit; Form; Contents
9.01.10: Existing Encroachments
9.01.11: Waiver
9.01.01: TITLE:
This Chapter shall be known as the LYON COUNTY EXCAVATIONS AND ENCROACHMENTS
ORDINANCE. (Ord. 377, 3-4-93, eff. 4-1-93)
9.01.02: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the following
definitions apply:
BOARD: The Lyon County Board of Commissioners.
CONTRACTOR: Any person, public utility, private utility or improvement district
created or existing under NRS chapter 309 or 318, that performs an excavation,
street-cut or encroachment.
COUNTY: A political subdivision of the State of Nevada.
COUNTY RIGHT OF WAY: The entire width of a public right of way whether shown on
a recorded document or claimed by County as a prescriptive right of way. This
includes land, property or interest therein offered for, acquired for,
dedicated to or developed as a public right of way, whether or not the area of
such is actually used as a right of way or maintained or accepted for
maintenance by the County.
DEPARTMENT: The Lyon County Road Department.
ENCROACHMENT: Includes any tower, pole, pole line, pipe, pipeline, fence,
stand, driveway, roadway, culvert, building excavation or any structure or
object of any kind or character not particularly mentioned herein which is
placed in, under or over any portion of the entire County right of way.
EXCAVATION: The movement or removal of earth, rock, pavement or other material
in or on the ground. The term includes auguring, backfilling, digging,
ditching, drilling, grading, plowing-in, ripping, scraping, trenching and
tunneling.
LICENSED CONTRACTOR: A person who possesses a license issued under NRS chapter
624 and a Lyon County business license to allow the person to engage in
excavation and construction activities.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, district or
organization.
STREET CUT: Any excavation in any improved portion of any County highway,
street, alley, road or right of way.
SUPERINTENDENT: The Lyon County Road Superintendent. (Ord. 377, 3-4-93, eff. 4-
1-93)
9.01.03: PERMIT REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to encroach or excavate within a County
right of way without first obtaining a permit.
   B.   In the case of an emergency requiring an immediate encroachment and/or
excavation upon a County right of way when the Department is not open, the
person making such shall notify the Lyon County Sheriff and appropriate fire
department(s) of the encroachment and/or excavation with the location, time and
extent thereof. The person making the emergency encroachment and/or excavation
shall obtain a permit on the next business day following the encroachment and/
or excavation whether the work has been completed or not. (Ord. 377, 3-4-93,
eff. 4-1-93)
9.01.04: PERMIT APPLICATION:
   A.   Issuance: The Superintendent is authorized to issue written permits
authorizing the permittee to do any of the following:
      1.   To make an excavation/street cut upon a County right of way;
      2.   To construct, install, build, place, change or remove any
encroachment upon a County right of way; and/or,
      3.   To plant, remove, cut down, injure or destroy any tree, shrub, plant
or flower growing upon any County right of way.
   B.   Application:
      1.   All applications for a permit under this Chapter shall be made to
the Department.
      2.   All applications shall be in writing on forms provided by the
Department.
      3.   Each applicant shall have a licensed contractor perform any work
described in the application and shall provide the contractors name, license
classification and address thereon, unless the requirements of this Section are
waived by the Superintendent.
      4.   Each applicant for a permit allowing an encroachment shall include
the following information in the application:
         a.   The name(s) of the owner(s) of the property abutting the portion
of the County right of way upon which the encroachment is to be made;
         b.   The legal description of the property abutting the portion of the
County right of way upon which the encroachment is proposed to be made;
         c.   A clean and legible drawing, which shows the affected property
lines as they abut the right of way, the edge of the traveled portion of the
right of way, including shoulder areas, and the location, size, height and type
of construction of the proposed encroachment; and
         d.   All other information that the Superintendent deems necessary.
      5.   Each applicant applying for permit allowing a street cut or
excavation, shall provide the following information:
         a.   The time, date and location of the excavation;
         b.   A concise description of the work to be completed; and,
         c.   All other information that the Superintendent deems necessary.
(Ord. 377, 3-4-93, eff. 4-1-93)
9.01.05: PERMIT; FEES:
Any and all fees associated with the Lyon County right-of-way use permit shall
be set by the Board pursuant to resolution of the Board. (Ord. 377, 3-4-93,
eff. 4-1-93)
9.01.06: ENCROACHMENTS ALLOWED:
If the encroachment will not infringe on the public's ability to safely
traverse the right of way or the right of way will not otherwise be adversely
affected by allowing the encroachment, the Superintendent may issue a Lyon
County right-of-way use permit to the applicant to allow the encroachment.
(Ord. 377, 3-4-93, eff. 4-1-93)
9.01.07: STREET CUTS; REQUIREMENTS PRIOR TO ISSUANCE:
   A.   Bond: Every person seeking a Lyon County right-of-way use permit for
the purpose of a street cut shall first execute, in County's favor, a bond or
other suitable guarantee, approved by the District Attorney, in an amount
sufficient to complete the total work requested by permittee plus ten percent
(10%). County may collect on the bond or other like guarantee if the permittee
fails to complete the work in accordance with the conditions set forth on the
permit.
   B.   Insurance: Every person making a street cut shall purchase and maintain
a policy of comprehensive general liability insurance of limits not less than
five hundred thousand/one million dollars ($500,000.00/1,000,000.00) aggregate
limits. A certificate of insurance must be placed on file with the
Superintendent evidencing proof of coverage with a thirty (30) day notice of
cancellation or change in coverage to the County.
   C.   A single permit allowing the street cut is required for any single
continuous excavation, master development, or series of test holes, cores,
borings, pole anchors or pole holes, or any other individual openings less than
three (3) square feet in area within an improved portion of the County right of
way. (Ord. 377, 3-4-93, eff. 4-1-93)
9.01.08: EXCAVATIONS UNIMPROVED:
Any excavation performed on an unimproved section of the County right of way
shall be subject to the same requirements prior to issuance as set forth in
Section
9.01.07. (Ord. 377, 3-4-93, eff. 4-1-93)
9.01.09: LYON COUNTY RIGHT-OF-WAY USE PERMIT; FORM; CONTENTS:
A Lyon County right-of-way use permit shall be in the form and contain all the
conditions and restrictions as set forth below:
   * * * * *
   LYON COUNTY RIGHT-OF-WAY USE PERMIT
   Pursuant to the provisions of chapter 244 of the Nevada Revised Statutes and
the Lyon County Code, LYON COUNTY hereby grants a revocable permit to
_______________________________, hereinafter referred to as "Permittee", to
make an (excavation) (encroachment) (street cut) within the right of way of
LYON COUNTY.
   The project permitted hereby is for the benefit of the permittee and/or his
real property and all restrictions and conditions set forth herein shall be
binding upon the permittee, his legal representatives, successors and assigns.
Said permit is more particularly described as follows:
   (complete description of project)
   1. This permit is issued contingent upon the Lyon County Road
Superintendent's, hereinafter referred to as Superintendent, approval, prior to
the beginning of the project, of the construction schedule, safety and traffic
control measures and any other facet of the permitted project which he deems
prudent to control in the interest of the County and the traveling public.
Failure to secure such approval from the Superintendent shall render this
permit null and void. All work shall be done in accord with the applicable
County standards for such work as adopted by the Board.
   2. During the project, proper barricade, warning and directional signs,
flags, flag persons, flares or other protective devices shall be installed and
maintained as a protection to the traveling public as required by the
Superintendent.
   3. No work may be done under this permit in any place other than the
location(s) specified on this permit.
   4. Nothing in this permit is to be construed as relieving the permittee
hereunder from obtaining permits as may be necessary under the Lyon County
Code, and the work which is the subject of this permit shall be performed in
accordance with all applicable requirements of law and standards of Lyon
County.
   5. Work must commence on _________________, 19___, and must be completed
within _____ days from the commencement of the work. Failure to comply with the
work schedule provided to the Superintendent causes this permit to become VOID
absent a written extension by the Superintendent. A permit which has been
expired under this Section may be renewed only upon payment of a new permit
fee.
   6. Any surface or public road appurtenance damaged or disturbed shall be
returned at least to its original condition, within two (2) weeks of the
damage, and if not so performed, the Superintendent reserves the right to make
necessary replacements and repairs, and the permittee hereby agrees to pay the
actual cost of such work performed by the County upon receipt of proper billing
for such work.
   7. This permit is (transferrable-encroachment) (nontransferable-street cut/
excavation) from the permittee to another person.
   8. This permit may be revoked at any time for a violation of any provision
of the permit or the Lyon County Code relating to the work to be performed
hereunder.
   9. Encroachments: Permittee shall make any and all repairs to the
encroachment installed by authority given in this permit as soon as the need
thereafter arises, and shall at all times maintain said encroachment in good
condition. Permittee further agrees to indemnify, hold and save harmless Lyon
County, its officers, agents, assigns, volunteers and employees, from any and
all liability for property damage to the encroachment caused or occasioned by
any road maintenance performed by the County in its right of way.
   Upon notification in writing from the County of the necessity thereof, the
permittee shall adjust or remove the encroachment at its own expense, within
thirty (30) days after receipt of such notice, unless the emergency of the
situation requires the work to be done in a shorter time.
   10. Excavation/Street Cuts: Permittee shall make any repairs necessitated
due to settlement of the excavation backfill, breaking up or decomposition of
the resurfacing or any other repairs necessitated by the acts or omissions of
the permittee within two (2) years from the completion of the work hereunder.
If the permittee fails to make such repairs within thirty (30) days of written
notice by the County, County will commence repairs and permittee shall
reimburse the County for all expenses related thereto. The notice required by
this Section shall be by certified mail.
   11. Permittee shall indemnify, hold and save harmless County, its officers,
agents, assignees, volunteers and employees, from any and all liability arising
from personal injuries, property damage, loss, claim or expense, including
attorney's fees, caused or occasioned by, or in any way arising out of, the
project granted herein.
   12. No bushes, shrubs, trees, other flora, survey marks or other like
boundary monuments now located within the public road right of way or that
which hereafter may be planted, grown or placed within said right of way shall
be cut, trimmed, mutilated, removed or disturbed in any manner whatever without
the written consent, approval and supervision of the Superintendent.
THE PERMITTEE AGREES TO THE ABOVE RESTRICTIONS AND CONDITIONS AND ACKNOWLEDGES
THAT SAID RESTRICTIONS AND CONDITIONS SHALL RUN WITH THE PERMITTEE'S REAL
PROPERTY BENEFITTED BY THIS PERMIT AND BE BINDING UPON PERMITTEE, HIS LEGAL
REPRESENTATIVES, SUCCESSORS, HEIRS AND ASSIGNS.
DATED this _______ day of ______________, 19 ___.
   ____________________________
   LYON COUNTY
   By: Lyon County Road    Superintendent
   ____________________________
   PERMITTEE(S)
STATE OF NEVADA   )
            ) ss:
COUNTY OF LYON      )
   On _________________________ before me the undersign Notary Public, in and
for said County and State, personally appeared the Superintendent known to me
to be the person whose name is subscribed to the within instrument, and
acknowledged to me that he/she executed the same.
__________________________
Notary Public
STATE OF NEVADA   )
            ) ss:
COUNTY OF LYON      )
   On ________________________ before me the undersigned Notary Public, in and
for said County and State, personally appeared (Permittee)
_______________________________ known to me to be the person(s) whose name(s)
is/are subscribed to the within instrument, and acknowledged to me that he/she/
they executed the same.
_____________________________
Notary Public
(Ord. 377, 3-4-93, eff. 4-1-93)
   * * * * *
9.01.10: EXISTING ENCROACHMENTS:
   A.   Any unpermitted encroachments existing at the time this Chapter becomes
effective must be permitted, pursuant to the terms of this Chapter, within one
year from the effective date of this Chapter.
   B.   Following the one year period provided above, the Superintendent may
remove from the right of way any encroachment for which a permit has not been
authorized which is not removed, or the removal of which is not commenced and
thereafter diligently prosecuted, within five (5) days after personal service
of notice and demand upon the owner of the encroachment or his agent. In lieu
of personal service upon that person or his agent, service of the notice may
also be made by registered or certified mail and by posting, for a period of
five (5) days, a copy of the notice on the encroachment described in the
notice. Removal by the Superintendent of the encroachment on the failure of the
owner to comply with the notice and demand given the Superintendent. (Ord. 377,
3-4-93, eff. 4-1-93)
9.01.11: WAIVER:
The provisions of this Chapter may be waived by the Board upon application by
the permittee. (Ord. 377, 3-4-93, eff. 4-1-93)
CHAPTER 2
ENCROACHMENTS
(Rep. by Ord. 377, 3-4-1993, eff. 4-1-1993)
CHAPTER 3
WATER SERVICE
SECTION:
9.03.01: General Provisions
9.03.02: Definitions
9.03.03: Notices
9.03.04: Water Department
9.03.05: Application For Regular Water Service
9.03.06: Main Extensions And/Or Capacity Enhancements
9.03.07: General Use Regulations
9.03.08: Meters
9.03.09: Billing
9.03.10: Discontinuance Of Service
9.03.11: Public Fire Protection
9.03.12: Private Fire Protection Service
9.03.13: Temporary Service
9.03.14: Public And Private Water System Construction
9.03.15: Backflow And Cross Connection Regulations
9.03.16: Water Conservation Required
9.03.01: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Short Title: This chapter shall be known and may be cited as LYON
COUNTY UTILITIES WATER ORDINANCE.
   B.   Enabling Statutes: This chapter is adopted pursuant to Nevada Revised
Statutes.
   C.   Words And Phrases: For the purpose of this chapter, all words used
herein in the present tense shall include the future; all words in the plural
number shall include the singular number; he may be used for she, she for he
and all words in the singular number shall include the plural number.
   D.   Water System Enterprise: LCUD will furnish a system, works and
undertaking used for and useful in obtaining, conserving and disposing of water
for public and private uses, including all parts of the enterprise, all
appurtenances to it, and lands, easements, rights in land, water rights,
contract rights, franchises, and other water supply, storage and distribution
facilities and equipment.
   E.   Separability: If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of
this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is for
any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter or the
application of such provision to other persons or circumstances. The board of
commissioners hereby declares that it would have passed this chapter or any
section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase hereof irrespective of the fact
that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases be
declared to be unconstitutional.
   F.   Pressure Conditions: All applicants for service connections or water
service shall be required to accept such conditions of pressure and service as
are provided by the distributing system at the location of the proposed service
connection, and to hold LCUD harmless for any damages arising out of low
pressure or high pressure conditions or interruptions in service.
   G.   Maintenance Of Water Pressure And Shutting Down For Emergency Repairs:
LCUD shall not accept any responsibility for the maintenance of pressure, and
it reserves the right to discontinue service while making repairs and when
necessary for the protection of property. Consumers dependent upon a continuous
supply should provide emergency storage.
   H.   Tampering With LCUD Property: No one except an employee or
representative of LCUD shall at any time in any manner operate the curb valves
or meter valves, main valves, gates or control valves of LCUD's system; or
interfere with meters or their connections, lock out tags, meter stakes, street
mains or other parts of the water system. Violators will be prosecuted under
Nevada Revised Statutes 704.800.
   I.   Penalty For Violation: For the failure of the customer to comply with
all or any part of this chapter, and any ordinance, resolution or order fixing
rates, charges and penalties of LCUD, the customer's service shall be
discontinued and the water shall not be supplied to such customer until he
shall have complied with the rule or regulation, rate or charge which he has
violated or, in the event that he cannot comply with said rule or regulation,
until he shall have satisfied LCUD that in the future he will comply with all
the rules and regulations established by ordinance of LCUD and with all rates
and charges.
   J.   Posting: The adoption of this chapter shall be entered in the minutes
of the board of commissioners and certified copies hereof shall be posted in
accordance with the state of Nevada open meeting law, Nevada Revised Statutes
241, section 020, pertaining to posting requirements.
   K.   Relief Of Application: When any person by reason of special
circumstances, is of the opinion that any provision of this chapter is unjust
or inequitable as applied to his premises, he may make written application to
the board through the utilities director stating the special circumstances,
citing the provision complained of, and requesting suspension or modification
of that provision as applied to his premises.
If such application involves nonpolicy related issues, the utilities director
may act on the request. If the person is not satisfied with the utilities
director's decision, that person may make a written appeal to the county
manager within ten (10) working days. The county manager will respond in
writing within fifteen (15) working days. The applicant may make a written
appeal to the county manager's decision to the board within ten (10) working
days of the county manager's decision. The appeal will be placed on a board
agenda within thirty (30) calendar days.
   L.   Relief Of Own Motion: The board of commissioners may, on its own
motion, find that by reason of special circumstances any provision of this
regulation and chapter should be suspended or modified as applied to a
particular premises and may, by resolution, order such suspension or
modification for such premises during the period of such special circumstances,
or any part thereof.
   M.   Ruling Final: All rulings of the board shall be final. All rulings of
the county manager shall be final unless appealed in writing to the board
within ten (10) working days. When appealed, the board's ruling shall be final.
(Ord. 504, 1-18-2007)
9.03.02: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings defined
below:
AGENT: A duly authorized individual to act for the legal owner. Agents are
required to have notarized authorization from the legal owner if owner is not
present.
APPLICANT: The person, firm, association, corporation or governmental agency
applying for water service.
APPLICATION: The written request on a form provided by LCUD for water service
as distinguished from an inquiry as to the availability or charges for such
service.
AVERAGE MONTH: Thirty (30) days.
BILLING PERIOD: The regular billing period will be monthly or at the discretion
of the LCUD.
BOARD: The Lyon County board of county commissioners.
BUILDING: Any structure used for human habitation or a place of business,
recreation or other purpose containing water facilities.
CAPACITY RATIO: The relative flow of each water service line size as compared
to that of a three-fourths inch (3/4") service.
Water Service Line Capacity Ratio
(In Inches)
Water Service Line Capacity Ratio
(In Inches)
                   
   1               1.67
   1.5             3.33
   2               5.33
   3               10.00
   4               16.67
   6               33.33
   8               53.33
   10              76.65
 
CONNECTION - SUPPLY LATERAL: The pipeline and appurtenant facilities such as
the curb stop, meter, meter box and piping all used to extend water service
from a main to premises. Where services are divided at the curb or property
line to serve several customers, each such branch service shall be deemed a
separate service connection.
CONTRACTOR: An individual, firm, corporation, partnership or association duly
licensed by the state of Nevada and approved by LCUD to perform the type of
work to be done under the permit.
COST: The cost of labor, material, transportation, supervision, engineering,
and all other necessary overhead expenses.
COUNTY: The county of Lyon.
COUNTY MANAGER: The county manager of Lyon County.
CROSS CONNECTION: Any physical or potential connection between the piping
system from the LCUD service and that of any other water supply that is not, or
cannot be, approved as safe and potable for human consumption, whereby water
from the unapproved source may be forced or drawn into LCUD distribution mains.
CUSTOMER: In the case of single-family or individually metered multiple-family
residences, the customer shall be the owner of the property served, but the
billing for service may be sent to the owner in care of his agent or renter.
For commercial services, the person in whose name service is rendered, as
evidenced by the signature on the application or contract for that service, or
in the absence of a signed instrument, by the receipt and payment of bills
regularly issued in his name regardless of the identity of the actual user of
the service.
DATE OF PRESENTATION: The date upon which a bill or notice is mailed or
postmarked or delivered to the customer by LCUD.
DESIGNATED PROPERTY MANAGER: That individual or business entity so designated
by the owner to act on his/her behalf.
DIRECTOR: The person appointed by the county manager in accordance with title
1, chapter 7 of this code to perform the duties of utilities director.
ENGINEER: The engineer appointed and acting for LCUD and shall be a registered
civil engineer in the state of Nevada.
FIXTURE UNIT: As defined in the latest edition of the uniform plumbing code,
International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials as adopted by
Lyon County.
FLAT RATE SERVICE: An unmetered water service.
HOUSE PIPING: All piping and fittings installed within the house or building up
to and including the last fitting on the outside of an exterior wall.
INSPECTOR: That person so designated by the utilities director to perform
inspections, tests, fixture unit counts, and related work in determining
compliance with LCUD construction specifications, standards and ordinances.
LCUD: The Lyon County utilities department acting through its duly authorized
officers or employees within the scope of their respective duties. May also be
used to mean service provider for another service area.
LAW: Any statute, rule, ordinance, bylaw or regulation established by federal,
state, county, or municipal authorities.
LIVING UNIT: Any residence, apartment, habitation or other structure to be
occupied by a single person or family requiring water service.
MAIN: A water line in a street, highway, alley or easement used for public and
private fire protection and for general distribution of water.
MAIN EXTENSION AND/OR CAPACITY ENHANCEMENT: The extension or replacement of
water distribution mains and necessary facilities beyond existing service
facilities in accordance with the provisions of this chapter applicable to main
extensions and/or capacity enhancements.
METERED SERVICE: A service for which charges are computed on the basis of
measured quantities of water, sewage, or liquid wastes.
OWNER: The person owning the property, or the person in whose name the legal
title to the property appears, by deed duly recorded in the county recorder's
office, or the person in possession of the property or building under claim of,
or exercising acts of ownership over same for himself, or as executor,
administrator, guardian or trustee of the owner.
PERMANENT SERVICE: A service which, in the opinion of LCUD, is of a permanent
and established character. The use of water may be continuous, intermittent or
seasonal in nature.
PERMIT: Any written authorization required pursuant to this or any other
regulation of LCUD for the installation of any waterworks.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, corporation, governmental agency, or other
organization operating as a single business entity.
PREMISES: All that real property of a single integrated operation under one
name which operation may involve one or more buildings, locations or services,
provided: a) such buildings, locations, or services are to a single unit of
property; or b) such buildings, locations or services that are on two (2) or
more units of property immediately adjoining, except for intervening public
highways, streets, alleys, or waterways.
PRIVATE WATER SYSTEM: Any system served water by LCUD under the responsibility
of others for ownership and maintenance.
REGULAR WATER SERVICE: Water service and facilities rendered for normal
domestic, commercial and industrial purposes on a permanent basis, and the
water available therefor.
SERVICE CLASSIFICATION: Shall be defined as follows:
Commercial Service: Service to customers engaged in selling, warehousing, or
distributing a commodity, in some business activity, or in a profession, or in
some form of economic or social activity (offices, stores, clubs, schools,
hotels, etc.) and for purposes that do not come directly under another
classification of service.
Domestic Service: Service to a residential customer.
Industrial Service: Service to customers engaged in a process which creates or
changes raw or unfinished materials into another form or product (factories,
mills, machine shops, pumping plants, etc., i.e., in extractive fabrication or
processing activities).
Irrigation Service: Service to customers for agricultural, floricultural or
horticultural use.
Multi-Family Residential Unit: The place of residence of a single family within
a multi-unit complex. The family premises and the service thereto, whether a
separate building, multiple buildings, a townhouse, an apartment, a mobile
home, a condominium or any other type of living unit, and the supporting
services for a single family.
Private Fire Protection Service: Water service and facilities for building
sprinkler systems, hydrants, hose reels and other facilities installed on
private property for fire protection and the water available therefor.
Public Fire Protection Service: Water service and facilities of the entire
water supply, storage and distribution system of LCUD, including the fire
hydrants affixed thereto, and the water available for fire protection,
excepting house service connections and appurtenances thereto.
Single-Family Residential: A single-family residential customer and the
services for residential purposes to a single-family dwelling, the residential
portion of a building, an individual apartment, a condominium, a mobile home, a
multiple dwelling or the portion thereof occupied as the home, residence or
sleeping place for one or more persons.
   A. This service classification can include a family operated business within
or part of the family residence, and the supporting services to the family
residence, and the supporting services to the family residential customer on
the same unsubdivided premises as the family residential unit. The fixture unit
count for these services shall be added to the single-family unit in
determining connection charges and water rights requirements.
SERVICE CONNECTIONS: The point of connection of the customer's piping with
LCUD's facilities which is most commonly the connection point on the discharge
side of the meter pit or curb stop valve. Where the meter is located other than
at the property line, the private water system from the corp valve on the main
shall be maintained by the owner of the property.
SERVICE SIZE FOR BILLING PURPOSES: Water service billing is based on a single
meter size even when compound meters are used. The water service for billing
purposes is based on the calculated demand using the methods based in the
uniform plumbing code or from standard engineering practice and correlated to a
standard meter flow rate capacity. This calculated service size for billing
purposes may vary from the actual meter size installed. Certain site conditions
necessitate the installation of a larger meter than required by the flow
capacity. Billing will be based on the calculated flow capacity for that
connection.
STREET: Any public highway, road, street, avenue, alley, way, public place,
public easement or right of way.
TEMPORARY WATER SERVICE: Water service and facilities rendered for construction
work and other uses of limited duration, and the water available therefor.
UTILITIES SUPERINTENDENT: The person appointed to superintend the water and
sewer works.
WATER DEPARTMENT: The board of commissioners of Lyon County performing
functions related to LCUD's water service, together with the county manager,
utilities director, utilities superintendent, utilities engineer and other duly
authorized representatives.
WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM - PRIVATE SERVICE LINE: All piping between the house piping
and the service connection as described in the definition of "service
connections" in this section.
WATER WASTE: The negligent or wasteful discharge of water from a hose,
sprinkler head, irrigation pipe, water main, indoor and outdoor plumbing
fixtures and/or water service, which is flowing into a street, roadside ditch,
storm drain, driveway, adjacent property and/or sidewalk creating puddles,
streams of water or flooding as further described in subsection
9.03.07B and section
9.03.16 of this chapter.
WILL-SERVE LETTER: A letter written by LCUD at the request of an applicant with
respect to a single residential unit, subdivision, commercial or multi-family
residential project to confirm: a) that the subdivision or project is within
LCUD's boundaries and b) that, if water is available and deeded to Lyon County
to serve the proposed connection(s) at the time service is requested under the
standards set forth in section
9.03.05 of this chapter, LCUD is willing to provide water service thereto upon
compliance with all LCUD requirements and payment of all applicable LCUD fees
and charges. (Ord. 504, 1-18-2007) !DEFEND!
9.03.03: NOTICES:
   A.   Notices To Customers: Notices from LCUD to an owner or customer will
normally be given in writing, and either delivered, posted on a door or mailed
to the last known address. Where conditions warrant and in emergencies, LCUD
may resort to notification either by telephone or messenger.
   B.   Notices From Owners Or Customers: Notice from the owner or customer to
LCUD may be given by him or his authorized representative in writing to LCUD at
the office or by e-mail. Owner or customer must have written proof that LCUD
received the e-mail. (Ord. 504, 1-18-2007)
9.03.04: WATER DEPARTMENT:
   A.   Creation: A water department is hereby created comprised of the board
of commissioners, county manager and utilities director.
   B.   County Manager: The county manager shall have full responsibility for
the maintenance, operation and construction of the waterworks and system in
accordance with title 1, chapter 7 of this code.
   C.   Utilities Director: The position of utilities director is hereby
created. He/she shall have charge of the utilities of LCUD. This shall include
all maintenance, operation and construction of the water and sewer works, and
the billing for and collecting the charges herein provided. He/she shall
perform such other duties as shall be determined by the county manager in
accordance with title 1, chapter 7 of this code.
   D.   Inspections: LCUD shall perform inspections on all public water and
sewer construction within LCUD's service area to assure compliance with LCUD
standards and specifications. All existing residential, commercial and
industrial establishments are subject to inspection for proper operation of
backflow prevention, cross connection control, investigation of potential water
waste and pressure regulating devices. Inspections shall be scheduled with the
property owner or property manager. If the property owner or property manager
refuses access, subsection F of this section shall apply.
   E.   Performance Of Duties: The foregoing duties of the utilities director
may be performed by the utilities superintendent or by a designated employee or
employees, as the county manager in accordance with title 1, chapter 7 of this
code may direct, so long as those decisions or actions that require
professional engineering judgment are performed by a registered professional
engineer.
   F.   Consequences Of Denial Of Entry Or Access: Where an owner or user,
after having received reasonable notice from LCUD refuses to permit properly
identified LCUD personnel to enter or have access to premises or facilities in
accordance with the above sections, LCUD may forthwith give written notice of
its intent to terminate water and/or sewer service to such user. Such notice
shall be given in accordance with sections 9.03.09, "Billing", and 9.03.10,
"Discontinuance Of Service", of this chapter, and termination based on these
sections shall be treated as a termination for refusal of access under this
section.
   G.   Violation: Any person found to be violating any provision of this
chapter or any ordinance, rule or regulation of LCUD, shall be served by the
LCUD with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a
reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender
shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all
violations. The owner shall be held strictly responsible for any and all acts
of their agents, renters or employees done under the provisions of this chapter
or any other ordinance, rule or regulation of LCUD.
      1.   Amounts: Violations of these regulations shall be subject to civil
monetary penalties established by: a) applicable Nevada statutes or
administrative code, b) Nevada division of environmental protection and Lyon
County and c) by such penalty schedules as may from time to time be adopted by
the board of commissioners.
      2.   Continuing Violations: For purposes of the computation of penalties,
each day of a continuing violation of these regulations shall be deemed to be
separate violation.
   H.   Water Pressure And Supply: LCUD assumes no responsibility for loss or
damage due to lack of water or pressure fluctuations, either high or low, and
merely agrees to furnish such quantities and pressures as are available in its
general distribution system. LCUD will endeavor to give reasonable notice to
customers before a curtailment of services; however, LCUD shall not be liable
for shutdowns or variations in pressures or water quantities that occur without
prior notice by LCUD. (Ord. 504, 1-18-2007)
9.03.05: APPLICATION FOR REGULAR WATER SERVICE:
   A.   Form Of Application: A property owner or his agent shall make
application for regular water service on a form provided by LCUD.
      1.   Purpose: The application is merely a written request for service on
a form provided by LCUD and does not bind the applicant to take service;
neither does it bind LCUD to serve.
      2.   Calculation Of Fixture Units: The number and type of fixture units
shall be as defined in the uniform plumbing code as adopted herein, with the
exception of exterior landscaping irrigation systems. The fixture unit charge
for exterior landscaping irrigation systems will only be assessed upon
application for an irrigation meter. Other interpretations or calculations of
fixture unit counts for fixtures not listed in the uniform plumbing code shall
be at the discretion of the utilities director or his designee.
   B.   Undertaking Of Applicant: Such application will signify the customer's
and owner's willingness and intention to comply with this chapter and other
ordinances or regulations relating to the regular water service and to make
payment for water service required.
   C.   Payment For Previous Service, Special Assessments: An application will
not be honored unless payment in full has been made for water and other
services previously rendered to the applicant or owner by LCUD, and unless all
special assessments on the parcel of land to be served are paid current.
   D.   Installation Charges: Where a regular charge has been fixed for the
type of service connection desired, such regular charge shall be paid in
advance by the applicant. Where there is no regular charge, LCUD reserves the
right to require the applicant to deposit an amount equal to the estimated cost
of such service connection. Only duly authorized employees, or agents of LCUD
or LCUD approved contractors will be authorized to install service connections.
   E.   Installation Of Services: Service installations will be made only to
property abutting distribution mains as have been constructed in public
streets, alleys or easements. Services installed in new subdivisions prior to
the construction of streets or in advance of street improvements must be
accepted by the applicant in the installed location. If an applicant desires a
change, all costs associated with a change in location or alteration of the
water service shall be borne by the applicant.
   F.   Changes In Customer’s Equipment Or Usage: Customers making any material
change in the size, character or extent of the equipment or operations
utilizing water service, or whose change in operations results in a large
increase in the use of water, shall immediately give LCUD written notice of the
nature of the change, and, if necessary, amend their application. If annual
water usage exceeds the amount of water rights provided for the property, the
owner will be required to deed the additional water rights to the county with
clear title.
   G.   Size And Location: LCUD reserves the right to determine the size of
service connections and their location with respect to the boundaries of the
premises to be served. The laying of consumer’s pipeline to the curb shall not
be done until the location of the service connection has been approved by the
LCUD.
   H.   Curb Stop Valves: Every service connection installed shall be equipped
with an approved valve on the inlet side of the meter. If a valve or related
equipment is damaged by the customer’s use or negligence, repairs and/or
replacement shall be at the customer’s expense.
   I.   Domestic, Commercial And Industrial Service Connection: It shall be
unlawful to maintain a connection that does not conform to the following rules:
      1.   Separate Building: Each house or building under separate ownership
must be provided with a separate service connection. Two (2) or more houses
under one ownership and on the same lot or parcel of land may be supplied
through the same service connection, if sufficient water rights have been
provided. LCUD must approve all installations and may require modifications to
the existing system.
      2.   Single Connection: Not more than one service connection for domestic
or commercial supply shall be installed for one building, except as approved by
LCUD.
      3.   Different Owners: A service connection shall not be used to supply
an adjoining property of a different owner or to supply property of the same
owner across a property line, street or alley.
      4.   Divided Property: Each service connection shall be considered as
belonging to the lot or parcel of land which it directly enters prior to any
lot line adjustments. Additional service connections may be required.
   J.   Service Connections: The service connections extending from the water
main to the property line and including the meter, meter box and meter valve,
shall be maintained by LCUD except as otherwise stated. All pipes and fixtures
extending or lying beyond the meter pit shall be installed and maintained by
the owner of the property. Where the meter is located other than at the
property line, the private water system from the corp valve on the main shall
be owned and maintained by the owner of the property.
   K.   Individual Liability For Joint Service: Two (2) or more parties who
join in one application for service shall be jointly and severally liable for
payment of bills and shall be billed by means of single periodic bill. The
owner is ultimately responsible in any case.
   L.   Special Cases: LCUD will require a written contract with special
guarantee from applicants whose unusual characteristics of load would require
excessive investment in facilities or whose requirements for service are of a
special nature. Applicants may be required to either construct or fund
improvements required to serve their project.
   M.   Water Used Without Application Being Made: An owner taking possession
of premises and using water from an active service connection without having
made application to LCUD for water service shall be held liable for the water
delivered from the date of such use or possession or the earliest date of
occupancy which can be reasonably established. Where services are not metered,
the quantity consumed will be estimated. If proper application for water
service is not made within seven (7) days of notification to do so by LCUD and
if accumulated bills for service are not paid immediately, the service may be
discontinued by LCUD without further notice.
   N.   Connection To System Required Within Three Hundred Sixty Five Days Of
Application: Any application that has been accepted by LCUD shall be considered
vacated if the applicant fails to commence construction and connection to
LCUD’s water system within three hundred sixty five (365) calendar days of such
acceptance. Any fees collected for such application that are unused, shall be
returned to the applicant, upon written request, and a new application and
payment of fees will be required before service will be provided. Connection
fees shall be charged at the rate in effect on the day of application.
Connection(s) not made within three hundred sixty five (365) days will be
subject to the current rates in effect at the time of connection. Previously
paid connection fees shall be credited to the new connection fee rate. Payment
of connection fees constitutes acceptance of a new service connection
application by LCUD. No fees will be refunded after connection.
   O.   Changes In Use Or Uses Of Served Property: Any changes in the use or
uses of properties served by regular water service which may affect the service
classification under which it is served or the number of fixture units served
must have the prior approval of LCUD. Examples of such changes would be adding
plumbing fixtures not previously approved in applying for service; modifying a
residence to accommodate more single-family units than were approved, changes
to irrigation systems, or such other changes that would similarly change the
character of the building and/or grounds. Such changes in use shall be subject
to an additional connection charge and may require additional water rights. If
such changes are made without application they shall be considered to have been
made in violation and be subject to discontinuance of service as provided in
section
9.03.10 of this chapter.
   P.   General: All costs and expenses related to the installation and
connection of any water service or other work for which a permit has been
issued shall be borne by the applicant, and shall be in addition to all fees,
service and connection charges. The owner shall indemnify LCUD for any loss or
damage that may directly or indirectly be related to the work. All work shall
be made by or be authorized by LCUD for any new construction, addition,
remodel, or demolition that may result in a change of water use or will require
a building permit. Written approval and final acceptance by LCUD is required.
   Q.   Connection Charge: The following charges are established by the board
and shall be collected at the time of issuing the permit for a water
connection. Connection fees shall be charged at the rate in effect on the day
of application to LCUD. Connections not made within three hundred sixty five
(365) days will be subject to the current rates in effect at the time of
connection. Previously paid connection fees shall be credited to the new
connection fee rate. No fees will be refunded after connection.
      1.   Units Within The Service Area: Water connection fees shall be
established by the board. Each dwelling or multiple dwellings on a single
parcel shall constitute a separate unit.
      2.   Fire Protection: Connection fees for fire protection shall be
established by the board.
      3.   Units Outside Of The Service Area: Reserved for future use.
      4.   Remodeling Connection Charges: If remodeling necessitates upgrade of
the water meter, connection fees shall be charged equal to the fee for that
meter size as described in subsection Q.1. of this section minus: a) the total
in connection fees paid to LCUD previously or b) water connection fee for the
existing meter size, whichever results in the lower net additional connection
charges. Additional water rights may also be required based on a fixture unit
count of the entire property including existing uses plus proposed additions.
      5.   Plan Check Fee: In accordance with LCUD’s most recently adopted fee
schedule, a plan check fee shall be required for all plans requiring LCUD’s
approval. Each plan revision requiring rechecking shall be assessed an
additional fee. Plan recheck fees shall be invoiced at a rate to reimburse
direct costs on a time and materials basis as determined by the utilities
director. Plan checking is performed for both water and sewer concurrently.
      6.   Inspection Fee: Inspection fees shall be at a rate as determined by
the board and may be on a time and materials basis.
   R.   Subdivisions:
      1.   Application: Any person desiring to provide a water system within a
tract of land that he proposes to subdivide shall make written application to
LCUD. Such application shall contain streets or easements dedicated and
accepted by the county and/or all utility extensions to service the project or
subdivision and any required flow models or studies.
      2.   Contents: The application shall state the number of lots in the
tract, the name of the subdivision, and its location. It shall be accompanied
by a copy of the proposed final map, and of the plans, profiles and
specifications for the water and sewer infrastructure work therein.
      3.   Investigation: Upon receiving the application, the LCUD shall make
an investigation of the proposed subdivision and shall submit a written
response to the applicant stating what, if any, modifications need to be made.
      4.   Specifications And Construction: The size, type and quality of
materials and location of the lines shall be in accordance with development
standards and construction specifications accepted by Lyon County and shall be
approved by LCUD and will be inspected by LCUD or by an inspector approved by
LCUD.
      5.   Connections: The subdivider shall, at his cost, provide all
connections to premises within the subdivision.
      6.   Plan Checking Fee: Any person requiring approval of plans by LCUD,
or desiring plan checking shall pay to LCUD the plan check fee or fees
established by the board.
   S.   Will-Serve Letters/Water Rights Required:
      1.   Standards For Granting Or Denial Of Requests: No “will-serve”
letters shall be issued by LCUD for any project if in the director’s judgment,
it is likely that LCUD will be unable to serve the project to be connected to
LCUD’s water system, if the project does not meet the requirements of NAC 445A
or if sufficient water rights to support the project have not been provided. In
making this determination, LCUD shall take into account the estimated amount of
water that will be required to serve the entire project at full development,
and the amount of water LCUD is likely to have available at that time.
      2.   Effect Of “Will-Serve” Letter: The issuance of a “will-serve” letter
by LCUD shall obligate LCUD to reserve a connection for the project for which
the letter has been issued for the time period stated in the letter. This
section is declarative of LCUD’s existing policy and practice with respect to
“will-serve” letters.
      3.   Procedure For Consideration Of Requests For “Will-Serve” Letters:
Requests for “will-serve” letters shall be considered by the LCUD on a case by
case basis. Any person requesting a “will-serve” letter from LCUD shall submit
a written application provided by LCUD.
      4.   Required Assignment Of Water Rights: In addition to compliance with
all other standards for granting applications for connections, all applicants
shall be required to assign to LCUD water rights acceptable to LCUD in
sufficient quantity to support the project as determined by LCUD. Water rights
must be deeded to Lyon County and be in good standing, approved for point of
diversion and place and type of use by the state water engineer.
      5.   Water Rights Required: For any new connections or developments,
water rights must be deeded to the county in the amount determined by using the
following table and/or formula and meet the conditions in subsections S.5.a.,
S.5.b. and S.5.c. of this section.
         a.   The priority, quantity, drought year supply, yield and quality of
the water rights are sufficient to meet the demand of the project.
         b.   The water rights have been changed under applicable law to allow
their use by the county for municipal and industrial purposes, at the county’s
place of use and for diversion at the county’s points of diversion.
         c.   The applicant can show unencumbered and clear title to ownership
of the water rights.
Lot Size Or Multi-Family (Square Feet) Required Water Rights (AFA)
Lot Size Or Multi-Family (Square Feet) Required Water Rights (AFA)
4,000                                  0.39
8,000                                  0.60
12,000                                 0.72
20,000                                 0.88
32,000                                 0.99
43,000                                 1.05
                                       0.35 (0.25 per door if a separate
Multi-family or manufactured in parks  irrigation meter is installed and water
                                       rights provided)
   AF/lot= 1.4
         1.1 + (10,000/lot size)
 
Commercial use water rights requirements will be calculated by performing a
fixture unit count. (Ord. 568, 7-3-2014)
      6.   Penalties For Overuse: Property owners or their agents with water
rights who use water in an amount greater than the provided or allocated
amounts must:
         a.   Pay an assessment that is equal to double the amount charged per
one thousand (1,000) gallons over the base water rate; and
         b.   Reduce consumption; or
         c.   Provide additional water rights to Lyon County. (Ord. 504, 1-18-
2007, amd. Ord. 512, 8-2-2007; Ord. 622, 12-16-2021)
9.03.06: MAIN EXTENSIONS AND/OR CAPACITY ENHANCEMENTS:
   A.   Application For Main Extension And/Or Capacity Enhancement: The
following rules are established for making main extensions and/or capacity
enhancement:
      1.   Application: Any owner of one or more lots or parcels, or subdivider
of a tract of land, desiring the extension of one or more water mains to serve
such property, shall make a written application to LCUD on a form provided by
LCUD.
      2.   Investigation: Upon receipt of the application, LCUD shall make an
investigation of the proposed extension and/or enhancement.
      3.   Reimbursements: The board of commissioners may consider
reimbursement agreements as presented by the director or county manager.
      4.   LCUD Lines: All extensions must be approved and accepted by LCUD and
be offered for dedication to the county by the applicant. There may be a
situation where the main extension may be privately owned.
      5.   Dead End Lines: No dead end lines shall be permitted, except at the
discretion of the utilities director.
   B.   Costs: All costs and expenses incident to the installation and
connection of any water service or other work for which a permit has been
issued shall be borne by the applicant, and shall be in addition to all fees
established by the board. The owner shall indemnify LCUD for any loss or damage
that may be directly or indirectly related to the work. All work shall be made
by or be authorized by LCUD.
   C.   Reserved.
   D.   Reimbursement Agreement: If the applicant must extend the water main
through another's property or along the frontages of another's property or
along the frontages of various intermediate property owners, and if said
properties are not currently served by the county's water system, then said
intermediate and benefiting property owners shall be responsible when
development commences or connection is made for a pro rata share of the costs
of the water line extension.
   When the applicant is required to extend a water line, he shall "front end"
the entire cost of the water line design and construction and shall be
responsible for the actual construction of said water line. Any owners of
properties to be served by the extended water line will thereafter be
responsible for reimbursing the first property owner through LCUD for a pro
rata share of the costs of the water line at the time said subsequent owners
begin to plat, parcel, develop or build upon their parcels. LCUD may reimburse
the applicant for materials associated with oversizing at LCUD's request. Only
the difference in cost between the two (2) different sizes will be considered.
   The pro rata shares for the applicant and all subsequent owners benefited by
the extended water line shall be determined prior to the county entering into
the reimbursement agreement. Extensions and/or capacity upgrades financed by
the applicant shall be prorated to the linear footage along the extension. Flag
lots and large parcels with narrow frontage may be calculated by a percentage
of the parcel square footage in relation to the main line installation cost
percentage.
   The county shall collect a fifteen percent (15%) administrative fee from the
applicant who front ended the water line construction upon reimbursement by
deducting the fifteen percent (15%) administrative fee from the subsequent
owners' pro rata share prior to reimbursement to the applicant by the county.
The reimbursement agreement shall become null and void ten (10) years from the
date of board of county commissioners' approval.
   The applicant shall submit three (3) bids prior to construction from
qualified contractors attached to the application for reimbursement, unless due
to extraordinary circumstances three (3) bids are not available due to
specialized construction. The bids shall be itemized and include costs for all
items to be installed. Failure to provide the itemized bids will exempt the
installation from reimbursement. Construction costs eligible for reimbursement
are limited to engineering, contractor's bid, construction staking by an
engineer or surveyor, permit, inspection and testing fees. Final costs must be
approved by LCUD and may require certification from a Nevada licensed civil
engineer. The applicant's administration costs are not eligible for
reimbursement.
   Single-family homes on property zoned single-family existing at the time of
application for a reimbursement agreement shall be exempt from the provisions
of the agreement. When an existing single-family home is on a parcel which has
adequate area to be divided per the current zoning or master plan designation
of the parcel, the area which could be divided for new development will be
required to be included in the reimbursement agreement. In no event shall any
owners of the property to be served by such extended water lines be permitted
to connect thereto without first paying to the county the pro rata share of the
costs described above as well as all other fees required by the county.
   Any facilities installed pursuant to this section are the property of the
LCUD upon inspection and acceptance by the county and LCUD. A one year warranty
agreement period is in effect for the contractor to be responsible for repairs.
(Ord. 504, 1-18-2007)
9.03.07: GENERAL USE REGULATIONS:
   A.   Number Of Services Per Premises: The applicant may apply for as many
services as may be reasonably required for the premises provided that the
pipeline system for each service is independent of the others and that they not
be interconnected. LCUD must approve all service connections.
   B.   Water Waste: It is unlawful for anyone connected to the public water
system to waste water. For the purpose of this section, "waste" means any
excessive usage which causes water to run into or along any street, alley,
storm drainage system, or into or upon another's property; provided nothing in
this section shall be construed as to apply to the accidental breaking of any
hose, water pipe, or other irrigation. If such breaks are not repaired or the
water turned off within the specified time once notice is given, LCUD may
discontinue water service, and it is unlawful for any person to again turn on
such water until proper repairs have been made.
   If personal notice is unable to be given, the water may be immediately shut
off by the LCUD and a notice shall be placed on the most accessible door
stating the reason for shutoff. If service is disconnected due to failure to
stop the waste that may cause damage or during moderate or strict conservation,
a service fee will be charged for every occurrence after the first shutoff.
Other penalties may apply as prescribed in subsection 9.03.16E of this chapter.
   Exception: Car washing by civic or philanthropic groups may receive written
approval from the utilities director or his/her designee when it is determined
that said usage will not be detrimental to the public water supply.
   C.   Responsibility For Equipment On Customer Premises: All facilities
installed by LCUD on private property for the purpose of rendering water
service shall remain the property of LCUD and may be maintained, repaired or
replaced by the LCUD without consent or interference of the owner or occupant
of the property. The property owner shall use reasonable care in the protection
of the facilities. No payment shall be made for placing or maintaining said
facilities on private property. Easements and rights of way are to be kept free
of encroachment of any kind, and LCUD shall have access to such areas, and any
obstructions or encroachments in these areas shall be removed at the expense of
the customer and/or owner. All meters and meter boxes must be clearly marked
and accessible and are to be kept free of encroachment of any kind. Any
obstructions, encroachments and/or inaccessibility conditions will be removed
at the customer's and/or owner's expense, and shall become a charge on the
customer's bill. LCUD has no responsibility to return the site to anything but
its natural, unlandscaped condition.
   D.   Damage To Water System Facilities: The customer shall be liable for any
damage to the service facilities when such damage is from causes originating on
the premises by an act of the customer or his tenants, agents, employees,
contractors, licensees or permittees, including the breaking or destruction of
locks or tags by the customer or others on or near a meter, and any damage to a
meter that may result from hot water or steam from a boiler or heater on the
customer's premises. LCUD shall be reimbursed by the customer for any such
damage promptly on presentation of a bill. Damage to water system would also
include, but not be limited to, damage to meter boxes, fire hydrants, water
valves and boxes, removal of meter location stakes, service lines and
distribution system.
   E.   Ground Wire Attachments: All individuals or business organizations are
forbidden to attach any ground wire or wires to any plumbing which is or may be
connected to a service connection or main belonging to LCUD. LCUD will hold the
customer liable for any damage to its property occasioned by such attachments.
   F.   Control Valve On The Customer's Property: The customer shall provide a
valve on his side of the service connection to control the flow of water to the
piping on his premises. The customer shall not use the meter valve or curb stop
valve to turn water on or off for his convenience.
   G.   Relief Valves And Regulating Valves: As a protection to the customer's
or owner's plumbing system, a suitable pressure relief valve and pressure
regulating valve must be installed and maintained at the customer's or owner's
expense. When check valves or other protective devices are used, the relief
valve and an expansion tank shall be installed between the check valves and the
water heater.
   H.   Service Size: Where increased meter and service sizes are required, the
owner is responsible for the installation and associated cost of any needed
infrastructure. Only contractors approved by LCUD are allowed to install
waterworks infrastructure. Any costs incurred by LCUD will be charged to the
owner on a time and materials basis.
   I.   Discontinued Service: The service of water to any premises may be
immediately discontinued by LCUD if any defect is found in the check valve or
other protective devices, or if it is found that dangerous unprotected cross
connections, or jumper connections exist. Services will not be restored until
such defects have been corrected and inspected by LCUD. LCUD shall not be
responsible for damages or losses as a result of the water being disconnected.
   J.   Interruptions In Service: LCUD shall not be liable for damage or losses
which may result from an interruption in service from a cause beyond the
control of LCUD or during emergency shutdowns.
   K.   Ingress And Egress: Representatives from LCUD shall have the right of
ingress and egress to the customer's premises at reasonable hours for any
purpose reasonably connected with the furnishing of water service.
   L.   Nonexistent Services: Where service lines do not exist from the main to
the property line, the applicant is responsible for service line installation
and costs under the ordinances, rules and regulations of LCUD.
   M.   Pools And Tanks: When an abnormally large quantity of water is desired
for filling a swimming pool or for other purposes, arrangements must be made
with LCUD prior to taking such water. Permission to take water in unusual
quantities will be given only if it can be safely delivered through LCUD's
facilities and if other consumers are not inconvenienced thereby.
   N.   Responsibility For Equipment: The customer shall, at his own risk and
expense, furnish, install and keep in good and safe condition all equipment
that may be required for receiving, controlling, applying and utilizing water,
and LCUD shall not be responsible for any loss or damage caused by the improper
installation of such equipment, or the negligence or wrongful act of the
customer or of any of his tenants, agents, employees, contractors, licensees or
permittees in installing, maintaining, operating or interfering with such
equipment. LCUD shall not be responsible for damage or losses to property
caused by faucets, pipes, valves and other equipment that are open or leaking
when water is turned on at the meter, either originally or when turned on after
a temporary discontinuance of service. Costs of repairs, replacements or
disruption of services shall be borne by the customer.
   O.   Use Of Siphons: No siphon of any nature shall be operated from any
service connected to LCUD's system.
   P.   Uniform Plumbing Code And Standard Details: The following uniform
plumbing code provisions are made a part of this chapter. Deviations from the
UPC must be approved by LCUD.
      1.   This chapter hereby adopts the 2003 uniform plumbing code and its
appendices including: A, B, C, E, H, I (omitting the standards contained within
"I" of 8-95, 11-87), K, (omit K-7 and K-8), and L, (omit L4.0 to L6.3).
      2.   This chapter hereby adopts the "Standard Specifications For Public
Works Construction" and "Lyon County Standard Details" most current versions.
(Ord. 504, 1-18-2007)
9.03.08: METERS:
   A.   Meter Installation: Meters will be installed on all services. This
chapter establishes the minimum meter size to be three-fourths inch (3/4").
Flat rate services will not be allowed.
   All meter installation charges are based upon materials and labor costs.
Only duly authorized LCUD employees or contractors preapproved by the LCUD will
be authorized to install service connections and/or meters. Meters will be
installed at the property line and shall be owned by LCUD. The seal or lock of
any meter sealed by LCUD shall not be altered or broken except by one of its
authorized employees or agents.
   B.   Change In Location Of Meters: Meters moved or raised for the
convenience of the customer will be relocated at the customer's expense and
must be approved by LCUD. Meters moved to protect LCUD's property will be moved
at LCUD's expense.
   C.   Meter Tests; Deposit: If a customer desires to have the meter serving
his premises tested, he shall first make a deposit in the amount established by
the board. Should the meter register faster than AWWA standards, latest
revision, the deposit will be refunded, but should the meter register less than
AWWA meter test standards, latest revision, LCUD will retain the deposit.
   D.   Adjustment For Meter Errors; Fast Meters: If a meter tested at the
request of a customer is found to be faster than AWWA standards, the charges in
excess of AWWA standards for a period not to exceed six (6) months shall be
refunded to the customer.
   E.   Adjustment For Meter Errors; Slow Meters: If a meter tested is found to
be slower than AWWA standards, LCUD may bill the customer for the amount of the
undercharge based upon corrected meter readings for the period, not exceeding
six (6) months that the meter was in use.
   F.   Nonregistering Meters: If a meter is found to be not registering, the
charges for service shall be at the minimum monthly rate or based on the
estimated consumption, whichever is greater. Such estimates shall be made from
previous consumption for a comparable period or by such other method as is
determined by LCUD. (Ord. 504, 1-18-2007)
9.03.09: BILLING:
   A.   Billing Period: The regular billing period will be at the discretion of
LCUD.
   B.   Meter Reading: Meters shall be read as nearly as possible on the same
day of each billing period. (Ord. 504, 1-18-2007)
   C.   Opening And Closing Bills: Opening and closing bills for less than the
normal billing period will be prorated for the number of days in the month for
which service is provided based on the meter size plus any water used in excess
of five thousand (5,000) gallons' base use amount. (Ord. 568, 7-3-2014)
   D.   Billing Time: Bills for the base rate and for consumption over the
minimum are billed in arrears.
   E.   Penalties: All charges shall become due and payable upon presentation.
Payments not received by the due date listed on the bill shall become
delinquent on the next business day after the due date. All charges which
become delinquent shall be subject to a penalty of ten percent (10%) for the
first month delinquent. Customers' payments shall be applied to their oldest
balances due, including penalties, first.
   F.   Delinquent Charges Collected On Tax Rolls:
      1.   The purpose of this subsection is to adopt an ordinance authorized
by Nevada Revised Statutes 244.36605 to have delinquent charges for water and/
or sewer service placed on the tax roll in the same manner, by the same
persons, and at the same time as, together with and not separately from, Lyon
County's general taxes.
      2.   The utilities department shall cause a description of each parcel of
real property with respect to which a water service charge is delinquent on May
1 and the amount of the delinquent charge to be prepared and submitted to the
county clerk/treasurer no later than June 1. The description of each parcel and
the amount of the delinquent charge must be submitted in a form approved by the
county clerk/treasurer.
      3.   The amount of the charge which is delinquent constitutes a lien
against the lot or parcel of land against which the charge has been imposed as
of the time when the lien of taxes attaches.
      4.   The county clerk/treasurer shall include the amount of the charges
on bills for taxes levied against the respective lots and parcels of land.
      5.   Thereafter the amount of the charges must be collected at the same
time and in the same manner and by the same persons as, together with and not
separately from, the general taxes for the county.
      6.   All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of
general taxes of the county, including, but not limited to, those pertaining to
the matters of delinquency, correction, cancellation, refund, redemption and
sale, are applicable to delinquent charges for water and/or sewer.
      7.   The county clerk/treasurer may issue separate bills for those
charges and separate receipts for collection on account of those charges.
   G.   Protests To Rates And Charges: If any owner shall be dissatisfied with
any water charge imposed, he may file a written protest with the utilities
director setting forth his/her objections provided such protest is filed within
fifteen (15) working days of receipt of the bill being protested.
   Upon receipt of any such protest, the director shall, within fifteen (15)
working days, make a determination in writing as to the correctness of the
bill. Should the director determine that the bill was incorrect, he/she may
cause the corrections to be made.
   If the owner is not satisfied with the utilities director's decision, the
owner may appeal that decision to the county manager in writing within five (5)
working days. The county manager shall, within fifteen (15) working days, make
a determination in writing.
   If the protester is dissatisfied with the county manager's decision, he/she
may appeal to the board, provided such written appeal is filed within ten (10)
days of receipt of the county manager's decision.
   The board, upon receipt of a protest, shall fix a time and place for a
hearing of said protest which shall not be later than thirty (30) calendar days
after receipt of same and cause the protesters to be notified thereof.
   Upon the hearing, the board may adjust the water charge if it is satisfied
with the reasons and basis of the protest. Action taken on any protest shall be
entered in the minutes of the board.
   The protester shall have fifteen (15) calendar days after determination of
the protest by the board within which to pay his/her water charge before any
penalty or interest shall be attached or imposed, notwithstanding any other
provision of this chapter concerning the imposition of penalty and interest
charges.
   H.   Represents Lien On Property: Until paid, all rates, tolls and charges
provided in this chapter constitute a perpetual lien on and against the
property served and may be foreclosed upon as provided by law.
   I.   Billing Of Separate Meters Not Combined: Separate bills will be
rendered for each meter installation except where LCUD has, for its own
convenience, installed two (2) or more meters in place of one meter. Where such
installations are made, the meter readings may be combined for billing
purposes.
   J.   Owner's Guarantee: Before water is turned on by LCUD for any purpose,
the property owner must sign the application form as provided by LCUD in which
he guarantees payment of future water bills for the service required. The
property owner signing the owner application for utility service form will be
held liable for the appropriate fee for water service until LCUD is notified in
writing to remove the meter or transfer the account to another property owner.
The owner may assign an agent that the bill will be mailed to, however the
owner will ultimately be responsible for all payments.
   At LCUD's discretion, service may be established verbally, but must be
followed up with an application form completed by the owner or agent within
ninety (90) days of request for service.
   K.   Water Used Without Application Being Made: An owner taking possession
of premises and using water from an active service connection without having
made application to LCUD for water service shall be held liable for the water
delivered from the date of the last recorded meter reading, and if the meter is
found inoperative, the quantity consumed will be estimated. If proper
application for water service is not made within a period of time specified by
LCUD, and if accumulated bills for service are not paid immediately, the
service may be discontinued by LCUD without further notice.
   L.   Damages Through Leaking Pipes And Fixtures: Owner or owner's agent must
be present at the property at the time scheduled for LCUD to turn on the water
service. LCUD will in no case be liable for damages caused by water leaking or
running from open or faulty fixtures, or from broken or damaged pipes or any
other appurtenances within or outside of the building structure. (Ord. 504, 1-
18-2007)
   M.   Policy For Appeal For Relief From Excessive Water Charges: When
customers, through no fault of their own, have incurred excessively high water
bills due to freezing or breaking of water lines or other unavoidable
circumstances, and the detection and correction of such a break could not have
reasonably been accomplished in time to avoid the excessive water usage, the
following policy shall apply. Leaving water running unattended does not qualify
for relief.
   An LCUD water customer who has an uncontrollable loss of water that results
in an excess of one hundred twenty five dollars ($125.00) above the previous
year's bill for the same period, may apply to LCUD for relief under this
policy. The utilities director will review the matter and determine if the high
overage was a result of an undetectable condition and was not a result of
negligence or inattention of the property owner. Upon such a determination,
LCUD will credit the overage charge in excess of one hundred twenty five
dollars ($125.00). This adjustment will only be allowed one time per parcel
within a twenty four (24) month period. The owner may be required to replace
plumbing in order to qualify for future relief. The utilities director may use
other means necessary in determining average water usage. Relief will only be
considered for one billing period. (Ord. 568, 7-3-2014)
   N.   Checks And Electronic Funds Transfers Not Honored By Bank: Checks and
electronic funds transfers presented in payment of bills that are returned by a
bank shall be treated as though no payment had been made, and an administrative
charge will be levied by LCUD, plus any additional charges received from the
bank. The customer must reimburse LCUD for any returned check/electronic funds
transfer fees charged by a bank to LCUD.
   O.   Collection By Suit:
      1.   Suit: As an alternative to any of the other procedures herein
provided, all unpaid rates and charges and penalties herein provided may be
collected by suit. As an additional procedure, LCUD shall have all rights as
provided by law.
      2.   Costs: Defendant shall pay all costs of suit in any judgment
rendered in favor of LCUD, including a reasonable attorney fee.
   P.   Collection With Other Utility Charges:
      1.   With Utility Charges Of LCUD: Where the person charged is a user of
another utility owned and operated by LCUD, the charges may be collected
together with and not separately from the charges for the other utility service
rendered by it. They may be billed upon the same bill and collected as one item
at the discretion of LCUD.
      2.   Discontinuance Of Service Upon Delinquency: Upon delinquency, the
other utility service may be discontinued until full payment of the dual
charges and penalties and associated fees are paid in full. At the discretion
of LCUD the delinquent charges may be added to the property tax rolls.
   Q.   Service Rates:
      1.   Rates: For all users within LCUD, rates established by the board
shall apply.
         a. Monthly Charges: For all monthly water consumption of five thousand
(5,000) gallons or less, the minimum charge as established by the board shall
apply. For all consumption in excess of five thousand (5,000) gallons in any
month, a charge according to the unit cost established by the board shall
apply.
         b. Fire Protection: Public and private fire protection systems shall
be charged the following monthly rates:
            (1) Public fire protection rates shall be billed to the responsible
fire protection agencies at the rate determined in the contract between LCUD
and the fire protection agency.
            (2) Private fire protection systems shall be billed monthly to the
property owner or association of property owners at the rate established by the
board.
      2.   Multi-Unit Residential Accounts: The base charge for multi-unit
residential accounts using common meters shall be determined by the base charge
based on meter size. The excess charge for multi-unit residential accounts
using common meters shall apply to usage exceeding five thousand (5,000)
gallons per month.
      3.   Bulk Water For Construction: Where water is used for construction
and obtained from a fire hydrant or other location approved by LCUD, the volume
used will be billed on a per one thousand (1,000) gallon rate established by
the board plus a rental fee and any additional time or material costs
associated with the hydrant meter setup.
      4.   Call Out Service Charges: A customer requesting LCUD assistance with
customer related water issues, i.e., interior water leak, problem with
irrigation system, water shutoff at meter (because customer cannot locate their
own shutoff valve, etc.), may be billed a service call charge, at the
discretion of the utilities director. (Ord. 504, 1-18-2007)
      5.   Source Water Impact Fee: A service charge may be imposed for
stormwater planning, capital improvements, maintenance and repair of stormwater
collection and detention systems in order to protect groundwater quality within
the LCUD water service area. (Ord. 568, 7-3-2014)
9.03.10: DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE:
   A.   For Nonpayment Of Bills When Not Collected On Tax Rolls: A customer's
service may be discontinued for nonpayment of a bill for service furnished if
the account becomes delinquent, provided LCUD has given the customer at least
two (2) days' prior written notice of such intention.
   B.   Liability For Bills: Failure to receive a water bill does not relieve
consumer or owner of liability. Any amount due shall be deemed a debt to LCUD,
and any person, firm, or corporation failing, neglecting or refusing to pay
said indebtedness shall be liable to an action in the name of LCUD in any court
of competent jurisdiction for the amount thereof.
   C.   Resumption Of Service Charge: Where service has been discontinued for
violation of these rules or for nonpayment of bills, the cost of discontinuing
and resuming service shall be at the expense of the customer or owner.
      1.   Made During Regular Business Hours: LCUD will endeavor to resume
service during regular business hours on the day of the request, if conditions
permit; otherwise, LCUD will endeavor to resume service on the next regular
business day following the day the request is made.
      2.   Made At Other Than Regular Business Hours: When a customer has
requested that the service be resumed at a time outside of regular business
hours, LCUD will reasonably endeavor to resume service if practicable under the
circumstances but will be under no obligation to do so, unless an emergency
exists. A charge based on costs, including overtime rates, shall be billed to
the customer for services rendered outside of regular business hours.
      3.   Presence Of Owner Or Authorized Representative: During requested
resumption of service, the owner or their authorized representative is required
to be on site. (Ord. 504, 1-18-2007)
   D.   Unsafe Apparatus: Water service may be refused or immediately
discontinued to any premises where apparatus or appliances are in use which
might endanger or disrupt the service to other customers in any way. Where
service has been disconnected due to an unsafe apparatus, all costs associated
with investigating, discontinuing and resuming service shall be at the expense
of the customer. (Ord. 568, 7-3-2014)
   E.   Cross Connections: Water service may be refused or discontinued to any
premises where a cross connection exists that is in violation of this chapter
or state, federal or local laws.
   F.   Fraud Or Abuse: Service may be immediately discontinued if necessary to
protect LCUD against fraud or abuse.
   G.   For Noncompliance With Rules: LCUD may discontinue service to any
customer for violation of these rules after it has given the customer at least
five (5) days' written notice of such intention. In case of emergency,
unauthorized use, water waste, or where safety of water supply is endangered,
service may be discontinued or curtailed immediately without notice, in
addition to any other penalties provided by law and these regulations.
   H.   Abatement: During the period of discontinuance of service, habitation
of such premises by human beings shall constitute a public nuisance, whereupon
the county manager shall cause proceedings to be brought for the abatement of
the occupancy of said premises by human beings. In such event, a reasonable
attorney fee shall become due as a penalty for nonpayment.
   I.   Customer's Request For Discontinuance Of Service: A customer may have
service discontinued by giving not less than two (2) working days' advance
notice, in writing, to LCUD. Water base rates shall only be ceased for
"seasonal offs" lasting more than one billing period. Base fees for partial
months in seasonal off status will not be prorated. When the water is turned
back on, either the owner or agent must be present or the owner must provide
LCUD with written authorization to resume service without an owner
representative being present. LCUD will not be responsible for damage caused
from leaking or damaged plumbing.
   J.   Charges For Discontinuing And Resuming Service: Charges shall be made
for discontinuing and resuming service, as determined by the board.
      1.   When a discontinuance or resumption of service is made at other than
regular business hours, the charge for that service shall be actual cost to
LCUD, or at the rate established by the board.
      2.   If the use of equipment is necessary in discontinuing or resuming a
service, the customer shall be billed at an hourly rate on a time and materials
basis, in addition to the charge for the discontinuance or resumption of
service.
      3.   Service shall be considered to be disconnected when an employee of
LCUD has been dispatched for that purpose, and the rates, as established by the
board, will apply.
      4.   If an unauthorized connection is made to a public water system, the
owner or applicant will be charged a fee on a time and materials basis
associated with disconnection. Jumpers will be confiscated by LCUD and the
owner or person making the connection may be prosecuted under Nevada Revised
Statutes 704.800.
   K.   Reserved. (Ord. 504, 1-18-2007)
9.03.11: PUBLIC FIRE PROTECTION:
   A.   Use Of Fire Hydrants: Fire hydrants are for use by LCUD or by organized
fire protection agencies pursuant to contract with LCUD. Other parties desiring
to use fire hydrants for any purpose must first obtain written permission from
LCUD prior to use and shall operate the hydrant in accordance with instructions
issued by LCUD. Unauthorized use of hydrants will be prosecuted according to
law.
   B.   Hydrant Rental: A charge, to be determined by contract between LCUD and
organized fire protection agencies, will be imposed for hydrant maintenance and
water used for public fire protection.
   C.   Moving Of Fire Hydrants: When a fire hydrant has been installed in the
location specified by the proper authority, LCUD has fulfilled its obligation.
If a property owner or other party desires a change in the size, type or
location of the hydrant, he shall bear all costs of such changes, without
refund. Any change in the location of a fire hydrant must be approved by LCUD
and the appropriate fire protection district. (Ord. 504, 1-18-2007)
9.03.12: PRIVATE FIRE PROTECTION SERVICE:
   A.   Payment Of Cost: The applicant for private fire protection service
shall pay the total actual cost of installation of the service from the
distribution main to the customer's premises to meet the requirements of LCUD
and the appropriate fire protection district. Requirements of LCUD include, but
are not limited to, detector check meter, meter box, backflow device, hotbox,
vault, valve and valve box, and construction materials acceptable to LCUD.
   B.   No Connection To Other System: There shall be no connection between the
fire protection system and any other water distribution system on the premises.
   C.   Use: There shall be no water used through the fire protection service
except to extinguish fires and for testing the firefighting equipment.
   D.   Rates: The monthly rates for private fire protection shall be
established by the board.
   E.   Water Used For Firefighting Not To Be Charged For: In those instances
wherein private fire protection is provided from a metered domestic water or
fire service line, the volume of water used for firefighting will be estimated
and that estimated volume shall be deducted from the water bill for that
billing period.
   F.   Water For Fire Storage Tanks: Occasionally water may be obtained from a
private fire service for filling a tank connected with the fire service, but
only if written permission is secured from LCUD in advance and an approved
means of measurement and backflow protection are available. The regular water
rates will be applied.
   G.   Violation Of Agreement: If water is used from a private fire service in
violation of the agreement or these regulations, LCUD may, at its option,
discontinue and remove the service at owner's expense and charge a fee for the
volume used.
   H.   Water Pressure And Supply: LCUD assumes no responsibility for loss or
damage due to lack of water or pressure, either high or low, and merely agrees
to furnish such quantities and pressures as are available in its general
distribution system. The fire service is subject to shutdowns and variations
required by the operation of the distribution system.
   I.   Rules: The following rules shall apply to fire service connection:
      1.   Additional Service: LCUD shall have the right to take a domestic,
commercial or industrial service connection from the fire service connection at
the curb to supply the same premises as those to which the fire service
connection belongs. LCUD shall charge all fees associated with each service
connection.
      2.   Backflow Prevention: LCUD reserves the right to require installation
of an approved backflow prevention assembly. (Ord. 504, 1-18-2007)
9.03.13: TEMPORARY SERVICE:
   A.   Duration Of Service: Temporary service connections shall be
disconnected and terminated within six (6) months after installation unless an
extension of time is granted in writing by LCUD.
   B.   Deposit: The applicant may be required to deposit, in advance, the
estimated cost of installing and removing the facilities required to furnish
said service.
   C.   Installation And Operation: All facilities for temporary service to the
customer connection shall be inspected by LCUD and shall be operated in
accordance with its instructions.
   D.   Responsibility For Meters And Installations: The customer shall use all
possible care to prevent damage to the meter or to any other loaned facilities
of LCUD which are involved in furnishing the temporary service from the time
they are installed until they are removed. If the meter or other facilities are
damaged, the cost of making repairs shall be paid by the customer. If water is
supplied to the property through an existing water meter, no permission will be
granted to use water from a fire hydrant. If application has been made for
water connection services, the customer must arrange to make water connection
in a timely manner to avoid use of the fire hydrant.
   E.   Supply From Fire Hydrant: An applicant for temporary use of water from
a fire hydrant must secure a permit, as provided in subsection 9.03.11A of this
chapter, therefor from LCUD and pay a deposit equal to the replacement value of
the meter assembly, the regular rental fee charged for the use of a meter to be
installed on said hydrant; provide a hydrant wrench necessary to operate such
hydrant, and pay for the water used in accordance with the meter readings, at
the rates established by the board. Applicant must call in meter readings to
LCUD billing staff on a monthly basis or be charged a service fee based on a
time and materials basis for LCUD to obtain the meter reading.
   F.   Unauthorized Use Of Hydrants: Tampering with any fire hydrant for the
unauthorized use of water therefrom, or for any other purpose, is a
misdemeanor, punishable by law. (Ord. 504, 1-18-2007)
9.03.14: PUBLIC AND PRIVATE WATER SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION:
   A.   Permit Required: No person shall construct, extend, or connect to any
public water system without first obtaining a written permit from LCUD and
paying all fees and connection charges and furnishing bonds as required. The
provision of this section requiring permits shall not be construed to apply to
contractors constructing water systems and appurtenances under contracts
awarded and entered into by LCUD.
   B.   Plans, Profiles And Specifications Required: The application for a
permit for public water system construction shall be accompanied by complete
plans, profiles and specifications, complying with all applicable ordinances,
rules and regulations of LCUD, prepared by a professional engineer registered
in the state of Nevada, showing all details of the proposed work based on an
accurate survey of the ground. The application, together with the plans,
profiles and specifications, shall be examined by LCUD and LCUD shall approve
them as filed or require them to be modified as deemed necessary for proper
installation.
   C.   Easements Or Rights Of Way: In the event that an easement is required
for the extension of the public water system or the making of connections, the
applicant shall procure a proper easement or grant of right of way sufficient
in law to allow the construction and operation of such extension, facility or
connection. Easements or rights of way are reserved for the servicing of
utilities, and no structure or building shall be placed within or over
easements or rights of way, nor shall these areas be occupied or used in any
manner as to restrict or deny access for repairs or maintenance, and all costs
of removing or replacing land surfaces, landscaping or other occupancies shall
be charged to the property owner.
   D.   Persons Authorized To Perform Work: Only properly licensed contractors
shall be authorized to perform the work of public water system construction
within LCUD. LCUD will not accept dedication of any public water system, or
portions thereof, unless the construction has been performed by the holder of a
class A contractor's license issued by the Nevada state contractors board. All
terms and conditions of the permit issued by LCUD to the applicant shall be
binding on the contractor.
   E.   Compliance With Local Regulations: Any person constructing a water
system within a street shall comply with all state, county, or city laws,
ordinances, rules, and regulations pertaining to the cutting of pavement,
opening, barricading, lighting and protecting of trenches, backfilling and
repaving thereof, and shall obtain all permits and pay all fees required by the
department having jurisdiction, prior to starting any work.
   F.   Protection Of Excavation: The applicant shall maintain such barriers,
lights and signs as are necessary to give warning to the public at all times
that a water system is under construction and of each dangerous condition to be
encountered as a result thereof. He shall also likewise protect the public in
the use of the sidewalk against any such conditions in connection with the
construction of the water system. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other
property disturbed in the course of the work shall be reinstalled in a manner
satisfactory to LCUD or any other entity having jurisdiction.
   G.   Design And Construction Standard: Minimum standards for the design and
construction of water systems within LCUD shall be in accordance with the
standard specifications for Lyon County water, sewer, as adopted by the board,
copies of which are on file in the LCUD office and in accordance with NAC445A
and as approved by NDEP - bureau of safe drinking water.
   Reproducible "record" drawings, stamped and prepared by a professional
engineer registered in the state of Nevada, showing the actual location of all
mains, service connections, hydrants, valves and appurtenances, shall be filed
with LCUD before final acceptance of the work. LCUD may accept and/or require
specific electronic versions of record drawings.
   H.   Completion Of Water System Required: Before any acceptance of any water
infrastructure by LCUD, the infrastructure shall be tested and shall be
complete and in full compliance with all requirements of LCUD and the state of
Nevada. (Ord. 504, 1-18-2007)
9.03.15: BACKFLOW AND CROSS CONNECTION REGULATIONS:
   A.   General Policy:
      1.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is:
         a.   To protect any public potable water supply of LCUD from the
possibility of contamination or pollution by isolating within the customer's
internal distribution system or the customer's private water system such
contaminants or pollutants which could backflow into the public water systems;
and
         b.   To promote the elimination or control of existing cross
connections, actual or potential, between the consumer's potable water system
and nonpotable water system, plumbing fixtures and industrial piping systems;
and
         c.   To provide for the maintenance of a continuing cross connection
control program that will systematically and effectively prevent the
contamination or pollution of all potable water systems within the jurisdiction
of LCUD. This program shall also meet the requirements of the safe drinking
water act amendments of 1986, public law 99-339, Nevada administrative code
sections 445A.67185 through 67255, uniform plumbing code, meet all of the
laboratory and field performance specifications of the Foundation for Cross-
Connection Control and Hydraulic Research of the University of Southern
California (hereinafter referred to as foundation), and the American Water
Works Association manual M14 with AWWA C506-84 Standards for Reduced Pressure
Principle and Double Check Valve Backflow Prevention Devices, including any
existing or future amendments.
      2.   Responsibility: The utilities director, or his designee, shall be
responsible for the protection of the public potable water system from
contamination or pollution due to the backflow of contaminants or pollutants
through the water service connection. If, in the judgment of said utilities
director, an approved backflow prevention assembly is required at the
customer's water service connection, or within the customer's private water
system, the utilities director or his designated agent shall give notice in
writing to said customer to install such an approved assembly(ies) at specific
locations on the customer's premises. Immediately upon receipt of the notice,
the customer shall install such assembly at the customer's sole expense.
Failure or refusal on the part of the consumer to make such installation and to
have such tested yearly or as required by LCUD by a certified CA/NV section
American Water Works Association (AWWA) tester and/or tester/agent approved by
LCUD's backflow administrator and maintained in good working order shall
constitute grounds for discontinuing water service to the premises until such
requirements have been satisfactorily met.
      3.   Nonliability Of LCUD: LCUD shall not be responsible for any loss or
damage directly or indirectly resulting from or caused by the proper, improper,
or negligent installation, operation, use, repair, or maintenance of, or
interfering with, any protective device by any customer of LCUD or any other
person.
      4.   Shared Responsibility: Customers must share in the responsibility
for the protection of the potable water system. Customers must maintain their
water piping system so that pollutants do not backflow into LCUD's water mains.
It is also the customer's responsibility to report any possible hazard that may
affect LCUD's water mains. Reports should be made to the utilities director as
soon as a hazard is detected.
   B.   Backflow Definitions:
   APPROVED: Accepted by LCUD utilities director as meeting an applicable
specification contained in this chapter, or as suitable for the proposed use.
   AUXILIARY WATER SUPPLY: Any water supply on or available to the premises
other than LCUD's approved public water supply and which is within LCUD's water
service area shall constitute an auxiliary water supply.
   APPROVED BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES: An assembly or means to prevent
backflow that has been manufactured, tested and approved in conformance with
the foundation.
   BACKFLOW: The reversal of normal flow of water caused by either back
pressure or back siphoning.
   CONTAMINATION: An impairment of the quality of the potable water by
materials to a degree which creates an actual or potential hazard to the public
health.
   CROSS CONNECTION: Any physical connection or arrangement of piping or
fixtures between two (2) otherwise separate piping systems, one of which
contains potable water and the other nonpotable water or industrial fluids of
questionable safety, through which, or because of which backflow may occur into
the potable water system.
   HAZARD, DEGREE OF: The term is derived from an evaluation of the potential
risk to public health and the adverse effect of the hazard upon the potable
water system.
    Hazard, Health: Any condition, device, or practice in the water supply
system and its operation which could create or may create a danger to the
health and well being of the water consumer.
    Hazard, Pollution: An actual or potential threat to the physical properties
of the water system or the consumer's potable water system, which constitutes a
nuisance or is aesthetically objectionable or could cause damage to the system
or its appurtenances, but which is not dangerous to human health. (Ord. 504, 1-
18-2007) !DEFEND!
   C.   Requirements:
      1.   Policy:
         a.   No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or
maintained by LCUD unless the water supply is protected as required by state
laws and regulations and section 9.07.04 of this title. Service of water to any
premises shall be discontinued by LCUD if a backflow prevention assembly has
been removed, bypassed, or if an unprotected cross connection exists on the
premises. Service will not be restored until such conditions or defects are
corrected. (Ord. 568, 7-3-2014)
         b.   The customer's system shall be open for inspection at all
reasonable times to authorized representatives of LCUD to determine whether
cross connections or other structural or sanitary hazards exist. When such a
hazard becomes known, the utilities director may deny or discontinue service to
the premises by providing for a physical break in the service line until the
customer has corrected the condition(s) in conformance with state law and local
ordinances relating to plumbing and water supplies and any regulations adopted
pursuant thereto.
         c.   An approved backflow preventer shall be installed on each service
line to a customer's water system at or near the property line or immediately
inside the building being served; but, in all cases, before the first branch
line leading off the service line, wherever the following conditions exist:
            (1) In the case of premises having an auxiliary water supply that
is not acceptable as an additional source, the public water system shall be
protected by installing an approved backflow preventer in the service line
appropriate to the degree of hazard.
            (2) In the case of premises on which any industrial fluids or any
other objectionable substance is handled in such a fashion as to create an
actual or potential hazard to the public water system, the public system shall
be protected against backflow from the premises by installing an approved
backflow preventer in the service line appropriate to the degree of hazard.
            (3) In the case of premises having: a) an internal cross connection
that cannot be permanently corrected or controlled, or b) intricate plumbing
and piping arrangements or where entry to all portions of the premises is not
readily accessible for inspection purposes, making it impracticable or
impossible to ascertain whether or not dangerous cross connections exist, the
public water system shall be protected by installing an approved backflow
preventer in the service line at the owner's expense.
            (4) Any customer wishing to fill water trucks or other equipment
shall fill out an LCUD application for service and have that equipment
inspected and approved by a representative of LCUD. An approved air gap must be
installed before filling from the potable water supply. Violation of this
section shall result in discontinuance of service and a charge on a time and
materials basis for any corrective action needed.
      2.   Type Of Backflow Preventer: The type of backflow preventer required
shall depend upon the degree of hazard which exists as follows:
         a.   Where there is an auxiliary water system, a minimum of a reduced
pressure principle assembly will be required.
         b.   Where there is any pollution hazard, the public water system
shall be protected with a minimum of an approved double check valve assembly.
         c.   Where there is any health hazard, the public water system shall
be protected by an approved air gap or an approved reduced pressure principle
assembly. Hospitals, sewage treatment plants and structures with chemical
additives in fire sprinkler systems are examples of these type premises.
         d.   Where access is denied or is impossible or impractical to make a
cross connection survey, the public water supply shall be protected with an
approved air gap or an approved reduced pressure principle assembly.
      3.   Approval Required: Any backflow preventer required herein shall be a
model and size approved by the utilities director. Any below grade applications
must be approved by LCUD prior to installation.
      4.   Inspections:
         a.   It shall be the joint duty of LCUD and the customer at any
premises where backflow prevention assemblies are installed to have certified
inspections and operational tests made upon installation and at least once a
year thereafter, or as determined necessary by the LCUD. In those instances
where utilities director deems the hazard to be great enough, more frequent
tests may be required. All cross connection surveys and tests shall be
performed by CA/NV AWWA certified technicians preapproved by LCUD. The customer
shall bear the cost of the inspection, repairs and testing. Records of testing
and repairs shall be kept by LCUD when said work is completed.
         b.   All industrial, commercial, residential, multi-residential and
all other properties with backflow devices installed and requiring testing
according to this chapter shall provide access upon request to any authorized
representative of LCUD to perform such testing or provide acceptable test
results to LCUD from a CA/NV AWWA certified backflow tester, preapproved by
LCUD's utilities director, of the customer's choice.
      5.   Charges For Backflow Testing: Charges for backflow testing/repairs
performed by LCUD shall be a minimum rate, or actual cost, labor and materials,
as established by the board.
      6.   Exclusions: All presently installed backflow prevention assemblies
which do not meet the requirements of this section, but which were approved
devices for the purposes described herein at the time of installation and which
have been properly maintained, shall, except for the inspection and maintenance
requirements, be excluded from the requirements of these rules so long as the
utilities director is satisfied that they will protect the public water system.
Whenever such device is moved, removed, or requires more than minimum
maintenance or when LCUD finds that the maintenance constitutes a hazard to
health, the unit shall be replaced by an approved backflow prevention assembly
meeting the requirements of this section. Any plumbing improvements requiring a
building permit will require that the rules of this chapter be observed. (Ord.
504, 1-18-2007)
9.03.16: WATER CONSERVATION REQUIRED:
When in the opinion of the board of commissioners circumstances require water
conservation by LCUD customers, the board of commissioners may impose one or
more of the following conditions after consideration of those circumstances at
a regular public hearing after notice to the customers as provided for in
Nevada law or at an emergency meeting conducted by the board.
Routine conservation does not require special board action and is observed
annually from June 1 through October 1 of each year.
   A.   Routine Conservation:
      1.   Restrict watering to odd and even days depending on service address.
There is no restriction to hand watering or washing cars using hoses with self-
closing nozzles.
         a.   Watering is not allowed between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00)
A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M.
         b.   No outside watering on the thirty first day of a month.
         c.   No outside watering when it is windy.
      2.   Exempted from this section are the following:
         a.   Nevada licensed commercial gardeners or caretakers who are on the
premises at the time watering is taking place;
         b.   Vegetable gardens, flowerbeds, trees within two (2) months of
planting;
         c.   New lawns including sod, for twenty one (21) days from planting
or installation date, that have been planted prior to June 15 or after August
15;
         d.   Complexes that file for and receive approval of an irrigation
plan.
         e.   Residential customers adjusting and repairing their irrigation
system during the nonwatering times for a not to exceed time frame of one hour.
         f.   Special exemptions from this section may be granted by the
utilities director or his/her designee on a case by case basis based on a
determination that the special request shall not be detrimental to the public
water system or supply. A customer requesting an exemption must submit a
written request to LCUD.
      3.   No excess water running down impervious surfaces or on to other
property that may cause damage or as described in subsection 9.03.07B of this
chapter.
   B.   Moderate Conservation:
      1.   All items under subsection A, "Routine Conservation", of this
section.
      2.   Restrict landscape irrigation to more restrictive schedule such as
no watering on Mondays or watering only twice a week.
      3.   Limit use of water from fire hydrants to actual firefighting use.
      4.   Prohibit wash down of driveways, sidewalks, parking lots and other
impervious surfaces.
   C.   Strict Conservation:
      1.   All items under subsection B, "Moderate Conservation", of this
section.
      2.   No landscape or lawn irrigation under any circumstances.
      3.   No new lawn or landscape installation.
      4.   No wash down of automobiles, trucks, vans or other motorized
equipment except at commercial washing facilities that recycle wash water.
      5.   Impose an excess consumption charge of three hundred percent (300%)
of the existing rate per one thousand (1,000) gallons for water use in excess
of one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the base amount. The director may make
arrangements on a case by case basis but must report the arrangements to the
board through the county manager.
   D.   Circumstances Under Which Moderate Or Strict Conservation May Be
Required: The board of commissioners, upon its findings that one or more of the
following emergency conditions are present, may impose moderate or strict
conservation measures:
      1.   Water scarcity condition exists or is likely to exist.
      2.   Failure of water production, storage or distribution system(s).
      3.   Demand for service in excess of LCUD's authorized water rights.
      4.   Order of any agency of the federal, state or local government having
jurisdiction in such matters.
      5.   Any other condition that may require such action.
   E.   Penalties: As a condition of service, any person who violates any of
the provisions of subsection 9.03.07B of this chapter, subsections A, B and C
of this section, will be assessed as follows:
      1.   For the first offense, issuance of a verbal warning;
      2.   For the second offense, issuance of a written warning both posted
and mailed;
      3.   For the third through seventh offense, a fee assessment established
by the board;
      4.   For the eighth offense and subsequent offenses, the installation of
a flow restriction device and a service fee on a time and materials basis to
cover the installation cost.
   Fee assessments shall be added to the owner's or agent's monthly utility
bill. Owners or agents shall be notified of the fee assessment through
certified mail within seven (7) days of the observed violation. Protests shall
be handled as provided for in subsections 9.03.01K through M and 9.03.09G of
this chapter. (Ord. 504, 1-18-2007)
CHAPTER 4
WATER SHORTAGE AND WASTE OF WATER 1
(Rep. by Ord. 504, 1-18-2007)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 3 of this title.
CHAPTER 5
SEWER SERVICE
SECTION:
9.05.01: General Provisions
9.05.02: Definitions
9.05.03: General Rules
9.05.04: Sewer Department
9.05.05: Use Of Public Sewers Required; Prohibitions; Connection
9.05.06: Application And Billing For Regular Sewer Service
9.05.07: Application For Service When Main Extension Or Capacity Enhancement Is
Required
9.05.08: Public Sewer Extensions
9.05.09: Building Sewers, Private Sewer Lines, Laterals, And Connections
9.05.10: Public And Private Sewer System Construction
9.05.11: Requirements For Use Of Public Sewers
9.05.12: Permits And Fees
9.05.13: Billing And Collection
9.05.14: Disconnection
9.05.01: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Short Title: This chapter may be cited as LYON COUNTY UTILITIES SEWER
ORDINANCE.
   B.   Enabling Statutes: This chapter is adopted pursuant to Nevada Revised
Statutes.
   C.   Enterprise: The county will furnish a system, plant, works and
undertaking used for and useful in the collection, treatment and disposal of
domestic wastewater and industrial waste for the various LCUD service areas,
including all parts of the enterprise, all appurtenances thereto, and lands,
easements, rights in land, contract rights and franchises.
   D.   Separability: If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of
this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is for
any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter or the
application of such provision to other persons or circumstances. The board
hereby declares that it would have passed this chapter or any section,
subsection, sentence, clause or phrase hereof irrespective of the fact that any
one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared to
be unconstitutional.
   E.   Posting: The adoption of this chapter shall be entered in the minutes
of the board and certified copies hereof shall be posted in accordance with the
state of Nevada open meeting law, Nevada Revised Statutes 241, section 020,
pertaining to posting requirements.
   F.   Relief Of Application: When any person, by reason of special
circumstances, is of the opinion that any provision of this chapter is unjust
or inequitable as applied to his premises, he may make written application to
the board stating the special circumstances, citing the provision complained
of, and requesting suspension or modification of that provision as applied to
his premises.
If such application be approved, the board may, by resolution, suspend or
modify the provision complained of, as applied to such premises, to be
effective as of the date of the application and continuing during the period of
the special circumstances. This decision shall not violate Nevada department of
environmental protection, federal or state regulations.
   G.   Relief Of Own Motion: The board may, on its own motion, find that by
reason of special circumstances any provision of this regulation and chapter
should be suspended or modified as applied to a particular premises during the
period of such special circumstances or any part thereof.
   H.   Violations And Penalties:
      1.   Violations: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation
to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert,
demolish, equip, use, or maintain any plumbing or permit the same to be done in
violation of this chapter.
      2.   Penalties: Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision
of this chapter shall be penalized in accordance with the provisions of the
applicable county ordinance or resolutions or applicable laws. Each separate
day or any portion thereof during which any violation of this chapter occurs or
continues shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense.
   I.   Ruling Final: All rulings of the board shall be final. All rulings of
the county manager shall be final unless appealed in writing to the board
within ten (10) working days. When appealed, the board's ruling shall be final.
(Ord. 507, 1-18-2007)
9.05.02: DEFINITIONS:
ADDITIONAL DEFINITIONS: For the purpose of this chapter, additional terms not
specifically defined herein shall have the meaning indicated in chapter 1 of
the most recently adopted edition of the plumbing code entitled "uniform
plumbing code" (UPC), compiled by the International Association of Plumbing and
Mechanical Officials, copies of which are on file with the LCUD.
AGENT: A person or firm, corporation, partnership or association duly
authorized with supporting documentation to complete requirements and
performances of this chapter.
APPLICANT: The person making permit application for a sewer or plumbing
installation and shall be the record owner of premises to be served by the
sewer for which a permit is requested or his authorized agent.
APPLICATION: A written request for sewer service as distinguished from an
inquiry as to the availability or charges for such services.
BILLING PERIOD: The regular billing period will be monthly, or at the
discretion of the board.
BOARD: The Lyon County board of commissioners.
BUILDING: A structure built, erected, and framed of component structural parts
designed for the housing, shelter, enclosure, or support of persons, animals,
or property of any kind.
BUILDING SEWER: That privately maintained part of the horizontal piping of a
drainage system which extends three feet (3') outside the foundation from the
end of the building drain and which receives the discharge of the building
drain and conveys it to a public sewer, private sewer delivery system, or other
point of disposal.
COMBINED SEWER: A sewer which conveys both sewage and storm water or other
drainage.
COMMERCIAL UNIT: Any building, structure, or facility or a portion thereof,
devoted to the purposes of trade or commerce, such as a store or office
building.
COMMUNAL SEWER: A sewer serving any multi-unit property and is considered a
private sewer system and not properly controlled by or under the jurisdiction
of the county.
CONTRACTOR (AGENT): An individual, firm, corporation, partnership or
association duly licensed by the state of Nevada to perform the type of work to
be done under the permit.
COUNTY: The county of Lyon, Nevada.
COUNTY ENGINEER: The engineer appointed and acting for the LCUD and shall be a
registered civil engineer in the state of Nevada.
COUNTY MANAGER: The manager of Lyon County.
CUSTOMER: In the case of single-family or multiple-family residences, the
customer shall be the owner of the property served, but the billing for service
may be sent to the owner in care of his agent or renter. For commercial
services, the person in whose name service is rendered, as evidenced by the
signature on the application or contract for that service, or in the absence of
a signed instrument, by the receipt and payment of bills regularly issued in
his name regardless of the identity of the actual user of the service.
DATE OF PRESENTATION: The date upon which a bill or notice is postmarked or
hand delivered to the customer of the county.
DEVELOPER: Any person engaged in or proposing development of property.
DEVELOPMENT: A parcel of property being improved and requiring installation of
sewer collection lines to and possibly on the property being improved.
ENGINEER: An engineer licensed and registered in the state of Nevada. A civil
engineer is required for design of all public utility main lines.
GARBAGE: Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food
products.
INSPECTOR: That person so designated by the LCUD to perform inspections, tests,
fixture unit counts and related work in determining compliance with Lyon County
construction specifications, standards and ordinances.
LAW: Any statute, rule, ordinance, bylaw or regulation established by federal,
state, county or municipal authorities.
LEGAL ENTITLEMENT: Any person holding legal title to property within Lyon
County or his or her authorized agent.
LIVING UNIT: Any residence, apartment, or other structure to be occupied for
purposes of habitation by a single person or family and requiring wastewater
disposal services.
LOCAL PURVEYOR: The local entity that provides utility service to the public
within a specified area of service. This chapter is applicable only to local
purveyor as individually accepted by their respective board.
LYON COUNTY UTILITIES DEPARTMENT (LCUD): The Lyon County utilities department
and related service area. May be used in conjunction with "local purveyor" for
areas outside the LCUD service area, providing the local purveyor chooses to
obtain board acceptance.
MAIN EXTENSION/CAPACITY ENHANCEMENT: The extension or replacement of sewer
collection mains and necessary facilities in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter applicable to main extensions and/or capacity enhancements.
METERED SERVICE: A service for which charges are computed on the basis of
measured quantities of water, wastewater or liquid wastes.
OUTSIDE SEWER: A sanitary sewer beyond the limits of the LCUD service area not
subject to the control or jurisdiction of the LCUD.
PERMANENT SERVICE: A service which, in the opinion of the LCUD, is of a
permanent and established character. The use of the sewer may be continuous,
intermittent or seasonal in nature.
PERMIT: Written authorization received from the entity having jurisdiction over
the area. Permit required pursuant to this or any other regulation of Lyon
County and the LCUD for the installation of any utility related infrastructure,
or development requiring a permit from any state, county, city or presiding
entity.
PERSON: A natural person, his heirs, executor, administrators, or assigns and
shall also include a firm, corporation, municipal or quasi-municipal
corporation, or governmental agency. Singular includes plural, male includes
female.
PLUMBING FIXTURE: Any sink, tub, shower, water closet or other facility as
defined by UPC connected by a building drain to the building sewer.
PREMISES: All that real property of a single integrated operation under one
name which operation may involve one or more buildings, locations or services,
provided: a) such buildings, locations, or services are to a single unit of
property; or b) such buildings, locations or services are on two (2) or more
units of property immediately adjoining, except for intervening public
highways, streets, alleys, or waterways.
PRIVATE SEWER: A sewer which is privately maintained and receives the discharge
from one or more building drains and conveys it to a public sewer, private
sewer disposal system, or other point of disposal.
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: Any public deeded, dedicated and accepted highway, road,
street, avenue, alley, way, public easement or right of way for public access.
PUBLIC SEWER: A common sewer main line and related infrastructure directly
controlled by public authority.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW): Any arrangement of devices and
structures used for treating wastewater. The treatment plant and related works
shall be designed and operated in compliance with pertinent state of Nevada
and/or federal statutes, rules, regulations and permits.
SANITARY SEWER: A sewer which carries wastewater and to which storm, surface
and ground waters are intentionally excluded.
SERVICE CLASSIFICATIONS:
   A.   Commercial Unit: Office buildings, private clubs, motels, hotels, dry
cleaners, supermarkets, or portions thereof, laundry, or other facilities
(excepting toilet facilities) requiring wastewater disposal services. All
commercial buildings, or portions thereof, shall include, but not be limited
to, department stores, restaurants, clubs and schools.
   B.   Industrial Service: Service to customers engaged in a process which
creates or changes raw or unfinished materials into another form or product.
(Including, but not limited to, factories, mills, machine shops, mines, pumping
plants, creameries, canning and packing plants, or processing activities.)
   C.   Residential Service: Service to a customer from a residential activity
in a single-family dwelling or building, mobile home, in an individual flat,
condominium, or apartment in a multiple-family dwelling, or building or portion
thereof occupied as the home, residence or sleeping place of one or more
persons.
SERVICE CONNECTION: The point of connection of the customer's piping with the
LCUD or local purveyor's public sewer facilities. Customer owned "Y" on sewer
laterals connecting to the main line, or the point of connection of customer
piping to a public owned manhole.
SERVICE SIZE FOR BILLING PURPOSE: The service size for commercial billing
purposes is based on the calculated demand using the fixture unit calculation
found in the uniform plumbing code. Certain site conditions may necessitate the
installation of a different size meter or a submeter. Billing will be based on
the calculated flows for that connection. Lyon County must approve all metering
design and size.
SEWER: A pipe or conduit approved by LCUD for the conveyance of wastewater.
SEWERAGE: See definition of Treatment Works/Sewerage.
STORM SEWER: A sewer which carries storm, surface, ground, and clear water.
STORM WATER: Water, rainfall or other precipitation which drains from roofs,
other surfaces, catch basins or other pipelines or structures during or
following a storm.
TREATMENT PLANT: See definition of Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW).
TREATMENT WORKS/SEWERAGE: All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and
disposing of wastewater. The treatment works and all facilities shall be in
accordance with design and construction practices of pertinent state of Nevada
statutes, rules, regulations and permits and federal regulations where
applicable.
UTILITIES DIRECTOR: The person appointed to perform the duties of utilities
director.
WASTE: The solid, liquid, or vapor components of wastewater that may be
discharged into the sewer system.
WASTEWATER: The spent water of a community. From the standpoint of source, it
may be a combination of the liquid and water carried wastes from residences,
commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions, together with any
ground water, surface water, and storm water that may be present. (Ord. 507, 1-
18-2007)
9.05.03: GENERAL RULES:
   A.   Rules And Regulations: The following rules and regulations respecting
sewer construction, disposal of wastewater, and connection to the treatment
works of LCUD, are hereby adopted, and all work in respect thereto shall be
performed as herein required.
   B.   Purpose: This chapter is intended to provide rules and regulations for
the use and construction of sanitary sewer facilities hereafter installed,
altered or repaired within the LCUD.
   C.   Violation Unlawful: Following the effective date hereof it shall be
unlawful for any person to connect to, construct or install or provide any
other means of wastewater disposal from any building in the LCUD except by
connection to a public sewer where available within four hundred feet (400').
Connection shall be as provided in this chapter.
   D.   Protection From Damage: No person shall maliciously, wilfully, or
negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any
structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the LCUD treatment
works. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to the penalties
provided by law, and shall be responsible for the cost of repair.
   E.   Violation: Any person found to be violating any provision of this
chapter or any other ordinance, rule or regulation of the LCUD, except
subsection F of this section, shall be served by the inspector or other
authorized person with written notice stating the nature of the violation and
providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. Said
time limit shall be ten (10) working days. The offender shall, within the
period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. All
persons shall be held strictly responsible for any and all acts of agents or
employees done under the provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance,
rule or regulation of the LCUD and state and federal rules or regulations. Upon
being notified by the inspector of any defect arising in any sewer or of any
violation of this chapter, the person or persons having charge of said work
shall immediately correct the same.
      1.   Amounts: Violations of these regulations shall be subject to civil
monetary penalties established: a) by applicable Nevada law, b) by applicable
rules and regulations of the Nevada department of environmental protection and
the LCUD and c) by such penalty schedules as may from time to time be adopted
by the LCUD and appended to these regulations.
      2.   Continuing Violations: For purposes of the computation of penalties,
each day of a continuing violation of these regulations shall be deemed to be a
separate violation.
   F.   Public Nuisance: Continued habitation of any building or continued
operation of any industrial facility in violation of the provisions of this
chapter or any other ordinance, rule or regulation of the LCUD is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance. The LCUD may cause proceedings to be brought
for the abatement of the occupancy of the building or industrial facility
during the period of such violation.
   G.   Disconnection: As an alternative method of enforcing the provisions of
this chapter or any other ordinance, rule or regulation of the LCUD, the LCUD
shall have the power to disconnect the user from the sewer mains or water mains
or both. Upon disconnection, the LCUD shall estimate the cost of disconnection
from and reconnection to the system and such user shall deposit the cost, as
estimated, of disconnection and reconnection before such user is reconnected to
the system. LCUD shall refund any part of the deposit remaining after payment
of all costs of disconnection and reconnection.
   H.   Abatement: During the period of such disconnection, habitation of such
premises by human beings shall constitute a public nuisance, whereupon the LCUD
shall cause proceedings to be brought for the abatement of the occupancy of
said premises by human beings during the period of such disconnection. In such
event, and as a condition of reconnection, there is to be paid to the LCUD a
reasonable attorney fee and cost of suit arising in said action.
   I.   Means Of Enforcement Only: The LCUD hereby declares that the foregoing
procedures are established as a means of enforcement of the terms and
conditions of its ordinances, rules and regulations, and not as a penalty.
   J.   Lateral Sewer: That portion of utility line connecting between the main
and the customer property line adjacent to the right of way. A sewer lateral is
that portion of the private sewer line that is within the right of way, but
maintained by the property owner. Sewer laterals are privately owned and
maintained. Any work to be done on the lateral requires a permit and a
contractor licensed to do the work within the right of way.
   K.   Permits And Fees: No public sewer, private sewer delivery system or
other sewerage facility connected or to be connected to the treatment works of
the LCUD shall be installed, altered or repaired within the LCUD service area
until a permit for the work has been obtained and all fees paid in accordance
with the requirements of this chapter.
   L.   Responsibility For Loss Or Damage: LCUD will not be responsible for any
loss or damage caused by any negligence or wrongful act of a person or his
authorized representative in installing, maintaining, operating or using any or
all appliances, facilities or equipment for which sewer service is supplied.
The person will be held responsible for damage to LCUD's facilities and other
property resulting from the use or operation of appliances and facilities on
customer's premises, including damage caused by steam, hot water, chemicals,
electrical connections, private sewer connections, grease sewer overflow or
backups, etc.
Contractors, owners' agents, or other persons responsible for damage to LCUD
property shall be required to pay for repair, replacement, or other
compensation resulting from such damages.
The LCUD assumes no responsibility for loss or damage due to sewage backup or
overflow. The LCUD merely agrees to furnish such capacity in its general
collection system as required by Nevada rules and regulations. The LCUD will
endeavor to give reasonable notice to customers before curtailment of services;
however, the LCUD shall not be liable for shutdown or variations to the system
that occur without prior notice by the LCUD.
   M.   Uniform Plumbing Code: The following uniform plumbing code provisions
are made part of this chapter as they pertain to areas of responsibility of
LCUD:
This chapter hereby adopts the 2003 uniform plumbing code and its appendices
including: A, B, C, E, H, I (omitting the standards contained within "I" of 8-
95, 11-87, 20-2000), K, (omit K-7 and K-8), and L, (omit L4.0 to L6.3). This
chapter hereby adopts the "Standard Specifications For Public Works
Construction" and "Lyon County Standard Details" most current versions. (Ord.
507, 1-18-2007)
9.05.04: SEWER DEPARTMENT:
   A.   Creation: A sewer department is hereby created comprised of the board,
county manager, and the utilities director.
   B.   County Manager: The county manager shall have full charge and control
of the maintenance, operation and construction of the sewer works and system.
   C.   Utilities Director: The position of utilities director of LCUD is
hereby created. He/she shall have charge of the utilities of the LCUD. This
shall include all maintenance, operation and construction of the sewer works,
and billing for and collecting of service and connection charges. He/she shall
perform such other duties as shall be determined by the county manager.
   D.   Inspections: The LCUD shall perform inspections on all sewer system
construction within the LCUD service area to assure compliance with LCUD
standards and specifications. All existing residential, commercial and
industrial establishments are subject to inspection for proper operation of
grease traps, pretreatment devices, etc. Inspection of existing devices shall
be scheduled with the property owner or property manager. If the property owner
or property manager refuses access, subsection G of this section shall apply.
   E.   Performance Of Duties: The foregoing duties of the utilities director
may be performed by the county manager or by a designated employee(s), as the
county manager may direct, so long as a registered professional engineer
performs those decisions or actions that require professional engineering
judgment.
   F.   Consolidations: Any of the foregoing offices may be consolidated, one
with the other, or with other offices of the LCUD.
   G.   Consequences Of Denial Of Entry Or Access: Where an owner or user,
after having received reasonable notice from the LCUD, refuses to permit
properly identified LCUD personnel to enter or have access to premises or
facilities in accordance with subsection D of this section, the LCUD may
forthwith give written notice of its intent to terminate water and/or sewer
service to such user. Such notice shall be given in accordance with section
9.05.13, "Billing And Collection", and subsection
9.05.14B, "Discontinuance Of Service By LCUD", of this chapter. Termination
based on these sections shall be treated as a termination for refusal of access
under subsection D of this section.
   H.   Violation: Any person found to be violating any provision of this
chapter or any ordinance, rule or regulation of the LCUD, shall be served by
the LCUD authorized personnel with written notice stating the nature of the
violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction
thereof. Said time limit shall be ten (10) business days. The offender shall,
within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all
violations. All persons shall be held strictly responsible for any and all acts
of their agents or employees under the provisions of this chapter or any other
ordinance, rule or regulation of the LCUD. Upon being notified by the LCUD of
any violation of this chapter, the person or persons having charge of said work
shall immediately correct the same.
      1.   Amounts: Violations of these regulations shall be subject to civil
monetary penalties established by: a) applicable Nevada statutes or
administrative code, b) NDEP and the LCUD and c) by such penalty schedules as
may from time to time be adopted by the LCUD and appended to these regulations.
      2.   Continuing Violations: For purposes of the computation of penalties,
each day of a continuing violation of these regulations shall be deemed to be a
separate violation. (Ord. 507, 1-18-2007)
9.05.05: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED; PROHIBITIONS; CONNECTION:
   A.   Disposal Of Wastes: It shall be unlawful for any person to place,
deposit, or permit to be deposited upon public or private property within the
LCUD service area, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the county, any
human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
   B.   Treatment Of Wastes Required: It shall be unlawful to discharge into
any stream or watercourse any sawdust, pulp, oils, rubbish, filth, industrial
waste, poisonous or deleterious substances which affect the health of persons,
fish or livestock, or render such waters unpalatable or distasteful, or other
polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter and Lyon County's industrial
wastewater requirements found in chapter 6 of this title.
   C.   Unlawful Disposal: Except as herein provided, it shall be unlawful to
construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, cesspool, seepage pit or other
facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater. Septic tanks will
only be allowed in areas where sewer service is not available.
   D.   Occupancy Prohibited: No building, industrial facility or other
structure shall be occupied or issued a certificate of occupancy, until the
owner of the premises has complied with all rules and regulations of the LCUD.
   E.   Sewer Required: The owner of any residential building or structure
occupied by humans, situated within the LCUD service area, is hereby required
at his expense to connect said building directly with the public sewer of the
LCUD where available within four hundred feet (400'), in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
      1.   Manner Of Connection And Service: Prior to any connection to the
public sewer, an approved permit for such connection shall be obtained and all
fees paid for such connection.
         a.   A condition for obtaining a permit shall be the approval of plans
and information required for the proposed development. Conformance with
"Standard Specifications For Public Works Construction", current "Standard
Details For The Lyon County Utilities Water And Sewer System", and the current
"Lyon County Ordinance And Development Standards".
         b.   Every building or industrial facility must be separately
connected to the public sewer main with a private building sewer line. One or
more existing buildings located on a single lot or parcel belonging to the same
owner may be served with the same private sewer line during the period of said
ownership. Upon the subsequent subdivision, parceling or dividing of said
parcel or ownership thereof, the portion not directly connected to a public
sewer shall sever and properly cap the connection to the jointly used private
sewer line, install a private building sewer line and lateral and connect
directly to the public sewer. Any proposed new buildings to be used as "mother-
in-law" type quarters located on a single lot or parcel belonging to the same
owner desiring to have the buildings share a single lateral, private main, or
building lateral, shall obtain approval of the LCUD prior to obtaining a permit
to construct.
         c.   In all buildings in which the plumbing system is too low for
gravity flow to the public sewer, domestic wastewater carried by the building
drain shall be lifted by pump or other means approved by the LCUD and
discharged to the public sewer at the expense of the owner. Private sewer
pumping systems shall be designed by an engineer at no cost to the county, LCUD
or local purveyor. Private pumps and equipment are to be located on private
property, not in the public right of way or any public utility easements.
Private pumping systems and related infrastructure are to be privately
maintained.
         d.   Building private sewer lines with the lateral connection below
the manhole rim of the immediate upstream manhole of the public sewer shall
provide at the owner's expense such protective devices in the private sewer
building line as may be necessary to protect owner against flooding. The LCUD
shall not be responsible for any damages from flood or damages caused by flow
to owner's buildings or property regardless of whether such facilities are
located below the hydraulic grade line of the public sewer.
      2.   Protection Of Excavation: All excavations for sewer installations
shall be adequately guarded with barricades or lights to protect the public
from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, easements and other property
disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory
to the LCUD and the county or other person or agency having jurisdiction.
      3.   Approval Of Private Building Sewer Line And Lateral: Prior to any
service, a representative of the LCUD shall inspect and approve the connection
to the public sewer system. Prior to covering the private sewer building line
or lateral, the inspector shall determine compliance with approved plans and
LCUD specifications before approval and authorizing any service. Noncompliance
with plans or specifications shall be corrected prior to issuance of
certification of occupancy or service by the LCUD.
      4.   Permit Required: No unauthorized person shall excavate, make any
connection with or opening into, use, or disturb any public sewer or
appurtenance or perform any work on any building sewer without first obtaining
authorization from LCUD or the local purveyor, and when required a Lyon County
building permit, road department permit, or Nevada department of transportation
permit. (Ord. 507, 1-18-2007)
9.05.06: APPLICATION AND BILLING FOR REGULAR SEWER SERVICE:
   A.   Application: A property owner or his agent shall make application for
regular water service on a form provided by LCUD:
      1.   Purpose: The application is merely a written request for service on
a form provided by LCUD and does not bind the applicant to take service;
neither does it bind LCUD to serve.
Sewer service will not be provided until all provisions related to state,
federal and local regulations and standards have been met.
   B.   Forms Of Application: A property owner or his agent shall make an
application for regular sewer service on the form provided.
   C.   Undertaking Of Applicant: Such application will signify the customer's
willingness and intention to comply with this chapter and other ordinances or
regulations relating to the regular sewer service and to make payment for sewer
service required.
   D.   Individual Liability For Joint Service: Two (2) or more persons who
join in one application for service shall be jointly and severally liable for
payment of bills and shall be billed by means of a single periodic bill.
   E.   Change In Customer's Equipment Or Operations: Before a customer makes
any material change in size, or operation resulting in significant increase in
volumes or wastewater characteristics, or extent of the equipment or operations
for which the LCUD's service is utilized, customer shall immediately file with
the LCUD a new application for additional service.
   F.   Special Cases: The LCUD will require a written contract or permit with
special guarantee from applicants whose unusual characteristics of load would
require excessive or special investment in facilities or whose requirements for
service are of a special nature. Pretreatment may be required and must be
approved by LCUD and NDEP and may require a separate industrial discharge
permit.
   G.   Payment For Previous Service: An application will not be honored unless
payment in full has been made for sewer and other services previously rendered
to the applicant by the LCUD.
   H.   Connection To System Required Within Three Hundred Sixty Five Days Of
Application: Any application that has been accepted by the LCUD may be
considered vacated if the applicant fails to commence construction and
connection to the LCUD's sewer system within three hundred sixty five (365)
days of such acceptance. The fees collected for such application shall be
returned to the applicant upon written request, and a new application and
payment of fees in effect at time of approval of application will be required
before service will be provided. No fees will be refunded after connection.
   I.   Changes In Use Or Uses Of Served Property: Any changes in the use or
uses of properties served by regular sewer service which may affect the service
classification under which it is served or the number of fixture units served
must have the prior approval of the LCUD. Examples of such changes would be
adding plumbing fixtures not previously approved in applying for service,
modifying a residence to accommodate more single-family units than were
approved or such other changes that would similarly change the character of the
building. Such changes in use shall be subject to then current standards and
the fee resolution in effect at time of application approval. Payment of such
fees shall be made upon application. If such change is made without
application, it shall be subject to the corrective measures and current fees.
   J.   Connection Charges: Connection fees shall be collected at the time of
issuing the permit for a sewer connection. Connection fees shall be charged at
the rate in effect on the day of application. Connections not made or
construction not started within three hundred sixty five (365) days will be
subject to reapplication and the current rates in effect at the time of
reapplication. Previously paid connection fees shall be credited to the new
connection fee rate.
      1.   Unit Charges: Sewer connection fees are based on fixture unit counts
for commercial use and one EDU for residential use. Each unit of multi- family
or multiple dwellings on a single parcel shall constitute a separate unit.
      2.   Remodeling Connection Charges: If remodeling necessitates upsizing
of the water meter, sewer connection fees shall be charged equal to the fee for
the upgraded meter size as described in subsection J.1. of this section minus:
a) the total in sewer connection fees paid to the LCUD previously or b) sewer
connection fees for the difference between the old fixture unit count and the
new fixture unit count on commercial service, whichever results in the lower
net additional connection charges.
      3.   Plan Check Fee: Any person requiring approval of plans by the LCUD,
or desiring plan checking, shall pay to the LCUD a plan checking fee as
established by the LCUD and board accepted by resolution. Each plan revision
requiring rechecking shall necessitate the charge of an additional plan check
fee per the Lyon County fee resolution. Plan checking is performed for water
and sewer concurrently.
   K.   Subdivisions:
      1.   Plan Check Fee: Any person requiring approval of plans by the LCUD,
or desiring plan checking shall pay to the LCUD the following fee or fees. Plan
checking fees shall be invoiced at a rate to reimburse direct costs, labor and
materials as determined by LCUD as contained in the current fee resolution.
If any portion of the plans after being checked, are required to be redrawn or
rechecked, the applicant shall pay the additional cost of checking based upon
the actual expense of the rechecking labor and materials, as determined by the
LCUD. Plans will not be released until all fees have been paid.
Encroachment permit applications are available in the office of the LCUD and
are to be filled out by the engineer submitting the plan. Plan checking is
performed for water and sewer concurrently.
      2.   Plan Checking Application: A record owner or his agent may make
application for plan checking service on the form established by the LCUD for
the purpose intended.
      3.   County Or Other Permits: The applicant is responsible to apply for
and obtain any required county road cut, NDOT encroachment or other required
permits.
      4.   Notice To Customer: Notice to a customer will normally be in writing
and will be delivered or mailed to the customer's last known address. In
emergencies, or when circumstances warrant, the LCUD where feasible, will
endeavor to promptly notify the customer affected and may make such
notification orally, either in person or by telephone.
      5.   Notice From Customers: A customer may make notification in writing
to the LCUD at its utilities office or through e-mail. If a customer uses e-
mail for notification, the customer must keep a printed copy showing LCUD
received the notice. (Ord. 507, 1-18-2007; amd. Ord. 622, 12-16-2021)
9.05.07: APPLICATION FOR SERVICE WHEN MAIN EXTENSION OR CAPACITY ENHANCEMENT IS
REQUIRED:
   A.   Application: Any owner of one or more lots or parcels, or subdivider of
a tract of land, desiring the extension of one or more mains to serve such
property, and/or for any capacity enhancement of existing facilities shall
submit an application with six (6) complete sets of plans to the Lyon County
planning department, two (2) sets of plans to the LCUD, a copy of the
application, and any needed studies will be sent to LCUD, such application to
contain the legal description of the property to be served and tract number,
flow models, location of the proposed connection and any additional information
which may be required by LCUD, or Lyon County. Costs shall be borne by the
applicant for surveys or engineering services, including engineering or
potholing to determine location of existing utilities, or the costs of
extensions and/or capacity enhancement. Refer to Lyon County development
standards, "Standard Details And Specifications For Public Works Construction".
Design with plan and profile by a civil engineer registered in Nevada are
required for all main line development. Installation must be by a Nevada and
Lyon County licensed contractor.
   B.   Investigation: Upon receipt of an application for a main extension, the
LCUD engineer shall make an investigation and review of the proposed extension
and/or capacity enhancement.
   C.   Ruling: The director shall thereupon consider the application for main
extension and the report thereon and after such consideration reject or approve
it.
   D.   LCUD Lines: All sewer main extensions and/or capacity enhancement shall
be in accordance with the Lyon County utilities sewer ordinance, "Standard
Specifications For Public Works Construction" and "Lyon County Standard
Details". Main lines shall be and remain the property of the LCUD or the local
purveyor for the area.
   E.   LCUD Extension: The LCUD will inspect all main extensions and/or
capacity enhancement installations.
   F.   Determination: The cost of such extension shall be borne by the
applicant, subject to the reimbursement agreement provided in subsection G of
this section, unless the board determines it is in the best interest of the
LCUD to advance such costs.
   G.   Reimbursement Agreement: If the applicant must extend the sewer line
system through another's property or along the frontages of another's property
or along the frontages of various intermediate property owners, and if said
properties are not currently served by the county's sewer system, then said
intermediate and benefiting property owners shall be responsible when
development commences or connection is made for a pro rata share of the costs
of the sewer line extension.
When the applicant is required to extend a sewer line, he shall "front end" the
entire cost of the sewer line construction and shall be responsible for the
actual construction of said sewer line. Any owners of properties to be served
by the extended sewer line will thereafter be responsible for reimbursing the
first property owner for a pro rata share of the costs of the sewer line system
at the time said subsequent owners begin to plat, parcel, develop or build upon
their parcels.
The pro rata shares for the applicant and all subsequent owners benefited by
the extended sewer line shall be determined prior to the county entering into
the reimbursement agreement. Extensions and/or capacity upgrade financed by the
applicant shall be prorated to the linear footage along the extension. Flag
lots and large parcels with narrow frontage may be calculated by a percentage
of the parcel square footage in relation to the main line installation cost
percentage.
The county shall collect a fifteen percent (15%) administrative fee from the
applicant who front ended the sewer line construction upon reimbursement by
deducting the fifteen percent (15%) administrative fee from the subsequent
owners' pro rata share prior to reimbursement to the applicant by the county.
The reimbursement agreement shall become null and void ten (10) years from the
date of board of county commissioners' approval.
The applicant shall submit three (3) bids prior to construction from qualified
contractors attached to the application for reimbursement, unless due to
extraordinary circumstances three (3) bids are not available due to specialized
construction. The bids shall be itemized and include costs for all items to be
installed (i.e., pipe, manholes, etc.). Failure to provide the itemized bids
will exempt the installation from reimbursement. Construction costs eligible
for reimbursement are limited to engineering, contractor's bid, construction
staking by an engineer or surveyor, permit, inspection and testing fees. The
applicant's administration costs are not eligible for reimbursement.
Single-family homes on property zoned single-family existing at the time of
application for a reimbursement agreement shall be exempt from the provisions
of the agreement. When an existing single-family home is on a parcel which has
adequate area to be divided per the current zoning or master plan designation
of the parcel, the area which could be divided for new development will be
required to be included in the reimbursement agreement. In no event shall any
owners of the property to be served by such extended sewer lines be permitted
to connect thereto without first paying to the applicant or the county the pro
rata share of the costs described above as well as all other fees required by
the county.
Any facilities installed pursuant to this section are the property of the LCUD
upon inspection and acceptance of the county and LCUD. A one year warranty
agreement period is in effect for the contractor to be responsible for repairs.
      1.   Participation By LCUD: Should LCUD require an oversized sewer line,
LCUD will reimburse the applicant for the costs for materials only of the
additional sewer line size as long as said line is greater than ten inches
(10") in diameter. The applicant shall be responsible for the cost of the size
of mains up to and including ten inches (10") or larger if needed for the
project, whichever is greater.
When the LCUD agrees to pay for an increase in sewer line size, at least three
(3) bids, signed and prepared by a contractor, shall be required which show the
comparable cost of the incremental increase. LCUD shall select the proposal
most beneficial to it. The LCUD reserves the right to reject the bids if the
cost differentials exceed prices paid by the LCUD on similar installations. In
no event shall LCUD pay more than the lowest proposal presented. Prior to
construction, the applicant shall submit three (3) bids from qualified
contractors attached to the application for participation, unless due to
extraordinary circumstances three (3) bids are not available due to specialized
construction.
For LCUD to reimburse an applicant for any utility upgrades, approval must be
obtained, an agreement signed and the lowest of three (3) bids approved. LCUD
is not obligated or required to participate in any costs, any reimbursement is
at the discretion of LCUD, and is for out of the ordinary situations only. In
no event shall LCUD pay more than the lowest proposal presented. Bids shall be
itemized and include cost differentials for all items to be included in the
reimbursement. Failure to provide the itemized bids will exempt the
installation from reimbursement.
   H.   Extension By Customer: In special cases where extension of the LCUD's
mains to a point adjacent to customer's premises is not feasible, in the
opinion of the LCUD, customer may obtain necessary easements and upon approval
of LCUD, lay service pipe, at his own expense, from point of use to point where
tap can be made directly to the LCUD's then existing main. This method of
installation will require encroachment permit approval and a possible annual
fee for private lines within the right of way. Easements from adjacent property
owners may be required. This method will be used only in emergencies or as a
last result. This method will only be used on a temporary basis if private
lines are running parallel to the road, or within the public rights of way or
public utility easement. Any damage because of the private line shall be the
responsibility of the line owner, Lyon County shall be held harmless, with no
costs incurred to the county.
   I.   Point Of Connection: LCUD shall be obligated to provide service at the
point of connection to its collection main lines only, and customer shall
assume all responsibility and cost for maintenance, operation and replacement
of his private sewer line and the flow therein.
   J.   Additional Facilities Required: If additional facilities, including,
but not limited to, a sewer pump, should be required in customer's private
sewer line to provide adequate customer service, beyond that normally provided
by the LCUD at point of connection of customer's private sewer line to the
LCUD's main, customer shall provide, operate, maintain and replace such
facilities, all at his own expense.
   K.   No Obligation By LCUD: The LCUD shall at no time in the future be
required to lay additional public sewers beyond the original point of delivery
to provide service to said customer or others supplied through said customer's
private sewer. (Ord. 507, 1-18-2007)
9.05.08: PUBLIC SEWER EXTENSIONS:
   A.   Extensions: The record owner, or duly authorized agent acting on behalf
of the owner, shall submit a written application to LCUD requesting a main line
extension. This application shall contain the legal property description,
assessor's parcel number, map and plan showing proposed extension and
connection, easements or rights of way to be granted or procured. Prior to LCUD
approval of the project for permit, submittal of proposed plans, profiles, flow
models and specifications, prepared and stamped by an engineer registered in
the state of Nevada shall be received. Refer to Lyon County development
standards and current codes for permit requirements. Acceptance of application
is no guarantee of approval by LCUD and does not obligate LCUD to participate
in any costs or installation. LCUD's participation in main line extensions or
upsizing projects must be approved by the Lyon County board of county
commissioners.
LCUD may make but must approve extensions along streets, alleys, lanes, roads,
common areas, and easements cut by established grades, and/or make alterations
in its existing facilities in accordance with these rules and regulations,
provided such extensions are located within the service area of LCUD.
      1.   Extensions of collection lines and appurtenances to provide service
to an applicant will be made at applicant's expense. Subsection G of this
section may apply if LCUD and board of county commissioners' approval is
obtained.
      2.   The cost for LCUD to extend and install utility appurtenances will
be based on actual cost of the project.
      3.   Reserved.
      4.   Reserved.
      5.   All main extensions will become the property of the LCUD. LCUD must
approve inspections and verify compliance with all rules, regulations and
specifications required by the LCUD. A one year maintenance period is in effect
for the contractor to be responsible for repairs. After that time the main
extension will be accepted, owned, operated and maintained by the LCUD at its
own expense.
      6.   Acceptance criteria of sewer lines installed by approved licensed
contractors shall include, but not be limited to:
         a.   Submittal of a three (3) mil Mylar, hard copy and electronic
version acceptable to LCUD, stamped record drawing plan and profile upon
completion of the main line extension;
         b.   Completion of all required testing to the satisfaction of the
LCUD;
         c.   Completion of all appropriate legal documentation incidental to
the transfer of ownership of utility infrastructure and easements to the LCUD.
      7.   All expenses incurred relating to the line extension and/or capacity
enhancement shall be borne by the applicant.
      8.   LCUD approval and acceptance of lines shall be based on compliance
with all Lyon County, federal, and state ordinances, rules, regulations and
policies.
      9.   No extension contract, or any rights thereunder, granted under this
provision may be assigned without written notification to the LCUD by the
registered holder of the contract. (Ord. 507, 1-18-2007)
9.05.09: BUILDING SEWERS, PRIVATE SEWER LINES, LATERALS, AND CONNECTIONS:
   A.   Permit Required: No unauthorized person shall excavate, make any
connection with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer,
building drain or building sewer; and appurtenances thereto or perform any work
on any lateral or building sewer without first obtaining a written permit from
the LCUD. Any new construction, addition, remodel or demolition requiring
issuance of a Lyon County building permit shall require written approval and
final acceptance by an LCUD inspector.
   B.   Construction Requirements: Construction of building sewers and private
sewer lines shall be in accordance with the requirements hereof and other
current Lyon County standards. Conflicts in current codes will be resolved by
using the most stringent code, or at the discretion of LCUD.
   C.   Minimum Size And Slope: The minimum size of a building sewer shall be
four inches (4") in diameter unless discharging from a pressure system. The
building sewer, private sewer delivery system or all other portions of the
sewerage shall be four inches (4"), six inches (6"), or eight inches (8") in
diameter, as determined by the engineer of record, and approved by LCUD.
   D.   Separate Sewers: No two (2) adjacent buildings fronting on the same
street shall be permitted to join in the use of the same private building sewer
line or lateral. Every building or industrial facility must be separately
connected to a public sewer if such public sewer exists in the street upon
which the property abuts or in an easement which will serve said property.
However, upon approval of LCUD, one or more buildings located on a lot or
parcel of land belonging to the same record owner may be served with the same
private sewer main line during the period of said ownership. Upon the
subsequent subdivision of said lot and sale of a portion thereof, the portion
not directly connected to public sewer shall have a new private lateral and
building line installed and connect directly to the public sewer main. It shall
be unlawful for the record owner thereof to continue to use or maintain such
indirect connection. Joint use sewers shall only be approved in the case of a
multi-family complex, or commercial complex that has a private main line for
collection. Any private main lines are privately maintained. Ownership shall be
as stated above, unless easements and agreements are created between commercial
or multi-family owners, approved by LCUD. Customer must record the agreement
with the county recorder's office. A main line is classified as six inches (6")
and above, and shall connect with the county main with a manhole.
   E.   Old Building Sewers: Old building sewers may be used in connection with
new buildings only when they have been video inspected and tested and are found
to meet all requirements of the LCUD and engineer of record. The inspector must
approve their use. Any sewer not used shall be properly capped at the
connection to the main. The capping must be inspected by LCUD or the local
purveyor. If street work is required for the capping, the owner will be
required to get an encroachment permit.
   F.   Cleanouts: Cleanouts shall be provided and privately maintained in the
private building sewer at a location three feet (3') outside the foundation
wall of the building. Cleanouts shall be constructed as per Lyon County
standard details, the adopted uniform plumbing code and where the building
sewer crosses a property line. All cleanouts shall be maintained watertight,
with plug enclosure and covered with a concrete box with a steel lid marked
"sewer" and set to finished surface grade.
   G.   Sewer Too Low, Individual Sewage Pump Stations (ISPS): In all buildings
or properties in which the plumbing systems are too low to permit gravity flow
to the public sewer, domestic wastewater carried by the building sewer shall be
lifted by artificial means and discharged to the public sewer at the expense of
the owner. Design of the system shall be by the owner's project engineer and
approved by LCUD. Installation shall be approved by the inspector. Location of
the pump and related equipment is to be on private property, not in the right
of way, or public utility easement. A backwater device shall be installed and
maintained by the customer in building sewers serving fixtures at a lower
elevation than the overflow rim of the upstream manhole of the sewer to which
it discharges. The LCUD reserves the right to have sewer pump stations
inspected and tested when deemed by the utilities director to be a potential
hazard to public health or the environment. The LCUD shall determine the
inspection and testing frequency. Maintenance will be done at the owner's
expense. All ISPSs must be approved by LCUD and all backwater devices must be
accessible for maintenance and repair.
   H.   Abandonment Of Private Sewer Disposal (Septic) System: The LCUD will
not authorize a customer to extend and connect customer's private sewer
disposal system (septic system) to the LCUD's main.
Abandonment of any failed or unused septic system shall be done in accordance
with the uniform plumbing code, state health and Lyon County requirements.
Under no circumstance will an abandoned private sewer disposal system be
allowed to stay in service with any connection to the county sewer system. Any
parcel connecting to the county sewer shall properly abandon the existing
septic system.
The costs incurred for the abandonment and connection to the sewer shall be the
responsibility of the record owner and the connection shall be at the location
specified or approved by the LCUD.
All water and sewer testing is required to comply with federal, state and local
regulations, laws or ordinances and shall be at the expense of the applicant.
   I.   Backflow Prevention Devices: The LCUD may refuse or discontinue service
to any premises where a cross connection to a source of water supply exists.
   J.   Maintenance: The LCUD will not be responsible for the installation and
maintenance of the sewer or waste lines beyond the point of connection of the
private sewer lateral to the public sewer (see subsection K of this section).
It shall be the owner's and/or customer's responsibility to verify that
fixtures and piping conform to the requirements of all state, county or
municipal ordinances, laws, codes and regulations and be properly maintained.
   K.   Connection To Public Sewer:
      1.   Connection Point Provided: The connection of the building sewer and
private sewer delivery system into the public sewer shall be made at a point
where the lateral and building sewer meets the county sewer main line. The wye
branch, lateral and building line are the customer's responsibility for
maintenance and repair.
      2.   Location: The location of all sewer connection points shall be
approved by the LCUD.
      3.   Installation Standards: The connection to public sewer shall be
installed in accordance with all rules, regulations and standards of LCUD.
      4.   Connection Point: All building sewers, laterals and private mains
are the responsibility of the property owner to the connection at the main
sewer including the wye, tee or saddle.
      5.   Backwater Valve Required: Where any fixture in a structure is lower
than the overflow rim of the upstream manhole or end of line cleanout, an
approved backwater valve must be installed on the building sewer service line.
   L.   Protection Of Excavation: All excavations for sewer installations shall
be adequately guarded with barricades and/or lights so as to protect the public
from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other property disturbed in the
course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the LCUD and
the county or any other entity or person having jurisdiction.
   M.   Maintenance Of Building Sewer: Building sewers to point of connection
to public sewer (wye connection on main) shall be maintained by the record
owner served by that building sewer per subsection K of this section.
      1.   It is unlawful for any record owner of a house, building or property
connected to a public sewer to maintain the private sewer delivery system or
building sewer in a condition that is incapable of passing a test as specified
in subsection M3 of this section.
      2.   All private sewer delivery systems and building sewers, including
lines serving residential, multiple residential and commercial properties
connected to a public sewer shall be cleaned and tested as specified in
subsection M3 of this section prior to completion of the following events:
         a.   Complete remodel or over fifty percent (50%) addition to a house,
building or property served.
         b.   Installation of additional buildings or property to be served.
         c.   Change of use of a house, building or property served from
residential to business or commercial, or from nonrestaurant commercial to
restaurant commercial.
         d.   Repair or replacement of all or part of the building sewer or
private sewer delivery system.
         e.   Determination by the utilities director that the cleaning and
testing is required for the protection of the public health, safety or welfare.
         f.   Laterals installed at the time of the main line installation
shall be tested and video inspected.
         g.   Video inspection may be required after completion of hardscape or
other surface improvements.
      3.   Air testing of existing private sewer delivery systems and building
sewers shall be completed as follows:
         a.   Install cleanouts to grade within three feet (3') outside of the
foundation wall and at property line, including box with metal lid marked
"sewer".
         b.   Testing from LCUD manholes is permissible if the sewer line ties
directly into the manhole. If the sewer line exceeds seventy five feet (75') in
length, use of the property line cleanout for testing is required. When testing
from an LCUD manhole, conformance with the approved safety methods is required.
         c.   Insert air test plug at foundation cleanout.
         d.   Insert an inflatable plug at the property line cleanout.
         e.   Pressurize the line to 3.5 pounds per square inch (psi). The line
shall be allowed a maximum loss in pressure of 0.5 psi in five (5) minutes. If
the loss exceeds 0.5 psi, the test may be attempted one additional time. A
second loss of pressure constitutes failure of the line.
         f.   Lines which fail the air pressure test shall be repaired or
replaced at the record owner's expense. The line shall be air pressure tested
following the repair or replacement.
         g.   Private sewer delivery systems and building sewers shall be left
operationally clean after air testing.
         h.   If access to private sewer delivery systems or building sewers at
the LCUD main is not available, testing will be between property line and
foundation cleanouts. Cleaning and video inspection must be performed on the
entire line from foundation cleanout to public sewer.
         i.   LCUD must witness all pressure tests.
      4.   The record owner of any house, building or property shall conduct
all cleaning and testing required at his sole expense and shall notify the LCUD
for inspection. Testing conducted without such notice shall not satisfy the
requirements of this section.
      5.   The utilities director shall have the authority to waive the
cleaning and testing requirements.
      6.   In the event that cleaning, testing, repair or replacement is
required at a time when weather conditions or excavation restrictions prohibit
such repairs, the utilities director may defer completion of the requirements
until such date as agreed upon between the record owner and the LCUD. If the
test is deferred, the record owner shall post a performance bond or cash
deposit with the LCUD in an amount equal to one hundred fifty percent (150%) of
the engineer's estimate of the cost of replacing the building sewer or private
sewer delivery system. In such an event, the testing requirements shall be
completed within a six (6) month period.
      7.   If any items in subsection M2 of this section applies, if the
property is being sold and weather conditions or excavation restrictions
prohibit testing, the record owner shall deposit escrow funds in the amount
equal to one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the engineer's estimate of the
cost of replacing the private sewer delivery system. Funds held in escrow will
not be released without written notice by the LCUD to the title company holding
such funds. If the testing requirements are not completed by the time set by
this section, the funds held in escrow shall be released to the LCUD. The funds
shall be used by the LCUD for physical disconnection, testing, repair or
replacement of the private sewer delivery system. Should such costs exceed the
amount held in escrow, the difference shall be billed to the new owner of
record.
      8.   In the event a private sewer delivery system or building sewer does
not meet the standards set forth in subsections M3 and N of this section, the
record owner shall complete corrective work and testing shall be performed
within thirty (30) days from the date of the original test.
      9.   A state of Nevada licensed contractor shall be responsible for the
performance of all work connected with the cleaning and testing of private
sewer delivery systems. If the record owner chooses to perform the cleaning and
testing, he may do so by obtaining authorization from the LCUD. Contractors and
owners must post a certificate of insurance with the LCUD showing property
damage and public liability in an amount satisfactory to the LCUD.
      10.   Testing of private sewer delivery systems for common interest
developments shall be completed as follows:
         a.   All homeowners' and property owners' associations for common
interest developments are responsible for the cleaning and maintenance for the
building lines and laterals.
         b.   Each parcel or development applying for a permit shall include on
the site and utility plan the location of all existing and proposed private
sewer lines and appurtenant facilities, designating those sewer facilities
belonging to the association, sizes and lengths of pipes, location of cleanouts
and types of pipe. Said plans shall also show the location of proposed new
cleanouts, where necessary, in order to gain access to the private sewer
delivery systems and facilities. Prior to final approval of inspections a three
(3) mil Mylar drawing showing the above items shall be provided to LCUD.
         c.   Homeowners' and property owners' associations for common interest
developments may undertake a six (6) year program of testing and cleaning
private delivery systems, and may coordinate with LCUD for assistance in
keeping records and plans showing pertinent locations of on site facilities.
Each homeowners' or property owners' association choosing to undertake and
participate in the six (6) year maintenance program shall submit to the LCUD a
schedule of that year's proposed testing and cleaning program with a timetable
as to when actual work will take place. LCUD reserves the right to vary the
testing schedule in order to coordinate with the availability of LCUD
inspectors.
   N.   Testing: Testing shall be conducted in accordance with the most
recently adopted edition of the uniform plumbing code and the LCUD
requirements. In the case of conflicting requirements, the LCUD requirement
shall prevail.
   O.   Modification Of Time Frame: Modifications of the time frames in
subsection M of this section shall be at the discretion of the utilities
director. (Ord. 507, 1-18-2007)
9.05.10: PUBLIC AND PRIVATE SEWER SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION:
   A.   Permit Required: No person shall construct, extend or connect to any
public sewer without first obtaining a written permit from Lyon County and
obtaining approval from the LCUD, paying all fees and furnishing any required
bonds. The provision of this section requiring permits shall not be construed
to apply to contractors constructing sewers and appurtenances under contracts
awarded and entered into by the LCUD except as provided in this chapter.
Inspections, tests, approvals, and one year maintenance agreements are required
on all LCUD owned main line installations, regardless of the party processing
the contract or awarding the bid for contractors.
   B.   Plans, Profiles And Specifications Required: The application for a
permit for public sewer construction shall be accompanied by complete plans,
profiles and specifications, complying with all applicable ordinances, rules
and regulations of Lyon County and the LCUD, prepared by a registered Nevada
civil engineer, showing all details of the proposed work based on an accurate
survey of the ground. The application, together with the plans, profiles, flow
models and specifications, shall be examined by the LCUD who shall approve them
as filed or require them to be modified as necessary to meet all regulations
for proper installation. Refer to Lyon County development standards.
   C.   Easements Or Rights Of Way: In the event that an easement is required
for the extension of the public sewer or the making of connections, the
applicant shall procure, have recorded and have accepted by LCUD a proper
easement or grant of right of way sufficient in law to allow the laying and
maintenance of such extension or connection. Easements or rights of way are
reserved for the servicing of utilities, and no structure or building shall be
placed within or over easements or rights of way, nor shall these areas be
occupied or used in any manner as to restrict or deny access for repairs to
maintenance, and all costs of removing or replacing land surfaces, landscaping
or other occupancies shall be charged to the property record owner.
In order to preserve the health, safety and welfare of the residents within the
LCUD service area, and in order to comply with the environmental protection
agency's safe drinking water act/surface water treatment rule and the clean
water act and the intents and specifications thereof, the LCUD requires and
shall be allowed open and continuous access by its personnel over, across,
through, and under all easement locations for normal and emergency operation of
the LCUD infrastructure.
Types of obstructions restricted within easement areas include, but are not
limited to:
      1.   Residential site improvements, such as landscaping, lawn,
flowerbeds, gardens, irrigation systems, outbuildings, secondary residences,
fences, walls, gazebos, paving, and other site improvements and ancillary
improvements associated therewith.
      2.   Primary residence, multi-family, commercial, industrial, public,
special use buildings and lands and such ancillary improvements associated
therewith, such as decks, carports, pools, gazebos, spas, parking and paved
accesses, carports and garages, fences and detached outbuildings.
      3.   Refer to Lyon County development standards for development criteria.
A sewer easement shall have a minimum width of twenty feet (20'). Any
development encroaching into an easement may be removed by the entity doing
maintenance on the sewer line. There is no requirement for replacement of items
or structures removed.
      4.   Easements shall allow for a ten foot (10') minimum horizontal
separation that shall be maintained between water lines and sewer, storm drain
and reclaimed water lines. Measurement shall be from outside edge of pipes.
Minimum horizontal separation from all other utilities shall be five feet (5').
All natural and constructed obstructions in aforementioned rights of way shall
be subject to the provisions set forth herein.
All new construction, remodeling, restoration and further development on any
parcel shall incorporate the provisions as set forth herein.
   D.   Mitigation Of Encroachments Onto Easements And Rights Of Way: Lyon
County and the LCUD may accommodate, by means of direct negotiations leading to
the execution of an encroachment agreement (that may include a yearly fee for
county owned right of way encroachment), extenuating circumstances where
conditions of clear necessity or historical occupation or use are present.
Encroachment agreements approved and executed shall be recorded. Absent
explicit language to the contrary, by entering into any encroachment agreement,
the LCUD does not surrender a claim to title nor control of operations;
furthermore, absent explicit language in the encroachment agreement to the
contrary, the LCUD shall not incur any additional cost by reason of existing or
constructed privately owned improvements. The county, LCUD, county retained
contractors or other professionals on a bid contract shall be held harmless,
with no cost to the county or LCUD for any damage to encroachments during
maintenance on utility lines and infrastructure within the easement. The above
hold harmless clause does not include any blatant acts of carelessness or
activities outside normal legal parameters.
   E.   Persons Authorized To Perform Work: Only properly licensed contractors
shall be authorized to perform the work of public sewer construction within
Lyon County. The LCUD will not accept dedication of any public sewer
construction, or portions thereof, unless the construction has been performed
by the holder of a class A contractor's license issued by the Nevada state
contractors board and a current Lyon County business license. The licensed
contractor shall sign for and pick up the permit, or authorization issued by
the county or LCUD. All terms and conditions of the permit issued by the county
and/or LCUD to the applicant shall be binding on the contractor. The
requirements of this section shall apply to building sewers and private sewer
lines, laterals and mains installed concurrently with public sewer
construction. Owners, developers or others without proper licensing may not be
issued the permit for right of way, or public utility construction.
No person, other than employees of the LCUD, persons contracting to do work for
the LCUD, or maintenance workers of the LCUD, shall construct or cause to be
constructed, or alter or cause to be altered, any public sewer, lateral sewer,
house connection or industrial connection sewer over six inches (6") in
diameter, sewage pumping plant, pollution control plant, or other sewerage
facility within the LCUD service area where existing or proposed wastewater
flows will discharge directly or indirectly to facilities of the county without
first obtaining approval of sewerage construction plans from LCUD and obtaining
a construction permit.
   F.   Grade Stakes: Grade and line stakes shall be set by a registered civil
engineer or a licensed surveyor prior to the start of work on any public sewer
construction. The contractor shall be responsible for accurately transferring
grades to grade bars and sewer invert.
   G.   Compliance With Local Regulations: Any person constructing a sewer
within a street shall comply with all state, county or city laws, ordinances,
rules and regulations pertaining to the cutting of pavement, opening,
barricading, lighting and protecting of trenches, backfilling and repaving
thereof, and shall obtain all permits and pay all fees required by the
department having jurisdiction prior to the issuance of a permit by the LCUD.
   H.   Design And Construction Standards: Minimum standards for the design and
construction of sewers within the LCUD service area shall be in accordance with
Lyon County and LCUD's development standards, standard details, "Standard
Specifications For Public Works Construction", and ordinances, rules and
policies heretofore or hereafter as amended by Lyon County and the LCUD, copies
of which are on file in the LCUD office. The LCUD may permit engineered
modifications or may require higher standards where unusual conditions are
encountered. Modifications to the engineered plans require the engineer of
design to approve and submit revisions for the modifications. LCUD or Lyon
County and the design engineer will determine when a project will require
resubmittal. The LCUD inspector may "shut down" a job in process with a written
stop work notice, if he deems more information is required on the approved
improvement plans, therefore requiring a resubmittal for more information, or
the correct information to be shown on the plans.
   I.   Connection To A Trunk Sewer Main Line:
      1.   Any person desiring to connect a sewer six inches (6") or smaller in
diameter directly to a trunk sewer of the LCUD shall make written application
to the LCUD. The applicant shall furnish such information as required by the
LCUD to substantiate that the proposed work or use will comply with the
provisions of this chapter.
      2.   A trunk sewer connection permit will not be issued for any sewer
which will convey industrial wastewaters unless the discharger has first
obtained a permit for industrial wastewater discharge.
      3.   Direct attachment of a sewer six inches (6") or smaller in diameter
to a trunk sewer will be permitted only if the LCUD determines that a suitable
local sewer is not available, that adequate trunk sewer capacity exists, that
the connection will function properly, and that the connection will not
adversely affect existing or anticipated facilities or operations of the LCUD
system. Sewers six inches (6") or smaller in diameter to be attached directly
to a trunk sewer shall be constructed in a manner and at the location specified
by the LCUD. Inspection of the connections to a trunk sewer shall be made by
personnel of the LCUD. No sewer exceeding six inches (6") in diameter shall be
connected directly to a trunk sewer without the prior approval of plans for
sewerage construction, by the LCUD.
   J.   Completion Of Sewer Required: Before any acceptance of any sewer line
by the LCUD and prior to the admission of any wastewater into the system, the
sewer line shall be video inspected, tested and shall be in full compliance
with all requirements of the most recently adopted edition of the uniform
plumbing code, "Lyon County Standard Details", "Standard Specifications For
Public Works Construction" and/or LCUD requirements to construct water and
sewer and private communal utility systems, LCUD requirements to construct
water and sewer service lines, the specifications for sewer construction, and
to the satisfaction of the LCUD staff. All permit requirements must be met, and
all required inspections approved. There is a one year warranty period where
the developer/contractor is responsible for repairs or defects. (Ord. 507, 1-
18-2007)
9.05.11: REQUIREMENTS FOR USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS:
   A.   Drainage Into Sanitary Sewers Prohibited: No leaders from roofs, no
surface drains for rainwater, or no underdrains for foundations or paved
surfaces shall be connected to any sanitary sewer. No surface or storm water,
seepage, cooling water, ground water or unpolluted industrial process waters
shall be permitted to enter any sanitary sewer by any device or method
whatsoever.
   B.   Combined Sewers: No combined sewer or storm sewer shall be connected to
the POTW.
   C.   Required Use Of Grease Interceptors: All waste discharged from
commercial establishments which may generate grease shall install and maintain
a grease interceptor. Sizing specifications for interceptors are outlined in
the uniform plumbing code. The design, operation and sizing of all grease
interceptors must be approved by the LCUD. Grease traps are not allowed.
      1.   Capacity: Grease interceptors and sand/oil separators shall be
constructed to prevent any bypass of matter prohibited in the wastewater
system. Grease interceptors and sand/oil separators shall be a minimum capacity
of seven hundred fifty (750) gallons or as specified in the uniform plumbing
code and a sampling manhole will be installed. All systems must be designed by
a registered civil engineer with the state of Nevada.
Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when and where necessary
for the removal of grease, oil, sand or other waste components not present in
normal residential wastewater. No such device shall be required for residential
service. Grease interceptors shall be cleaned regularly to ensure proper
operation and shall comply with the industrial wastewater discharge and
pretreatment regulations.
      2.   Service Log: The owner or operator of the establishment or business
conducted on the premises where the grease trap or interceptor and/or sand/oil
separators are located shall maintain a log describing the date and type of all
service and maintenance performed in connection with the grease trap or
interceptor and/or sand/oil separator, the identity of the person who performed
the service or maintenance, the amount of residue removed from the grease
interceptor and/or sand/oil separator on each date, the method of disposal of
the residue, and copies of the receipts for service. The log entries shall be
maintained for six (6) years, along with photocopies of receipts for service,
and shall be made available for inspection and copying at the request of an
LCUD representative. The schedule for service and maintenance of a grease
interceptor and/or sand/oil separator shall be subject to approval by the LCUD.
Any change of ownership, remodel, and/or use of a property or facility, may
require the installation or upgrade of a grease interceptor.
      3.   Prohibitions: The introduction of emulsifiers, bacteria, enzymes or
any other product into the grease interceptor which would cause oil and grease
to pass through the interceptor is prohibited.
      4.   Inspections: The LCUD engineer shall determine frequency of
inspections. Should inspections become necessary at a frequency of less than
four (4) months, then the LCUD shall charge the cost, labor and materials for
the more frequent inspections.
      5.   Violations And Citations: At the discretion of the LCUD engineer,
after a notice to the property owner stating the violation, a citation may be
issued, and service may be discontinued if the situation is not in compliance
with local, state, and federal regulations. LCUD may require replacement or
upsizing of facilities to meet current standards. Level of response shall be in
direct relation to the level of hazard or violation, and shall be at the
discretion of the LCUD engineer to take the appropriate measures to confirm
compliance is met for local, state and federal regulations.
   D.   Limitations On The Use Of Garbage Grinders: Waste from garbage grinders
shall not be discharged into LCUD wastewater facilities except when the wastes
are generated in preparation of food normally consumed on the premises and the
grinders shred the waste to a degree that all particles will be carried freely
under normal flow conditions prevailing in the wastewater facilities, and to a
size not to exceed one-half inch (1/2") in any dimension. Garbage grinders
shall not be used for grinding plastic, paper products, inert materials or
garden refuse. All scullery or dish table wastes shall not be put through a
garbage grinder unless the discharge is through an approved grease interceptor,
except that such interceptors shall not be required for buildings used for
noncommercial/residential purposes.
   E.   Maintenance Of Pretreatment Facilities: Such devices as are required in
the preceding subsections shall be of a type and capacity approved by the LCUD,
and shall be so located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection. All grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the
owner, at his expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times. Any
maintenance costs incurred by the LCUD to remove grease, sand, oil, or other
nonapproved waste from county mains will be billed to the owner of the
property.
   F.   Preliminary Treatment Of Wastes: The admission into the public sewers
of any waste containing any quantity of substance having characteristics
described in chapter 6 of this title, shall be subject to special rates and
such conditions as public sewer system requires to treat and dispose of the
special waste discharged. Where necessary, this may include increase in rate
from that for normal residential waste, or such treatment as necessary prior to
discharge into the sewer system and the complete exclusion of certain wastes
harmful to the treatment process.
Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information relating to proposed
preliminary treatment facilities shall be prepared and stamped by an engineer
licensed in Nevada and submitted for the approval by the LCUD and NDEP. No
construction of such facilities shall be commenced until said approvals are
obtained in writing.
   G.   Swimming Pools: It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge the
contents of a swimming pool into a sanitary sewer except in the manner
specified herein. The size pipe carrying discharge water shall not be larger
than two inches (2") and shall not be under a head to exceed twenty feet (20').
If the water is discharged by pumping, the rate of flow shall not exceed a
discharge rate approved by the LCUD. Each swimming pool discharging to a
sanitary sewer shall be equipped with an approved separator to preclude any
possibility of a backflow of wastewater into the swimming pool or piping
system. No discharge of the contents of a swimming pool into a sanitary sewer
shall be made until a permit therefor has been obtained from the LCUD and the
payment by the applicant of a permit fee in the amount fixed by the LCUD. Such
discharge shall be made only at the time and in the manner specified by the
LCUD or its authorized representatives and subject to the rules and/or
regulations of the LCUD.
   H.   Limitations On Point Of Discharge: No person shall discharge any
substances directly into a manhole or other opening in a community sewer.
   I.   Cleaning Of Sewers (Limitations And Notification): No person shall
discharge to the public sewer by means of sewer line cleaning equipment as a
scheduled maintenance operation or under emergency conditions without first
contacting the LCUD. In all cases a means of extracting solid material from the
LCUD mains at a manhole shall be required. Acceptable means of extraction shall
be by trapping, vacuum equipment or other appropriate means, as approved by the
LCUD engineer. (Ord. 507, 1-18-2007)
9.05.12: PERMITS AND FEES:
   A.   Permit Required: No unauthorized person shall excavate, make any
connection with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or
appurtenances or perform any work on any building sewer without first obtaining
a written authorization from the LCUD. Plans for sewerage construction shall
not be approved by LCUD for any facility that will convey industrial wastewater
unless the discharger has first obtained a permit for industrial wastewater
discharge.
   B.   Application For Permit: Any person legally entitled to apply for and
receive a permit shall submit an application on forms provided by the LCUD. The
applicant shall submit to LCUD for approval, construction plans and such
specifications and other details as required, to describe fully the proposed
sewerage facility. The plans shall have been prepared under the supervision of
and shall be signed by an engineer of suitable training registered in the state
of Nevada.
If LCUD determines that the plans, specifications, drawings, description or
information furnished by the applicant is in compliance with the ordinances,
rules and regulations of federal, state, and county, LCUD shall issue the
permit applied for upon payment of the required fees as the board of
commissioners approved in the latest fee resolution. The inspector shall also
issue, when applicable, a permit, upon approval of application and payment of
connection fees. The permit shall authorize its holder to access service in
accordance with all ordinance policy rules and regulations of the LCUD.
   C.   Compliance With Permit/Revisions To Permit: After approval of the
application, evidenced by the issuance of a permit, no change shall be made
from those described in the permit or as shown on the plans and specifications
for which the permit was issued, except with written permission from the LCUD.
   D.   Agreement: The applicant's signature on an application for any permit
shall constitute an agreement to comply with all of the provisions, terms and
requirements of this chapter and other ordinances, rules and regulations of the
LCUD, and with any plans and specifications he has filed with his application,
together with such corrections or modifications permitted by the LCUD. Such
agreement shall be binding upon the applicant and may be altered only by the
LCUD upon the written request for the alteration from the applicant.
   E.   All Work To Be Inspected: All sewer construction work, building sewers,
plumbing and drainage systems shall be inspected by an inspector acting for the
LCUD to ensure compliance with all requirements of the LCUD. No sewer shall be
covered at any point until it has been inspected and passed for acceptance. No
sewer shall be connected to the LCUD's public sewer until the work covered by
the permit has been completed, inspected and approved by the inspector. If the
test proves satisfactory, and all construction work is in compliance with all
applicable rules and regulations of the LCUD, and the sewer has been cleaned of
all debris accumulated from construction operations, the inspector shall issue
a certificate of satisfactory completion.
   F.   Notification: It shall be the duty of the person doing the work
authorized by permit to notify the office of the LCUD, in writing, that said
work is ready for inspection. Such notification shall be given not less than
forty eight (48) hours before the work is to be inspected. It shall be the duty
of the person doing the work to make sure that the work will stand the tests
required by the LCUD before giving the above notification.
   G.   Condemned Work: When any work has been inspected and the work
condemned, the LCUD shall deliver a written notice to that effect to the record
owner of the premises or his authorized agent, instructing the record owner to
repair the sewer or other work authorized by the permit in accordance with the
ordinances, rules and regulations of the LCUD.
   H.   All Costs Paid By Owner: All costs and expenses incident to the
installation and connection of any sewer or other work for which a permit has
been issued shall be borne by the owner and shall be in addition to all fees
and availability of service charges provided for in the sewer ordinance of the
LCUD. The owner shall indemnify the LCUD against any loss or damage that may
directly or indirectly be occasioned by the work.
   I.   Street Excavation Permit: A separate permit must be secured from the
LCUD, the Lyon County road department, or any other person having jurisdiction
thereover by the owners or contractors intending to excavate in a public right
of way for the purpose of installing sewers, repairing or making sewer
connections.
   J.   Liability: The LCUD and its officers, agents and employees shall not be
held responsible for any liability or injury or death to any person or damage
to any property arising from the performance of any work by any such applicant.
The applicant, his engineer and contractor shall be held responsible for, and
the LCUD and its officers, agents and employees shall be held harmless from,
any liability imposed by law upon the LCUD or its officers, agents or
employees, including all costs, expenses, fees and interest incurred in
defending same or in seeking to enforce this provision. As between the
applicant and the LCUD; applicant, his engineer and contractor shall be solely
liable for any defects in the performance of his work or work performed on his
behalf or any failure which may develop therewith.
   K.   Time Limit On Permits: If work under a permit is not commenced within
three hundred sixty five (365) calendar days from the date of issuance, or if
after partial completion the work is discontinued for a period of three hundred
sixty five (365) days, the permit shall become void and no further work shall
be done until a new permit is secured. A new, then current fee shall be paid
upon the issuance of said permit.
   L.   Final Inspection: Final inspection shall be performed and if approved,
shall constitute the completion of the permitted project in accordance with
LCUD ordinances, rules, regulations and policies. (Ord. 507, 1-18-2007)
9.05.13: BILLING AND COLLECTION:
   A.   Billing: The regular billing period will be monthly, or at the
discretion of the LCUD. Before service is activated by LCUD the property owner
must sign the application form as provided by LCUD in which he guarantees
payment of future sewer bills for the service required. The property owner
signing the owner application for utility service form will be held liable for
the appropriate fee for sewer service until LCUD is notified in writing to
terminate service or transfer the account to another property owner. The owner
may assign an agent that the bill will be mailed to, however the owner will
ultimately be responsible for all payments.
   B.   Opening And Closing Bills: Opening and closing bills for less than the
normal billing period shall be no less than the minimum charge for the monthly
service.
   C.   Penalties: All charges shall become due and payable upon presentation.
Payments not received by the due date shown on the bill shall become delinquent
on the next business day after the due date. All charges which become
delinquent shall be subject to a penalty of ten percent (10%) for the first
month delinquent. Customers' payments shall be applied to their oldest balances
due, including penalties, first.
   D.   Represents Lien On Property: Until paid, all rates and charges provided
in this chapter constitute a perpetual lien on and against the property served
and may be foreclosed upon as provided by law.
   E.   Delinquent Charges Collected On Tax Rolls:
      1.   The purpose of this section is to adopt provisions authorized by
Nevada Revised Statutes 244.36605 to have delinquent charges for sewerage
collected on the tax roll in the same manner, by the same persons, and at the
same time, together with and not separately from, Lyon County's general taxes.
      2.   The utilities department shall cause a description of each parcel of
real property with respect to which a sewer charge is delinquent on May 1 and
the amount of the delinquent charge to be prepared and submitted to the county
clerk/treasurer no later than June 1. The description of each parcel and the
amount of the delinquent charge must be submitted in a form approved by the
county treasurer.
      3.   The amount of the charge which is delinquent constitutes a lien
against the lot or parcel of land against which the charge has been imposed as
of the time when the lien of taxes on the roll attaches.
      4.   The county clerk/treasurer shall include the amount of the charges
on bills for taxes levied against the respective lots and parcels of land.
Thereafter the amount of the charges must be collected at the same time and in
the same manner and by the same persons as, together with and not separately
from, the general taxes for the county.
      5.   All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of
general taxes of the county, including, but not limited to, those pertaining to
the matters of delinquency, correction, cancellation, refund, redemption and
sale, are applicable to delinquent charges for sewerage.
      6.   The county clerk/treasurer may issue separate bills for those
charges and separate receipts for collection on account of those charges.
   F.   Collection By Suit: As an alternative to any of the other procedures
herein provided, LCUD may bring an action against the person or persons who
occupied the premises when the service was rendered for the collection of the
amount of the delinquent rate and all penalties and costs of collection
including a reasonable attorney fee.
   G.   Collection With Utility Charges Of LCUD: Where the person charged is a
user of another utility owned and operated by LCUD, the charges may be billed
and collected together.
   H.   Checks And Electronic Funds Transfers Not Honored By Bank: Checks and
electronic funds transfers presented in payment of bills which are returned by
a bank shall be treated as though no payment had been made, and an
administrative charge as established by the board will be levied by the LCUD,
plus any additional charges levied by the bank. Redemption of returned checks
may be required to be by cash or equivalent. The customer must reimburse the
LCUD for any returned check/electronic funds transfer fees charged by a bank to
the LCUD.
   I.   Service Charges: Any users of the LCUD's sewage facilities shall pay to
the LCUD a sewer service charge established by the board. (Ord. 507, 1-18-2007)
   J.   Multi-Unit Residential Accounts: The base charge for multi- unit
residential accounts using common meters shall be determined by multiplying the
number of units by the multi-family residential rate. No adjustment will be
made for vacant units. (Ord. 568, 7-3-2014)
   K.   Review Of Sewer Service Charges: The board of commissioners may
annually review the service charges set by resolution and determine if the
charges are adequate to meet the costs of operating the sewer system.
   L.   Call Out Service Charges: A customer requesting LCUD assistance with
owner related sewer issues (i.e., blockage, backup on owner's sewer service
line, sewer line tracing, etc.) may be charged for actual costs, labor and
materials at the discretion of the utilities director.
   M.   Protests To Rates And Charges: If any owner shall be dissatisfied with
any sewer charge imposed, he may file a written protest with the utilities
director setting forth his/her objections, provided such protest is filed
within fifteen (15) working days of receipt of the bill being protested.
If the owner is not satisfied with the utilities director's decision, the owner
may appeal that decision to the county manager in writing within five (5)
working days. The county manager shall, within fifteen (15) working days, make
a determination in writing.
If the protester is dissatisfied with the county manager's decision, he/she may
appeal to the board, provided such written appeal is filed within ten (10) days
of receipt of the county manager's decision.
The board, upon receipt of a protest, shall fix a time and place for a hearing
of said protest which shall not be later than thirty (30) calendar days after
receipt of same and cause the protesters to be notified thereof.
Upon the hearing, the board may adjust the sewer charge if it is satisfied with
the reasons and basis of the protest. Action taken on any protest shall be
entered in the minutes of the board.
The protester shall have fifteen (15) calendar days after determination of the
protest by the board within which to pay his/her sewer charge before any
penalty or interest shall be attached or imposed, notwithstanding any other
provision of this chapter concerning the imposition of penalty and interest
charges. (Ord. 507, 1-18-2007)
9.05.14: DISCONNECTION:
   A.   Customer's Request For Discontinuance Of Service: A customer may have
service discontinued by giving not less than two (2) working days' advance
notice, in writing, to LCUD. Sewer base rates shall only be ceased for
"seasonal offs" lasting more than one billing period. Base fees for partial
months in seasonal off status will not be prorated.
In cases of demolition the laterals are to be capped at the main, unless the
laterals are approved for future use by LCUD.
   B.   Discontinuance Of Service By LCUD:
      1.   For Nonpayment Of Bills: A customer's sewer service may be
discontinued for nonpayment of a bill for service furnished if the account
becomes delinquent, provided the LCUD has given the customer at least forty
eight (48) hours' prior notice by mailer or door tag of such intention and the
parcel is not covered under section
9.05.13 of this chapter. During the discontinuance for nonpayment, any
structures will be red tagged by the building department and shall be
uninhabitable.
Premises to which charges have become delinquent may be disconnected, and in
the instance of sewer charges only being delinquent, water service may be
disconnected. If sewer or water service is disconnected, charges for costs,
labor and materials of discontinuing and resuming service as determined by the
utilities director shall apply and must be paid in full prior to resuming
service.
      2.   For Noncompliance With Rules: The LCUD may discontinue water and/or
sewer service to any customer for violation of these rules after it has given
the customer at least two (2) days' written notice.
Where safety of water supply or environment is endangered, or the discharge to
the sewer is dangerous to public health and safety or may cause damage to the
POTW, service may be discontinued or curtailed immediately without notice.
      3.   For Infiltration Or Illegal Connections: Where negligence,
infiltration, illegal connection or discharge of harmful wastes into the
collection system, on or from a customer's premises occurs, LCUD may make such
corrections as may be required at customer's expense or disconnect service, if
such practices are not remedied within five (5) days after the LCUD has given
the customer written notice.
      4.   For Fraudulent Use Of Service: When the LCUD has discovered that a
customer has obtained service by fraudulent means, connected to the sewer
without payment of connection fees, going through the permit process, or has
altered the sewer service for unauthorized use, the service to that customer
may be discontinued without notice and charges may be filed under Nevada
Revised Statutes 704.800. The LCUD will not restore service to such customer
until that customer has complied with the requirements of the LCUD and the LCUD
has been reimbursed for the full amount of the service rendered and the actual
cost of the LCUD incurred by reason of the fraudulent use. If the customer
fails to reimburse LCUD for all costs for services provided by fraudulent use
within the specified time frame, LCUD may file a lien on the property, or
collect fees with the property taxes as provided in section
9.05.13 of this chapter.
   C.   Restoration Of Service:
      1.   During Regular Business Hours: The LCUD will endeavor to restore
service during regular business hours on the day of the request, if conditions
permit; otherwise, the LCUD will endeavor to make the reconnection on the next
business day following the day the request is made.
      2.   Other Than Regular Business Hours: When a customer has requested the
reconnection at a time outside of regular business hours, the LCUD will
reasonably endeavor to so make the reconnection if practicable under the
circumstances, but will be under no obligation to do so, unless an emergency
exists. A charge based on costs, including overtime rates, shall be billed to
the customer for services rendered outside of regular business hours.
   D.   Refusal To Serve:
      1.   Conditions For Refusal: The LCUD may refuse to provide an applicant
service under the following conditions:
         a.   If the applicant requesting service is not within the boundaries
of the Lyon County utilities service area.
         b.   If the intended use of the service is of such a nature that it
will be detrimental or injurious to existing customers.
         c.   If the applicant fails to comply with any of the rules or
regulations.
         d.   If, in the judgment of the LCUD, serving the applicant is unsafe
or hazardous or subject to freezing, or flooding, or of such nature that
satisfactory service cannot be rendered.
         e.   Where service has been discontinued for fraudulent use, the LCUD
will not serve an applicant until it has determined that all conditions of
fraudulent use or practice have been corrected.
         f.   When the collection system or treatment facilities do not have
capacity or the capability to receive and treat liquid waste as required by
federal, state and/or local government requirements.
      2.   Notification To Customers: When an applicant is refused service
under the provisions of this subsection D, the LCUD will notify the applicant
promptly of the reason for the refusal to serve and of the right of the
applicant to appeal LCUD's decision to the county manager. (Ord. 507, 1-18-
2007; amd. Ord. 622, 12-16-2021)
CHAPTER 6
INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REGULATIONS
AND REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
9.06.01: Definitions
9.06.02: Discharge Permits; Scope And Purpose
9.06.03: Discharge Permit Required
9.06.04: Discharge Permit Application Procedure
9.06.05: Discharge Permit Application Signature Requirements
9.06.06: Discharge Permit; Prohibition Against Issuing In Certain Instances
9.06.07: Discharge Permits; Other Terms And Conditions Of Issued Permits
9.06.08: Discharge Permits; Duration, Reissuance And Assignment
9.06.09: Discharge Permits; Monitoring, Recording And Reporting Of Discharges
9.06.10: Discharge Permit Issuance, Modification, Suspension, And Revocation
9.06.11: Board Of Appeals Created
9.06.12: Board Of Appeals; Duties
9.06.13: Board Of Appeals; Appeals Procedure
9.06.14: Emergency Powers
9.06.15: Violations; Remedies
9.06.16: Administrative Action; Notice Of Violation
9.06.17: Request For Hearing
9.06.18: Citation
9.06.19: Violations; Injunctive Relief And Civil Penalties
9.06.20: Violations; Criminal Penalties
9.06.21: Sewerage Construction; Approval Of Plans
9.06.22: Sewerage Construction; Connection Permit
9.06.23: Sewerage Construction; Inspection
9.06.24: Sewerage Use; Excessive Sewer Maintenance Expense
9.06.25: Sewerage Use; Grease Interceptors Required
9.06.26: Sewerage Use; Sand And Oil Interceptors Required
9.06.27: Sewerage Use; Car Wash Interceptors
9.06.28: Sewerage Use; Secondary Containment
9.06.29: Sanitary Sewer Design Standards And Specifications; General
9.06.30: Industrial Wastewater Sampling, Analysis And Flow Measurements
9.06.31: Prohibited Discharges
9.06.32: Industrial Wastewater Treatment Surcharge
9.06.33: Unit Charge Rates For Industrial Wastewater Treatment Surcharge
9.06.34: Variances
9.06.01: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section unless the context requires otherwise:
ACT OR THE ACT: The federal water pollution control act, also known as the
clean water act, as amended, 33 USC section 1251 et seq.
APPROVED: Approval by the director or board as a result of investigation and
tests conducted by them, or by reason of accepted principles or tests by
national authorities, technical or scientific organizations.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD5): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in
five (5) days at twenty degrees Celsius (20°C), expressed in milligrams per
liter.
BOARD: The Lyon County commissioners.
BOILER BLOW OFF: The condensed steam or hot water from a boiler when "blown
off" to remove scale and slime or "blown down" from cleaning and repair.
CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (COD): The quantity of chemically oxidizable material in
wastewaters as determined by standard laboratory procedure, expressed in
milligrams per liter.
COUNTY: Lyon County and Lyon County utilities department (LCUD) and those areas
within Lyon County where Lyon County collects, treats, and disposes of
wastewater.
COUNTY STANDARDS: Those standards for the design and construction of
interceptor sewers, sewers, interceptors, force mains, lift stations, and
appurtenances both water and sewer currently used by Lyon County.
DIRECTOR: The utilities director or the director's designee.
DISCHARGE: The addition of a pollutant or effluent to water or to the sewer
system or to an individual sewage disposal system.
DISCHARGE STANDARD, LIMITATION: Any applicable state, federal, or county
discharge standard or limitation which imposes any restriction or prohibition
on quantities, rates or concentrations of chemical, physical, biological, and
any other constituent discharge into the county's treatment works.
DISTRICT ATTORNEY: The district attorney of Lyon County.
ECA (ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL AUTHORITY): The officers and agents of the
environmental control section of Lyon County and the utilities director.
EFFLUENT: Sewage, industrial or any other waste, pollutant, or water whether
treated or untreated which is discharged into or permitted to enter the sewer
system or an individual sewage disposal system.
ISDS (INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM): A single system of sewage treatment
tanks and effluent disposal facilities serving only a single dwelling or other
building.
INDUSTRIAL USER: A source of indirect discharge (40 CFR 403.3(h)).
INDUSTRIAL WASTE: Wastes resulting from any process of industry, manufacturing,
trade or business, or from the development or recovery of any natural resource,
that:
A.Contains toxic pollutants in toxic amounts as defined in standards issued
under section 307(a) of the act; or
B.Is found by the ECA to have significant impact, either singly or in
combination with other wastes, on the treatment or collection system.
LAW: The Nevada water pollution control law, Nevada Revised Statutes 445A.300
to 445A.730, inclusive.
PEAK FLOW RATE: The average rate at which wastewater is discharged during the
highest thirty (30) minute flow period in the preceding twelve (12) months.
PERMIT: A written authorization to discharge pollutants into the county's
treatment works in accordance with the act, the law, the regulations
promulgated thereunder and this chapter.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, firm, private corporation, trust, estate,
commission, board, public or private institution, utility or cooperative;
includes the state of Nevada and the United States, to the extent authorized by
the state and federal law.
POLLUTANT: Agricultural waste or any substance that impairs the chemical,
physical or biological character or condition of water.
PRETREATMENT STANDARD: The standards promulgated under section 307(b) of the
act.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW): Publicly owned treatment works.
RESIDENTIAL WASTES: Waste which includes human excreta and liquid wastes from
kitchens, water closets, lavatories, and laundries.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER: All industrial users subject to categorical
pretreatment standards under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N
and any other industrial user that discharges an average of twenty five
thousand (25,000) gallons per day or more of process water (excluding sanitary)
and as more thoroughly described in 40 CFR 403.3(t).
SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE: Chronic violations (66 percent of measurements in 6
months exceed allowable limits), technical review criteria (TRC) violations,
failure to meet a compliance schedule milestone within ninety (90) days,
failure to submit a report within thirty (30) days of the due date, violation
that causes pass through or interference, discharge that causes imminent
endangerment, failure to accurately report noncompliance, other violations that
adversely affect the POTW pretreatment program.
SINGLE PASS COOLING WATER: Water used for cooling components of heating or
cooling equipment that is directly discharged to the county's treatment works.
TSS (TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS): The insoluble solid matter suspended in water or
wastewater.
TOXIC EFFLUENT STANDARD POLLUTANT: Any material appearing on the list developed
by the administrator of the U.S. environmental protection agency pursuant to
section 307(a) of the act.
TREATMENT WORKS: A.Any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment,
recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid
nature including intercepting sewers, outfall sewers, sewage collection
systems, pumping, power, and other equipment, and their appurtenances;
B.Extensions, improvements, remodeling, additions and alterations of any device
or system mentioned in subsection A of this definition;
C.Units essential to provide a reliable recycled supply such as standby
treatment units and clear well facilities.
WASTE: Any useless, superfluous or discarded matter which is discharged into
the sewer system.
WASTEWATER: Water carried wastes, liquid, solid, gaseous or radioactive,
associated with human habitation or from human or animal origin, or from
producing, manufacturing, processing or business operation of whatever nature.
WORKING DAY: Everyday except Saturday, Sunday, or a state or county holiday.
(Ord. 505, 1-18-2007)
9.06.02: DISCHARGE PERMITS; SCOPE AND PURPOSE:
   A.   Sections 9.06.03 through 9.06.17 of this chapter prescribe procedural
and substantive rules governing this county's industrial waste program
promulgated to protect the county's treatment works, human health, and the
environment, and to provide a method of controlling industrial discharges to
the county's system or ground water resources.
   B.   Industrial businesses that utilize an individual sewage disposal system
(ISDS), must obtain a discharge permit from the ECA and are prohibited from
discharging wastewater containing other than residential wastes. (Ord. 505, 1-
18-2007)
9.06.03: DISCHARGE PERMIT REQUIRED:
Except as authorized by a permit issued by the ECA in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter, it is unlawful for any person to discharge any
industrial waste into any portion of the county's sewage collection system.
(Ord. 505, 1-18-2007)
9.06.04: DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION PROCEDURE:
   A.   Any person wishing to commence future discharges of industrial wastes,
or any industrial business utilizing an ISDS, must file a complete application
either:
      1.   No less than ninety (90) days in advance of the date on which it is
desired to commence the discharge; or
      2.   In sufficient time prior to the commencement of the discharge to
ensure compliance with the act, law and this chapter.
   B.   The ECA may require the submission of additional information after a
permit application has been filed. Applicant shall be responsible for all costs
associated with review of the permit application.
   C.   Any information submitted to the ECA pursuant to this chapter may be
claimed confidential by the submitter. Any such claim must be asserted at the
time of submission in the manner prescribed on the application form or
instructions, or, in the case of other submissions, by stamping the words
"Confidential Business Information" on each page containing such information.
If no claim is made at the time of submission, the ECA may make the information
available to the public without further notice. Information and data provided
pursuant to this chapter which is effluent data shall be available to the
public without restriction. (Ord. 505, 1-18-2007)
9.06.05: DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION SIGNATURE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Application and reporting forms submitted to the ECA shall be signed as
follows (any changes in signatory authority must be reported to ECA):
      1.   Corporations: By a principal executive officer, of at least the
level of vice president, or a duly authorized representative who is responsible
for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge described in
the application or reporting form originates;
      2.   Partnership: By a general partner;
      3.   Sole proprietorship: By the proprietor;
      4.   State or other public facility: By either a principal executive
officer, ranking elected official, or other duly authorized employee.
   B.   Each application must contain a certification by the person signing the
application that he or she is familiar with the information provided, that to
the best of his or her knowledge and belief, such information is complete and
accurate, and that he or she has the authority to sign and execute the
application. (Ord. 505, 1-18-2007)
9.06.06: DISCHARGE PERMIT; PROHIBITION AGAINST ISSUING IN CERTAIN INSTANCES:
No permit may be issued which authorizes any discharge of:
   A.   Any radiological, chemical or biological warfare agent;
   B.   Wastes which create fire or explosion hazard in the treatment works;
   C.   Waste which will cause corrosive structural damage to treatment works
or result in a hazard to structures, equipment or personnel, but in no case
with a pH lower than 5.5 standard units nor higher than 10.0 standard units;
   D.   Solid or viscous wastes which would cause obstruction to the flow in
sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the treatment works;
   E.   Wastes which exceed the discharge limitations as listed in section
9.06.31 of this chapter;
   F.   Wastewater containing concentrations in excess of one thousand
milligrams per liter (1,000 mg/l) BOD5, one thousand milligrams per liter
(1,000 mg/l) suspended solids, or two thousand milligrams per liter (2,000 mg/
l) COD. These limits shall not apply to septic tank carriers that discharge
sewage at any county wastewater treatment facility (WWTF). A user proposing to
discharge septic tank wastes into the county wastewater treatment system must
first secure a permit from the Lyon County utilities director;
   G.   Any water added for the purpose of diluting wastes which would
otherwise exceed applicable maximum concentration limitations;
   H.   Any single pass cooling waters at a rate in excess of one gpm (gallon
per minute);
   I.   Any boiler blow off exceeding one-third (1/3) of the makeup water;
   J.   Deionized water, steam condensate or distilled water at a rate in
excess of one gpm;
   K.   Any substance promoting or causing the promotion of toxic gases;
   L.   Any wastes requiring an excessive quantity of chlorine or other
chemical compound used for disinfection;
   M.   Any waste producing excessive discoloration of POTW effluent;
   N.   Any recognizable portions of the human anatomy;
   O.   Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity,
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere
with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or
animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the POTW, or to
exceed the limitation set forth in a categorical pretreatment standard. A toxic
pollutant includes, without limitation, any pollutant identified pursuant to
section 307(a) of the act;
   P.   Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its national
pollutant discharge elimination system or state disposal system permit or the
receiving water quality standards;
   Q.   Heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity at the county's
treatment works but in no case heat in such quantities that the temperatures at
the treatment works influent exceeds one hundred twenty degrees Fahrenheit
(120°F);
   R.   Which the ECA determines is inconsistent with the rules, regulations
and ordinances promulgated by the board;
   S.   Any industrial wastes to an ISDS. (Ord. 505, 1-18-2007)
9.06.07: DISCHARGE PERMITS; OTHER TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF ISSUED PERMITS:
The terms and conditions of each issued permit must provide for and ensure the
following:
   A.   That all discharges authorized by the permit are consistent with the
terms and conditions of the permit; that facility expansions, production
increases, or process modifications which result in new or increased discharges
of pollutants are reported by submitting a new permit application or, if such
discharge does not violate discharge limitations specified in the permit, by
submission to the ECA of a notice of such new or increased discharge or
pollutants; that the discharge of any pollutant not identified and authorized
by the permit or the discharge of any pollutant more frequently than or at a
level in excess of that identified and authorized by the permit constitutes a
violation of the terms and conditions of the permit;
   B.   That the permit may be modified, suspended, or revoked in whole or in
part during its term for cause including, but not limited to, the following:
      1.   Violation of any terms or conditions of the permit,
      2.   Obtaining a permit by misrepresentation or failure to disclose fully
all relevant facts, or
      3.   A change in conditions, or the existence of a condition, which
requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or an elimination of the
permitted activity;
   C.   That the permittee shall permit the ECA, upon the presentation of
credentials:
      1.   To enter upon the permittee's premises in which an effluent source
is located or in which any records are required to be kept under terms and
conditions of the permit,
      2.   To have access to and copy any records required to be kept under
terms and conditions of the permit,
      3.   To inspect the entire premises and any monitoring equipment or
method required in the permit, or
      4.   To sample and test any discharge without prior notice,
      5.   To perform slug discharge control evaluations every two (2) years to
determine if a slug discharge control plan is needed that is described in 40
CFR 403.8(f)(2)9v)(A) through (D);
   D.   That the permittee at all times shall maintain in good working order
and operate as efficiently as possible any facilities or systems of control
installed by the permittee to achieve compliance with the terms and conditions
of the permit;
   E.   That if a toxic effluent standard or prohibition (including any
schedule of compliance specified in such effluent standard or prohibition) is
established under 307(a) of the act for a toxic pollutant which is present in
the permittee's discharge and such standard or prohibition is more stringent
than any limitation upon such pollutant in the permit, the ECA shall revise or
modify the permit in accordance with the toxic effluent standard or prohibition
and so notify the permittee;
   F.   That if a pretreatment standard (including any schedule of compliance
specified in such standard) is established under 307(b) and (c) of the act for
a pollutant which is present in the permittee's discharge and such standard is
more stringent than any limitation upon such pollutant in the permit, the ECA
shall revise or modify the permit in accordance with the pretreatment standard
and so notify the permittee;
   G.   That when it becomes necessary or desirable to discharge into the sewer
system any waste from any source which does not conform to the requirements
outlined in section
9.06.31 of this chapter, it may be required, upon determination of the ECA,
that before such waste may be discharged into the sewer system, the producer
thereof shall pretreat such waste at the producer's own expense to the extent
that the effluent does not exceed the concentrations listed in section
9.06.31 of this chapter. Such pretreatment facilities shall include grease
traps, chemical or biological plants, sedimentation chambers, and any other
devices which effect a change of any nature in the waste being treated. Any and
all such devices and equipment are subject to the approval of the ECA, shall
not be put into operation without a written permit of approval issued by the
ECA, shall be provided with all necessary features of construction to permit
inspection of operations and testing of waste passing through them, and shall
be open to the inspection of the ECA at any time; but the producer in lieu of
the treatment of the sewage as described herein may, with the written approval
of the ECA being first obtained, discharge the sewage, waste, or other matter
into the sewage system subject to the provisions of the county standards and
subject to the payment of the additional cost of the treatment thereof, as
provided for in section
9.06.33 of this chapter. (Ord. 505, 1-18-2007)
9.06.08: DISCHARGE PERMITS; DURATION, REISSUANCE AND ASSIGNMENT:
The duration of the permits is fixed and must not exceed five (5) years. The
expiration date must be recorded on each permit issued. A new application must
be filed with the county to obtain renewal or modification of a permit.
Applications for renewal must be filed at least one hundred eighty (180) days
prior to expiration of the permit. No permit shall be assigned or transferred
without first obtaining the written permission of the ECA. (Ord. 505, 1-18-
2007)
9.06.09: DISCHARGE PERMITS; MONITORING, RECORDING AND REPORTING OF DISCHARGES:
   A.   In order to determine the existence, nature and frequency of any
discharges to the county's sewer system or to an ISDS, the ECA may by order or
permit require the owner or operator of any source of a discharge to:
      1.   Establish and maintain records;
      2.   Make reports;
      3.   Install, calibrate, use and maintain monitoring equipment or
methods, including, where appropriate, biological monitoring methods with
monitoring devices being fully accessible by the ECA;
      4.   Provide other information relating to discharges.
   B.   The cost of all testing and sampling as may be required by the ECA must
be provided and paid for by the discharger. (Ord. 505, 1-18-2007)
9.06.10: DISCHARGE PERMIT ISSUANCE, MODIFICATION, SUSPENSION, AND REVOCATION:
   A.   The ECA may, after notice and opportunity for a hearing, modify,
suspend, or revoke any permit in whole or in part during its term for cause
including, but not limited to, the cause listed in subsection
9.06.07B of this chapter or for failure or refusal of the permittee to carry
out the requirements of subsection
9.06.07C of this chapter.
   B.   The ECA may, upon request of the permittee, revise or modify a schedule
of compliance in an issued permit if the ECA determines good and valid cause
(such as an act of God, strike, flood, materials shortage, or other event over
which the permittee has little or no control) exists for such revision. (Ord.
505, 1-18-2007)
9.06.11: BOARD OF APPEALS CREATED:
There is created a board of appeals which shall consist of the five (5) members
of the board of commissioners. (Ord. 505, 1-18-2007)
9.06.12: BOARD OF APPEALS; DUTIES:
   A.   The duty of the board of appeals is to hold a meeting upon request of
the director to review this chapter and make recommendations for upgrading and
to review any appeal of the director's interpretation of this chapter and make
recommendations concerning those interpretations. Appeals brought before the
board of appeals shall be in writing. The board of appeals shall adopt
reasonable rules and regulations as necessary to execute its business.
   B.   The board of appeals shall meet at the call of the chairman, or at the
request of any two (2) members of the board of appeals. This board of appeals
shall make such recommendations as are necessary for the improvements of its
operation and conduct of business.
   C.   All appeals or complaints must be considered by the board of appeals
within thirty (30) days of receipt by the ECA. (Ord. 505, 1-18-2007)
9.06.13: BOARD OF APPEALS; APPEALS PROCEDURE:
A person aggrieved by the issuance, modification, suspension or revocation of a
permit by the ECA may file notice of appeal with the board of appeals within
ten (10) days after the date of action taken by the ECA, except as otherwise
provided by law.
   A.   Within thirty (30) days after receipt of the notice, the board of
appeals shall hold a hearing to consider a timely and complete appeal filing.
   B.   Notice of the hearing shall be given to all affected parties no less
than five (5) days prior to the date set for the hearing.
   C.   A quorum of the board of appeals must be present in order to conduct
hearings.
   D.   The attendance of witnesses and the production of documents may be
subpoenaed by the board of appeals at the request of any party. Witnesses shall
receive the fees and mileage allowed witnesses in civil cases. Costs of
subpoenas shall be taxed against the requesting party.
   E.   All testimony shall be given under oath, and recorded verbatim by human
or electronic means.
   F.   Costs of transcribing proceedings of the board of appeals shall be
taxed against the requesting party. (Ord. 505, 1-18-2007)
9.06.14: EMERGENCY POWERS:
The ECA may take any appropriate action against a discharger or any combination
of dischargers which the ECA has evidence is presenting an imminent and
substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or treatment
works. An appropriate action may include termination of water or sewer service
to discharger's facility. (Ord. 505, 1-18-2007)
9.06.15: VIOLATIONS; REMEDIES:
   A.   Whenever the ECA finds that any person is engaged, or is about to
engage, in any act or practice which violates any provision of this chapter,
the ECA may:
      1.   Issue an order:
         a.   Specifying the provision or provisions of the ordinance, permit
or order alleged to be violated or about to be violated,
         b.   Indicating the facts alleged which constitute a violation
thereof, and
         c.   Prescribing the necessary corrective action to be taken and a
reasonable time for completing that corrective action;
      2.   Commence a civil action pursuant to section
9.06.19 of this chapter;
      3.   Request the district attorney to institute by indictment or
information a criminal prosecution pursuant to section
9.06.20 of this chapter;
      4.   Issue an administrative notice of violation to include an assessed
fine amount, if applicable;
      5.   Issue a citation.
   B.   Such remedies and sanctions for the violation of this chapter, or
permit or order issued hereunder, are cumulative, and the institution of any
proceeding or action seeking any one of such remedies or sanctions does not bar
any simultaneous or subsequent action or proceeding seeking any other of such
remedies or sanctions.
   C.   Take any other enforcement action deemed necessary including provisions
for cost recovery. (Ord. 505, 1-18-2007)
9.06.16: ADMINISTRATIVE ACTION; NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
   A.   A notice of violation may be issued by the ECA to any person who is
believed to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   A notice of violation must contain the following information regarding
the person and the violation(s):
      1.   Name, address and telephone number;
      2.   Findings of fact;
      3.   Specific provisions of this chapter that have been violated;
      4.   If a penalty is assessed, a penalty narrative and calculations must
be attached to the notice of violation. (Ord. 505, 1-18-2007)
9.06.17: REQUEST FOR HEARING:
   A.   Upon receipt of a notice of violation, the person accused has ten (10)
working days to request a hearing, in writing, with the ECA to provide
additional reports, data, and statements of any relevant material.
   B.   A failure to request a hearing, in writing, within the time allowed, is
deemed a waiver of the right to be heard.
   C.   Upon consideration of evidence provided by the alleged violator during
a hearing, the ECA shall, within ten (10) working days, issue a final notice of
violation.
   D.   Upon issuance of a final notice of violation, the alleged violator
shall have ten (10) working days to request, in writing, an appeal to the board
of appeals. (Ord. 505, 1-18-2007)
9.06.18: CITATION:
Whenever the environmental control authority determines that any of the
provisions of this chapter have been violated, a citation may be issued to the
person responsible for the violation. The citation may be issued by the
environmental control authority, by any peace officer, officer of the court, or
other authorized person. (Ord. 505, 1-18-2007)
9.06.19: VIOLATIONS; INJUNCTIVE RELIEF AND CIVIL PENALTIES:
   A.   The ECA may seek injunctive relief in the appropriate court to prevent
the continuance or occurrence of any act or practice which violates this
chapter, any permit or order issued hereunder.
   B.   Any person who violates or aids or abets in the violation of any
provision of this chapter, or of any permit or order issued hereunder, shall
pay a civil penalty of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each
day of such violation.
   C.   In addition to the penalty provided in subsection B of this section,
the county may recover from such person actual damages to the county resulting
from the violation of this chapter or permit or final order. (Ord. 505, 1-18-
2007)
9.06.20: VIOLATIONS; CRIMINAL PENALTIES:
   A.   Any person who knowingly makes any false statement, representation, or
certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed
or required to be filed by this chapter, or by permit or order, or who
falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device
or method required to be maintained under this chapter, or by permit or order
issued hereunder, is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of
not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), nor less than one hundred
dollars ($100.00), or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than six
(6) months, or by both fine and imprisonment.
   B.   Except as provided in subsection A of this section, "any person who
intentionally or with criminal negligence violates this chapter, or permit or
order issued hereunder, is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a
fine" of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), nor less than two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each violation, or by imprisonment in the
county jail for not more than six (6) months, or by both fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. 505, 1-18-2007)
9.06.21: SEWERAGE CONSTRUCTION; APPROVAL OF PLANS:
   A.   No person, other than employees of the county, and/or persons
contracting to do work for the county, shall construct or cause to be
constructed, or alter or cause to be altered, any public sewer, lateral sewer,
house connection or industrial connection sewer over four inches (4") in
diameter, sewage pumping plant, pollution control plant, or other sewerage
facility within the county where existing or proposed wastewater flows will
discharge directly or indirectly to facilities of the county without first
obtaining approval of sewerage construction plans from the county. Class A
contractor license from the state of Nevada shall be required.
   B.   The applicant shall submit to the county for approval construction
plans and such specifications and other details as required to describe fully
the proposed sewerage facility. The county may require that the plans shall
have been prepared under the supervision of and shall be signed by an engineer
of suitable training registered in the state of Nevada.
   C.   Plans for sewerage construction shall not be approved by the county for
any facility which will convey industrial wastewater unless the discharger has
first obtained a permit for industrial wastewater discharge.
   D.   Plans for sewerage construction shall meet all design requirements of
the county and shall also meet all sanitary sewer design standards as
established in the county standards.
   E.   Inspection of all sewerage construction under this section through
section
9.06.24 of this chapter shall be made by personnel of the county or their
designee.
   F.   Approval of plans for sewerage construction shall expire one year after
the date of approval unless construction has been substantially completed. Lyon
County may grant an extension at its discretion. (Ord. 505, 1-18-2007)
9.06.22: SEWERAGE CONSTRUCTION; CONNECTION PERMIT:
   A.   Any person desiring to connect a sewer four inches (4") or smaller in
diameter directly to a trunk sewer of the county shall make written application
to the county. The applicant shall furnish such information as required by the
county to substantiate that the proposed work or use will comply with the
provisions of this chapter.
   B.   A trunk sewer connection permit will not be issued for any sewer which
will convey industrial wastewaters unless the discharger has first obtained a
permit for industrial wastewater discharge.
   C.   Direct attachment of a sewer four inches (4") or smaller in diameter to
a trunk sewer will be permitted only if the county determines that a suitable
local sewer is not available, that adequate trunk sewer capacity exists, that
the connection will function properly, and that the connection will not
adversely affect existing or anticipated facilities or operations of the
county. Applicant may be required to submit a sewer flow model prepared by a
professional engineer (PE) licensed in the state of Nevada.
   D.   Sewers four inches (4") or smaller in diameter to be attached directly
to a trunk sewer shall be constructed in a manner and at the location specified
by the county. Inspection of the connections to a trunk sewer shall be made by
personnel of the county.
   E.   No sewer exceeding four inches (4") in diameter shall be connected
directly to a trunk sewer without the prior approval of plans for sewerage
construction by the county. (Ord. 505, 1-18-2007)
9.06.23: SEWERAGE CONSTRUCTION; INSPECTION:
   A.   All sewers to be attached directly to a trunk sewer shall be inspected
by personnel of the county during construction. The county shall be notified in
making a connection to a trunk sewer. No physical alteration of the county
facilities shall commence until an inspector is present. County shall require
forty eight (48) hours' notice for inspection scheduling.
   B.   Sewerage facilities which will not be directly connected to a county
sewer will not be inspected routinely by the county during construction. Upon
completion of construction and prior to removal of the downstream bulkhead and
upon receiving forty eight (48) hours' notice, the county will inspect the work
to determine if it has been constructed in a satisfactory manner and to
determine if all facilities are cleaned of construction debris that could be
flushed into the county sewers.
   C.   No wastewater shall be discharged into any sewerage facility tributary
to a county facility prior to obtaining inspection and approval of sewerage
construction by the county. (Ord. 505, 1-18-2007)
9.06.24: SEWERAGE USE; EXCESSIVE SEWER MAINTENANCE EXPENSE:
   A.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to a trunk sewer,
either directly or indirectly, any waste that creates a stoppage, plugging,
breakage, any reduction in sewer capacity or any other damage to sewers or
sewerage facilities in the county. Any excessive sewer or sewerage maintenance
expenses or any other expenses attributable thereto will be charged to the
offending discharger by the county.
   B.   Any refusal to pay excessive maintenance expenses duly authorized by
the county shall constitute a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 505, 1-18-2007)
9.06.25: SEWERAGE USE; GREASE INTERCEPTORS REQUIRED:
All businesses dealing in food preparation of any kind shall install an
approved grease interceptor in accordance with the uniform plumbing code.
Grease emulsifiers or enzymes are prohibited for use in grease interceptors.
Interceptors shall be designed and stamped by a professional engineer licensed
in the state of Nevada and approved by the county. (Ord. 505, 1-18-2007)
9.06.26: SEWERAGE USE; SAND AND OIL INTERCEPTORS REQUIRED:
All businesses with wash pads or the potential to discharge petroleum products
or excessive suspended solids shall install an approved sand and oil
interceptor in accordance with the uniform plumbing code. Interceptors shall be
designed and stamped by a professional engineer licensed in the state of
Nevada. (Ord. 505, 1-18-2007)
9.06.27: SEWERAGE USE; CAR WASH INTERCEPTORS:
   A.   Self-serve car washes with three (3) or fewer bays must have at least a
one thousand five hundred (1,500) gallon interceptor. The size of the
interceptor required by this section shall be increased by five hundred (500)
gallons per bay for every additional bay above three (3).
   B.   Automatic car washes are required to submit an engineering study of
water use and discharge, reflecting water conservation methods and wastewater
discharge compliance with section
9.06.31 of this chapter, prior to approval. (Ord. 505, 1-18-2007)
9.06.28: SEWERAGE USE; SECONDARY CONTAINMENT:
Any commercial or institutional facility in Lyon County which stores or
accumulates any new or used product, which has the potential to impact the
sewer system or contaminate soil or ground water, must have secondary
containment for the product. The secondary containment area must have the
capacity to contain one hundred percent (100%) of the amount of product stored
within it, including potential storm water accumulations.
The new or used product includes, but is not limited to, engine oil,
antifreeze, solvents, hydraulic fluids, fuels, and sludge. Each container must,
at a minimum, be labeled identifying the contents.
This section does not exempt any commercial or institutional facility from
complying with any other applicable state, federal or local laws or
regulations. Any person generating hazardous waste within the boundaries of
Lyon County shall comply with chapter 40 of the code of federal regulations,
part 262. (Ord. 505, 1-18-2007)
9.06.29: SANITARY SEWER DESIGN STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS; GENERAL:
The county shall approve plans for new systems, extensions or replacement of
sewers only when designed upon a separate plan, in which storm water from
roofs, streets, and other areas and ground water from foundation drains are
excluded from entering the wastewater collection system, and when it is
demonstrated that the requirements of this chapter have been complied with.
Design shall conform to county standards and shall be designed by a civil
engineer registered in the state of Nevada. (Ord. 505, 1-18-2007)
9.06.30: INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER SAMPLING, ANALYSIS AND FLOW MEASUREMENTS:
   A.   All wastewater analysis must be conducted in accordance with the
methods promulgated under section 304(g) of the act. If no appropriate
procedure is contained therein, the standard procedure of the industry or a
procedure judged satisfactory by the ECA must be used to measure wastewater
constituents. Any independent laboratory or discharger performing tests shall
furnish any required test data or information on the test methods or equipment
used if requested to do so by the ECA.
   B.   All dischargers making periodic measurements shall furnish and install
in a control manhole or other appropriate location a calibrated flume, weir,
flow meter or similar device approved by the county and suitable to measure the
industrial wastewater flow rate and total volume. A flow indicating, recording
and totalizing register may be required by the ECA. In lieu of wastewater flow
measurement, the ECA may accept records of water usage and adjust the flow
volumes by suitable factors to determine peak and average flow rates for the
specific industrial wastewater discharge. The discharger shall install and
maintain facilities to allow inspection and monitoring of the wastewater.
   C.   The sampling, analysis and flow measurement procedures, equipment and
results are subject at any time to inspection by the ECA. Sampling and flow
measurement facilities must provide safe access to authorized personnel. (Ord.
505, 1-18-2007)
9.06.31: PROHIBITED DISCHARGES:
The following constituents shall not be discharged to the county's sewer system
in excess of the concentrations provided below:
   A.   Listed Constituents (Based On Monthly Averages):
Constituent Concentration
Constituent            Concentration
                       
Temperature               120°F
pH                        5.5pH10.0
Arsenic                   0.1 mg/l
Barium                    10.0 mg/l
Boron                     0.5 mg/l
Cadmium                   0.1 mg/l
Chromium, total           2.0 mg/l
Copper                    1.0 mg/l
Cyanide                   0.1 mg/l
Formaldehyde              10.0 mg/l
Iron                      20.0 mg/l
Lead                      0.6 mg/l
Manganese                 1.0 mg/l
Mercury                   0.05 mg/l
Nickel                    1.0 mg/l
Selenium                  0.2 mg/l
Silver                    0.5 mg/l
Sulfides                  0.1 mg/l
Zinc                      4.0 mg/l
Oil and grease            150.0 mg/l
                       
Total Phenols           
                       
Phenolic compounds        0.5 mg/l
COD                    500 mg/l
BOD5                   250 mg/l
Total suspended solids 250 mg/l
 
   B.   Other Constituents: In addition to the listed constituents and toxic
effluent standards promulgated by the U.S. environmental protection agency,
other identified constituents (organic or inorganic) shall not be discharged to
the county's sewer system in excess of the constituent's federally promulgated
maximum contaminant level (MCL), water quality criteria standards, or published
toxicity levels. Discharge of identified constituents in excess of the
federally promulgated maximum contaminant level (MCL), water quality criteria
standards, or published toxicity levels may be approved upon demonstration to
the ECA by a professional engineer registered in Nevada that the proposed
constituent discharge concentration achieved by the implementation of best
management practices (BMP) and best available technology (BAT) shall not have
significant impact, either singly or in combination with other waters, on the
treatment or collection system. (Ord. 505, 1-18-2007)
9.06.32: INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER TREATMENT SURCHARGE:
   A.   An industrial wastewater treatment surcharge is paid to the county on a
monthly basis by those industrial wastewater dischargers whose contribution of
BOD5 and total suspended solids (TSS) create costs in excess of the value of
their sewer service charges. The individual waste discharge is considered as
creating cost in excess of the value of their sewer service charges when the
concentration of BOD5 and TSS exceed the following:
      BOD5   - 275 mg/l
      TSS   - 200 mg/l
   The treatment surcharge is based on the appropriate county sewerage system's
total maintenance, operation, and capital expenditures for providing industrial
wastewater collection, treatment and disposal services as described in section
9.06.33 of this chapter. The annual industrial wastewater treatment surcharge
is computed by the following formula:
   Rate (in $/1,000 gallons of water consumption) =
   {'{'}(R1 + [(R2)(C2)(8.34)]/1000 + [(R3)(C3)(8.34)]/1000{'}'}/1000(Z)
   Where:
      R1   =   Unit costs associated with wastewater flow in $/MG per year.
      R2   =   Unit costs associated with BOD5 in $/1,000 lb. per year.
      R3   =   Unit costs associated with TSS in $/1,000 lb. per year.
      C2   =   BOD5 concentration in mg/l.
      C3   =   TSS concentration in mg/l.
      Z   =   The estimated ratio between wastewater flow and water
consumption.
   B.   The quantity for total flow is the quantity of water measured at the
water meter. Where no meter exists, the surcharge will be calculated based on
nine hundred fifty (950) gallons per month per fixture unit.
   The quantities for BOD5 and TSS for certain classes of users shall be based
on typical strengths as listed herein:
 
                            BOD5 (mg/l)   Total Suspended
                                           Solids (mg/l)
                                         
Commercial laundry              450          240
Hotel with dining facilities    500          300
Mortuaries                      800          800
Restaurants                     1,000        300
Wholesale bakery                1,000        600
 
   The quantities of BOD5 and TSS for other industrial discharges are
established by sampling and analysis as specified by the ECA in the permit
issued pursuant to sections 9.06.02 through 9.06.20 of this chapter. (Ord. 505,
1-18-2007)
CHAPTER 7
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 1
SECTION:
9.07.01: General Information
9.07.02: Improvement Plan Requirements
9.07.03: Design Requirements
9.07.04: Backflow Prevention
9.07.05: Grease Interception And Trash Containment
9.07.06: Sand/Oil Interception And Containment
9.07.07: Industrial Pretreatment Program
9.07.08: Wellhead Protection
 
Notes
  1. Private systems, general improvement districts, special districts and
  cities may recognize codes, design standards and details that are different
1 from what is cited in this chapter. Developers must contact those local
  service providers to determine what development standards will apply to
  developments within the boundaries of the specific service area.
9.07.01: GENERAL INFORMATION:
   A.   Water And Sewer: Water and sewer mains shall be extended for the
following:
      1.   Parcel map development with a property line within four hundred feet
(400') of an existing water or sewer main or as otherwise required in these
standards. Prior to recording a parcel map, the owner/developer shall submit
improvement plans to the service provider and the Lyon County engineer. The
owner/developer shall be responsible for the construction of the water and/or
sewer mains. A licensed class A contractor must be used for water/sewer
infrastructure installation.
      2.   Water and sewer mains shall be extended the entire frontage(s) of
the parcel unless engineering analysis determines it is physically impossible
to do so or it is determined by the service provider that further extension of
the main beyond the parcel can never occur or it is not necessary for
continuity of the system. In such cases, the length of extension shall be
determined by the service provider or designee. Construction of a single-family
residence on a parcel not associated with a subdivision, planned unit
development (PUD) or parcel map development and currently served by an existing
main shall not require extension of the main(s). Construction of a single-
family residence on a corner lot not associated with a subdivision, PUD or
parcel map development shall require extension along one street frontage only.
      3.   The owner or developer will supply a water model that will identify
possible locations of insufficient capacity. Any shortfalls will be addressed
by the developer's engineer. The developer shall be responsible for main
extensions when the design capacity of existing mains is less than that
required to serve a development. Mains shall be extended when existing mains
are physically inaccessible to maintenance crews and equipment, as determined
by the service provider.
      4.   For the purposes of administering these standards for main
extensions and replacements, "developments" are defined as follows:
         a.   Subdivisions, PUDs, parcel map developments;
         b.   New building construction;
         c.   Multi-family, commercial and industrial additions or remodels,
which may result in an increase in the historical water usage or sewer
contribution for the parcel.
      5.   Reclaimed water mains shall not be required to be extended if the
parcel does not receive connection. Connection to reclaimed water mains
requires the developer to obtain approval from local, state agencies and the
service provider.
   B.   Reimbursement Agreements: The owner/developer may apply to the service
provider for future reimbursement from adjacent property owners, which connect
to the main extension per the provisions established by the service provider.
The service provider shall process the developer's application and, upon
approval of a reimbursement agreement by the respective board, the agreement
shall be administered by the respective board.
   C.   Participation In Oversizing Mains: When the oversizing of mains has
been requested by the service provider, the development shall participate in
the installation of oversized water and sewer mains as per the provisions of
this code. (Ord. 506, 1-18-2007)
9.07.02: IMPROVEMENT PLAN REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Main Extensions And Fire Lines: Improvement plans for water, sewer and
reclaimed water main extensions, public and private fire hydrant installations,
and fire sprinkler line installations shall conform to the following
requirements:
      1.   Sewer service lateral sizes and water service line, curb and
corporation stop sizes for subdivision and parcel map development shall be
shown by note on each plan/profile sheet.
      2.   Plans shall indicate dimensions from street centerline or control
line to all existing and proposed mains. All valves, hydrants, flush valve
assemblies, air release valves, manholes and laterals shall be stationed and
dimensioned from street centerline or control line.
      3.   Plans shall indicate proposed use of meter; i.e., domestic or
irrigation.
      4.   Plans shall indicate whether the water service lateral shall be
installed by a properly licensed contractor or by the service provider. (Ord.
506, 1-18-2007)
9.07.03: DESIGN REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Water And Reclaimed Water Design Criteria:
      1.   Main Analysis: Water mains shall be analyzed to determine system
capability to provide adequate flows and pressures. The analysis and
calculations shall be provided to the service provider for review and approval.
Water mains shall be designed to deliver a minimum of sixty (60) pounds per
square inch (psi) at the meter during peak demand periods, a maximum of one
hundred (100) psi, and to provide adequate fire flow as required by the fire
department with a minimum residual pressure of twenty (20) psi. If the project
is an infill development where the existing system is incapable of providing
sixty (60) psi, the service provider may waive the requirement.
Subdivisions, PUDs and large commercial or industrial projects having a
significant impact on the service provider water system as determined by the
service provider shall provide an update of the water model using a format that
is compatible with the current model.
New construction or remodels adjacent to the existing public water system where
little or no additional system improvements are required must provide a report
with current date, project address (with location map), APN number, permit
number, if available, comparing the required fire flow established by the fire
department and the available flow obtained by the actual fire flow data sheet,
which shall be approved.
The report shall address system pressures at the project location to ensure
sixty (60) psi is available at all water meters during peak day demands.
Reclaimed water systems must meet the requirements found in the 2006 or most
current version of the LCUD reclaimed water standards unless a specific
standard has been accepted by the service provider and approved by NDEP for a
specific development.
      2.   Main Size And Material: Mains shall be sized as required by flow
calculations, however, the minimum water main diameter shall be eight inches
(8") unless the service provider approves otherwise.
Water mains shall be PVC C-900 CL 150 or 200 (as required by operating
pressure) unless otherwise required and approved by the service provider.
Reclaimed water (RCW) mains shall be PVC C-900 CL 150 or 200, RCW pipe must be
purple, unless otherwise required and approved by the service provider.
      3.   Standard Details: The installation of all new water and reclaimed
water lines shall conform to the standard details for public works construction
as adopted by the service provider.
      4.   Meters: Each building shall be served by a separate water service
and meter unless otherwise approved by the service provider. All meters shall
be located within the street right of way or in a public utilities easement
(PUE) parallel and adjacent to the street right of way unless otherwise
approved by the service provider. Meters shall not be located within the
driving surface.
Meter sizes available include:
      5/8 inch
      3/4 inch
      1 inch
      11/2 inch
      2 inch
      3 inch
      4 inch
      6 inch
      8 inch
      10 inch
      12 inch
      5.   Services: Services shall be located as per the standard details
unless otherwise approved by the service provider. Reclaimed water meter boxes
shall be manufactured purple. All services, except those located in cul-de-
sacs, shall be installed perpendicular to the main.
Service lines may be:
      3/4 inch
      1 inch
      11/2 inch
      2 inch
      3 inch
      4 inch
      6 inch
      8 inch
      10 inch
      12 inch
A three inch (3") service requires a four inch (4") gate valve with a four inch
(4") line. See the service provider standard details. Service lines must be
sized to accommodate any required fire sprinkler systems. Fire systems must be
approved by the local fire department and meet the requirements of NFPA 13.
      6.   Valves: Water valves on distribution mains shall be spaced at
intervals not to exceed five hundred feet (500') unless approved otherwise by
the service provider. Reclaimed water valves shall be spaced at intervals not
to exceed one thousand three hundred twenty feet (1,320') with service provider
approval. No point within the system being designed shall require more than
three (3) valve closures to discontinue service. Valves shall be located so
that no more than fifteen (15) customers are taken out of service at any one
time. Valves shall be placed a minimum of twenty feet (20') from the end of all
mains, which may be extended in the future unless there is no possibility of
future connections as determined by the service provider. See standard details
titled "Valve Detail And Valve Box Detail".
Reclaimed water valves shall not be located at intersections without approval
by the service provider.
All existing valves necessary to isolate the section of main to be extended
shall be shown on the plans.
      7.   Flush Valve Assemblies: A four inch (4") flush valve assembly or
fire hydrant is required at the end of all pressurized dead end water mains and
stubs longer than ten feet (10') as per the standard detail titled "Flush Valve
Assembly".
      8.   Fire Hydrants: Fire hydrants within a subdivision shall be spaced as
approved by the fire department. Fire hydrants and their associated valve shall
be shown on the plans and constructed as per the standard detail titled "Fire
Hydrant Assembly Detail". The service provider may require a particular
manufacturer, model number and color. A fire hydrant maintenance agreement
between the service provider and fire district may be required.
      9.   Check Valves: Backflow assemblies or check valves may be required on
all private fire hydrant lines per the standard details. Pressure loss
associated with all check valves shall be included in fire flow calculations.
Backflow assemblies shall be installed on the customer's side of the right of
way line unless otherwise approved by the service provider. When a PUE is
parallel to the right of way line, the check valve shall be installed on the
customer's side of the PUE.
      10.   Backflow Assemblies: Double check valve assemblies shall be
installed on all private fire sprinkler lines as per the standard detail titled
"Detail For Double Check Valve Assemblies". Fire systems utilizing chemicals
require a reduced pressure backflow assembly. Pressure loss associated with all
backflow assemblies shall be included in fire flow calculations. The assemblies
shall be tested prior to certificate of occupancy and annually by a certified
AWWA backflow prevention assembly tester as approved by the service provider.
Double check valve assemblies shall be installed on the customer's side of the
right of way line. When a PUE is parallel to the right of way line, the double
check valve assembly shall be installed on the customer's side of the PUE.
Freeze protection may also be required.
      11.   Tapping Sleeves: Tapping sleeves are required when connecting a new
main to an existing main when water service cannot be discontinued. See the
standard detail titled "Tapping Sleeve Detail".
Plans shall include a note indicating that the contractor shall notify the
service provider forty eight (48) hours prior to performing hot taps, either by
fax or mail, and that underground service alert be notified forty eight (48)
hours prior to any excavation.
      12.   Air Release And Vacuum Valves: Air release and/or vacuum valves are
required at all high points in water mains unless adequate relief is provided
and approved by the service provider. See the standard detail titled "Air-
Release Valve Detail". Air release/vacuum valves are required at all high
points in pressurized mains and shall be spaced at two thousand six hundred
foot (2,600') maximum intervals, regardless of whether high points exist in the
main, unless otherwise approved by the service provider. Provide calculations
for sizing air release/vacuum valves for review and approval by the service
provider.
      13.   Separations: Minimum horizontal separation between water lines and
sewer, storm drain and reclaimed water lines shall be ten feet (10'). Minimum
horizontal separation from all other utilities shall be five feet (5'). Minimum
vertical separation shall be eighteen inches (18") unless otherwise approved by
the service provider. See the Lyon County standard detail titled "Typical
Utility Trench".
      14.   Lowering Water Mains: Water mains in conflict with sewer, storm
drain and reclaimed water lines shall be adjusted as per the standard detail
titled "Lowering Water Mains". Other means for separation, such as designing
with vertical curves, shall require approval of the service provider. When
pipelines are deeper than prescribed in Lyon County standard detail LC-W5 or by
the service provider, larger easements may be required on a proportionate basis
to accommodate future access for repairs and/or maintenance.
      15.   Air Gap Separation: Private receiving tanks require an air gap and
shall be installed as per the standard detail titled "Installation For Air-Gap
Separation". The service provider must approve all installations.
      16.   Reduced Pressure Assemblies: Reduced pressure assemblies shall be
per the standard detail titled "Detail For Reduced Pressure Principle
Assemblies" and are required per table 1, "Type Of Backflow Protection
Required", of this chapter. Approval from the service provider is required
prior to installation. These assemblies shall be tested prior to certificate of
occupancy by a certified AWWA backflow prevention assembly tester as approved
by the service provider. (Table 1 may be superseded by a state approved cross
connection control program specific to the service provider.)
      17.   Thrust Blocks: Thrust blocks are required on all new water and
reclaimed water main installations, public and private fire hydrants, and
sprinkler line installations and shall be constructed as shown in the standard
detail titled "Thrust Block Bearing Areas". Restrained joint pipe may be used
in lieu of thrust blocks if approved by the service provider.
      18.   Sampling Stations: Water sampling stations must be installed within
new subdivisions and must be approved along with location, by the service
provider.
   B.   Sewer Design Criteria:
      1.   Main Analysis: Sewer mains shall be analyzed to determine system
capability to provide capacity for the ultimate tributary population with the
calculations provided to the service provider. Projects with less than ten (10)
dwelling units or less than two hundred (200) fixture units are exempt from
these criteria. Flow generation and peaking factors shall be per recommended
standards for wastewater facilities (ten state standards). Sewer mains are
considered at capacity when peak flow is at d/D=0.75. Main analysis shall
include a narrative report submitted to the service provider with maps and
calculations addressing the following:
         a.   Area of project;
         b.   Tributary areas outside project;
         c.   Adjacent areas;
         d.   Contours usually extending a minimum of three hundred feet (300')
beyond the project or as needed to evaluate localized tributary areas;
         e.   Line layout, pipe size and slope;
         f.   Predicted average and peak flows at major junction points
including flow coming from outside the project area;
         g.   Direction of flow;
         h.   Zoning used to predict flows;
         i.   Special areas such as hospitals, schools, large office or
industrial buildings, etc.;
         j.   Boundaries of areas within the project which are tributary to
points of major flow;
         k.   Floodplains;
         l.   Scale;
         m.   Predicted flow from each area;
         n.   Peaking factors;
         o.   Cumulative flow;
         p.   Pipe capacities and depths of flow.
      2.   Sewer Size And Lateral: The minimum size for sewer mains shall be
eight inches (8") and laterals shall be four inches (4") unless otherwise
approved by the service provider. Mains shall be sized as required by flow
calculations. Sewer lines shall be PVC SDR-35 unless otherwise approved by the
service provider.
      3.   Standard Details: The installation of all new sewer lines shall
conform to the standard details for public works construction, as adopted by
the service provider. When pipelines are deeper than prescribed in Lyon County
standard detail LC-W5 or by the service provider, larger easements may be
required on a proportionate basis to accommodate future access for repairs and/
or maintenance.
      4.   Service Lateral: Each parcel shall be served by a separate sewer
service lateral unless otherwise approved by the service provider.
Sewer service laterals shall be located as per the standard detail titled
"Typical Utility Laterals Locations", unless otherwise approved by the service
provider. See standard details titled "Sewer Lateral Connection Detail And
Sewer Service Saddle Detail". All service laterals, except those located in
cul-de-sacs, shall be installed perpendicular to the main.
Sewer service laterals are not to be connected to manholes without prior
approval of the service provider. Laterals six inches (6") and over shall be
connected to a manhole.
      5.   Design Velocity: The design velocity shall be two feet (2') per
second (fps) minimum, ten feet (10') per second (fps) maximum for the design
condition.
      6.   Manning's Formula: The Manning's formula:
   V = 1.49(R2/3 S1/2) n
shall be used in determining slope, velocity, design flow and diameter.
Manning's "n" shall be 0.013 for PVC pipe.
      7.   Slope: Minimum pipe slope shall be as required to achieve the
minimum velocity of two feet (2') per second (fps), but shall not be less than
as listed in the table below, unless otherwise approved by the service
provider;
 
Size       Minimum Slope
           
   6 inc   1.0 percent
   8 inc   0.4 percent
   10 in   0.28 percent
   12 in   0.22 percent
   15 in   0.15 percent
 
 
   The design engineer shall submit velocity and depth calculations for sewers
less than minimum slope for review and approval prior to preparation of design
drawings. For pipe slopes less than 0.4 percent, the design engineer shall
place the following note in a prominent location on each plan/profile sheet
with slopes less than 0.4 percent; "The contractor shall use due care in
installing sewer mains". Minimum pipe slope for dead end sewers shall be 0.5
percent unless it can be shown by calculations that the velocity in the pipe is
two (2) fps or greater. Dead end sewers shall generally end in a manhole.
   Dry sewers which shall be extended at a future date and installed without a
manhole shall be certified as built for line and grade by a Nevada professional
engineer or land surveyor prior to backfill. The engineer shall place a note in
a prominent location on each plan/profile sheet including the as built
requirement. A cleanout may be allowed at the end of the line if approved by
the service provider. Cleanout shall be no smaller than six inches (6").
      8.   Sanitary Sewer Design Standards And Specifications; Alignment:
         a.   Horizontal: Sewer lines less than twenty four inches (24") in
diameter shall be straight between manholes and generally parallel with the
street or easement centerline whenever possible.
         Sewer lines twenty four inches (24") and larger may be considered for
horizontal curvature when approved by the service provider.
         b.   Vertical: Sewer lines with vertical curvature shall not be
allowed.
      9.   Sanitary Sewer Design Standards And Specifications; Manholes And
Laterals: Standard manholes shall be installed at the end of each line with
continuing stub-out; at all intersections of other sewer lines; at all changes
in grade, size or alignment.
         a.   Spacing: Maximum spacing for manholes shall be four hundred feet
(400') for all lines smaller than fifteen inches (15"), and five hundred feet
(500') for lines fifteen inches (15") to twenty four inches (24") and six
hundred feet (600') for twenty four inches (24") and larger, or as required by
the service provider.
         b.   Increasing Size: When a smaller sewer flows into a larger sewer,
the invert of the larger sewer shall be lowered sufficiently to maintain the
same energy gradient. An appropriate method for obtaining this result is to
place the crown at the same elevation for both pipes. The average energy
gradient line shall be derived from anticipated full flow capacities of the
pipes.
         c.   Drop Manholes: A drop connection shall be provided for a sewer
entering a manhole at an elevation two feet (2') or more above the manhole
invert. When the difference in elevation between the incoming sewer and the
manhole invert is less than two feet (2'), the manhole invert shall be filleted
and channeled to prevent deposition of solids. The drop connection shall be
constructed in accordance with the standard detail requirements for manhole
installation. Supporting calculations for hydraulic efficiency through manholes
that do not meet the above requirements shall be submitted to the service
provider for approval. Drop manholes shall be forty eight inches (48") in
diameter, unless otherwise approved by the service provider.
         d.   General: Manholes shall be installed at the end of all sewer
mains, at all intersections of mains, and changes of grade, size, or alignment.
One foot (1') stubs shall be provided at manholes for sewer mains which may be
extended in the future. When extending a sewer main from an existing manhole
without a stub, the existing manhole base shall be removed and replaced, unless
coring is approved by the service provider. Sewer mains entering manholes shall
have a minimum one-tenth (0.1) of a foot of fall across the manhole and a
maximum two- tenths (0.2) of a foot of fall across the manhole. Two-tenths
(0.2) of a foot of fall may be exceeded when matching crowns of different pipe
diameters. Manholes with the angle between the entering sewer main and existing
sewer main less than seventy five degrees (75°) shall be sixty inches (60")
diameter and maintain two-tenths (0.2) of a foot of fall.
   Watertight manhole covers shall be used.
         e.   Dead End Sewers: Dead end sewers shall generally end in a
manhole. Dry sewers which shall be extended at a future date and installed
without a manhole shall be certified as built for line and grade by a Nevada
professional engineer or land surveyor prior to backfill. A cleanout may be
required by the service provider.
         f.   Prior to any extension or connection to the existing system, a
mechanical type pipe plug must be installed in a manhole to prevent flows from
entering existing system from new system until new system has been tested and
accepted. Service provider will inspect all plug installations.
      10.   Separation Of Lines:
         a.   Definitions: As used in the Nevada administrative code (NAC),
chapter 445A, unless the context otherwise requires:
   SEWER MAIN: Includes:
            (1) A sewer main of a sanitary sewer, storm sewer or any other type
of sewer; and
            (2) Any unidentified conduit with a diameter that exceeds six
inches (6").
   SEWER SERVICE LATERAL: Includes:
            (1) A sewer service lateral of a sanitary sewer, storm sewer or any
other type of sewer; and
            (2) Any unidentified conduit with a diameter of not more than six
inches (6").
         b.   Sewer Main Parallel To Water Main Or Water Service Lateral: If a
sewer main parallels a water main or water service lateral:
            (1) Whenever possible, the sewer main must be located lower than
the water main or water service lateral.
            (2) Except as otherwise provided in subsection B10b(3) of this
section, the sewer main must be in a separate trench, and
               (A) Located at least ten feet (10') away from the water main or
water service lateral, as measured horizontally from the exterior walls of the
pipes;
               (B) If compliance with subsection B10b(2)(A) of this section is
not practicable, located:
                  (i) At least five feet (5') away from the water main or water
service lateral; as measured horizontally from the exterior walls of the pipes;
and
                  (ii) At least eighteen inches (18") lower than the water main
or water service lateral, as measured vertically from the exterior walls of the
pipes; or
               (C) If compliance with neither subsection B10b(2)(A) nor B10b(2)
(B) of this section is practicable, located at least six feet (6') away from
the water main or water service lateral, as measured horizontally from the
exterior walls of the pipes. If the sewer main:
                  (i) Is in place at the time a water project is performed, the
sewer main must, except as otherwise provided in subsection B10b(2)(C)(iii) of
this section, be totally encased in at least four inches (4") of cement slurry;
                  (ii) Is not in place at the time a water project is
performed, the sewer main must, except as otherwise provided in subsection B10b
(2)(C)(iii) of this section, be constructed of PVC with joints that comply with
Standard D3212 of the American Society for Testing and Materials; or
                  (iii) Is part of a storm sewer and has a diameter of not less
than twenty four inches (24"), the sewer main must be installed with watertight
joints that use joint sealants or joint gaskets.
            (3) If compliance with the requirements for separation set forth in
subsection B10b(2) of this section are not practicable:
               (A) The water main or water service lateral must be encased in
at least four inches (4") of cement slurry; and
               (B) The sewer main must comply with the requirements of
subsections B10b(2)(C)(i), B10b(2)(C)(ii) and B10b(2)(C)(iii) of this section.
         c.   Sewer Service Lateral Parallel To Water Main Or Water Service
Lateral: If a sewer service lateral parallels a water main or water service
lateral, the sewer service lateral must be in a separate trench, and
            (1) Located:
               (A) At least twelve inches (12") lower than the water main or
water service lateral, as measured vertically from the exterior walls of the
pipes; and
               (B) At least forty eight inches (48") away from the water main
or water service lateral, as measured horizontally from the exterior walls of
the pipes; or
            (2) If compliance with subsection B10c(1) of this section is
impracticable, located in such a manner as is authorized by the health
division.
         d.   Sewer Main Crossing Water Main: If a sewer main crosses a water
main:
            (1) The sewer main must be located at least eighteen inches (18")
lower than the water main, as measured vertically from the exterior walls of
the pipes; or
            (2) If compliance with subsection B10d(1) of this section is
impracticable:
               (A) A reasonable effort must be made to place the pipeline
joints of the sewer main and water main, other than any welded joints, an equal
distance from the point of crossing;
               (B) The sewer main and water main must be:
                  (i) Located at least six inches (6") apart, as measured
vertically from the exterior of the pipes; and
                  (ii) Provided with such structural support as the supplier of
water determines necessary; and
               (C) The area of crossing must be constructed in such a manner
that:
                  (i) The sewer main is constructed of materials that comply
with "Standard Specifications For Public Works Construction" and the American
Water Works Association standards for water system materials;
                  (ii) The sewer main consists of PVC which is constructed with
joints that comply with standard D3212 of the American Society for Testing and
Materials;
                  (iii) The sewer main or water main is totally encased in at
least four inches (4") of cement slurry for a distance of at least ten feet
(10') on each side of the point of crossing; or
                  (iv) The sewer main or water main is installed in a pipe
sleeve that extends, without joints, at least ten feet (10') on each side of
the point of crossing.
         e.   Sewer Main Crossing Water Service Lateral:
            (1) If a sewer main crosses a water service lateral, the sewer main
must be located:
               (A) At least eighteen inches (18") lower than the water service
lateral, as measured vertically from the exterior walls of the pipes; or
               (B) If compliance with subsection B10e(1)(A) of this section is
impracticable, in such a manner as is authorized by the health division.
            (2) If a water service lateral is in place at the time a sewer main
is constructed and must be relocated to comply with this section, the
relocation must be performed:
               (A) With the approval of the supplier of water; or
               (B) If compliance with subsection B10e(2)(A) of this section is
impracticable, in such a manner as is authorized by the health division.
         f.   Sewer Service Lateral Crossing Water Main Or Water Service
Lateral:
            (1) If a sewer service lateral crosses a water main or water
service lateral, the sewer service lateral must be located:
               (A) At least twelve inches (12") lower than the water main or
water service lateral, as measured vertically from the exterior walls of the
pipes; or
               (B) If compliance with subsection B10f(1)(A) of this section is
impracticable, in such a manner as is authorized by the health division.
            (2) If a water main or water service lateral is in place at time a
sewer service lateral is constructed and must be relocated to comply with this
section, the relocation must be performed:
               (A) With the approval of and in accordance with the procedures
and standards of the supplier of water; or
               (B) If compliance with subsection B10f(2)(A) of this section is
impracticable, in such a manner as is authorized by the health division. (Added
to NAC by board of health, effective February 20, 1997.)
         g.   Lines Across Surface Water:
            (1) A supplier of water shall consult with the health authority
before preparing any plans for the construction of a pipeline of the public
water system across any surface water, regardless of whether the crossing will
be over or under the surface of the water.
            (2) If the pipeline will cross over the surface of the water, the
pipe must be adequately supported and anchored, protected from damage and
freezing, and accessible for repair and replacement.
            (3) Except as otherwise provided in subsection B10g(4) of this
section, if the pipeline will cross under the surface of the water, the pipe
must be:
               (A) Covered with at least five feet (5') of backfill; and
               (B) Enclosed in a pipe sleeve or encased with at least four
inches (4") of cement slurry.
            (4) If the pipeline will cross under the surface of a channel of
water that is fifteen feet (15') or more wide:
               (A) The pipe must be constructed with watertight mechanical
joints that are capable of deflection.
               (B) Isolation valves must be located at both ends of the
crossing in such a manner that the length of the crossing can be isolated for
testing, repair and sampling. The isolation valves must be easily accessible
and must not be subject to flooding. All installations must be reviewed and
approved by the service provider and the appropriate state entity.
      Water mains in conflict with sewer, storm drain and reclaimed water lines
shall be adjusted as per the standard detail titled "Lowering Water Mains".
Other means for separation shall require approval of the service provider.
      11.   Interceptor Connections: Sewer service laterals shall not be
directly connected to sewer interceptors and sewer service laterals shall not
be directly connected to sewer interceptor manholes without prior approval of
the service provider. A sewer interceptor is defined as any sewer main larger
than twelve inches (12") in diameter, or as determined by the service provider.
Sewer service laterals may be connected to a parallel sewer main that is
connected to an existing interceptor manhole.
      12.   Inverted Siphons: The design of siphons shall not be undertaken
until approved by the service provider. The siphons shall not have less than
two (2) barrels, with a minimum pipe size of eight inches (8"), and shall be
provided with the necessary appurtenances for convenient flushing and
maintenance. The manholes shall have adequate clearances for rodding.
Sufficient head and pipe sizes shall be designed to obtain minimum velocities
of three feet (3') per second for average flow. The inlet and outlet details
shall be arranged so that normal flow is diverted to one barrel and so that
either barrel may be removed from service for cleaning.
      13.   Sewer Main Televising: All sewer mains and laterals shall have a
television inspection prior to acceptance by the service provider and prior to
paving. All sewer mains and manholes shall be clear of debris prior to
televising. Debris shall not be washed into existing sewer mains and shall be
pumped to an approved disposal location or vacuumed.
      14.   Air Testing: Air testing must be completed per "Orange Book"
standard.
      15.   Well Meters: For new development only, private well water meters
are required for property connected to public sewer and not connected to public
water. Meter location and type shall be approved by the service provider prior
to installation.
      16.   Manholes: Vacuum or hydraulic testing may be required by the
service provider.
   C.   Sewer Lift/Pump Stations:
      1.   General Requirements: Because of the complex technical detail of the
lift stations, the service provider must approve all designs. Lyon County
utility department's standard details for lift station construction may also be
accepted. The standards below are basic.
   These standards apply only to those facilities to be owned and operated by
the service provider. The use of sewage lift stations or pump stations is
allowed only where gravity flows are infeasible. The service provider or
designee shall determine if a lift/pump station is to be owned and operated by
the service provider. The design of stations to be owned and operated by the
service provider is subject to approval by the service provider.
   Special design consideration shall be given to match existing systems and
equipment as determined by the service provider. Lift stations shall not have
any areas requiring routine or preventative maintenance, or normal operations,
designated as a confined space.
   All stations shall generally conform to the following:
      2.   Flows: The pumping system including the discharge piping and mains
shall be designed for a minimum of one hundred ten percent (110%) of the
capacity of the tributary system leading to the station. The capacity shall be
based on peak hour volumes.
      3.   Pumps: No fewer than two (2) pumps shall be provided. When only two
(2) pumps are used, each pump shall pump the capacity of the system.
   For stations with more than two (2) pumps, there shall be a standby pump
with the capacity of the largest unit.
   Pumps shall be designed to operate automatically in alternate cycles with
the idle pump in each cycle to function as standby. Pumps shall be specifically
designed for the conveyance of wastewater.
   Pumps in a dry well/wet well application shall be equipped with motors that
are premium efficiency with TEFC enclosures; double mechanical seals with
external flushing water; seal water systems shall meet service provider
requirements (a standby seal water pump shall be provided).
      4.   Flow Metering: The pump station shall have one magnetic flow meter
with 4-20 MA output installed on the pressure main in a suitable watertight
vault.
      5.   Piping: Dry well/wet well piping applications shall be ductile iron
with grooved or flanged joints.
   Any fasteners used for joining pipes shall be stainless steel. Pump
isolation valves shall be eccentric or full port plug valves. Swing check
valves shall be provided on each pump discharge. The individual pump discharge
shall connect into the main header horizontally to prevent grit buildup in the
check valve. Sewage air relief valves are required at high points in the
discharge line.
      6.   Wet Well: Openings to wet wells shall be sealed to prevent the
escape of gasses. All surfaces of wet wells shall be HDPE lined to prevent
concrete corrosion. Steel used in wet wells shall be stainless. Wet well sizing
shall be in accordance with the "Hydraulic Institute Standards", latest issue.
The wet well shall be sized for no greater than four (4) pump starts per hour
to prevent motor overheating. Openings between the wet well and dry well shall
be sealed gastight.
      7.   Dry Well: Dry well access shall be by straight stairs unless
otherwise approved by the service provider or designee. The dry well shall
contain two (2) sump pumps with one pump on the floor out of the sump. Each
sump pump shall be capable of pumping fifty (50) gallons per minute. The dry
well layout shall allow for wastewater pump removal through a hatch at the
ground level over each pump. The layout shall allow for personnel access to all
sides of the installed equipment. The dry well shall contain an auxiliary space
heater, station dehumidifying unit, and venting fan. Individual equipment
lockouts are required for all motorized equipment. Fall protection must also be
provided for.
      8.   Ventilation: Ventilation shall be in accordance with the latest
edition of NFPA 820, fire protection in wastewater treatment and collection
facilities.
      9.   Flood Protection: Access to all spaces, all electrical panels, and
motors shall be at an elevation above or protected from a 100-year flood.
      10.   Standby Power: A standby generator shall be provided capable of
automatically running the entire station's load if power fails due to a sensed
high or low voltage on any of three (3) legs of four hundred eighty (480) volt
power. The generator shall be located in a weather protective, soundproofed
(hospital rated), vandal proof and lockable housing with access to all engine
and generator components for servicing and maintenance. The generator shall be
fueled by diesel with an aboveground, vandal proof storage tank with a capacity
to provide a forty eight (48) hour continuous run time. The generator engine
block shall be equipped with a block heater and thermostat that shall allow for
instantaneous startup at minus thirty degrees Fahrenheit (-30°F). The engine
shall be protected with shutdown safeguards, gauges and indicator lamps for
over temperature, low oil pressure, over speed and over crank. The engine shall
be equipped with an automatic battery charger, installed on the hot side of the
transfer switch enabling the battery to maintain its charge when idle.
      11.   Applicable Design Codes: The following list of codes and standards
are to be followed as a minimum, unless otherwise approved by the service
provider and/or NDEP:
         a.   International building code (latest edition or as adopted by
service provider);
         b.   Uniform plumbing code (latest edition as adopted by service
provider);
         c.   Uniform mechanical code (latest edition as adopted by service
provider);
         d.   International fire code (latest edition as adopted by service
provider);
         e.   National electrical code (latest edition as adopted by service
provider);
         f.   NFPA article 820 (latest edition as adopted by service provider);
         g.   National fire code (latest edition as adopted by service
provider);
         h.   Occupational safety and health standards (latest edition as
adopted by service provider);
         i.   Hydraulic Institute standards (latest edition as adopted by
service provider);
         j.   Great Lakes-Upper Mississippi River board of state and provincial
public health and environmental managers standards for wastewater facilities
(ten state standards) (latest edition as adopted by service provider).
      12.   Controls: All controls and telemetry shall be above surface grade
in suitable lockable and vandal proof housings. Wastewater pump activation
shall be by SCADA pack control and transducer with high level backup float.
      13.   Alarms: Alarm system shall be of a radio telemetry type and shall
include a sending unit at the lift station and a receiving unit at a designated
facility. The telemetry system shall be compatible and of like type with those
units presently in use at the wastewater reclamation facility or as determined
by the service provider. As a minimum, the following alarms shall be provided:
         a.   High wet well;
         b.   Flooded dry well;
         c.   Loss of power;
         d.   Loss of seal water;
         e.   Wastewater pump failure (by check valve limit switch in addition
to motor overload);
         f.   Low level;
         g.   Generator status.
      14.   Electrical Components: In addition to the requirements of NFPA 820
and the national electric code, electrical enclosures shall be NEMA 4X,
stainless steel out of doors and NEMA 4X fiberglass in dry wells and wet wells
as a minimum. Conduits and boxes located in wet wells shall be PVC coated.
      15.   Land: Suitable land area for the lift station installation and
operation including access shall be provided by dedication to the service
provider. (Ord. 506, 1-18-2007)
9.07.04: BACKFLOW PREVENTION1:
   A.   Type Of Protection Required2: The type of protection that shall be
provided to prevent backflow into the approved water supply shall be
commensurate with the degree of hazard that exists on the consumer's premises.
The minimum types of backflow protection required to protect the approved water
supply, at the user's water connection are given in NAC 445(a), or local
ordinances. Situations which are not covered in the table shall be evaluated on
a case by case basis and the appropriate backflow protection shall be
determined by the service provider.
   B.   Backflow Prevention Assemblies:
      1.   Approved Backflow Prevention Assemblies:
         a.   Only backflow prevention assemblies which have been approved by
the Foundation for Cross Connection Control and Hydraulic Research (FCCCHR)
shall be acceptable for installation by a water user connected to the service
provider's potable water system.
      2.   Backflow Prevention Assembly Installations:
         a.   Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in a manner
prescribed in the standard details. Location of the assemblies shall be as
close as is practical to the user's connection, or at a location approved by
the service provider. The service provider shall have the final authority in
determining the required location of a backflow prevention assembly. There
shall be no connections between the meter and the backflow device.
            (1) Air Gap Separation (AG): The air gap separation shall be
located on the user's side of and as close to the service connection as is
practical. All piping from the service connection to the receiving tank shall
be above grade and be entirely visible. No water use shall be provided from any
point between the service connection and the air gap separation. The water
inlet piping shall terminate a distance of at least two (2) pipe diameters from
the supply inlet, but in no case less than one inch (1") above the overflow rim
of the receiving tank.
            (2) Reduced Pressure Principle Backflow Prevention Assembly (RP):
The approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly shall be
installed on the user's side of the service connection. The assembly shall be
installed in accordance with the standard details. The assembly shall be
installed so that it is readily accessible for maintenance and testing. Water
supplied from any point between the service connection and the RP assembly
shall be protected in a manner approved by the service provider. Freeze
protection may be required.
            (3) Double Check Valve Assembly (DC): The approved double check
valve assembly shall be located on the user's side of the connection, and in a
manner where it is readily accessible for testing and maintenance. If a double
check valve assembly is put below grade it must be installed in accordance with
the standard detail.
      3.   Backflow Prevention Assembly Testing And Maintenance:
         a.   The owners of any premises on which, or on account of which,
backflow prevention assemblies are installed, shall have the assemblies tested
by a current AWWA backflow tester. Backflow prevention assemblies must be
tested at least annually and immediately after installation, relocation or
repair. The service provider may require a more frequent testing schedule. No
assembly shall be placed back in service unless it is functioning as required.
A report in a form acceptable to the service provider must be filed with the
service provider each time an assembly is tested, relocated, or repaired. These
assemblies shall be serviced, overhauled, or replaced whenever they are found
to be defective and all costs of testing, repair, and maintenance shall be
borne by the water user.
         b.   The service provider may supply affected water users with a list
of persons acceptable to the service provider to test backflow prevention
assemblies. The service provider shall notify affected customers by mail when
annual testing of an assembly is required and also supply users with the
necessary forms which must be filled out each time an assembly is tested or
repaired.
         c.   Upon request the service provider may test a water user's
backflow prevention assembly to fulfill the requirements of this section. The
water user shall be charged for the test and any maintenance found necessary to
keep the assembly in working order on the next regular water bill.
      4.   Backflow Prevention Assembly Removals:
         a.   Approval must be obtained from the service provider before a
backflow prevention assembly is removed, relocated, or replaced.
            (1) Removal: The use of an assembly may be discontinued and the
assembly removed from service upon presentation of sufficient evidence to the
service provider to verify that a hazard no longer exists or is not likely to
be created in the future.
            (2) Relocations: An assembly may be relocated, following
confirmation by the service provider that the relocation shall continue to
provide the required protection and satisfy installation requirements. A retest
shall be required following the relocation of the assembly.
            (3) Repair: An assembly may be removed for repair, provided the
water use is either discontinued until repair is completed and the assembly is
returned to service, or the service connection is equipped with other backflow
protection approved by the service provider. A retest shall be required
following the repair of the assembly.
            (4) Replacements: An assembly may be removed and replaced provided
the water use is discontinued until the replacement assembly is installed. All
replacement assemblies must be approved by the service provider and must be
commensurate with the degree of hazard involved, and be approved by FCCCHR. A
test shall be required following the replacement of the assembly.
   TABLE 1   TYPE OF BACKFLOW PROTECTION REQUIRED
 
RP   =   Reduced preRPDA   =   RP detector assembly
DC   =   Double checDCDA   =   Double check detector assembly
AG   =   Air gap    PVB      =   Pressure vacuum breaker
 
Degree Of Hazard  Minimum Type Of Backflow Prevention
                                                                                         Minimum
Degree Of Hazard                                                                         Type Of
                                                                                         Backflow
                                                                                         Prevention
1.   Autopsy facilities                                                              RP
2.   Auxiliary water systems. Defined as any water supply on, or available to, a     RP
customer's premises other than an approved public water system
3.   Beverage bottling plants                                                        RP
4.   Breweries                                                                       RP
5.   Buildings:                                                                       
   a.   Hotels, apartment houses, public and private buildings, or structures, wh RP
sewage pumps and/or sewage ejectors have been installed
   b.   Any commercial structure in which the specific business activity cannot b RP
ascertained
   c.   Multi-storied buildings that use booster pumps or elevated storage tanks  DC
distribute potable water within the premises
6.   Chemical plants. Any premises, served from a public water supply, where there is
a facility requiring the use of water in the industrial process of manufacturing,
storing, compounding or processing chemicals                                            RP
 
This shall also include facilities where chemicals are used as additives to the water
supply or in the processing of products
7.   Chemically contaminated water system on any premises, served from a public water
supply, where chemicals are used as additives to the water supply, or where the water   RP
supply is used for transmission or distribution of chemicals, or where chemicals are
used with water in the compounds or processing of products
8.   Cold storage plants                                                             RP
9.   Convalescent homes                                                              RP
10.   Dental clinics                                                                 RP
11.   Dry cleaning facilities                                                        RP
12.   Dye works                                                                      RP
13.   Film processing facilities or film manufacturing plants                        RP
14.   Fire protection systems that are supplied from a public water system:           
   a.   Low hazard fire protection system:                                         
      (1)   Premises where the fire system is directly supplied from a public water
system and there is an unapproved auxiliary water supply on or to the premises (not     RPDA
interconnected)
      (2)   Premises where the fire system is supplied from a public water system and
where either elevated storage tanks or fire pumps which take suction from private       RPDA
reservoirs or tanks are used
   b.   High hazard fire protection systems:                                       
      (1)   Fire protection system is supplied from a public water system and  RPDA
interconnected with an unapproved auxiliary water supply
      (2)   Fire protection system is supplied from a public water system, and RPDA
contains any hazardous substance
15.   Hospitals                                                                      RP
16.   Ice manufacturing plants                                                       RP
17.   Irrigation systems:                                                             
   a.   Premises or locations where facilities have been installed for pumping,   RP
injecting or spreading fertilizers, pesticides or other hazardous substances
   b.   All other irrigation systems shall be equipped with an approved vacuum br PVB or RP
installed on the discharge side of each of the last valves
18.   Laboratories. Including, but not limited to, teaching institutions, biological RP
and analytical facilities
19.   Laundries (commercial)                                                         RP
20.   Medical buildings and clinics                                                  RP
21.   Metal manufacturing, cleaning, processing or fabricating plant                 RP
22.   Morgues                                                                        RP
23.   Mortuaries                                                                     RP
24.   Food establishments                                                            RP
25.   Oil/gas production, storage or transmission premises                           RP
26.   Paper and paper products manufacturing plants                                  RP
27.   Plastic manufacturing, extruding and injection molding (see chemical plants)   RP
28.   Plating plants                                                                 RP
29.   Portable spray or cleaning equipment which can be connected to a public water  AG
system
30.   Radioactive materials or substances. Plants or facilities that process, handle RP
or store radioactive materials or substances
31.   Reclaimed water distribution systems:                                           
   a.   Premises where the public water system is used to supplement the reclaime AG
water system
   b.   Premises where reclaimed water is used and there is not interconnection w RP
the potable water system
32.   Rubber manufacturing plants, natural or synthetic                              RP
33.   Sand and gravel plants                                                         RP
34.   Solar heating systems. Solar collector system which contains any hazardous
substance and where there is a direct makeup water connection to the public water       RP
system
35.   Tank trucks                                                                    AG
36.   Vehicle washing facilities                                                     RP
37.   Veterinary clinics                                                             RP
38.   Automotive shops                                                               RP
 
Plants, facilities or situations which are not listed in this section shall be
evaluated on a case by case basis and the appropriate type of protection shall
be determined by the service provider. (Ord. 506, 1-18-2007)
Plants, facilities or situations which are not listed in this section shall be
evaluated on a case by case basis and the appropriate type of protection shall
be determined by the service provider. (Ord. 506, 1-18-2007)
9.07.05: GREASE INTERCEPTION AND TRASH CONTAINMENT:
   A.   Policy and procedure for approval of grease interceptors and trash
containment drain systems related to food service establishments is presented
in this section.
   B.   All new food service establishments or those being remodeled are
required to:
      1.   Install a grease interceptor sized in accordance with the uniform
plumbing code, appendix H, but must be a minimum of seven hundred fifty (750)
gallons;
      2.   Submit plumbing plans depicting all sewer lines discharging to or
bypassing the grease interceptor; and
      3.   Submit, in writing, to the service provider, all calculations
required by the uniform plumbing code, appendix H, for sizing of the
interceptor as prepared by a Nevada licensed civil engineer.
   C.   Grease interceptors must be easily accessible at all times. If the
interceptor is placed in a drive-through lane, it is the owner's responsibility
to stop the flow of traffic during the inspection. This will be a condition of
the owner's industrial wastewater discharge permit.
   Note: Garbage disposals are prohibited in food establishments.
   D.   All new food establishments are required to install a floor drain in
the outside trash containment pad for cleanup purposes and must comply as
follows:
      1.   This drain must discharge to an approved grease interceptor.
      2.   Plans must reflect proper design and grading to ensure that only the
containment pad area water is captured by this floor drain.
      3.   The design must ensure that surface drainage (i.e., storm water or
irrigation runoff) from other areas does not discharge to this floor drain.
      4.   The pad cannot exceed six hundred (600) square feet unless it is
covered.
      5.   Design of this drainage system must be reviewed and approved by the
service provider.
      6.   During abnormally high precipitation or flooding, it is the owner's
responsibility to temporarily block this drain. This will be a condition of the
owner's industrial wastewater discharge permit.
      7.   It is the applicant's responsibility to ensure grading is completed
per the approved plans. Corrections due to construction errors are the
responsibility of the applicant and must be completed as a condition of the
industrial wastewater discharge permit.
   E.   The applicant shall submit plans to the building department and the
local service provider. Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the
applicant shall comply with the conditions of this policy. (Ord. 506, 1-18-
2007)
9.07.06: SAND/OIL INTERCEPTION AND CONTAINMENT:
   A.   Policy and procedure for approval of sand/oil interceptors and
secondary containment: The statement of this policy and procedure pertains to
applicants requesting building permits regarding any business utilizing wash
pads or having the potential to discharge petroleum products or excessive
suspended solids to the public sewer system.
      1.   It is the applicant's responsibility to ensure grading is completed
per the approved plans. Corrections due to construction errors are the
responsibility of the applicant and must be completed as a condition of the
industrial wastewater discharge permit.
   B.   The applicant shall submit plans to the building department and the
local service provider. Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the
applicant shall comply with the conditions of this policy. (Ord. 506, 1-18-
2007)
9.07.07: INDUSTRIAL PRETREATMENT PROGRAM1:
An industrial wastewater discharge permit is issued to each business which
prohibits the discharge of pollutants in excess of federally approved,
technically based local limits. The service provider samples wastewater from
these businesses to determine if they are in compliance with the permit
conditions. Enforcement actions are taken when necessary in accordance with the
federally approved emergency response plan and emergency response guide.
Authority for these actions are provided in this code, through NDEP and 40 CFR.
In addition to this program, is the requirement for, and enforcement of,
secondary containment. Any business that stores a product, new or used, that
has the potential to contaminate soil or ground water must provide a secondary
containment system that will prevent any leak or spill from adversely impacting
the environment. (Ord. 506, 1-18-2007)
9.07.08: WELLHEAD PROTECTION:
All new construction shall comply with the requirements of the Lyon County
wellhead protection ordinance. Examples of certain uses not permitted within
one hundred fifty feet (150') of a public wellhead supplying potable water to
the public water supplies are as follows:
Uses permitted within one hundred fifty feet (150') of a public wellhead shall
be limited to necessary public water supply wellhead equipment including the
following: wellhead facility buildings, water storage tanks, disinfection and
treatment equipment, disinfection and treatment chemical storage and approved
landscaping. All other uses shall be prohibited including, but not limited to:
   A.   Manufacturing or industrial businesses involving the collection,
handling, manufacture, use, storage, transfer or disposal of any hazardous
solid or liquid material or waste having a potential impact on ground water
quality that would change ground water quality to below state drinking water
quality standards, and any land use activities posing a hazard or contamination
threat to existing ground water quality.
   B.   Sewer lines, septic tanks, drain fields or the disposal of waste oil,
oil filters, tires and all other petroleum products.
Exceptions may be allowed upon issuance of a special use permit. (Ord. 506, 1-
18-2007)
ARTICLE A. WELLHEAD PROTECTION PROGRAM
SECTION:
9.07A.01: Short Title And Purpose
9.07A.02: Definitions
9.07A.03: Establishment Of Wellhead Protection Overlay District
9.07A.04: Permitted And Prohibited Uses Within Zone I Of The Wellhead
Protection Area
9.07A.05: Notice Of Proposed Action To Operator Of Public Water System
9.07A.06: Proposed Land Uses Within Zone II Of The Wellhead Protection Area
9.07A.07: Nonconforming Uses
9.07A.08: Enforcement
9.07A.09: Amendments
9.07A.01: SHORT TITLE AND PURPOSE:
   A.   This article shall be known as the WELLHEAD PROTECTION ORDINANCE.
   B.   It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety,
and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to
contamination of the public water supply, and to formalize ground water
protection procedures. Specific goals are to:
      1.   Protect human life and health;
      2.   Ensure that the public is provided with a sustainable safe potable
water supply;
      3.   Minimize expenditure of public money for pollution remediation
projects;
      4.   Clarify regulations on land use; and
      5.   Minimize business interruptions. (Ord. 506, 1-18-2007)
9.07A.02: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings given in this section:
COMMUNITY WATER SYSTEM: A public system, which serves at least fifteen (15)
service connections used by year round residents or regularly serves at least
twenty five (25) year round residents.
COMMUNITY WELLHEAD: The upper terminal of a well, including adapters, ports,
seals, valves and other appurtenances.
CONTAMINANT: An undesirable substance not normally present, or an undesirably
high concentration of a naturally occurring substance.
FACILITY: Any business or corporation that is built, installed, or established
to serve a particular purpose.
HAZARDOUS WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITY: A hazardous waste treatment, storage, or
disposal facility, that receives hazardous material as described in part 40
chapter 260.1 of the code of federal regulations.
HAZARDOUS WASTE OR MATERIAL: Any waste or material, which because of its
quantity, concentration, physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may:
   A.   Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an
increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness; or
   B.   Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or to
the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or
otherwise managed; or
   C.   Any material or substance designated as a hazardous or toxic substance
defined by title 40 part 261.3 of the code of federal regulations, or any
material or substance designated as a hazardous or toxic substance by the state
of Nevada, acting through the division of environmental protection or any
successor agency.
NONCOMMUNITY WATER SYSTEM: A public water system that is not a community water
system.
PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM: A system that provides the public with piped water for
human consumption, if such system has at least fifteen (15) service connections
or regularly serves an average of at least twenty five (25) individuals daily
at least sixty (60) days out of the year. Such term includes:
   A.   Any drinking water source procurement, pumping, treatment, storage, and
distribution facilities under control of the operator of such system, and used
primarily in connection with such system; and
   B.   Any drinking water source procurement, pumping or pretreatment storage
facilities not under such control that are used primarily in connection with
such system.
A public water system is either a "community water system" or a "noncommunity
water system".
TIME OF TRAVEL DISTRICTS (TOT): The time required for a water molecule or
contaminant to move through an aquifer from a specific point to a well or
spring.
UNDERGROUND INJECTION WELL: A well that is used for or intended to be used for
the subsurface emplacement of fluids.
   A.   A bored, drilled or driven shaft whose depth is greater than the
largest surface dimension; or
   B.   A dug hole whose depth is greater than the largest surface dimension;
or
   C.   An improved sinkhole; or
   D.   A subsurface fluid distribution system.
WELL: A penetration in the ground made for the purpose of measuring, testing or
sampling the underground strata or producing ground water. The term includes a
water well, monitoring well or exploratory well; or any excavation or
artificial opening into the ground, which provides an unnatural conduit for
fluids to migrate to the water table.
WELLHEAD PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT: A land use designation on the land use
map, or a zoning designation on a zoning map, that modifies the basic
underlying designation in some specific manner. The wellhead protection overlay
district map will define specific area districts that delineate the surface and
subsurface area surrounding a drinking water well or well field. The map is
delineated using methods established in the NDEP, "Wellhead Protection Program
Guide".
WELLHEAD PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT I: Per NAC 444.792 and/or Nevada Revised
Statutes 439.200, 444.650, a minimum fixed radius extending no less than one
hundred fifty feet (150') from the wellhead supplying potable water to the
public water supplies.
WELLHEAD PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT II: A ten (10) year or twenty (20) year,
whichever is greater, time of travel district (TOT) as defined in this section,
and as defined in the public water system's approved or endorsed wellhead
protection program, recognized by the state of Nevada's wellhead protection
program, administered by the Nevada division of environmental protection. (Ord.
506, 1-18-2007)
9.07A.03: ESTABLISHMENT OF WELLHEAD PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT:
There is hereby established a wellhead protection overlay district identified
and described as all the area within the ten (10) year or twenty (20) year TOT
district around public water supplies as shown on the official zoning map. It
is further established that these areas be composed of two (2) districts,
"wellhead protection overlay district I" and "wellhead protection overlay
district II", as they are defined in this article. The board of commissioners
may record with the county recorder's office a metes and bounds description of
the wellhead protection overlay district. (Ord. 506, 1-18-2007)
9.07A.04: PERMITTED AND PROHIBITED USES WITHIN ZONE I OF THE WELLHEAD
PROTECTION AREA:
   A.   Permitted Uses: Uses permitted within zone I shall be limited to
necessary public water supply wellhead equipment including the following:
Approved landscaping.
Disinfection and treatment chemical storage.
Disinfection and treatment equipment.
Water storage tanks.
Wellhead facility buildings.
   B.   Prohibited Uses: All other uses shall be prohibited including, but not
limited to:
Any land use activities posing a hazard or contamination threat to existing
ground water quality.
Disposal of waste oil, oil filters, tires and all other petroleum products.
Drain fields.
Manufacturing or industrial businesses involving the collection, handling,
manufacture, use, storage, transfer or disposal of any hazardous solid or
liquid material or waste having a potential impact on ground water quality that
would change ground water quality to below state drinking water quality
standards.
Septic tanks.
Sewer lines.
Exceptions may be allowed upon issuance of a special use permit. The planning
commission may instigate a special use permit process during the application
review process. (Ord. 506, 1-18-2007)
9.07A.05: NOTICE OF PROPOSED ACTION TO OPERATOR OF PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM:
Whenever there is a request that requires a special use permit from the
planning commission for land lying within a wellhead protection district,
written notice no less than thirty (30) days before the hearing shall be given
to all entities operating a public or community water supply system within that
overlay district. The planning commission may require a granting of easements
for monitoring wells if the commission deems it appropriate for protection of
the public water supply. (Ord. 506, 1-18-2007)
9.07A.06: PROPOSED LAND USES WITHIN ZONE II OF THE WELLHEAD PROTECTION AREA:
Upon requesting a permit for land use or development within the wellhead
protection overlay district II, applicants will be informed by the permitting
agency regarding the goals of the wellhead protection plan for the associated
PWS. The permitting agency must promptly send a copy of the application to the
PWS. The PWS will then be allowed thirty (30) days to respond to the proposed
development or land use as they pertain to the goals stated in their wellhead
protection program. The PWS may then request more detailed information or
submit a nonbinding advisory statement detailing any suggested restrictions,
modifications and/or justification for denial or approval of the permit. (Ord.
506, 1-18-2007)
9.07A.07: NONCONFORMING USES:
Any legal use existing at the time of the adoption of this article and listed
as a prohibited use herein, shall become a legal nonconforming use and is
required to conform to this article upon any change or transfer of ownership or
upon expansion or improvement except as otherwise provided in the zoning
ordinance. (Ord. 506, 1-18-2007)
9.07A.08: ENFORCEMENT:
It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, government entity or business
to occupy or use the land within the area designated in the wellhead protection
overlay district of zones I, and/or II, contrary to, or in violation of, any of
the provisions of this article and/or adopted water quality legislation and
pursuant to regulations to protect ground water from potential contaminant
sources as identified in various chapters of the Nevada administrative code.
(Ord. 506, 1-18-2007)
9.07A.09: AMENDMENTS:
Proposed amendments will require advance notice to all entities operating
public or community water supplies that this article affects. (Ord. 506, 1-18-
2007)
CHAPTER 8
APPRAISER SELECTION
SECTION:
9.08.01: Purpose, Interpretation And Application
9.08.02: Appraisals Required
9.08.03: Exceptions
9.08.04: List Of Qualified Appraisers
9.08.05: Qualifications Of Appraisers
9.08.06: Selection And Appointment Of Appraisers
9.08.07: Severability Provision
9.08.08: Sunset Provision
9.08.01: PURPOSE, INTERPRETATION AND APPLICATION:
As required by state law Nevada Revised Statutes 244.2795, the board of county
commissioners establishes these procedures for creating or amending a list of
appraisers qualified to conduct appraisals of real property owned by the county
and offered for sale or lease by the board. This list may also be used to
select an appraiser required for the County to purchase property, as set forth
in NRS 244.275(2).
This chapter does not create a legal right, including but not limited to a
property or other constitutional right, to be placed upon the established
appraiser lists or to be awarded a contract for professional services. (Ord.
619, 9-2-2021)
9.08.02: APPRAISALS REQUIRED:
Before the county may sell or lease county-owned property, the county manager
or a department head authorized by the board to negotiate to sell or lease the
property must obtain two appraisals prepared by appraisers selected from a list
established by section
9.08.04. The selection and appointment of appraisers shall be according to the
procedure established pursuant to section
9.08.06. The qualifications of the appraisers shall be determined pursuant to
9.08.05.
If the board of county commissioners holds a public hearing on the matter of
the fair market value of the real property, one independent appraisal of the
real property is sufficient before selling or leasing it.
Before the county may purchase real property, the value of the same shall be
appraised and fixed by one or more competent real estate appraisers selected by
the board from the list of appraisers established pursuant to
9.08.04. The selection and appointment of appraisers shall be according to the
procedure established pursuant to section
9.08.06. The qualifications of the appraisers shall be determined pursuant to
9.08.05.
Purchases of real property from other federal, state or local governments are
exempt from such requirement of appraisement.
The appraisal or appraisals, as applicable, must have been prepared not more
than 6 months before the date on which the real property is purchased or
offered for sale or lease.
If two or more independent appraisals are obtained, the value is determined by
the average of the appraisals of the real property. (Ord. 619, 9-2-2021)
9.08.03: EXCEPTIONS:
This ordinance applies except as otherwise provided in NRS 244.189, 244.276,
244.279, 244.2815, 244.2825, 244.2833, 244.2835, 244.284, 244.287, 244.290,
278.479 to 278.4965, inclusive, and subsection 3 of NRS 496.080, except as
otherwise required by federal law, except as otherwise required pursuant to a
cooperative agreement entered into pursuant to NRS 277.050 or 277.053 or an
interlocal agreement in existence on or before October 1, 2004, except if the
board of county commissioners is entering into a joint development agreement
for real property owned by the county to which the board of county
commissioners is a party, except for a lease of residential property with a
term of 1 year or less, except for the sale or lease of real property to a
public utility, as defined in NRS 704.020, to be used for a public purpose,
except for the sale or lease of real property to the State or another
governmental entity and except for the sale or lease of real property larger
than 1 acre which is approved by the voters at a primary or general election or
special election. (Ord. 619, 9-2-2021)
9.08.04: LIST OF QUALIFIED APPRAISERS:
A list of appraisers will be established by the board as follows:
   A.    The county manager will send notice to the current certified general
appraisers with offices in Lyon County, NV and immediately surrounding
counties, requesting a response with their qualifications if they are
interested in providing appraisals for the purchase by Lyon County, or sale or
lease of real property owned by Lyon County.
   B.   The county manager will review and compile a list of qualified
appraisers and organize it in random order.
   C.   After an appraiser has completed an appraisal, the appraiser will be
added to the bottom of the list.
   D.   The list may be amended by the county manager to remove names on
written request from the appraiser, on information received from the state of
Nevada that the appraiser is no longer active, or on the board's determination
that there is a basis for removal.
Any appraiser, having Nevada General Appraiser Certification issued by the Real
Estate Division, may request to be included in a list of qualifies appraisers.
Determination of the qualifications of such appraisers will be conducted
pursuant to section 9.08.05. (Ord. 619, 9-2-2021)
9.08.05: QUALIFICATIONS OF APPRAISERS:
The board of county commissioners hereby establishes the following criteria to
be used in determining the qualifications of appraisers. These criteria shall
include, but are not limited to, the following:
   A.   Possession of Nevada General Appraiser Certification issued by the Real
Estate Division;
   B.   Years of experience in appraising real property in Nevada;
   C.   Description of previous projects similar in size and scope to the
particular assignment;
   D.   Professional expertise, based on a resume of qualifications,
certifications and professional expertise of the person performing the work;
   E.   Appraiser's current workload to determine ability to perform the work
required for the particular project;
   F.   Competitiveness of fees;
   G.   Ability to obtain professional liability insurance as required by the
county;
   H.   Willingness to indemnify the county for errors, omissions and
negligence; Lack of any conflict of interest as specified in Section
9.08.06; and
   I.   Any other criteria deemed appropriate under the circumstances of the
particular assignment. (Ord. 619, 9-2-2021)
9.08.06: SELECTION AND APPOINTMENT OF APPRAISERS:
The two appraisers at the top of the list will be chosen by the county manager
to appraise the property the county is intending to sell or lease. The one
appraiser at the top of the list will be chosen by the county manager to
appraise the property the county is intending to purchase. The appraisers
chosen must submit a proposal with a time frame of less than three months, a
fee quote, their qualification for the particular assignment and a statement
that they do not have a conflict in appraising the property.
A conflict is created when the appraiser or a person related to the appraiser
within the third degree of consanguinity or affinity has an interest in the
property or property adjoining the property to be appraised. If an appraiser
cannot meet these requirements the appraiser is considered not qualified for
the appraisal and the county manager may pick the next appraiser on the list.
An appraiser that is found not qualified for a job retains the same position on
the list for the next job. (Ord. 619, 9-2-2021)
9.08.07: SEVERABILITY PROVISION:
If any section of this ordinance or portion thereof is for any reason held
invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such
holding shall not invalidate the remaining parts of this ordinance. (Ord. 619,
9-2-2021)
9.08.08: SUNSET PROVISION:
This ordinance is effective until the date of repeal of the state law requiring
the board of county commissioners to obtain appraisals when purchasing or
offering any real property for lease or sale and to adopt an ordinance creating
a list of appraisers. (Ord. 619, 9-2-2021)
TITLE 10
RESERVED
TITLE 11
RESERVED
TITLE 12
RESERVED
TITLE 13
RESERVED
TITLE 14
COUNTY PARKS
CHAPTER 1
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
14.01.01: Definitions
14.01.01: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this title, unless the context otherwise requires, the words and
terms defined in this chapter have the meanings ascribed to them herein:
APPLICANT: A person or entity seeking a permit.
CAMPING: No person shall set up or leave equipment designed or intended for use
for sleeping in any county park except in areas designated and posted for that
purpose.
   A.   No person under the age of eighteen (18) may camp in any county park
unless accompanied by a parent or guardian or is part of a group permitted to
occupy a county park and is supervised by at least one responsible adult per
fifteen (15) juveniles.
DIRECTOR: The county manager and/or their designee.
FAIRGROUNDS: The Lyon County Fairgrounds.
OBSCENE: Has the meaning ascribed to that word in Nevada Revised Statutes
201.235(4).
OPEN SPACE: An area designated by the board that is typically used for
floodwater control, detention or storage and may also be designed and operated
as multipurpose recreational facilities.
PERMIT: A written authorization from the director, issued pursuant to the
provisions of this title, to conduct a special event in a county park.
PERMITTEE: A person or entity which has received a permit to conduct a special
event.
RANGE MASTER: A person designated by the director to supervise the safe
operation and use of a shooting facility, or, if no such person shall be
designated, the director.
SHOOTING FACILITY: An area designed and used for archery or sport shooting,
including, but not limited to, sport shooting that involves the use of rifles,
shotguns, pistols, silhouettes, skeet, trap, black powder or other similar
items.
SPECIAL EVENT: A group activity which is not normally conducted in the county
park system.
VANDALISM: Any wilful or intentional disruption, damage, removal, defacement,
or injury to any property in any county park. "Vandalism" does not include
maintenance of the county park system by employees or those contracted by the
county to perform such maintenance. (Ord. 498, 2-16-2006, eff. 3-13-2006; amd.
Ord. 587, 6-2-2016, eff. 6-22-2016)
CHAPTER 2
FIRES IN PARKS
SECTION:
14.02.01: Generally
14.02.02: Fire Danger
14.02.03: Fireworks
14.02.01: GENERALLY:
   A.   Only a person eighteen (18) years of age or older may light or maintain
a fire in a county park. Fires may only be lit and maintained in designated
areas, and only if means to extinguish the fire are readily available.
   B.   No person may leave a county park before extinguishing any fire which
he has built, lighted, or maintained in such a park, unless said fire is being
maintained by a person eighteen (18) years of age or older.
   C.   No person may leave a fire unattended within any county park. (Ord.
498, 2-16-2006, eff. 3-13-2006)
14.02.02: FIRE DANGER:
Upon existence of extreme fire danger, the director or his designee may
prohibit smoking or fires in designated areas within any county park, or may
close such areas to the public. (Ord. 498, 2-16-2006, eff. 3-13-2006)
14.02.03: FIREWORKS:
No person may possess, discharge, set off or cause to be discharged in or into
any portion of a county park any firecrackers, torpedoes, rockets, fireworks,
explosives, or other substance harmful to the life or safety of any person,
without written permission from the director. (Ord. 498, 2-16-2006, eff. 3-13-
2006)
CHAPTER 3
ANIMALS IN PARKS
SECTION:
14.03.01: Dogs
14.03.02: Other Animals
14.03.03: Exceptions
14.03.01: DOGS:
No person who owns, harbors, keeps, or who has possession, charge, care,
custody or control of any dog shall cause, permit, suffer, or allow such dog to
enter or remain in any park or portion thereof, unless the park or area has
been posted for such purpose.
In areas where dogs are allowed, all dogs must be licensed and have all tags
and vaccinations and meet any other requirements found in title 7, chapter 1,
"Animals And Animal Services", of this code. (Ord. 587, 6-2-2016, eff. 6-22-
2016)
14.03.02: OTHER ANIMALS:
Unless designated and posted for such purposes, no person shall ride, lead, or
keep any animal within a county park. (Ord. 498, 2-16-2006, eff. 3-13-2006)
14.03.03: EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   "Service animals", as the term is defined in Nevada Revised Statutes
426.097, and "service animals in training", as the term is defined in Nevada
Revised Statutes 426.099, are permitted in county parks.
   B.   The director may give written permission to a person or group to have
animals in a county park under circumstances that would otherwise constitute a
violation of this chapter. The permission is revocable in the discretion of the
director.
   C.   This chapter does not apply to the fairgrounds. (Ord. 498, 2-16-2006,
eff. 3-13-2006)
CHAPTER 4
MALICIOUS MISCHIEF
SECTION:
14.04.01: Vandalism
14.04.02: Park Signs
14.04.03: Historic Sites
14.04.04: Harming/Molesting Animals
14.04.05: Harming Plants
14.04.06: Littering
14.04.07: Firearms And Archery Devices
14.04.08: Noise
14.04.09: Disturbing The Peace And Trespassing
14.04.10: Obscene And Threatening Language
14.04.11: Disorderly Assembly
14.04.12: Nudity And Disrobing
14.04.13: Alcohol And Controlled Substances
14.04.14: Glass Containers
14.04.15: Smoking
14.04.16: Sewage
14.04.17: Games
14.04.18: Curfew
14.04.19: Disturbance Of Water Conduits
14.04.01: VANDALISM:
No person shall commit any act of vandalism in a county park. (Ord. 498, 2-16-
2006, eff. 3-13-2006)
14.04.02: PARK SIGNS:
   A.   No person may enter or remain in any county park unless he complies
with all officially posted signs and notices.
   B.   It shall be presumed, unless otherwise established by competent
evidence, that every sign in a county park is lawfully posted.
   C.   No person may disturb, alter, create or erect signs or marks of any
type within a county park without written permission from the director. (Ord.
498, 2-16-2006, eff. 3-13-2006)
14.04.03: HISTORIC SITES:
No person may knowingly and wilfully excavate, or remove, destroy, injure or
deface, any historic or prehistoric ruins, burial grounds, archeological or
paleontological site, or inscriptions on such sites, in any county park. (Ord.
498, 2-16-2006, eff. 3-13-2006)
14.04.04: HARMING/MOLESTING ANIMALS:
No person may molest, hunt, disturb, injure, trap, take, net, poison, harm or
kill any kind of animal or fish, or attempt to do so, except that fish may be
taken other than for commercial purposes in accordance with state fishing laws
and regulations.
Feeding of wild horses or livestock is prohibited. (Ord. 587, 6-2-2016, eff. 6-
22-2016)
14.04.05: HARMING PLANTS:
No person may wilfully or negligently pick, dig up, mutilate, destroy, injure,
disturb, move, molest, burn or carry away any tree, plant or portion thereof,
including foliage, flowers, berries, fruit, grass, turf, humus, shrubs, cones,
and deadwood, except in designated areas of county parks and with written
permission of the director. (Ord. 498, 2-16-2006, eff. 3-13-2006)
14.04.06: LITTERING:
   A.   No person may leave, deposit, drop, or scatter bottles, broken glass,
ashes, wastepaper, cans or other rubbish in any county park, except in a
receptacle designed for that purpose.
   B.   No person may import any rubbish, or import and deposit any rubbish,
into or in any county park from other places. (Ord. 498, 2-16-2006, eff. 3-13-
2006)
14.04.07: FIREARMS AND ARCHERY DEVICES:
   A.   Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person may discharge
any weapon from which a projectile may be propelled by means of explosive,
spring, gas, air, or other force in any county park or open space.
   B.   The provisions of this section relating to discharge of firearms do not
apply if the firearm or archery device is discharged:
      1.   At a designated shooting facility owned and operated by the county
and under the supervision and control of the range master at the facility,
      2.   By a peace officer while engaged in the performance of his official
duties, or
      3.   By hunters carrying shotguns in areas designated by the county as
waterfowl hunting areas along the Carson, Truckee or Walker Rivers, during the
Nevada state waterfowl hunting season. No shooting is allowed on such county
owned property above the high water mark of the river. Only shotguns may be
discharged in these areas. (Ord. 587, 6-2-2016, eff. 6-22-2016)
14.04.08: NOISE:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this code and in addition thereto, it is
unlawful for any person to permit or cause any noise, sound, music or program
to be emitted from any radio, tape player, tape recorder, record player, public
address system, CD player, television or other similar device outdoors on or in
any park, when such a noise, sound, music, or program emitted therefrom is
plainly audible at a distance of one hundred feet (100'). (Ord. 498, 2-16-2006,
eff. 3-13-2006)
14.04.09: DISTURBING THE PEACE AND TRESPASSING:
   A.   Disturbing The Peace: No person shall:
      1.   Operate any electrically powered or gasoline powered device in any
county park in such a manner as to disturb the peace in the park at any time,
unless permitted by the director, nor
      2.   Wilfully and maliciously disturb the peace or quiet of the park by
loud or unusual noises, or by tumultuous and offensive conduct, threatening,
traducing, quarreling, challenging to fight, or fighting.
   B.   Trespassing:
      1.   The director or his designee may order any person violating any
provision of this code, or any applicable city ordinance or state or federal
law to immediately leave the facility. Refusal or intentional failure to comply
with such an order shall constitute trespassing.
      2.   A person violating any provision of this title shall be ordered to
immediately cease the violation. Failure to comply with the order constitutes a
separate violation. (Ord. 498, 2-16-2006, eff. 3-13-2006)
14.04.10: OBSCENE AND THREATENING LANGUAGE:
No person may use threatening or obscene language or make threatening or
obscene gestures in any county park. (Ord. 498, 2-16-2006, eff. 3-13-2006)
14.04.11: DISORDERLY ASSEMBLY:
No person may conduct or participate in a disorderly assemblage. (Ord. 498, 2-
16-2006, eff. 3-13-2006)
14.04.12: NUDITY AND DISROBING:
No person may publicly appear nude or disrobe while in any county park. (Ord.
498, 2-16-2006, eff. 3-13-2006)
14.04.13: ALCOHOL AND CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES:
   A.   No person may possess any can, bottle, or other receptacle containing
any alcoholic beverage, which has been opened, or the seal broken, in any area
of a county park facility, which has been posted as a nonalcoholic area.
   B.   No person may possess or use any controlled substance if prohibited by
Nevada Revised Statutes chapter 453 in any county park facility. (Ord. 498, 2-
16-2006, eff. 3-13-2006)
14.04.14: GLASS CONTAINERS:
No person may bring a glass container into a county park, nor shall any person
possess a glass container in a county park, except those containers holding
foodstuffs or ingredients used in the preparation of a meal to be consumed in
the park site. (Ord. 498, 2-16-2006, eff. 3-13-2006)
14.04.15: SMOKING:
Smoking cigarettes, cigars, pipes, and other similar articles or devices is
permitted unless otherwise posted for a particular park or designated area of a
park. (Ord. 498, 2-16-2006, eff. 3-13-2006)
14.04.16: SEWAGE:
No person may deposit wastewater, sewage or effluent from sinks, portable
toilets or other plumbing fixtures directly upon or into the surface of the
ground or water in any county park. (Ord. 498, 2-16-2006, eff. 3-13-2006)
14.04.17: GAMES:
No person may play ball games, horseshoes, or participate in other similar
activities in county parks except in areas designated for such games. (Ord.
498, 2-16-2006, eff. 3-13-2006)
14.04.18: CURFEW:
   A.   The director may set a curfew for persons under eighteen (18) years of
age in any county park, upon finding that conditions therein are such as to
warrant special measures for the protection of juveniles and others, and for
the safety and welfare of the general public.
   B.   If a curfew has been set in accordance with this provision, no person
under eighteen (18) years of age may, during the curfew period, remain or be in
the park unless he is:
      1.   Accompanied by his parent or legal guardian, or
      2.   Part of a group permitted to occupy a county park and is supervised
by at least two (2) responsible adults per fifteen (15) juveniles or part
thereof. (Ord. 498, 2-16-2006, eff. 3-13-2006)
14.04.19: DISTURBANCE OF WATER CONDUITS:
Except for county employees in pursuit of their official duties, no person may
disturb the natural or artificially constructed conduits transporting water to
or within any county park. (Ord. 498, 2-16-2006, eff. 3-13-2006)
CHAPTER 5
VEHICLES
SECTION:
14.05.01: Operators
14.05.02: Registration
14.05.03: Speed Limit
14.05.04: Roads And Parking
14.05.05: Bicycles
14.05.06: Bike Trails
14.05.07: Skateparks
14.05.01: OPERATORS:
   A.   Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person may operate any
motor vehicle in any county park unless he complies with the general
requirements of Nevada Revised Statutes chapter 483, relating to licensing of
persons who operate motor vehicles.
   B.   In parks where the operation of ATVs is permitted, the director may
allow operation of ATVs in those county parks by persons who do not meet the
requirements contained in subsection A of this section. The nature and extent
of permitted operation of such vehicles by unlicensed operators shall be posted
in a conspicuous place at each affected park. Such permission may not extend to
any place subject to the provisions of Nevada Revised Statutes chapter 483.
(Ord. 498, 2-16-2006, eff. 3-13-2006)
14.05.02: REGISTRATION:
   A.   Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person may operate any
motor vehicle in any county park unless the vehicle is registered in compliance
with Nevada Revised Statutes chapter 482 relating to the registration of motor
vehicles.
   B.   In parks where the operation of ATVs is permitted, the director may
allow the operation of unregistered ATVs which are not registered in those
county parks. The nature and extent of permitted operation of such vehicles
shall be posted in a conspicuous place at each affected park. Such permission
may not extend to any place subject to the provisions of Nevada Revised
Statutes chapter 482. (Ord. 498, 2-16-2006, eff. 3-13-2006)
14.05.03: SPEED LIMIT:
No person may drive any motor vehicle within any county park at a speed greater
than:
   A.   Is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for traffic, pedestrians,
bicycles, weather conditions, illumination, and the surface and width of the
road; or
   B.   Fifteen (15) miles per hour, unless otherwise posted. (Ord. 498, 2-16-
2006, eff. 3-13-2006)
14.05.04: ROADS AND PARKING:
No person may drive, tow, ride, or park:
   A.   Any automobile, truck, trailer, bicycle, motorbike, or other vehicle in
a county park or open space, except on roads and parking areas provided for
such purposes, nor
   B.   Any type of motor vehicle on any walk, path, trail, bike path, service
road, or other area within a county park or open space, except where such areas
have been officially designated for use by motor vehicles,
   C.   Any vehicle left overnight at any park, open space or county owned
property will be subject to citation, towing and storage at the vehicle owner's
expense,
   D.   Motorized vehicles are not allowed beyond authorized parking or
designated areas in county parks, open space or county owned property unless
authorized by a county official and while on official county business. (Ord.
587, 6-2-2016, eff. 6-22-2016)
14.05.05: BICYCLES:
Operation of bicycles, scooters, skateboards, and other operator propelled
vehicle or device is permitted unless the director has determined that
conditions are unsafe for the operation of the vehicle or device, and has
issued and posted an order prohibiting such activity. (Ord. 498, 2-16-2006,
eff. 3-13-2006)
14.05.06: BIKE TRAILS:
No person may:
   A.   Unless given permission by the director, operate any motorized vehicle,
including, without limitation, motorcycles, trail bikes, or motorized bicycles
upon any bicycle trail except as necessary to cross a street, driveway, or
access road intersection, or
   B.   Hold any competitive event on any bicycle trail without authorization
from the director or ride a bicycle on a designated off street bicycle trail in
excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour, except during authorized competitive
events, or in a manner which is unsafe or which may be injurious to the rider
or other persons. (Ord. 498, 2-16-2006, eff. 3-13-2006)
14.05.07: SKATEPARKS:
No person shall:
   A.   Bring a motorized vehicle into a skatepark, or
   B.   Operate a motorized vehicle in a skatepark. (Ord. 498, 2-16-2006, eff.
3-13-2006)
CHAPTER 6
SPECIAL EVENTS
SECTION:
14.06.01: Application For Permit
14.06.02: Permit Required
14.06.03: Denial Of Permit
14.06.04: Issuance Of Permit; Revocation; Conditional Issuance
14.06.05: Concession Operation
14.06.06: Professional Filming
14.06.01: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
The director shall furnish and make available an application for a permit which
includes a list of the factors that are considered in deciding whether a permit
shall be issued and a list of any supporting documentation required prior to
the issuance of a permit. (Ord. 498, 2-16-2006, eff. 3-13-2006)
14.06.02: PERMIT REQUIRED:
A permit is required to hold a special event in a county park. The director may
approve and issue a permit for a special event, taking into account the
following factors:
   A.   The park facility requested for use, including the size of the park and
its location relative to other facilities and residential areas,
   B.   The number of persons expected to be in attendance,
   C.   The time of day the event is proposed to be held,
   D.   The nature, frequency, and duration of noise caused by the special
event,
   E.   The presence of restrooms and hand washing facilities, and the need for
additional facilities to accommodate the number of persons expected,
   F.   Whether there will be adequate parking for the event,
   G.   Whether alcohol will be served and/or sold,
   H.   Whether food will be served and/or sold,
   I.   Whether security will be required,
   J.   The risk of damage to the park,
   K.   Whether the applicant has obtained all relevant state and county
permits and/or licenses that are applicable including, without limitation:
      1.   Business licenses,
      2.   Sales tax permit,
      3.   Fire permit,
      4.   Health permit,
      5.   Street closure permit,
      6.   Liquor license,
      7.   Insurance. (Ord. 498, 2-16-2006, eff. 3-13-2006)
14.06.03: DENIAL OF PERMIT:
Should the director deny a permit for a special event, the director shall
furnish to the applicant a written statement setting forth the reasons for the
denial. Within thirty (30) days of denial of a special event permit the
permittee may appeal the decision to the board of county commissioners, who
shall determine compliance with the factors listed in section
14.06.02 of this chapter and sustain or overturn the action of the director as
warranted. (Ord. 498, 2-16-2006, eff. 3-13-2006)
14.06.04: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; REVOCATION; CONDITIONAL ISSUANCE:
   A.   A permit for a special event is revocable for cause, including, without
limitation, misrepresentation by the applicant, change in circumstances which
are relevant to the application or special event, inclement weather conditions
or risk of fire, or violations of park rules, county ordinances, or state laws
by permittee or person attending the special event.
   B.   A permit may be issued subject to certain conditions, clearly expressed
on the face of the permit. Such conditions shall be reasonably related to the
factors outlined for consideration in issuance of the permit. Failure to comply
with the conditions of the permit may be deemed an automatic revocation of the
permit, in the discretion of the director.
   C.   If the special event is likely to cause damage to the park, the
director may require that the permittee post a bond in favor of the county in
an amount of the expected damage as a condition of the permit.
   D.   All permits shall be subject to the condition that the permittee
indemnify and hold the county harmless for any and all liability that is
incurred in connection with the special event. (Ord. 498, 2-16-2006, eff. 3-13-
2006)
14.06.05: CONCESSION OPERATION:
No person may operate any concession or vending machine, engage in the business
of soliciting, selling or peddling any food or drink, distribute circulars,
peddle or vend any goods, wares, merchandise or services, or set up or use a
public address system in any county park without specific written authority
from the director. (Ord. 498, 2-16-2006, eff. 3-13-2006)
14.06.06: PROFESSIONAL FILMING:
No person may participate in motion picture filming or photography involving
the performance of a professional cast in any county park without written
permission from the director. (Ord. 498, 2-16-2006, eff. 3-13-2006)
CHAPTER 7
PARK FACILITIES
SECTION:
14.07.01: Payment For Use
14.07.02: Fees; How Established
14.07.03: Park Hours
14.07.01: PAYMENT FOR USE:
No person shall use, occupy or be within the boundaries of any facility for
which a fee has been established by the board of county commissioners, without
having first paid the required fee. (Ord. 498, 2-16-2006, eff. 3-13-2006)
14.07.02: FEES; HOW ESTABLISHED:
The director shall submit to the board of county commissioners a schedule which
defines categories and time limits of the use of facilities in the county park
system, and which sets forth proposed fees for each category of use. The
categories, time limits and fees shall become effective upon entry of an order
of the board of county commissioners and is subject to change by the board of
county commissioners from time to time. (Ord. 498, 2-16-2006, eff. 3-13-2006)
14.07.03: PARK HOURS:
The director may establish closing hours for county parks. Park closing times
shall be posted in a conspicuous place at each park unless written permission
has been given to extend the hours for a special event. (Ord. 498, 2-16-2006,
eff. 3-13-2006)
CHAPTER 8
PENALTY
SECTION:
14.08.01: Misdemeanor
14.08.02: Rules Adopted By Range Master
14.08.01: MISDEMEANOR:
A violation of any of the provisions contained in this title or in violation of
any issued permit or rule lawfully adopted by the director is hereby declared
to be a misdemeanor. (Ord. 498, 2-16-2006, eff. 3-13-2006)
14.08.02: RULES ADOPTED BY RANGE MASTER:
A violation of a rule lawfully adopted by the range master of any shooting
facility is hereby declared to be a misdemeanor. (Ord. 498, 2-16-2006, eff. 3-
13-2006)
TITLE 15
LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT CODE
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS; CONSISTENCY WITH MASTER PLAN
SECTION:
15.01.01: Title
15.01.02: Purpose
15.01.03: Conformance With Master Plan
15.01.04: Enactment
15.01.05: Interpretation, Conflict And Severability
15.01.06: Saving Provision
15.01.07: Effect Of This Title On Development Permits
15.01.08: Administration
15.01.09: Computation Of Time
15.01.10: Other Clarifications
15.01.11: Enforcement Authority
15.01.01: TITLE:
This title shall be known and may be cited in all proceedings as the LYON
COUNTY LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT CODE. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.01.02: PURPOSE:
The purposes of this title are to promote the public health, safety,
convenience and general welfare, to lessen traffic congestion in the streets,
to provide light and air for all buildings, to avoid undesirable concentration
of population, to prevent overcrowding of land and to facilitate adequate
provisions of transportation, water, sewage, schools, parks and other public
requirements and to provide the economic and social advantages gained from a
comprehensively planned use of land resources. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.01.03: CONFORMANCE WITH MASTER PLAN:
This title and the official zoning map of the County, as adopted, are declared
to conform to the master plan of the County pursuant to the provisions of
chapter 278, Nevada Revised Statutes. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.01.04: ENACTMENT:
To promulgate the Lyon County Comprehensive Master Plan, this title is adopted
and made effective as of November 1, 2018. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.01.05: INTERPRETATION, CONFLICT AND SEVERABILITY:
   A.   Minimum Requirements: In interpretation and application, provisions of
this title shall be held to be minimum provisions only for the promotion of
health, safety, convenience, property and general welfare of the public. It is
not intended that this title repeal or in any way interfere with existing law
or ordinances, regulations or permits other than those relating to land use and
construction and use of structures.
   B.   Conflicts With Other Laws And Agreements: When this title imposes a
greater restriction upon the use of land or upon height, bulk, location or use
of the buildings than is required by existing provisions of law or private
covenant or other restrictions, the provisions of this title shall prevail;
private covenants or deed restrictions which impose more restrictive conditions
than herein contained are not superseded by this title.
   C.   Similar Uses: The Director may authorize a use not specifically listed
within a zoning district if it is determined that the use is similar to other
uses permitted in the zoning district provided that the use is not specifically
listed in another zoning district, pursuant to section
15.221.01, "Determination On Unlisted Uses", of this title. (Ord. 603, 11-1-
2018)
15.01.06: SAVING PROVISION:
The provisions of this title shall not be construed as abating any action now
pending under, or by virtue of, prior existing land development regulations, or
as discontinuing, abating, modifying, or altering any penalty accruing or about
to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm, or corporation,
or as waiving any right of the County under any chapter or provision existing
at the time of adoption of these regulations, or as vacating or annulling any
rights obtained by any person, firm, or corporation, by lawful action of the
County except as shall be expressly provided for in these regulations. (Ord.
603, 11-1-2018)
15.01.07: EFFECT OF THIS TITLE ON DEVELOPMENT PERMITS:
   A.   Approved Development:
      1.   Development for which an application for conditional use permit,
variance, tentative parcel map, final parcel map, tentative subdivision map,
final subdivision map, tentative land division map or final land division map
has been finally approved and which approval remains valid on the effective
date of this title shall remain valid unless such approval expires by the terms
of the approval or in accordance with chapter 12 of this title. Development
which has been granted approval may be built in accordance with the development
standards in effect at the time of approval, provided that the approval is
valid at the time building permits are issued and that the approval is subject
to any time limits imposed pursuant to this title; further provided that any
subsequent applications for a development permit required by this title prior
to issuance of and including a building permit and certificate of occupancy
shall be processed in accordance with the procedures established by this title
for the processing of such development permit.
      2.   No provision of this title shall require any change in the plans,
permit expiration, construction or designated use of any structure for which a
building permit has been issued prior to the effective date of this title or
any subsequent amendment.
      3.   Any reapplication for an expired development permit must meet the
standards in effect at the time of reapplication.
   B.   Projects In Process: Development for which an application for a
development permit has been accepted as complete, but which has not been
granted final approval by the appropriate designated official prior to the
effective date of this title, shall be subject to the land use regulations,
standards for approval, and other requirements in effect at the time the
application was deemed complete; provided that any subsequent application for a
development permit required by this title prior to issuance of and including a
building permit and certificate of occupancy shall be processed in accordance
with the procedures established by this title for the processing of such
development permit. If approved, the development may be built in accordance
with the development standards in effect at the time of application, provided
that any design review filed subsequent to the issuance of a conditional use
permit or reapplication for an expired permit must meet the standards for
approval in effect at the time of application. This provision shall not apply
to any application for a master plan amendment or zoning map amendment.
   C.   New Applications: If no application for a development permit has been
accepted as complete and the development has received no more than approval of
a master plan map amendment or a zoning map amendment prior to the effective
date of this title, pending and subsequent applications for development
approval shall be subject to all requirements, standards and procedures set
forth in this title. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.01.08: ADMINISTRATION:
The Lyon County Community Development Director shall administer this title. For
the purposes of this title, the term "Director" means the Director of the
Community Development Department or the Director's designee, and the term
"department" means the Lyon County Community Development Department, unless
otherwise specified. The Director shall determine when any application is
complete.
In the event this title requires interpretation, the Director may make the
interpretation or refer the matter to the Planning Commission for action,
unless an alternative procedure for interpretation is proscribed in this title.
(Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.01.09: COMPUTATION OF TIME:
The time within which an act is to be performed shall be computed by excluding
the first day and including the last day. If the last day is a Saturday, Sunday
or legal holiday, the period runs until the next day which is not a Saturday,
Sunday, or legal holiday. The following time-related words shall have the
meanings ascribed below:
DAY: Means a calendar day unless otherwise stated.
WEEK: Means seven (7) calendar days.
MONTH: Means one calendar month.
YEAR: Means a calendar year, unless a fiscal year is indicated. (Ord. 603, 11-
1-2018)
15.01.10: OTHER CLARIFICATIONS:
The headings contained in this title are for convenience only and do not limit
or modify the intent or meaning of the provisions.
In case of any conflict between the text of this title and any figure, the text
shall control.
Unless clearly indicated to the contrary, words used in the present tense shall
include the future, words used in the plural shall include the singular, words
used in the singular shall include the plural and words of one gender shall
include the other.
The words "shall", "must", and "will" are always mandatory. The term "may" and
"should" are discretionary. Words and phrases shall be construed according to
the common and approved usage in the language, except for technical words and
phrases that may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning.
Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, conjunctions shall be
interpreted as follows:
AND: Indicates that all connected items or provisions apply.
OR: Indicates that the connected items or provisions may apply singularly or in
any combination.
Whenever reference is made to the head of a department or to some other County
officer or employee, the reference shall be construed as authorizing the head
of the department or other officer to designate, delegate to and authorize
subordinates to perform the required act or duty, unless expressly provided
otherwise.
All fractions of whole numbers are to be rounded to the nearest highest whole
number when the fraction is 0.5 or more, and to the next lowest whole number
when the fraction is less than 0.5, except as otherwise provided in this title.
(Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.01.11: ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY:
   A.   The Director is authorized to enforce all provisions of this title.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to interfere with the Director in the
performance of his duties. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
CHAPTER 2
CLASSIFICATION OF DEVELOPMENT PERMITS
SECTION:
15.02.01: Development Permits Required
15.02.02: Classification Of Development Permits Delineated
15.02.01: DEVELOPMENT PERMITS REQUIRED:
No development may be undertaken unless a development permit (defined to
include all building permits) is issued in accordance with the provisions of
this title. Development shall mean, except as otherwise provided in this title,
any of the following activities:
   A.   Filling, excavating, grading, paving, dredging, mining, mining
exploration, drilling or otherwise significantly disturbing the soil or land
form of a site with the exception of those activities associated with
cultivation of the land;
   B.   Building, installing, enlarging, replacing or substantially restoring a
structure or structural system or component, impervious surface, or water
management system and the storage of materials, except as otherwise exempted;
   C.   Erection of a sign except as otherwise exempted;
   D.   Alteration of a historic property for which authorization is required
under this title;
   E.   Changing the use of a site so that the requirement for parking is
increased;
   F.   Construction, elimination or alteration of a driveway onto a public
street. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.02.02: CLASSIFICATION OF DEVELOPMENT PERMITS DELINEATED:
Development permits shall be classified as zoning permits, land division
permits or building permits.
   A.   Zoning permits include approval of any of the following types of
development applications:
      1.   Master plan map amendment;
      2.   Master plan text amendment;
      3.   Zoning map amendment, including applications for Overlay District;
      4.   Zoning text amendment;
      5.   Specific plan;
      6.   Conditional use permit;
      7.   Design review;
      8.   Variance;
      9.   Modification (major or minor) to approved permit;
      10.   Planned development;
      11.   Home occupation permit;
      12.   Sign permit;
      13.   Temporary use permit;
      14.   Wireless communications facility permit; and
      15.   Floodplain development permit.
   B.   Land division permits include approval of any of the following types of
development applications:
      1.   Tentative or final subdivision map;
      2.   Tentative or final parcel map;
      3.   Tentative or final land map of division of land into large parcels;
      4.   Variances or exceptions to such maps;
      5.   Modifications (major and minor) to such maps;
      6.   Boundary line adjustment;
      7.   Reversions to acreage;
      8.   Amended map filings;
      9.   Extension of time;
      10.   Abandonment of right-of-way or public easement.
   C.   Building permits include approval of any of the following types of
development applications:
      1.   Building permit;
      2.   Site improvement permit;
      3.   Encroachment permit; and
      4.   Grading permit. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
CHAPTER 3
APPLICATION PROCESS AND OFFICIAL FILING DATE
SECTION:
15.03.01: Standardized Forms
15.03.02: Determination Of Complete Application
15.03.03: Lyon County Design Criteria And Improvement Standards
15.03.04: Processing Of Application And Report
15.03.05: Official Filing Date
15.03.01: STANDARDIZED FORMS:
Requests for development permits shall be made on applications provided by the
department. The County may promulgate submittal requirements, instructions for
completing forms, internal procedures for acceptance and filing of
applications, and provisions for waiver by administrative guideline. For
permits requiring a public hearing, the application shall include the names of
all owners and officers. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.03.02: DETERMINATION OF COMPLETE APPLICATION:
Within three (3) working days after an application for a zoning permit or a
land division permit has been received by the department, the Director must
determine whether the application is complete. If it is determined that the
application is not complete, written notice must be forwarded to the applicant
describing the additional information required. The Director may take no
further action on the application until the deficiencies are resolved. If the
Director fails to make a determination of completeness within three (3) working
days without the written concurrence of the applicant, the application is
deemed complete, provided that all applicable fees and taxes are paid in
accordance with section
15.17.02 of this title. A determination of completeness does not constitute a
determination of compliance with the substantive requirements of this title or
approval of the proposed development. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.03.03: LYON COUNTY DESIGN CRITERIA AND IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS:
Lyon County has adopted "Design Criteria and Improvement Standards" which
provide for minimum design specifications for development including, but not
limited to, subdivisions, streets, drainage, utilities, erosion control, fire
protection, lighting, landscaping, parking, etc. These standards must be
utilized in the design and installation of improvements for all divisions of
land and land development as defined in this title, and the County Engineer and
the Director shall insure that the applicant or developer is in compliance with
the design criteria and improvement standards. The standards are parallel in
authority to this title.
All development applications shall be in conformance with the adopted Lyon
County Design Criteria and Improvement Standards. The standards shall be
adopted, revised, and modified by resolution of the Lyon County Board of
Commissioners, the "Board". (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.03.04: PROCESSING OF APPLICATION AND REPORT:
Following the determination that a development application is complete or the
application is deemed complete under this title, the applicant shall tender the
applicable fees and taxes within five (5) business days of the determination of
completeness. The Director shall file the application, review it, forward it
for review to any agency, advisory body designated by this title, or Nevada
Revised Statutes, and prepare a report for the Planning Commission or Board, as
may be required, recommending approval, denial or continuance for redesign or
modification. The Director shall schedule the matter for public hearing or make
a final decision within the time and in the manner required by this title, the
Nevada Revised Statutes, or by administrative guidelines. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.03.05: OFFICIAL FILING DATE:
The time for processing applications for development permits or acting on
applications established by Nevada Revised Statutes or by this title shall
commence on the date that the application is deemed complete and the fees and
taxes are paid. The time-frames shall include, but shall not be limited to,
those established by Nevada Revised Statutes and this title, as may be amended.
Material modifications of any application by the applicant following the filing
of the application and prior to the expiration of the period during which the
County is required to take action shall extend the period for a like time
following the Director's determination that the modified application is
complete and the application is refiled. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
CHAPTER 4
DECISION BY THE DIRECTOR
SECTION:
15.04.01: Decision By Director
15.04.02: Notification Of Decision By Director
15.04.03: Appeal Of Decision By Director
15.04.01: DECISION BY DIRECTOR:
If this title delegates authority for making the final decision on a
development application to the Director, the Director shall review the complete
application, make necessary findings and render a decision on the application
within the time established for the specific application. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.04.02: NOTIFICATION OF DECISION BY DIRECTOR:
The Director shall notify the applicant of any decision on the development
application within three (3) working days of the decision. If the decision is
on a zoning permit application within an advisory board's boundary that the
advisory board has reviewed under section
15.05.01 of this title, a copy of the decision must be sent to the advisory
board at the same time. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.04.03: APPEAL OF DECISION BY DIRECTOR:
The decision of the Director regarding any development application may be
appealed to the appellate body in the manner and time-frame provided in section
15.11.02 of this title. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
CHAPTER 5
REVIEW BY CITIZEN ADVISORY BODY
SECTION:
15.05.01: Designation Of Citizen Advisory Body
15.05.02: Review And Recommendation By Advisory Body
15.05.03: Effect Of Action By Advisory Body
15.05.01: DESIGNATION OF CITIZEN ADVISORY BODY:
   A.   With the exception of home occupation permits, sign reviews, temporary
use permits, wireless communication facility permits, design review, boundary
line adjustments and records of survey, all applications for zoning permits and
tentative land division maps on any land within the established boundaries of
any citizen advisory board shall be forwarded for review by the advisory board,
prior to final action by the Director, Planning Commission or Board, as may be
required. Failure of a citizen advisory board to review an application prior to
consideration by the final decision-maker shall not constitute grounds for
appeal.
   B.   All applications for tentative or final land division map approval
shall be forwarded for review by the governmental entities required by Nevada
Revised Statutes 278, prior to final action by the Director, Planning
Commission or Board. Failure of a governmental entity to review an application
prior to consideration by the final decision-maker shall not constitute grounds
for appeal. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.05.02: REVIEW AND RECOMMENDATION BY ADVISORY BODY:
To have their comments considered by a decision-making body, the advisory body
must review and provide a written recommendation on any development
applications within its purview prior to the first scheduled public hearing on
the development application. Failure of advisory body to make a recommendation
may not operate to deprive an applicant of statutory rights, nor shall it delay
consideration by any other body charged by this title to act on an application.
(Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.05.03: EFFECT OF ACTION BY ADVISORY BODY:
All actions by advisory bodies in making a recommendation on any development
permit shall be deemed to be advisory and as evidence to be considered by the
final decision-maker. However, the record generated before an advisory body may
be considered by the decision-making body. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
CHAPTER 6
REVIEW AND DECISION BY PLANNING COMMISSION
SECTION:
15.06.01: Public Hearing And Recommendation By Planning Commission
15.06.02: Decision By Planning Commission
15.06.03: Notification Of Decision By Planning Commission
15.06.04: Appeal Of Decision By Planning Commission
15.06.01: PUBLIC HEARING AND RECOMMENDATION BY PLANNING COMMISSION:
Whenever the Planning Commission, the "commission", is required by Nevada
Revised Statutes or this title to make a recommendation to the Board concerning
an application for a development permit, the commission shall conduct a public
hearing, if required by this title, in accordance with the provisions of
chapter 10 of this title. The public hearing shall be held within the time
established by law. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.06.02: DECISION BY PLANNING COMMISSION:
Whenever the commission has been delegated as the final decision- making
authority for a development permit pursuant to this title, it shall approve,
conditionally approve, deny or continue the application at a public meeting,
following receipt of the report and recommendation of the Director. For an
approval, a majority of the Commissioners present must vote to approve the
item. A vote of less than a majority of the Commissioners present to approve or
a tie vote is considered a denial.
When considering adoption or amendment of the Master Plan, the commission shall
conduct all reviews, hearings and decision- making in conformance with the
provisions of this chapter and chapter 210 of this title.
When considering an appeal, the commission must, at a public meeting, decide
whether to affirm, reverse or modify only those items raised in the appeal,
following receipt of the report and recommendation of the Director and upon
consideration of the proceedings below. The commission may attach any
reasonably necessary conditions when approving a permit that was denied by the
Director or the final decision-maker. If a public hearing is required by this
title prior to decision, the hearing shall be noticed and conducted in the
manner provided in chapters 9 and 10 of this title. The public hearing shall be
held within the time established by law. The Director shall notify the
applicant of the decision of the commission, in writing, within three (3)
working days. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.06.03: NOTIFICATION OF DECISION BY PLANNING COMMISSION:
If the commission denies or conditionally approves the application, the
Director shall notify the applicant and Board of the commission's decision, in
writing, within three (3) working days of the decision and inform the applicant
of appeal rights and procedures. If the decision is on a zoning permit
application within an advisory board's boundary that the advisory board has
reviewed under section
15.05.01 of this title, a copy of the decision must be sent to the advisory
board at the same time. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.06.04: APPEAL OF DECISION BY PLANNING COMMISSION:
The decision of the commission regarding any development application may be
appealed to the appellate body in the manner and time-frame provided in section
15.12.02 of this title. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
CHAPTER 7
REVIEW AND DECISION BY BOARD OF COUNTY COMMISSIONERS
SECTION:
15.07.01: Review And Decision By Board
15.07.02: Review And Decision By Board On Appeal
15.07.01: REVIEW AND DECISION BY BOARD:
Whenever the Board is required by Nevada Revised Statutes or has reserved for
itself pursuant to this title the authority for final action upon a development
application, whether upon the recommendation of the Director or the commission,
the Board shall conduct a public hearing on the matter, in accordance with the
provisions of chapter 10 of this title. The public hearing shall be held within
the time established by law. If no public hearing is required, the Board shall
consider the matter at a regularly scheduled public meeting. Following the
conclusion of the public hearing, if required, the Board shall approve,
conditionally approve, deny or continue the application at a public meeting.
For an approval, a majority of all the Board members must vote to approve the
item. For purposes of this section, a public body may not count an abstention
as a vote in favor of an action. A vote of less than a majority to approve or a
tie vote is considered a denial. The applicant shall be notified by the
Director of the Board's decision in the manner provided in section
15.09.04 of this title. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.07.02: REVIEW AND DECISION BY BOARD ON APPEAL:
The Board, acting as the appellate body on an appeal of a decision of the
Director or the final decision maker, shall decide whether to affirm, reverse
or modify only those items raised in the appeal at a public meeting, following
receipt of the report and recommendation of the Director and upon consideration
of the proceedings below. The Board may attach any reasonably necessary
conditions when approving a permit that was denied by the Director or the final
decision-maker. If a public hearing is required by this title prior to
decision, the hearing shall be noticed and conducted in the manner provided in
chapters 9 and 10 of this title. If the Board denies the appeal, a written
statement setting forth the basis for its decision to deny the appeal shall be
prepared. The applicant shall be notified by the Director of the Board's
decision in the manner provided in section
15.09.04 of this title. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
CHAPTER 8
CONDITIONAL APPROVAL
SECTION:
15.08.01: Authority To Condition Development Permits
15.08.02: Record And Notification Of Conditions
15.08.03: Official Record Of Conditions
15.08.01: AUTHORITY TO CONDITION DEVELOPMENT PERMITS:
   A.   Whenever this title or Nevada Revised Statutes authorizes the Director,
the commission, Board, or other body to condition applications for development
permits, the official or entity, after review of the application and other
pertinent documents and any evidence made part of the record of the public
hearing, may, in addition to those conditions required for particular types of
development permits, impose additional conditions reasonably necessary to
assure the following:
      1.   Conformity with the goals and policies embodied in the master plan;
      2.   Standards which are generally or specially applicable to particular
uses including specific conditions relative to operation of the use;
      3.   Compatibility between the proposed development and adjacent
development and neighborhoods;
      4.   Preservation of the character and integrity of adjacent development
and neighborhoods; and
      5.   Protection of the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens
of the County.
   B.   Where additional conditions are imposed, the body imposing the
conditions shall make findings which embody the basic purpose of the conditions
placed on the application. The conditions imposed by recommendation of the
Director or commission may be modified subsequently by the final decision-maker
or by the appellate body upon appeal of those conditions. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.08.02: RECORD AND NOTIFICATION OF CONDITIONS:
The Director shall include a copy of the approved conditions with the record of
the decision which is filed with the Secretary of the final decision-maker and
the applicant as required by section
15.09.04 of this title. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.08.03: OFFICIAL RECORD OF CONDITIONS:
A copy of the Notice of Decision and all approved maps, plans, documents and
conditions shall be delivered to the County Recorder for recordation in the
official Lyon County records. The permittee shall pay all recording fees
assessed by the County Recorder. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
CHAPTER 9
NOTICE PROVISIONS
SECTION:
15.09.01: Published Notice
15.09.02: Personal Notice Of Public Hearing
15.09.03: Personal Notice Of Filings For Minor Variance And Design Review
Applications
15.09.04: Notification Following Decision
15.09.05: Notification Of Appeal Or Revocation
15.09.06: Costs Of Notice
15.09.01: PUBLISHED NOTICE:
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this title, in any instance in
which it is required by law that an advisory body, Director, the commission,
Board, or any other final decision- maker must hold a public hearing, a notice
setting forth the date, time, place and purpose of the hearing, the name of the
applicant, and identification of the subject property must be published once in
a newspaper of general circulation published in the County, at least ten (10)
days before the date set for the hearing. The notice shall be prepared by the
County. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.09.02: PERSONAL NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING:
   A.   Whenever personal notice of a public hearing is required by this title
or by chapter 278 of Nevada Revised Statutes, in addition to the notice
requirement of section
15.09.01 of this chapter, notice must be mailed, or if requested by a party,
provided by electronic means if the electronic notice can be sent and its
receipt can be verified by the County, at least ten (10) days prior to the
hearing to:
      1.   The applicant;
      2.   Any person who has filed a written request for the notice;
      3.   Surrounding property owners within a radius drawn from the perimeter
limits of the property that is subject of the application as follows:
         a.   All properties within three hundred feet (300') shall be
notified, or
         b.   To each owner of at least the thirty (30) parcels nearest to the
project parcel, as listed on the County Assessor's records, if it is a greater
number of parcels than required by subsection A3a of this section and to the
extent it does not duplicate notice given in subsection A3a of this section.
      4.   If a zone change, variance or conditional use permit is proposed
within three hundred feet (300') of a mobile home park, each tenant of the
mobile home park must be notified.
      5.   Any advisory board, which has been established for the affected area
by the Governing Body.
      6.   Where the site contains any type of conveyance ditch or easement,
notice shall be provided to any conveyance ditch user within Lyon County
adjacent to or downstream of the proposed map as determined from the list of
water right owners maintained by the State Engineer or Federal water master.
   B.   The notice must include the name of the applicant, the time, place and
purpose of the hearing and a physical description of, or map detailing the
proposed change of the property. The notice must include a section that an
owner of property may complete and return to the Governing Body to indicate his
approval of or opposition to the proposed amendment. The notice of zoning
permits must indicate the existing zoning designation, the proposed zoning
designation, and contain a brief summary of the intent of the change of the
property. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.09.03: PERSONAL NOTICE OF FILINGS FOR MINOR VARIANCE AND DESIGN REVIEW
APPLICATIONS:
Upon the filing of an application for a minor variance or design review,
excluding minor design review, the department shall send, by first class mail,
notice of the filing of an application to all contiguous property owners.
Contiguous for the purpose of this chapter includes those properties which
touch the parcel which is subject to the land use request including those which
would touch the property when projected across a public or private easement or
right-of-way. The notice shall contain a brief description of the request, the
location of plans for review and a deadline for comment. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.09.04: NOTIFICATION FOLLOWING DECISION:
Within five (5) working days of the date of the final decision- maker's
determination on the development application, written notification of the
action shall be mailed to the applicant, stating the action taken and including
all conditions imposed and times established for satisfaction of such
conditions, if any. If the final decision-maker denies the application, a
written statement setting forth the basis for that decision to deny the
application shall also be included. The record of the notification shall be
filed with the Clerk of the Board. If the decision is on a zoning permit
application within an advisory board's boundary that the advisory board has
reviewed under section
15.05.01 of this title, a copy of the decision must be sent to the advisory
board at the same time. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.09.05: NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL OR REVOCATION:
Whenever a notice of appeal is filed or whenever the County determines to
revoke a development permit obtained following a public hearing pursuant to
chapter 10 of this title, personal notice of the appeal or revocation shall be
prepared and made in the manner prescribed by section
15.09.03 of this chapter. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.09.06: COSTS OF NOTICE:
The applicant is responsible for providing the required mailing list, labels
and stamped envelopes, and for payment of any fee for the list and labels, for
any proposal requiring personal notice. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
CHAPTER 10
PUBLIC HEARING PROCEDURES
SECTION:
15.10.01: Setting Of The Hearing
15.10.02: Examination Of And Copying Of Documents
15.10.03: Conduct Of Hearing
15.10.04: Record Of Proceedings
15.10.05: Continuance Of Proceedings
15.10.01: SETTING OF THE HEARING:
When the Director determines that a development permit application is complete
and that a public hearing is required by this title, the place, date and time
for the required hearing shall be selected, and a notice of the hearing
pursuant to chapter 9 of this title prepared. The hearing shall be held as
provided by law, except where a written request for extension has been
submitted by the applicant and the extension is granted by the appropriate
body, or staff requested the continuance with the consent of the applicant.
(Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.10.02: EXAMINATION OF AND COPYING OF DOCUMENTS:
At any time, upon reasonable request, any person may examine the application
and materials submitted in support of or in opposition to an application for a
development permit. Copies of any material will be made available at cost to
the extent permitted by law. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.10.03: CONDUCT OF HEARING:
   A.   Any person or persons may appear at a public hearing and submit
evidence, either individually or as a representative of an organization. Each
person who appears at a public hearing shall state his or her full name, and if
appearing on behalf of an organization, state the name and mailing address of
the organization for the record.
   B.   The hearing body may exclude testimony or evidence that it finds to be
irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.10.04: RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   The body conducting the hearing shall record the proceedings by any
appropriate means and prepare written summary of the minutes. Upon written
request, the Clerk of the body conducting the hearing shall duplicate the audio
record or written summary of minutes.
   B.   The official record of the hearing shall include testimony and
statements of personal opinions, the minutes of the meeting, all applications,
exhibits and papers submitted and any proceeding before the body, all staff and
advisory body or commission reports and recommendations, and the decision and
reports of the body.
   C.   All records of the body shall be public records, open for inspection at
reasonable times and upon reasonable notice. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.10.05: CONTINUANCE OF PROCEEDINGS:
The body conducting the hearing may, on its own motion or at the request of any
person, for good cause, continue the hearing to a fixed date, time and place.
The applicant must agree to the continuance when the time limit of the
application provided by law would otherwise lapse.
An applicant has the right to one continuance upon payment of the established
fee, and if required, the cost of additional notice. All subsequent
continuances may be granted at the discretion of the body conducting the
hearing only on good cause shown, and on payment of applicable fees.
If the hearing is continued to a fixed date within thirty five (35) days of the
original hearing date, additional notice is not required. For all other
continuances, additional notice is required in the manner required for the
initial hearing. The County will prepare the notice and the party requesting
the continuance must pay the costs. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
CHAPTER 12
POST DECISION PROCEEDINGS
SECTION:
15.12.01: Reapplication Following Denial
15.12.02: Appeals To County
15.12.03: Judicial Appeals
15.12.04: Amendments And Revisions To Approval
15.12.01: REAPPLICATION FOLLOWING DENIAL:
Whenever any application for a development permit is denied for failure to meet
the requirements of this title, an application for a development permit for all
or a part of the same property shall not be considered for a period of one year
from the date of denial unless the subsequent application involves a proposal
that is materially different from the previously denied proposal. (Ord. 603,
11-1-2018)
15.12.02: APPEALS TO COUNTY:
   A.   Any person with standing, aggrieved by a final determination on a
development permit by the Director or final decision-maker may appeal the final
determination to the appellate body designated by this title, if any, in the
manner provided in this chapter.
 
Decision Maker Appeal Body
Director       Commission
Commission     Board
Board          Judicial review
 
   B.   The following persons have standing to appeal:
      1.   Any person with legal or equitable interest in the property affected
by the final decision;
      2.   Any person with legal or equitable interest in property located
within the notice radius for the given project.
   C.   A written notice of appeal must be filed with the department within ten
(10) working days of the date of the final decision. The notice of appeal shall
be filed on a form provided by the County and contain a written statement of
the reasons why the final decision is erroneous or why conditions to the
approval are erroneous, and shall be accompanied by the fee established by
resolution.
   D.   The appellate body shall hear the appeal and render its decision within
sixty (60) calendar days after the filing of the notice of appeal and
applicable fees. The hearing shall be noticed and conducted in accordance with
the provisions of chapters 9 and 10 of this title. If the person appealing the
decision is not the applicant, personal notice of the hearing is required to be
sent to the applicant pursuant to section
15.09.03 of this title. The appellate body, in reviewing the decision, will be
guided by the statement of purpose underlying the regulation of the improvement
of land expressed in Nevada Revised Statutes 278.020 and section
15.01.02 of this title, and the plain wording of any applicable section of this
title.
   E.   The appellate body may affirm, reverse or modify only those items
raised in the appeal. The appellate body may attach any conditions reasonably
necessary when approving a permit that was denied by the Director or the final
decision-maker, as provided in chapter 8 of this title.
   F.   The decision of the Board is a final decision for the purpose of
judicial review. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.12.03: JUDICIAL APPEALS:
A person who has appealed a decision of the Board and is aggrieved by the final
decision of the Board may file for judicial review as required by Nevada
Revised Statutes 278.0235 or applicable Nevada law. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.12.04: AMENDMENTS AND REVISIONS TO APPROVAL:
   A.   Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for a project, the
Director, upon submittal of the applicable form, materials and fee, may approve
minor amendments to the terms of approval of an application for a development
permit. Minor revisions must be authorized in writing by the Director and are
subject to appeal pursuant to this chapter. Minor revisions that may be
authorized are those that appear necessary in light of technical considerations
requested by the applicant or the Director and shall be limited to the
following:
      1.   Requests that involve less than ten percent (10%) of the building
area or project site area;
      2.   Requests that involve minor changes in color, material, signage,
design, landscape material or parking or driveway orientation; or
      3.   Requests that involve minor design changes which represent
improvements to previous engineering, site design or building practices,
provided the request does not change the character of the project or result in
negative impacts to adjoining properties, drainage facilities, irrigation
facilities or rights- of-way.
   B.   All other revisions shall be considered major revisions. Where the
holder of an approved application for a development permit wishes to make a
revision to the approval which is not covered by subsections A1 through A3 of
this section, an application including all required materials and fees shall be
submitted to the department and forwarded for approval of the final decision-
maker in accordance with the procedures established for the original approval.
(Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
CHAPTER 13
EXPIRATION OF APPROVAL OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT
SECTION:
15.13.01: Time Of Expiration
15.13.02: Extension Procedures
15.13.01: TIME OF EXPIRATION:
   A.   Unless otherwise specifically provided for in this title, development
permits shall automatically expire and become null or void, and all development
activities pursuant to such permit thereafter shall be deemed in violation of
this title, if the applicant:
      1.   Fails to start the project;
      2.   Fails to pursue the project to completion;
      3.   Fails to satisfy any condition that was imposed as part of the
original or revised approval of the development application or that was made
pursuant to the terms of any development agreement, within the time limits
established therein for satisfaction of such condition or term; or
      4.   Fails to present a subsequent development application required by
this title within the time required or as may be required by law.
   B.   If no time limit for satisfaction of conditions is specified in the
original or revised approval of the development application, the time shall be
deemed to be two (2) years from the date such approval was granted by the final
decision-maker or upon issuance of a certificate of occupancy, whichever occurs
first. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.13.02: EXTENSION PROCEDURES:
An applicant may request an extension of the following approved development
permits: map approved under chapters 600 through 607 of this title, design
review, modification, sign permit, conditional use permit, or variance. The
Director may grant a one year administrative extension of time from the
original date of the development permit expiration. Alternatively, the Director
may refer the extension application and decision to the final decision maker
who originally approved the development permit. An administrative extension
does not require notice to be provided or a public hearing.
Subsequently, an additional extension of time, up to one year may be granted by
the final decision maker who originally approved the development permit. All
requests for an extension must include a completed development application,
payment of the applicable fee, and a written justification for the extension.
Any extension request must be filed with the department no later than sixty
(60) days prior to the expiration of the development permit.
In reviewing any such extension, the Director or final decision maker must
consider the continued appropriateness of the development permit and may add
conditions, as necessary, to ensure the project does not adversely impact other
properties in the area, protects the public interest, and ensures the public
health, safety, or welfare. No further extensions may be granted by the
Director or by the final decision maker except as provided by an adopted
development agreement or by law. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
CHAPTER 14
REVOCATION OF PERMIT
SECTION:
15.14.01: Duties Of Director
15.14.02: Notice And Public Hearing
15.14.03: Required Findings
15.14.04: Decision And Notice
15.14.05: Effect; Appeals
15.14.06: Right Cumulative
15.14.01: DUTIES OF DIRECTOR:
If the Director determines, based on inspection by County staff, that there are
reasonable grounds for revocation of a development permit authorized by this
title, he or she shall set a hearing before the final deciding body that
reviewed the original permit application, or if the decision was made by the
Director, to the body to which appeal may be taken under this title. (Ord. 603,
11-1-2018)
15.14.02: NOTICE AND PUBLIC HEARING:
Notice shall be given in the same manner provided in chapter 9 of this title.
The public hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures
established in chapter 10 of this title. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.14.03: REQUIRED FINDINGS:
The hearing body may revoke the development permit upon making one or more of
the following findings:
   A.   That the development permit was issued on the basis of erroneous or
misleading information or misrepresentation by the applicant;
   B.   That the terms or conditions of approval of the permit relating to
establishment or operation of the use approved have either been violated or not
met, or that other laws or regulations of the County, State, Federal or
regional agencies applicable to the development have been violated;
   C.   That the applicant or property owner no longer wishes to proceed with
development of the project. Such desire must be submitted to the department, in
writing to request that the approval be nullified. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.14.04: DECISION AND NOTICE:
Within ten (10) working days from the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing
body shall issue a written decision, and notify the permittee and any other
person who has filed a written request for the notice in the manner provided in
chapter 9 of this title. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.14.05: EFFECT; APPEALS:
A decision to revoke a development permit shall become final ten (10) days
after the date of notice of the decision was given, unless appealed. After the
effective date, all activities pursuant to the permit are deemed in violation
of this title. Appeal of the decision to revoke the permit shall be to the
final deciding body that initially reviewed the application and shall conform
to the procedures established in chapter 12 of this title. (Ord. 603, 11-1-
2018)
15.14.06: RIGHT CUMULATIVE:
The County's right to revoke a development permit, as provided in this chapter,
is cumulative to any other remedy allowed by law. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
CHAPTER 15
ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
15.15.01: Procedures
15.15.02: Remedies
15.15.03: Penalties
15.15.01: PROCEDURES:
   A.   Any activity contrary to the provisions of this title is declared to be
unlawful and may in some circumstances constitute a public nuisance. The
following procedures shall apply to the enforcement of the provisions of this
title:
      1.   Notice: Upon submission of written notice to the department by a
person or appropriate authority of a violation of this title using the
appropriate County form, the Director, shall review the complaint for
applicability to this title. If it is determined that the complaint is valid
and in violation of this title, the department shall deliver (via certified
mail) to the party or parties in violation of this title, a written order to
comply with the provisions of this title within thirty (30) days of receipt of
the notice or other time frame established by the Code Enforcement Officer,
Building Inspector or Director.
      2.   No Compliance With First Notice: If the party or parties in
violation of this title fail to comply with the order to comply within the
identified timeframe, the Director may either choose to send a second notice or
refer the item to the District Attorney's Office for a decision concerning the
filing of criminal charges or to the Board for other potential remedy.
      3.   No Compliance With Second Notice: If a second notice is provided by
the department, and the party or parties in violation of this title have not
complied within the timeframe provided within the second letter (up to 30 days
from receipt of the letter), the matter will either be referred to the District
Attorney's Office for a decision concerning the filing of criminal charges or
to the Board for other potential remedy.
      4.   Enforcement By Injunction: Compliance with the provisions of this
title may also be enforced by injunction order at the suit of the County or one
or more owners of real property situated within an area affected by the
regulations of this title. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.15.02: REMEDIES:
All remedies provided for by this title shall be cumulative and not exclusive.
The conviction and punishment of any person hereunder shall not relieve any
person from the responsibilities of correcting prohibited conditions or
removing prohibited buildings, structures or improvements, nor prevent the
enforced correction or removal thereof. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.15.03: PENALTIES:
Any person, firm or corporation, whether as principal, agent, employee or
otherwise, found to be violating any provision of this title or violating or
failing to comply with any order or regulation made hereunder, is guilty of a
misdemeanor. The person, firm or corporation is guilty of a separate offense
for each day and every separate offense during which the violation of this
title or failure to comply with any order or regulation as committed, continued
or otherwise maintained. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
CHAPTER 17
FEES AND TAX OBLIGATIONS
SECTION:
15.17.01: Fee Schedule
15.17.02: Payment Of Fees
15.17.03: Payment Of Taxes Required
15.17.01: FEE SCHEDULE:
The Board shall establish a schedule of fees for processing of all development
applications under this title by resolution. All resolutions are incorporated
by reference into this title as though fully set forth. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.17.02: PAYMENT OF FEES:
   A.   Except as otherwise established by formal policy adopted by the Board,
every application for a development permit under this title shall be
accompanied by a fee as set by resolution of the Board.
   B.   A development permit application shall not be processed beyond a
determination of completeness until all fees have been paid. Any fee required
by this title shall be collected and deposited with the department.
   C.   The director shall refund development permit application fees based on
the following criteria:
      1.   One hundred percent (100%) of the total development permit
application fee if:
         a.   The director determines that the application is not needed to
accomplish the applicant's intent; or
         b.   The applicant requests a voluntary withdrawal of the development
permit application before the application is circulated for reviewing agencies.
      2.   Fifty percent (50%) of the total development permit application fee
if the director and applicant mutually agree that the application should be
withdrawn and the withdrawal occurs prior to the planning staff's analysis of
the application has started.
      3.   Zero percent (0%) of the total development permit application fee if
the shall be granted once the written analysis of the development permit
application by planning staff has started.and/or the development permit
application has been noticed for hearing.
   D.   Whenever evaluation of any development application requires the use of
professional assistance not available within the county government, processing
of the application may be conditioned upon payment by the applicant of the
reasonable cost of obtaining such special assistance. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018;
amd. Ord. 607, 9-19-2019)
15.17.03: PAYMENT OF TAXES REQUIRED:
The following applications shall be considered complete and move forward
through the review process when the property taxes have been paid through the
entire current fiscal year and proof of property tax payment from the County
Treasurer is provided with the application.
This provision shall apply, but not be limited to, all applications for change
of land, master plan amendments, reversion to acreage maps, parcel maps,
divisions into large parcels, tentative maps, and final maps. Proof of property
tax payment from the County Treasurer is required for any map to be recorded
Conditional use permits, major variances, all administrative reviews (such as
but not limited to design reviews, minor variances, building permits and mobile
home permits) will be considered complete and move forward in the review
process when the current property taxes have been paid and proof of the current
property tax payment from the County Treasurer is provided with the
application. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 607, 9-19-2019; Ord. 613, 12-3-
2020)
CHAPTER 20
RIGHT TO FARM
SECTION:
15.20.01: Purpose
15.20.02: Intent
15.20.03: Nuisance
15.20.04: Disclosure Statement
15.20.01: PURPOSE:
   A.   The right to farm all land is recognized to exist as a natural right
and is also ordained to exist as a permitted use everywhere in the County
except where expressly prohibited under this title, subject only to State
Health and Sanitary Codes.
   B.   It is the declared policy of Lyon County to conserve and protect
agricultural land, agricultural irrigation water rights and agricultural
operations, and to encourage sustainable agricultural operations within the
County. It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to reduce the loss to the
County of its viable agricultural land by limiting circumstances under which
agricultural operations may be considered a nuisance, consistent with Nevada
Revised Statutes 40.140. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.20.02: INTENT:
   A.   This chapter defines and limits cases in which agricultural operations
may be perceived a nuisance. It includes a disclosure notice to prospective
property buyers, notifying them that if the property they are purchasing is
adjacent to agricultural land, they may be subjected to certain inconveniences
associated with normal agricultural operations and that special setbacks may be
required on the property.
   B.   The right to farm includes, but is not limited to, the right to engage
in all of the "agricultural operations" defined in this chapter. This right to
farm shall also include the right to use land for agricultural production and
grazing by animals, in addition to agricultural products processing
transportation sales and distribution and distribution. The foregoing uses and
activities included in the right to farm, when necessary for the particular
farming, livestock, fowl or crop production, and when conducted in accordance
with generally accepted agricultural practices, may occur on holidays,
Saturdays, Sundays and weekdays, twenty four (24) hours a day, and the traffic,
noise, odors, dust, fumes and other disturbances that are caused by such
activities are also specifically permitted as part of the exercise of this
right. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.20.03: NUISANCE:
   A.   No present or future agricultural operation or any of its appurtenances
conducted or maintained for commercial purposes and in a manner consistent with
proper and accepted customs and standards of the agricultural industry on
agricultural land or commercial land shall be deemed a nuisance, due to any
changed condition of the use of adjacent land and water rights appropriated for
that land in or about the locality thereof; provided, that the provisions of
this section shall not apply whenever a nuisance results from the negligent or
improper operation of any such agricultural operation and its appurtenances or
if the agricultural activity or appurtenances obstruct the free passage or use
in the customary manner of any navigable lake, stream, river, canal or basin or
any public park, square, street or highway. Consistent with Nevada Revised
Statutes 40.140(2), it is presumed that an agricultural activity which does not
violate a Federal, State or local law, ordinance or regulation constitutes good
agricultural practice consistent with proper and accepted customs and standards
of the agricultural industry.
   B.   It is expressly found that whatever nuisance may be caused to others by
such uses and activities so conducted is more than offset by the economic and
social benefits from farming to the local and State economy, community
aesthetics, and to society in general, by the preservation of open space, the
beauty of the countryside and clean air, the provision for continual local
economic growth and by the preservation and continuance of farming operations
in this County and the State as a source of agricultural products for this and
future generations.
   C.   As a condition of approval of any subdivision or parcel map of any land
in Lyon County, the owners or developers of such land and their heirs, assigns
and successors, shall agree to provide notice to any and all subsequent
purchasers of the provisions of Nevada Revised Statutes 40.140 and this
chapter. Such notice shall include a signed acknowledgment on all land
development maps.
   D.   If a landowner or resident believes that an agricultural operation is
not being conducted or maintained in a manner consistent with proper or
accepted customs and standards of the agricultural industry, the landowner or
resident may submit a complaint to the department using the procedures
described in chapter 15 of this title. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.20.04: DISCLOSURE STATEMENT:
   A.   Every seller of any real property in Lyon County, either directly or
through his/her authorized agent shall provide to any prospective buyer a
written disclosure statement advising the buyer of the existence of a right to
farm ordinance enacted by Lyon County. Such disclosure statement shall contain
or be accompanied by a copy of the ordinance codified herein or successor, and
statement that intensive agricultural operations may be conducted on
agricultural and other land within the County. The disclosure statement shall
be substantially in the form promulgated by the Board, or their designee. The
written disclosure statement shall include any agricultural setback
requirements and water rights use restrictions applicable to the property. The
buyer shall sign a copy of the written disclosure statement acknowledging
receipt of the disclosure and accompanying documents and deliver the signed
copy to the seller or his/her authorized agent. The seller or his/her
authorized agent shall retain the copy of the disclosure statement executed by
buyer in the escrow process.
   B.   The disclosure statement shall contain substantially the following
language:
Lyon County has determined that the highest and best use for agricultural land
as defined below is to develop or preserve said lands for the purposes of
agricultural operations and it will not consider the inconveniences or
discomforts arising from or related to agricultural operations to be a
perceived nuisance if such operations are legal, consistent with accepted
customs and standards and operated in a non-negligent manner.
If property you own or may purchase in the future is located adjacent, near, or
close to agricultural lands or within agricultural lands, including agriculture
land easements, irrigation ditch easements, drain ditch easements, or
agricultural products processing facilities, you may be subject to
inconveniences or discomfort arising from agricultural operations. These may
include but are not limited to the spraying, cleaning, and maintenance of
irrigation water delivery systems as well as traffic, noise, odors, dust,
chemicals, smoke, insects, operation of machinery (during any 24-hour period),
aircraft operation, and storage and disposal of agriculture by-products,
including manure. One or more of the inconveniences described above may occur
even in the case of an agricultural operation, which is in conformance with
existing laws and regulations and locally accepted customs and standards. If
you live near an agricultural production area and/or agriculture products
facility, you should be prepared to accept such inconveniences or discomfort as
a normal and necessary aspect of living in a County with a strong rural
character and a healthy agricultural sector. You are prohibited from
interfering with or in any way obstructing agricultural operations, including,
for example, tampering with irrigation delivery facilities, obstructing
irrigation ditches, and obstructing agricultural land easements.
For purposes of this notification:
Land surrounding your property may or may not be presently zoned or designated
on the General Plan for primary or substantial agricultural use, the land
contains an existing agricultural operation of a type that would be obvious to
an uninformed observer after a physical inspection of the property, and that
operation began at a time when such use was permissible.
"Agricultural Operation" means all activities relating to agricultural
production and use as defined in chapter 1200, "Appendix A - Glossary And
Definitions" of the Lyon County Code, as such may be amended from time to time
and shall include, but not be limited to, the cultivation and tillage of the
soil, lawful use of appropriated water rights for agricultural irrigation
purposes, including groundwater, as well as any agriculture irrigation water
delivery system maintenance and improvements, the burning of agricultural
waste, weeds and other debris or other agricultural burning, including ditches
and fields, lawful use of housing and transportation of labor for the purpose
of crop production, lawful use of temporary and permanent facilities for the
health, safety and welfare of agricultural workers, protection of crops and
livestock from pests (i.e., insects, diseases, weeds, predators) damaging or
which could potentially damage crops or livestock, the proper and lawful use of
agricultural inputs and chemicals, whether organic or conventional, including
but not limited to the ground and aerial (i.e., via aircraft) application of
crop protection products and fertilizers, fumigation, or the raising,
production, irrigation, pruning, harvesting, or processing of any living
organism, organically or conventionally, having value as an agricultural
commodity or product, and any commercial practices performed incident to or in
conjunction with such operations where the agricultural product is being
produced, including preparation for market, delivery to storage, processing and
packaging, and distribution to market, or to carriers for transportation to
market or processing of an agricultural commodity, and those buildings or
related facilities (no matter their zoning) that process, store, package and
distribute agriculture products.
(Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
CHAPTER 100
IMPACT FEES
SECTION:
15.100.01: Definitions
15.100.02: Applicability
15.100.03: Procedure
15.100.01: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the words and
terms have the meanings ascribed to them in Nevada Revised Statutes 278B.010 to
278B.140, inclusive. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.100.02: APPLICABILITY:
   A.   The Board may consider the imposition of impact fees on new development
as a potential revenue source for construction or expansion of capital
improvements projects in the formation and annual revision of the five-year
capital improvement plan.
   B.   In reviewing any application for new development, including, but not
limited to approval of a tentative subdivision map, planned development,
specific plan, special use permit or design review for commercial or industrial
property which adds or increases the number of service units to be served by
capital improvements projects, the department, commission and Board shall
determine whether the new development is likely to require construction or
expansion of capital improvement projects, and may employ the provisions of
chapter 278B of Nevada Revised Statutes to fund the same. In the event it
determines to do so, then approval of the new development in question shall be
conditioned on participation in such a program. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.100.03: PROCEDURE:
If the Board determines to proceed with the imposition of impact fees, it shall
follow the procedure provided by chapter 278B of Nevada Revised Statutes. The
commission shall serve as the Capital Improvements Advisory Committee, the
membership of which may be augmented as provided in Nevada Revised Statutes
278B.150, to meet the requirements thereof. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
CHAPTER 110
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS
SECTION:
15.110.01: Purpose
15.110.02: General Provisions
15.110.03: Review Of Agreement
15.110.04: Board Action
15.110.05: Required Findings For Approval
15.110.06: Ongoing Review
15.110.07: Amendments To Approved Development Agreements
15.110.01: PURPOSE:
An agreement for the development of land as authorized by Nevada Revised
Statutes 278.0201 through 278.0207 et seq., may be approved as is set forth in
this chapter. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.110.02: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Agreement Requirements: Any owner, developer, or other person, party,
or corporation authorized by Nevada Revised Statutes 278.0201 desiring to enter
into an agreement with the County for the development of land must:
      1.   Prepare a brief statement summarizing the proposed provisions and
justification of such development agreement for review by the Board prior to
submission of a formal application with the Director; and
      2.   Submit a complete application for a land development agreement based
on the direction and recommendations of the Board with the Director.
   B.   Proposal Of Land Development Agreement: The application must be
accompanied by a proposed land development agreement addressing those matters
which are authorized by the Nevada Revised Statutes to be addressed in
agreements for the development of land, and such other documentation and/or
materials as required by the Director.
   C.   Contents Of Agreement:
      1.   Consistent with Nevada Revised Statutes 278.0201(2)(a) the
development agreement must:
         a.   Describe the land which is the subject of the agreement;
         b.   Specify the duration of the agreement;
         c.   Specify what events will constitute breach of the agreement; and
         d.   Provide periods during which any breach may be cured.
      2.   Should Nevada Revised Statutes 278.0201(2)(a) and the required items
identified, above be determined to be different, the requirements within Nevada
Revised Statutes 278.0201(2)(a) shall prevail.
      3.   The development agreement may contain (if applicable) provisions
specifying or relating to:
         a.   The permitted uses of the land, the density or intensity of the
use of the land, and the maximum height and size of any proposed buildings;
         b.   Provisions for the reservation or dedication of any portion of
land for public use or the payment of fees in lieu thereof;
         c.   Protection of environmentally sensitive lands;
         d.   Preservation and restoration of historic structures;
         e.   The phasing or timing of construction or development on the land,
including, without limitation, the dates on which all or any part of the
construction or development must commence and be completed, and the terms on
which any deadline may be extended;
         f.   The conditions, terms, restrictions and requirements for
infrastructure on the land and the financing of the public infrastructure by a
person having a legal or equitable interest in the land;
         g.   The conditions, terms, restrictions and requirements for
annexation of land by the County and the phasing or timing of annexation by the
County;
         h.   The conditions, terms, restrictions and requirements relating to
the intent of the Board to include the land in an improvement district created
pursuant to chapter 271 of Nevada Revised Statutes;
         i.   Require the land developer to make any and all improvements as
required by the Board, the department, and/or other County departments. Said
improvements shall be completed by the developer at his own expense and within
the specified time. In addition, the agreement may require the developer to
secure his promise to make improvements by providing a bond, cash deposit, or
other approved security;
         j.   A schedule of fees and charges; and
         k.   Any other matters relating to the development of the land. (Ord.
603, 11-1-2018)
15.110.03: REVIEW OF AGREEMENT:
   A.   The application and proposed agreements shall be reviewed by the
District Attorney and all other local and State governmental entities which
have jurisdiction over the development.
   B.   Upon completion of the review of the proposed agreement, the proposed
agreement for development of land shall be submitted to the commission for a
public hearing set and noticed as prescribed in chapters 9 and 10 of this
title.
   C.   The commission shall prepare a recommendation to the Board whether to
accept, reject or conditionally accept the agreement for the development of
land. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.110.04: BOARD ACTION:
   A.   Upon receiving a recommendation from the commission on a proposed
development agreement, the Board shall hold a public hearing. The hearing shall
be set and notice given as prescribed in chapters 9 and 10 of this title.
   B.   Following the closing of a public hearing, the Board shall determine if
the development agreement is consistent with the findings contained within
section
15.110.05 of this chapter. If determined to be consistent, the Board shall
introduce an ordinance adopting the development agreement.
   C.   Following introduction, a second reading shall be held and based on the
testimony provided at the hearing, the ordinance shall be adopted, denied or
continued. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.110.05: REQUIRED FINDINGS FOR APPROVAL:
Prior to taking an action to approve a development agreement, the Board shall
find as follows:
   A.   The proposed development agreement conforms to the maps and policies of
the master plan and any applicable specific plan.
   B.   The proposed development agreement complies with the requirements of
Nevada Revised Statutes.
   C.   The proposed development agreement is consistent with this title and
all other applicable codes and ordinances.
   D.   The proposed development agreement will not be detrimental to or cause
adverse effects to adjacent property owners, residents, or the general public
and that provisions have been included to address the completion or phasing of
improvements as well as provisions to address abandonment of the project.
   E.   The proposed development agreement provides clear and substantial
benefit to the residents of the County. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.110.06: ONGOING REVIEW:
The Board shall review all approved development agreements at least once every
twenty four (24) months to determine whether the applicant, or successor in
interest, is demonstrating good faith compliance with the terms of the
agreement. The ongoing review of a development agreement shall cease at the
completion of construction per the approved project plans. (Ord. 603, 11-1-
2018)
15.110.07: AMENDMENTS TO APPROVED DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS:
Any amendment to an approved development agreement shall be reviewed and
adopted pursuant to the procedures outlined in this chapter for a new
application. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
CHAPTER 115
DENSITY BONUS AGREEMENTS
SECTION:
15.115.01: Purpose
15.115.02: General Provisions
15.115.03: Application Procedures
15.115.04: Action By Board
15.115.05: Required Findings For Approval
15.115.06: Ongoing Review
15.115.07: Amendments To Approved Density Bonus And Affordable/Attainable
Housing Agreements
15.115.01: PURPOSE:
This chapter provides procedures and requirements for the consideration of
density bonus and affordable housing agreements for the purposes specified in
and as authorized by Nevada Revised Statutes. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.115.02: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
All density bonus and affordable/attainable housing agreements filed with the
County shall be in compliance with the following:
   A.   Only a qualified applicant may file an application. A qualified
applicant is a person who has a legal or equitable interest in the real
property which is the subject of the agreement, or an authorized agent of a
person who has a legal or equitable interest. Where a density bonus agreement
is sought for affordable/attainable housing, the applicant must submit as part
of the density bonus agreement application documentation of participation in,
at a minimum, one of the Federal and/or State affordable/attainable housing
financial assistance program(s) as well as documentation of how the program(s)
will assist in providing affordable/attainable housing. The Director may
require an applicant to submit a title report or other evidence satisfactory to
the department to verify the applicant's interest in the real property and of
the authority of the agent to act for the applicant.
   B.   Where a density bonus or affordable/attainable housing request does not
involve an existing development, the application shall be filed concurrently
with all other development applications for the property.
   C.   The density bonus or affordable/attainable housing agreement may only
be requested for development projects consisting of ten (10) or more dwelling
units, prior to any density bonus being applied.
   D.   For the purposes of this chapter, a density bonus shall mean an
increase in residential density from that otherwise allowable under the zoning
(the base density) in return for provision of housing at affordable/attainable
levels or development carried out in accordance with the provisions of chapters
340 through 350 of this title, where an increase in density is authorized in
exchange for provision of a specific public benefit, such as limitations on
floodplain development or provision of public open space or creation of an
affordable housing development.
   E.   When determining the number of units which are affordable/attainable,
the density bonus shall not be included.
   F.   When calculating base density or density bonus numbers, any fractional
portion of a unit shall be rounded down.
   G.   For any density bonus or affordable/attainable housing agreement
approved under the provisions of this chapter, the developer shall agree to
ensure continued affordability of all restricted income density bonus units in
compliance with the Federal or State program providing financial assistance.
(Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.115.03: APPLICATION PROCEDURES:
   A.   An application for a density bonus or affordable/attainable housing
agreement shall be made on a form provided for that purpose by the department,
along with the required fee or deposit.
   B.   The application shall be accompanied by the original draft density
bonus or affordable/attainable housing agreement and any other submittal
materials listed on the application. The agreement shall be in the County
approved form (e.g., restricted covenant or other similar form acceptable to
the County) and may include the following provisions as well as any other
deemed necessary by the County during review of specific proposals:
      1.   The terms and conditions of the agreement shall run with the land,
which assures that the public benefit provided or certain of the units to be
developed on the land will be used solely by qualified occupants as affordable/
attainable housing, shall be binding upon all successors in interest of the
developer unless released and terminated by the County, and shall be recorded
in the Office of the County Recorder, prior to issuance of any building or
grading permits for the project;
      2.   The developer shall give the County or State the continuing right-
of-first-refusal to purchase or lease any or all of the designated affordable/
attainable housing units at the fair market value;
      3.   The deeds to the designated units shall contain a covenant stating
that the developer and his or her successors in interest shall not sell, rent,
lease, sublet, assign, or otherwise transfer any interest in the same without
the written approval of the County confirming that the sales price of the units
is consistent with the limits established for very low, low or moderate income
households, which shall be related to the annual medium income ("AMI") for a
family of four (4) in Lyon County, Nevada as determined by the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development ("HUD");
      4.   The County shall have the authority to enter into other agreements
with the developer or purchasers of the dwelling units, as may be necessary to
assure that the required dwelling units are continuously occupied by eligible
households.
   C.   The department may require that the developer provide additional
information necessary for the Board to determine whether the density bonus
agreement is consistent with the objectives of the adopted master plan and any
applicable specific plan. This may include, but is not limited to, market
feasibility or absorption studies for the proposed project, evaluation of
conservation benefits or resource protections to be obtained. (Ord. 603, 11-1-
2018)
15.115.04: ACTION BY BOARD:
   A.   Upon receiving a recommendation from the department on a proposed
density bonus agreement, the Board shall hold a public hearing. The hearing
shall be set and notice given as prescribed in chapters 9 and 10 of this title.
The hearing may be continued from time to time.
   B.   Following the closing of a public hearing, the Board shall determine if
the density bonus agreement is consistent with the findings contained within
section
15.115.05 of this chapter. If determined to be consistent, the Board shall
introduce an ordinance adopting the density bonus agreement.
   C.   Following introduction, a second reading of the ordinance adopting the
agreement shall be held and based on the testimony provided at the hearing, the
ordinance shall be adopted, denied or continued. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.115.05: REQUIRED FINDINGS FOR APPROVAL:
Prior to taking an action to approve or recommend approval of a density bonus
or affordable housing agreement, the Board shall find as follows:
   A.   The proposed agreement is consistent with the maps and policies of the
master plan and any applicable specific plan;
   B.   The proposed agreement complies with the requirements of Nevada Revised
Statutes;
   C.   The granting of the proposed agreement will result in provision of
housing for persons with special needs, as identified in the County's
affordable housing element, or the permanent protection of natural resources or
lands of significant environmental value;
   D.   Where a density bonus is proposed, that the granting of the proposed
density bonus will not have an adverse impact on adjacent properties or on the
general public. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.115.06: ONGOING REVIEW:
The Board shall review all approved density bonus or affordable/attainable
housing agreements at least once every twenty four (24) months to determine
whether the applicant, or successor in interest thereto, is demonstrating good
faith compliance with the terms of the agreement. Review by the Board shall
occur until the project is complete. After the project is complete, the
department shall continue the ongoing review with the allowance to refer any
biennial review to the Board if deemed necessary by the Director. This review
process may require the submittal of an application form and materials as
established by the department. Ongoing review shall cease consistent with the
timeframes identified in subsection
15.115.02G of this chapter. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.115.07: AMENDMENTS TO APPROVED DENSITY BONUS AND AFFORDABLE/ATTAINABLE
HOUSING AGREEMENTS:
Any amendment to a previously-approved density bonus or affordable/attainable
housing agreement shall be reviewed pursuant to the procedures outlined in this
chapter for a new application. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
CHAPTER 120
REIMBURSEMENT AGREEMENTS
SECTION:
15.120.01: Purpose And Applicability
15.120.02: General Provisions
15.120.03: Application Procedure
15.120.04: Action By The Planning Commission And Board
15.120.05: Findings For Approval
15.120.06: Enforcement
15.120.01: PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for agreements for reimbursement of
the costs of constructing capital improvements or public facilities which
result in a benefit to the community and subsequent development. (Ord. 603, 11-
1-2018)
15.120.02: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
When the owner or developer of property funds construction of capital
improvements or public facilities likely to be served by future or other
development, it may request, as part of its approval, that the County enter a
reimbursement agreement. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.120.03: APPLICATION PROCEDURE:
   A.   The request for reimbursement agreement shall be made and filed
together with the application for tentative subdivision, planned development or
specific plan approval. The Board or commission may permit a request for
reimbursement agreement to be filed following public hearings on the tentative
subdivision, planned development or specific plan if the hearings result in
imposition of conditions for approval that require the construction of
qualifying capital improvements or public facilities.
   B.   The request for reimbursement agreement shall include a definition of
the capital improvement or public facility, the cost, with support materials, a
reimbursement plan, a description of the benefit area and the parcels included
therein, and a method for determining the proportionate cost to be assessed
against such parcels, when developed. The appropriateness of the benefit area
boundary will be reviewed and approved by the department and other involved
County departments and changes or modifications to the suggested benefit area
may occur.
   C.   An application for a reimbursement agreement shall be made on a form
provided for that purpose by the department, along with any required fee or
deposit established by resolution.
   D.   The term of the reimbursement agreement shall not exceed ten (10) years
unless an alternative term is mutually agreed by the County and the owner or
developer. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.120.04: ACTION BY THE PLANNING COMMISSION AND BOARD:
   A.   The commission shall consider the request for reimbursement agreement
and the extent of the benefit area boundary in connection with its hearing on
the application for tentative approval of the subdivision, planned development
or specific plan, and determine if the capital improvement or public facility
is consistent with the master plan. If the commission makes such a finding and
recommends approval of the reimbursement agreement, then its recommendation
will be forwarded to the Board for action.
   B.   At the Board level, the public hearing on the request for reimbursement
agreement and the extent of the benefit area boundary may be held on the same
date as the application for tentative approval, but will be posted as a
separate item on the agenda, and separately noticed. In addition to the notice
otherwise required by section
15.09.01 of this title, notice and copies of the reimbursement plan shall be
served on the owners of the affected parcels, at least ten (10) days before the
hearing. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.120.05: FINDINGS FOR APPROVAL:
The decision whether to enter a reimbursement agreement is discretionary, and
nothing contained in this chapter is intended to vest enforceable rights to a
reimbursement agreement in any person. In determining whether to enter a
reimbursement agreement, the Board shall make affirmative findings as follows:
   A.   The cost of the capital improvement or public facility and the extent
of the benefit area boundary is reasonable and the reimbursement plan is fair
and equitable to the parcels to be charged thereunder.
   B.   Construction of the capital improvement or public facility is
consistent with the master plan and represents a substantial and measurable
benefit to the community.
   C.   There are adequate existing or appropriately planned resources for the
annual operation and maintenance of the facility.
   D.   The costs of administering the reimbursement agreement have been
advanced by the applicant and will not create an unreasonable burden of the
County disproportionate to the size of the project and the benefit to the
community. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.120.06: ENFORCEMENT:
Copies of the reimbursement agreement and plan shall be recorded against each
of the parcels within the approved benefit area in the Office of the Lyon
County Recorder and filed in the office of the department. When the owner of a
parcel included in the benefit area of the reimbursement plan applies for a
development permit for the parcel, he or she shall comply with the terms of the
reimbursement agreement as a condition of the issuance of a permit. (Ord. 603,
11-1-2018)
CHAPTER 200
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
15.200.01: Purpose
15.200.02: Master Plan Consistency
15.200.01: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the zoning regulations is to promote the public health, safety,
general welfare and preserve and enhance the aesthetic quality of the County by
providing regulations to ensure an appropriate mix of land uses in an orderly
manner. In furtherance of this purpose the County desires to achieve a pattern
and distribution of land uses which generally achieve the following:
   A.   Implement the goals and policies of the master plan;
   B.   Retain and enhance established residential neighborhoods, Commercial
and Industrial Districts, regional-serving uses, recreation and amenities;
   C.   Allow for the infill and restoration of areas within identified
communities to maximize the use of available infrastructure and limit adverse
impacts to the provision of public services;
   D.   Limit expansion of development beyond community boundaries within
environmental and infrastructure constraints;
   E.   Maintain and enhance significant environmental resources;
   F.   Provide a diversity of areas characterized by differing land use
activity, scale and intensity;
   G.   Establish Lyon County as a unique and distinctive place with a high
quality of life and aesthetic resources, as well as a secure environment for
the County's residents and businesses; and
   H.   Promote a strong and diverse economy that attracts business by
providing a mix of development opportunities. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.200.02: MASTER PLAN CONSISTENCY:
The zoning regulations contained in this title have been found consistent with
the goals and policies of the Lyon County master plan, pursuant to the
provisions of chapter 278 of Nevada Revised Statutes. All development within
unincorporated portions of the County, except as otherwise provided, must be
consistent with these regulations. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
CHAPTER 201
PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCE
SECTION:
15.201.01: Purpose And Intent
15.201.02: When Required
15.201.03: Application For Pre-Application Conference
15.201.01: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of the pre-application conference is to acquaint the County with
the intentions of an applicant, to acquaint the applicant with any applicable
policies and procedures, to identify County codes and improvement standards,
and to identify significant development opportunities or constraints. (Ord.
603, 11-1-2018)
15.201.02: WHEN REQUIRED:
   A.   A pre-application conference is suggested for all application types,
however a pre-application conference is required prior to submittal of a formal
application for the following application types:
      1.   Site Improvement Permits;
      2.   Subdivision maps (final);
      3.   Planned Unit Developments (tentative);
      4.   Specific Plans;
      5.   Development Agreements (initial or revision);
      6.   Mobile home parks/recreational vehicle parks; and
      7.   Any development seeking alternative equivalent compliance. (Ord.
603, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 613, 12-3-2020)
15.201.03: APPLICATION FOR PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCE:
   A.   The application shall be filed with the department with any applicable
fee.
   B.   Submittal for a pre-application conference does not constitute a formal
filing of a project under provisions of Nevada Revised Statutes and is intended
solely to assist the project applicant and County in the initial review of a
conceptual development application. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
CHAPTER 202
NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES
SECTION:
15.202.01: Purpose
15.202.02: Nonconforming Uses
15.202.03: Nonconforming Structures
15.202.04: Termination Of Nonconforming Uses And Structures
15.202.05: Nonconforming Accessory Uses And Accessory Structures
15.202.06: Nonconforming Lots
15.202.07: Amortization Of Nonconforming Uses And Structures
15.202.01: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and limit the continued existence of
uses and structures lawfully established prior to the enactment of this title,
or any amendments, that do not conform ("nonconforming") to the provisions of
this title. Nonconforming uses may continue, but the provisions of this chapter
are designed to curtail substantial investment in nonconforming uses and
structures and, when necessary in order to preserve the integrity of this
title, to bring about their eventual elimination. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.202.02: NONCONFORMING USES:
   A.   Continuation: Nonconforming uses may continue in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Maintenance And Repair: Normal maintenance and repair to permit
continuation of registered nonconforming uses may be performed.
   C.   Expansion: Nonconforming uses shall not be extended or enlarged except
as provided by this chapter. Any extension or expansion of a nonconforming use
shall require review and approval of a conditional use permit as outlined in
chapter 15.230 of this title.
   D.   Change Of Use: A nonconforming use shall not be changed to any other
use unless the new use conforms to the provisions of the zoning district in
which it is located. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 607, 9-19-2019)
15.202.03: NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES:
   A.   A nonconforming structure devoted to a use permitted in the land use
district in which is it located may be continued in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Normal maintenance and repair of nonconforming structures may be
performed.
   C.   Nonconforming structures which are used in a manner conforming to the
provisions of this title may be enlarged or extended provided that the
nonconformity is not further enlarged or expanded.
   D.   A nonconforming structure, other than a historic structure previously
listed on the National Register of Historic Places or designated as historic by
the Board, shall not be moved unless it will conform to the regulations of the
land use district in which it is relocated. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.202.04: TERMINATION OF NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES:
   A.   When the active operation of a nonconforming use is discontinued or
abandoned for period of twelve (12) consecutive months, the use shall not be
reestablished or resumed. The active operation of a use is considered to be the
typical or normal activities associated with the use. A determination of
discontinuance or abandonment may be made where one or more of the following
conditions is documented for the twelve (12) months preceding the
determination:
      1.   Failure to maintain regular business hours, typical or normal for
the use; or
      2.   Failure to maintain required local, State or Federal licenses or
other approvals that would be required for the active operation of the use; or
      3.   Failure to maintain utilities which would be used for the active
operation of the use; or
      4.   Failure to pay taxes and fees required for the active operation of
the use.
   B.   A determination of discontinuance may not be made where the active
operation of a nonconforming use has been curtailed by:
      1.   Extensive rehabilitation of the property; or
      2.   Unique circumstances associated with repairs and alterations on
structures of historic value; or
      3.   Transfer of title delays caused by estate or probate issues; or
      4.   Delay caused by serious illness or injury of any owner that may
warrant special consideration on the basis of personal hardship; or
      5.   Market conditions that have impacted the ability to reoccupy or
reestablish a use within the twelve (12) month period.
      6.   In the case of a residential nonconforming use, the documented non-
use results from extended travel or temporary relocation of the owner or tenant
of the residence.
   C.   Nonconforming buildings which have been damaged or destroyed by natural
calamity may be repaired or reconstructed within one year from the date of
damage; provided, the repaired building is appropriate to the previous use.
(Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.202.05: NONCONFORMING ACCESSORY USES AND ACCESSORY STRUCTURES:
A nonconforming accessory use or accessory structure shall not continue after
the principal structure or use is terminated unless the structure or use
conforms to the provisions of the zoning district in which it is located. (Ord.
603, 11-1-2018)
15.202.06: NONCONFORMING LOTS:
   A.   When an existing nonconforming lot can be used in conformity with all
of the regulations applicable to the intended use, except that the lot is
smaller than the required minimum lot area applicable to the zoning district,
the lot may be used as proposed.
   B.   When a use proposed for a nonconforming lot is one that is conforming
in all other respects with the exception of applicable setback requirements,
the property owner may apply for a variance pursuant to chapter 203 of this
title.
   C.   If an undeveloped nonconforming lot adjoins one or more other
undeveloped nonconforming lots in common ownership, a variance shall not be
granted if re-subdivision or lot merger to make both lots conforming can be
reasonably accomplished. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.202.07: AMORTIZATION OF NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES:
   A.   Upon a recommendation by the Director that a type of nonconforming
structure or use, or any specific nonconforming structure or use is detrimental
to the public health, safety or general welfare, the Board may adopt an
amortization schedule under which a nonconforming use or structure, or type of
nonconforming use or structure, may be gradually eliminated. The schedule shall
establish a timetable by which the nonconforming uses or structures shall be
eliminated or made conforming and be consistent with the following:
      1.   Following adoption of an amortization schedule covering a type of
nonconforming use or structure, or a particular nonconforming use or structure,
the Director may initiate amortization proceedings with respect to specific
uses or structures in the manner provided in this section. Any nonconforming
use or structure found to be detrimental to the public health, safety or
general welfare, may be ordered to be removed or the use discontinued in
accordance with the time frames established in the adopted amortization
schedule.
      2.   Upon failure of the property owner to carry out the order, the
County may take any steps necessary to remove such structure or discontinue the
use and assess the cost thereof against the property owner. (Ord. 603, 11-1-
2018)
CHAPTER 203
VARIANCES
SECTION:
15.203.01: Purpose
15.203.02: Major And Minor Variances
15.203.03: Application For Variance
15.203.04: Procedures For Minor Variance
15.203.05: Procedures For Major Variance
15.203.06: Findings For Variances
15.203.07: Decision On Variance
15.203.08: Limitations On Variance
15.203.01: PURPOSE:
Variances are exceptions to compliance with zoning regulations of this title.
Variances are intended to alleviate exceptional practical difficulties or undue
hardship arising from the strict application of the provisions of this title to
a specific property. Variances address extraordinary, exceptional, or unique
situations that were not caused by the applicant's act or omission. (Ord. 603,
11-1-2018)
15.203.02: MAJOR AND MINOR VARIANCES:
   A.   The following applications for variances are minor variances and may be
approved administratively by the Director:
      1.   Ten percent (10%) or less for off-street loading,
      2.   Ten percent (10%) or less for building setback or fence height,
      3.   Ten percent (10%) or less for off-street parking or open space area,
or
      4.   An increase in accessory dwelling floor area of ten percent (10%) or
less in cases where there is an existing accessory building proposed to be
converted to an accessory dwelling.
   B.   All other applications for variances, including those related to sign
and/or building permits, are major variances and must be approved by the
commission, the final decision-maker. The Director is responsible for
processing such applications for major variances. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.203.03: APPLICATION FOR VARIANCE:
An application for a variance may be submitted by the property owner or an
agent authorized in writing to act on the owner's behalf to the department in
accordance with chapter 3 of this title. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.203.04: PROCEDURES FOR MINOR VARIANCE:
The Director must render a decision on each minor variance application in
accordance with chapter 4 of this title and may impose conditions pursuant to
chapter 8 of this title. Appeal of the decision must be to the commission in
accordance with the procedures set forth in chapter 12 of this title. Notice of
the filing of the application must be made in accordance with chapter 9 of this
title. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.203.05: PROCEDURES FOR MAJOR VARIANCE:
   A.   The Director must submit a report to the Board containing the County
staff's findings and recommendations on each application for a major variance
in the manner provided in chapter 3 of this title.
   B.   The Board must hold a public hearing not later than sixty five (65)
days after the application has been deemed complete. Published and personal
notice of the public hearing must be given in the manner provided in chapter 9
of this title. The public hearing must be conducted in accordance with chapter
10 of this title.
   C.   When a variance is associated with an application that requires a
hearing by the Board or on appeal, the application shall be processed in
accordance with chapter 7 of this title. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 618,
9-2-2021)
15.203.06: FINDINGS FOR VARIANCES:
   A.   Minor Variance Findings: The Director must not approve a minor variance
unless undue hardship is self-evident and the following findings are made:
      1.   The granting of the variance will not substantially impair the
intent and purpose of this title or the goals, policies and objectives embodied
in the master plan;
      2.   The variance is not requested exclusively on the basis of economic
hardship to the applicant; and
      3.   The variance does not result in the establishment of a use not
permitted within the specific zoning district.
   B.   Major Variance Findings: The Board must not approve a major variance
unless it finds that:
      1.   By reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, or shape of the
property in question, or by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or
other extraordinary and exceptional situation or condition of the property in
question, the strict application of the provisions of this title would result
in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to, or exceptional and undue
hardships upon, the applicant;
      2.   The circumstances or conditions do not apply generally to other
properties in the same land use district; and
      3.   The granting of the variance will not result in material damage or
prejudice to other properties in the vicinity, substantial impairment of
natural resources or be detrimental to the public health, safety and general
welfare. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 618, 9-2-2021)
15.203.07: DECISION ON VARIANCE:
The Board must approve, conditionally approve or deny the application for major
variance. The Board may impose conditions in accordance with chapter 8 of this
title and section
15.203.08 of this chapter. Appeal of the Board's decision must be in accordance
with chapter 12 of this title. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 618, 9-2-2021)
15.203.08: LIMITATIONS ON VARIANCE:
   A.   No minor or major variance shall be granted that allows a land use
prohibited in the zoning district in which it is located or that changes any
boundary of the district, nor shall any variance be granted that changes the
density of residential use or that changes the intensity of non-residential
use. Any variance so granted is null and void, and any activities undertaken
pursuant to such variance must be deemed in violation of this title.
   B.   The Board, in approving a major variance, and the Director, in
approving a minor variance, must impose the following conditions:
      1.   Where no other discretionary permit is required, the variance will
expire and become null or void if the project does not comply with the
provisions of chapter 13 of this title, expiration of approved permits.
      2.   Where approved concurrent with another discretionary permit, the
variance shall run with the time established for the other permit; and
      3.   Conformance to plans approved as a part of the variance.
   C.   No variance shall be granted which alters or modifies the procedures
under chapters 1 to 199 of this title. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 618, 9-
2-2021)
CHAPTER 210
AMENDMENT TO MASTER PLAN
SECTION:
15.210.01: Procedures For Amending Master Plan Text Or Map
15.210.02: Planning Commission Review And Action On Master Plan Text Or Map
Amendment
15.210.03: Findings For Master Plan Amendments
15.210.04: Initial Decision On Amendment To Master Plan By Board
15.210.05: Effective Date Of Amendment
15.210.06: Limitation On Reapplication After Denial
15.210.01: PROCEDURES FOR AMENDING MASTER PLAN TEXT OR MAP:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to provide for the method for
amending the master plan.
   B.   Types Of Amendment Of The Master Plan:
      1.   There are three (3) types of master plan amendments:
         a.   Amendment to the land use map or maps,
         b.   Revision of the text in the various master plan elements, and
         c.   Adoption of a new master plan element.
      2.   Any amendment shall be done in compliance with the provisions set
forth in this chapter and chapter 278 of the Nevada Revised Statutes.
   C.   Procedures For Amending The Master Plan: All amendments to the master
plan must comply with the following procedures:
      1.   Amendment of the master plan may be initiated as follows:
         a.   Amendment of the master plan may be initiated by the commission
or Board by resolution.
         b.   Amendment of the master plan land use maps may be initiated by
the Director, the commission, the Board, or an owner of real property in Lyon
County, or the property owner's authorized agent, for an amendment for their
property.
         c.   Amendment of the master plan text may be initiated by the
Director, the commission, the Board, or an owner of real property in Lyon
County, or the property owner's authorized agent.
         d.   Amendment or creation of a master plan element may be initiated
by the commission or the Board.
         e.   Citizen advisory boards established by the Board may petition the
commission to initiate an amendment.
         f.   An owner of real property, or the property owner's authorized
agent, must initiate an amendment by filing an application with the Director.
      2.   A request to amend the master plan by an owner of real property, or
the property owner's authorized agent, must be initiated by filing an
application for a master plan amendment with the department.
         a.   The application must be in the form established by the Director
and be accompanied by a fee as set forth by resolution of the Board before it
may be filed.
         b.   Prior to submission of an application for a master plan amendment
that includes a specific plan the applicant shall prepare a preliminary
development plan for review by the Director and other departments at an
informal but mandatory pre- application conference. The Director may require
the applicant to attend more than one pre-application conference to review and
discuss the preliminary plan. Formal application for approval must be made
within six (6) months following the final required pre-application conference.
         c.   In addition to the standards and findings set forth in this
title, the Director may prepare supplemental guidelines for the submission of
applications, and minimum standards and criteria for approving applications.
      3.   No action shall be taken on a master plan amendment or element until
the information required by this section to review and decide upon the proposed
master plan amendment or element is deemed complete by the Director.
      4.   Amendment of the master plan shall adhere to the following schedule:
         a.   The master plan land use map(s) may be amended by the Board no
more than three (3) times per calendar year as part of the tri- annual master
plan amendment review cycle.
         b.   Master plan elements or master plan text amendments may be
submitted in any month during the calendar year for adoption.
         c.   For the purposes of this section, the restriction on the number
of times that the master plan land use map(s) may be amended does not restrict
the number of applications that may be submitted, but only refers to the number
of times the land use map(s) of the master plan may be modified by the Board.
The restriction on the number of times the master plan may be amended does not
apply to information being updated for each element of the master plan.
      5.   The burden of establishing that a master plan amendment is
consistent with the purposes of this title is on the applicant.
   D.   Specific Plan Required:
      1.   A specific plan is required to be submitted for any master plan land
use map amendment in excess of one hundred sixty (160) acres in area.
      2.   A specific plan may be used in conjunction with any master plan land
use map amendment for projects of forty (40) acres or greater.
      3.   Specific plans shall conform to the provisions of this section and
chapter 211 of this title. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.210.02: PLANNING COMMISSION REVIEW AND ACTION ON MASTER PLAN TEXT OR MAP
AMENDMENT:
The commission shall review a master plan amendment or element in conformance
with chapter 6 of this title and this subsection:
   A.   Prior to adoption of any master plan amendment, the commission shall
hold at least one public hearing in accordance with the requirements of chapter
10 of this title for the purpose of receiving oral and written evidence
relative to the amendment application after receiving the report of the
Director.
   B.   The department shall cause notice of the hearing to be published in the
manner provided in accordance with the provisions of chapter 9 of this title
and Nevada Revised Statutes 278.210.
   C.   If a master plan amendment contains specific development plans, then
notice in addition to this section as well as Nevada Revised Statutes 278.210
shall be accomplished, and furthermore, noticing of the specific development
site shall be in accordance with the provisions of Nevada Revised Statutes
278.315(3) and this title.
   D.   Master plan elements and amendments to master plan text that do not
change the boundaries of a land use category of the land use plan map(s) shall
not require property owner noticing.
   E.   Prior to adoption of any master plan amendment, the commission shall
review evidence to determine if the proposed amendment or element is consistent
with existing master plan goals, objectives and actions, or that the proposed
amendment or element represents a necessary and appropriate modification of the
goals, objectives and actions of the master plan. The commission shall approve,
modify, or deny the application based on the results of this review.
   F.   The commission may take action to approve, modify or deny the master
plan amendment or element request.
      1.   The commission may adopt a master plan amendment or element only by
resolution upon the affirmative vote of not less than a two-thirds (2/3)
majority of the total membership of the commission.
      2.   The resolution shall refer expressly to the maps, descriptive
matter, text or other matter intended by the commission to constitute the
amendment or element.
   G.   Failure of the commission to hold a public hearing or take action
within the time frames provided in this chapter shall constitute a
recommendation of approval of the master plan amendment or element application.
An extension of time or continuance for a master plan application may be
granted in accordance with section
15.10.05 of this title.
   H.   The commission, after considering the application, must prepare a
recommendation regarding the request for a master plan amendment to the Board
and include with the recommendation the minutes of its hearing regarding the
application and the record prepared of its hearing. If the commission does not
recommend adoption, it must state why the commission could not make the
required findings for adoption in section
15.210.03 of this chapter. The commission shall transmit the recommendation and
other required information to the Board within forty five (45) days of the
commission's action. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.210.03: FINDINGS FOR MASTER PLAN AMENDMENTS:
   A.   Findings For Master Plan Amendments:
      1.   When making an approval, modification or denial of an amendment to
the master plan land use map or text, the commission and the Board shall, at a
minimum, consider each of the following and base approval, modification, or
denial based on the combined weight of the findings. Each finding shall be
supported by a statement of evidence, facts and conclusions.
         a.   Consistency With The Master Plan: The applicant has demonstrated
that the amendment is in substantial compliance with and promotes the master
plan goals, objectives and actions.
         b.   Compatible Land Uses: The proposed amendment is compatible with
the existing or master planned adjacent land uses, and reflects a logical
change in land uses.
         c.   Response To Change Conditions: The proposed amendment has
demonstrated and responds to changed conditions or further studies that have
occurred since the master plan was adopted by the Board, and the requested
amendment represents a more desirable utilization of land.
         d.   No Adverse Effects: The proposed amendment will not adversely
affect the implementation of the master plan goals, objectives and actions, and
will not adversely impact the public health, safety or welfare.
         e.   Desired Pattern Of Growth: The proposed amendment will promote
the desired pattern for the orderly physical growth of the County, allows
infrastructure to be extended in efficient increments and patterns, maintains
relatively compact development patterns, and guides development of the County
based on the consideration of natural resources, the physical geography and the
efficient expenditure of funds for public services. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.210.04: INITIAL DECISION ON AMENDMENT TO MASTER PLAN BY BOARD:
   A.   Board Review And Action On Amendment To Master Plan: The Board shall
review a master plan amendment or element in accordance with the provisions of
chapter 7 of this title and this subsection:
      1.   Following receipt of a report referencing the recommendation and
findings of the commission, the Board shall hold at least one public hearing
with notification as prescribed in chapters 9 and 10 of this title for the
purpose of receiving oral and written evidence relative to the amendment
application.
         a.   A public hearing will be scheduled before the Board regarding
master plan amendments within sixty (60) days after action taken by the
commission.
         b.   The public hearing shall be noticed as required by chapter 9 of
this title and Nevada Revised Statutes 278.220.
            (1)   If a master plan amendment contains specific development
plans, then notice in accordance with chapter 9 of this title, this subsection,
and Nevada Revised Statutes 278.210 shall be accomplished, and furthermore,
noticing of the specific development site shall be in accordance with the
provisions of Nevada Revised Statutes 278.315(3).
            (2)   Master plan elements and amendments to master plan text that
do not change the boundaries of a land use category of the land use plan map(s)
shall not require property owner noticing.
      2.   Prior to adoption of any master plan amendment, the Board shall
review the commission's report and recommendation, and evidence to determine if
the proposed amendment or element is consistent with existing master plan
goals, objectives and actions, or that the proposed amendment or element
represents a necessary and appropriate modification of the goals, objectives
and actions of the master plan. The Board shall approve, modify, or deny the
master plan amendment or element request based on the results of this review.
      3.   Action to approve, modify or deny a master plan amendment or element
shall require a simple majority of the Board members in attendance. The action
shall refer expressly to the maps, descriptive matter, text or other matter
intended by the Board to constitute the amendment or element.
      4.   If the Board approval proposes to modify the amendment, as
recommended by the commission, it shall refer the proposed modifications to the
commission for its consideration.
         a.   The commission shall be required to hold one public hearing on
the modification and notice this hearing pursuant to this subsection, per
chapter 9 of this title and Nevada Revised Statutes 278.210.
         b.   The commission shall submit a report on the proposed modification
back to the Board within forty (40) days, or such longer period as may be
designated by the Board from the date of referral by the Board, per Nevada
Revised Statutes 278.220(4).
      5.   Failure of the commission to hold a public hearing or take action
within the time frames provided in this subsection shall constitute a
recommendation of approval of the master plan amendment or element application.
      6.   The text of the master plan shall be amended to reflect the Board's
decision and, where applicable, the decision of the Board shall be reflected on
the master plan map.
      7.   An extension of time or continuance for a master plan application
may be granted as follows:
         a.   The time may be extended by mutual agreement of the Board and
applicant.
         b.   An extension of time for Board action may be granted if mutually
agreed upon between the applicant and the Director prior to the Board's hearing
of the application. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.210.05: EFFECTIVE DATE OF AMENDMENT:
   A.   A master plan amendment or element shall become effective immediately
upon majority approval by the Board after the Board has determined that the
amendment or element is in conformance with the master plan and all noticing
procedures have been fully complied with, and upon the filing of a notice of
final action by the Director with the Clerk of the Board. The notice of final
action must also be mailed to the applicant.
   B.   Proposed modifications of an approved master plan amendment shall
require a new application following the same procedure required for the initial
application. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.210.06: LIMITATION ON REAPPLICATION AFTER DENIAL:
   A.   After the denial of a master plan amendment, no application for a
master plan amendment for the same or similar amendment may be accepted from an
owner of real property in Lyon County, or the property owner's authorized
agent, for one year immediately following the denial unless there is a change
in circumstances or new information that would warrant reconsideration as
determined by the Director.
   B.   Only the commission or Board may initiate an amendment of the master
plan for a parcel within twelve (12) months after an amendment on that parcel
has been approved or denied. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
CHAPTER 211
SPECIFIC PLAN
SECTION:
15.211.01: Procedures For Specific Plans
15.211.02: Specific Plan Application Process
15.211.03: Planning Commission Review And Action On Specific Plan
15.211.04: Findings For Specific Plans
15.211.05: Board Review And Action On Specific Plan
15.211.06: Compliance With Provisions
15.211.07: Amendment Of Specific Plan
15.211.01: PROCEDURES FOR SPECIFIC PLANS:
   A.   A specific plan is a type of master plan which may be submitted on its
own or as part of a master plan amendment. A specific plan allows for more
precise implementation of the master plan by requiring or permitting review of
large scale planning issues in order to protect the natural environment, ensure
compatible uses, conserve energy, achieve coherent and diverse development
patterns, and ensure that roads and other infrastructure are or will be
adequate to serve new development.
   B.   A specific plan is required to be submitted for any master plan land
use map amendment in excess of one hundred sixty (160) acres in area, unless
such amendment results in a specific plan land use designation.
   C.   A specific plan may be used in conjunction with any master plan land
use map amendment for projects of forty (40) acres or greater.
   D.   Specific plans shall be required to implement development within lands
identified as the specific plan land use designation on the master plan land
use map. Within such specific plan land use designations, the specific plan
designation may be applied to individual planning subareas without regard to
specific acreage of the planning subarea.
   E.   A specific plan encompassing all contiguous lands identified as
specific plan land use designation in the master plan is required to establish
a statement of purpose or vision, and a set of goals, policies and development
guidelines designed to implement a coherent land development process that
complement and focus the more general goals and policies of the master plan by
addressing planning issues and objectives specific to the area identified as
specific plan. Where multiple specific plans may be necessary to implement
planned development of land designated specific plan, or subareas within an
area designated specific plan, the first specific plan in the series of plans
shall serve as the governing specific plan for the development of subsequent
plans, shall establish the goals, policies and development guidelines for all
subsequent and subarea specific plans, and shall identify a preliminary
sequence and schedule for submission of future plans. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.211.02: SPECIFIC PLAN APPLICATION PROCESS:
   A.   Submission Requirements: If a request to establish a specific plan is
initiated by a property owner or his authorized agent, the specific plan shall
be submitted with the appropriate application materials and fees.
   B.   Pre-Application Conference: An application for a pre- application
conference shall be submitted to the department in conformance with the
provisions of chapter 210 of this title.
   C.   Formal Application: An application for a specific plan shall be
submitted to the department. The application shall be processed by the
department as provided herein:
      1.   On the same application and review schedule as Master Plan
amendments as provided in section
15.210.01 of this title.
      2.   If the property is not within a single ownership and all owners
agree to the proposed development, then all owners shall join the application,
and a map showing the extent of ownership shall be submitted with the
application.
      3.   The following documents shall be included in the application,
provided that the Director may waive submission of documents that are not
pertinent to the proposed development:
         a.   A map showing proposed specific plan area boundaries and the
relationship of the area to abutting uses and structures;
         b.   A plan indicating the existing and proposed distribution,
location and extent, density and general intensity of land uses, including open
space (including a land use plan map and associated text);
         c.   A map of the specific plan area showing sufficient topographical
data to indicate clearly the character of the terrain, the location of
ridgelines and drainage patterns and active or potentially active faults;
         d.   A plan indicating the existing and proposed approximate gross
floor area, lot coverage, height, parking and density;
         e.   A transportation and circulation plan, showing the distribution,
location and extent of proposed streets and the relationship to the local and
regional circulation system, and a traffic impact analysis;
         f.   The distribution, location and extent of major infrastructure
systems to address sewage, water, drainage, solid waste and other essential
services;
         g.   A plan for phasing the development of land uses and
infrastructure including preliminary development schedule indicating phases or
tentative subdivision boundaries, the sequence and timing of development and
the timetable for provision of adequate public facilities and services;
         h.   A financing plan for proposed infrastructure including a plan for
extension of public facilities and services and for flood control and drainage,
including proposed financing arrangements for public improvements;
         i.   A handbook containing guidelines, performance standards and other
criteria including zoning standards and CC&Rs, if applicable, by which
development will proceed;
         j.   Performance standards for the protection and conservation of
natural resources including floodways, wildlife, soils, topography, geology and
hillsides/slopes;
         k.   Performance standards to achieve the goals and objectives of the
master plan;
         l.   Where adjacent land uses are not compatible, appropriate
performance standards for Transition Zones for buffering, screening and open
space to protect adjacent uses;
         m.   Other requirements including development agreements as deemed
appropriate by the Director and any additional requirements as are needed to
meet approval standards; and
         n.   Terms for abandonment or termination of the project. (Ord. 603,
11-1-2018)
15.211.03: PLANNING COMMISSION REVIEW AND ACTION ON SPECIFIC PLAN:
The Planning Commission shall consider and render its recommendation in
accordance with chapter 6 of this title. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.211.04: FINDINGS FOR SPECIFIC PLANS:
In order for the commission to recommend approval and the Board to approve the
proposed specific plan, the following findings shall be made:
   A.   Findings required by section
15.210.03 of this title; and
   B.   That the proposed location of the development and the proposed
conditions under which it will be operated or maintained is consistent with the
goals, objectives and actions embodied in the master plan;
   C.   That the proposed development is in accordance with the purposes and
objectives of this title and, in particular, will further the purposes stated
for each zoning district; and
   D.   That the development will not be detrimental to the public health,
safety or welfare of persons residing or working in or adjacent to such a
development; and will not be detrimental to the properties or improvements in
the vicinity or to the general welfare of the County. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.211.05: BOARD REVIEW AND ACTION ON SPECIFIC PLAN:
   A.   The Board, upon recommendation of the commission, shall be the final
hearing body for specific plans.
   B.   Following receipt of the commission's recommendation, the Board shall
consider and render its decision in accordance with chapter 7 of this title.
The Board shall hold a public hearing noticed and conducted in accordance with
chapter 9 of this title.
   C.   In order for the Board to approve the proposed Specific Plan, the
findings identified in section
15.211.04 of this chapter shall be made. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.211.06: COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS:
   A.   The specific plan designation shall not be used as the basis for
development proposals unless and until a specific plan for the area is approved
and adopted by the Board.
   B.   All discretionary permit applications submitted must be consistent with
applicable provisions of a specific plan.
      1.   Should a property owner in the specific plan designation desire to
develop, prior to adoption of a specific plan, an amendment to change the
master plan designation from specific plan to another land use will be required
before the development proposal is approved by Lyon County.
      2.   Should an area not be designated on the master plan land use map as
a specific plan, it may be requested for specific plan designation accompanying
a master plan amendment application. In such cases the specific plan
designation will follow the review procedures identified in section
15.210.02 of this title for the commission and section
15.210.04 of this title for the Board.
   C.   All other standards as required by this title are applicable to the
specific plan process. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.211.07: AMENDMENT OF SPECIFIC PLAN:
Requests for amendments to an adopted specific plan shall be processed in the
same manner as an application for original approval of the specific plan. (Ord.
603, 11-1-2018)
CHAPTER 15.212
AIRPORT INFLUENCE AREAS
SECTION:
15.212.01: Airport Influence Areas
15.212.02: Structure Height Limitations
15.212.01: AIRPORT INFLUENCE AREAS:
   A.   The Airport Influence Areas designated within the County-wide
Comprehensive Master Plan (master plan) are intended to promote land use
compatibility. The designation recognizes the benefits and potential adverse
impacts that may occur within certain distances from general aviation
facilities and provides a framework to minimize these impacts as well as
protect the safety and efficiency of aircraft operations.
   B.   The purpose is to identify when construction of new development or
alteration of existing development requires identification of potential
avigation hazards on properties located within airport influence areas as
identified in the master plan. (Ord. 638, 11-7-2024)
15.212.02: STRUCTURE HEIGHT LIMITATIONS:
The height limitations within the airport influence areas shall be limited to
the maximum as listed in individual zoning districts' development standards
listed Chapters
15.310  through
15.316 , inclusive and Chapter
15.330.03  (E).
If a parcel is located within an airport influence area as depicted in the
adopted Lyon County Master Plan and a development includes a structure which
would propose to exceed thirty-five feet (35') in height above ground level,
then the developer shall be required to process a Form 7460-1 with the Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA). (Ord. 638, 11-7-2024)
CHAPTER 220
ZONING ADMINISTRATION
SECTION:
15.220.01: Procedures For Amending Zoning Regulations
15.220.02: Procedures For Zoning Text Or Map
15.220.03: Decision Of The Planning Commission
15.220.04: Decision Of The Board On Zoning Amendments
15.220.05: Findings For Zoning Map Amendments
15.220.01: PROCEDURES FOR AMENDING ZONING REGULATIONS:
Amendments to the text of the zoning regulations must be in the form of an
ordinance and may be initiated by the department, the commission, the Board or
by request of a property owner, resident or owner of a business located in the
County. Requests by the public must be submitted to the department in the form
of an application. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.220.02: PROCEDURES FOR ZONING TEXT OR MAP:
For amendments to the text of the zoning regulations or zoning maps, the
amendment must be referred to the commission by the department for a public
hearing. The department must notice the hearing as provided in chapter 9 of
this title. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.220.03: DECISION OF THE PLANNING COMMISSION:
The commission must consider the amendment at a public hearing and must file
its written report recommending approval, approval with modification or
disapproval of the proposed zoning amendment for the Board's consideration.
(Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.220.04: DECISION OF THE BOARD ON ZONING AMENDMENTS:
Following the filing of the commission's report, the Board must consider the
ordinance containing the proposed zoning text amendment or the map amendment at
a public hearing, noticed and conducted in accordance with the provisions of
Nevada Revised Statutes 278.260 and chapters 9 and 10 of this title. The zone
text amendment must be adopted by ordinance and the map amendments must be
adopted in accordance with all procedures established in this title. Following
approval of the ordinance or map amendment, this Code's zoning text or County's
zoning map shall be changed to reflect the amendment. Within ten (10) days
following the public hearing on the zoning amendment, the Board shall file its
written report recommending approval or disapproval of the proposed zoning
amendment with the County Clerk. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.220.05: FINDINGS FOR ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS:
When approving a zoning text or map amendment the commission and the Board must
make the following findings, supported by a statement of evidence, facts and
conclusions.
   A.   That the proposed amendment is consistent with the policies embodied in
the adopted master plan and the underlying land use designation contained in
the land use plan;
   B.   That the proposed amendment will not be inconsistent with the adequate
public facilities policies contained in this title;
   C.   That the proposed amendment is compatible with the actual or master
planned adjacent uses. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
CHAPTER 221
UNLISTED USES
SECTION:
15.221.01: Determination On Unlisted Uses
15.221.02: Application Procedure
15.221.03: Investigation And Report
15.221.04: Findings
15.221.01: DETERMINATION ON UNLISTED USES:
Lyon County may determine whether or not a use not specifically listed as
allowed in a particular zoning district (by right or a conditionally permitted)
may be deemed sufficiently similar to be allowed in a particular zoning
district, either by right or conditionally permitted. Such determination can
either be made administratively or through commission review of similarity of
the use to uses already listed in accordance with the following:
   A.   Where the term "similar uses permitted by Director determination" is
mentioned within any zone district, it shall be deemed to mean other uses
which, in the judgment of the Director as evidenced by a written decision, are
similar to and not more objectionable to the general welfare than those uses
specifically listed in the same district.
   B.   The determination on the acceptance of the proposed use will be issued
in the form of an administrative decision and the text of the Zoning Code will
not be changed through this determination. If approved, the administrative
decision would become the allowance for the proposed use to be included within
the requested zoning designation.
   C.   The Director may provide the administrative determination or may refer
the request for determination on an unlisted use to the commission. If the
administrative determination is referred to the commission, the Director shall
provide a recommendation for consideration in the referral.
   D.   The Director's determination regarding conformance of a use to a zoning
district may be appealed to the commission pursuant to chapter 4 of this title.
The Planning Commission's determination regarding conformance of a use to a
zoning district may be appealed to the Board, pursuant to chapter 6 of this
title. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.221.02: APPLICATION PROCEDURE:
   A.   Application for a determination on an unlisted use shall be made in
writing to the Director, and shall include a detailed description of the
proposed use and any other information as may be required to facilitate review
of the request, along with the required fee as established by resolution.
   B.   The application shall provide rationale that the proposed use is
consistent with uses permitted in the respective zoning district by utilizing a
nationally accepted land use classification manual, such as the North American
Industry Classification System ("NAICS"), Land Based Classification Standards
("LBCS") or American Planning Association ("APA") or other resources that may
be acceptable to the Director.
   C.   The application shall provide the anticipated number of employees,
anticipated traffic impacts, anticipated parking demand, proposed hours of
operation, potential impacts on adjoining properties. The anticipated number of
average daily trips ("ADTs") of the proposed use shall increase by no more than
ten percent (10%) above what is generated by uses either allowed or
conditionally permitted within the zoning district. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.221.03: INVESTIGATION AND REPORT:
The Director shall review the application and request relative to the following
criteria and provide the analysis within a final administrative determination
letter to the applicant:
   A.   Comparison of the proposed use to the type and intensity of other uses
principally permitted or conditionally permitted in the same zoning district;
   B.   Evaluation of the purpose and intent of that zoning district;
   C.   Review of the master plan to compare the proposed use characteristics
with the applicable goals and objectives.
If a determination is referred on to the commission, the Director shall prepare
a report which will address the items above and shall submit copies to the
applicant and the commission. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.221.04: FINDINGS:
The Director, or the commission upon referral by the Director, shall base the
decision upon the following findings:
   A.   The use in question is of a similar type and intensity to other
principally permitted or conditionally permitted uses in the same zoning
district.
   B.   The use in question meets the purpose and intent of the district in
which it is proposed.
   C.   The use in question meets and conforms to the applicable policies and
maps of the master plan and would be appropriately served by planned or
existing infrastructure. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
CHAPTER 230
CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
SECTION:
15.230.01: Purpose And Intent
15.230.02: Limits On Authority
15.230.03: Status Of Conditionally Permitted Uses
15.230.04: Application For Conditional Use Permit
15.230.05: Procedures For Conditional Use Permits
15.230.06: Findings
15.230.07: Imposition Of Conditions
15.230.08: Maintenance Of Permit, Expiration And Revocation
15.230.01: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   A.   Conditionally permitted uses are those uses which are generally
compatible with the land uses permitted by right in a given zoning district,
but which require individual review of their location, design and configuration
and the imposition of conditions to mitigate potential impacts of the use at a
particular location within a given zoning district.
   B.   Only those uses that are enumerated as conditionally permitted uses in
a particular zoning district shall be authorized unless a similar unlisted use
determination has been made per chapter 221 of this title. A conditional use
permit shall not be required for a use allowed as a permitted use in a given
zoning district. No conditionally permitted use may be established until a
conditional use permit is issued in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
   C.   Special use permits (SUP) approved prior to the effective date of this
title may continue as a conditional use without modification of the SUP
provided the following conditions are met:
      1.   The special use is/was in active use upon the effective date of this
title, and;
      2.   The special use has continued in active use in conformance with the
original conditions of approval.
Upon discontinuance of a use permitted as a special use for a period of one
year, the SUP shall be null and void, and the use shall not be reinstated or
expanded without approval of a conditional use permit in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
   D.   Expansion or modification of a use previously permitted as a special
use will require approval of a new conditional use permit. Expansion or
extension of a lawfully created nonconforming use will require approval of a
conditional use permit. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018; Ord. 607, 9-19-2019)
15.230.02: LIMITS ON AUTHORITY:
   A.   A conditional use permit cannot be used in lieu of a variance to modify
or waive any of the regulations or standards prescribed for any use for which a
conditional use permit is required.
   B.   This provision does not prevent the property owner from concurrently
applying for a variance pursuant to chapter 203 of this title. (Ord. 603, 11-1-
2018)
15.230.03: STATUS OF CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES:
   A.   The designation of a use in a land use district as a conditionally
permitted use does not constitute an authorization or assurance that such use
will be approved.
   B.   Approval of a conditional use permit must authorize only the particular
use for which the permit is requested and issued.
   C.   No use authorized by a conditional use permit shall be enlarged,
extended, increased in intensity or relocated beyond the limit of the
conditional use permit unless an application is made to modify the conditional
use permit in accordance with the procedures set forth in this title.
   D.   Development of the use may not be carried out until the applicant has
secured all the permits and approvals required by this title, this Code, or
regional, State and Federal agencies. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.230.04: APPLICATION FOR CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
   A.   All applications for conditional use permit shall be made on forms
provided by the department. The department shall provide the applicant with
detailed information about specific submission requirements.
   B.   An application for a conditional use permit may be submitted by the
property owner or by an agent on the owner's behalf.
   C.   The application must be processed as provided in chapter 3 of this
title.
   D.   If the proposed use requires a division of land as provided in this
title, an application for a land division permit shall be submitted in
conjunction with the application for a conditional use permit. Approval of the
conditional use permit shall not become effective until final approval of the
land division permit; provided, that if the land division is proposed in
phases, the approval of the conditional use permit shall take effect upon final
approval of the phase of the land division containing the property on which the
conditionally permitted use is to be located. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.230.05: PROCEDURES FOR CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS:
   A.   The Director must submit a report to the commission containing the
required findings and recommendations for the conditional use permit request.
   B.   The commission must hold a public hearing not later than sixty five
(65) days after the application has been deemed complete unless a longer time
or a different process of review is provided in an agreement entered into
pursuant to chapter 110 of this title and Nevada Revised Statutes 278.0201.
Published and personal notice of the public hearing must be given in the manner
provided in chapter 9 of this title. The public hearing must be conducted in
accordance with chapter 10 of this title.
   C.   When a conditional use permit is associated with an application that
requires a hearing by the Board or on appeal, the application shall be
processed in accordance with chapter 7 of this title. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.230.06: FINDINGS:
When considering applications for a conditional use permit, the commission or
Board, where applicable, must evaluate the impact of the conditional use on and
its compatibility with surrounding properties and neighborhoods to mitigate
potential impacts of the use at a particular location and make the following
findings:
   A.   The proposed use at the specified location is consistent with the
policies embodied in the adopted master plan and the general purpose and intent
of the applicable district regulations;
   B.   The proposed use is compatible with the character and integrity of
adjacent development and neighborhoods and includes improvements or
modifications either on-site or within the public rights-of-way to mitigate
development related adverse impacts, such as traffic, noise, odors, visual
nuisances, or other similar adverse effects to adjacent development and
neighborhoods;
   C.   The proposed use will not generate vehicular traffic which cannot be
accommodated by the existing, planned or conditioned roadway infrastructure;
   D.   The proposed use incorporates roadway improvements, traffic control
devices or mechanisms, or access restrictions to control traffic flow or divert
traffic as needed to mitigate the development impacts;
   E.   The proposed use incorporates features to address adverse effects,
including visual impacts and noise, of the proposed conditional use on adjacent
properties;
   F.   The proposed conditional use complies with all additional standards
imposed on it by the particular provisions of this chapter and all other
requirements of this title applicable to the proposed conditional use and uses
within the applicable base zoning district, including but not limited to, the
adequate public facility policies of this title; and
   G.   The proposed conditional use will not be materially detrimental to the
public health, safety and welfare, and will not result in material damage or
prejudice to other properties in the vicinity. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.230.07: IMPOSITION OF CONDITIONS:
In approving a conditional use permit, the commission or Board may impose
conditions deemed reasonable and necessary to ensure that the approval would be
in compliance with the findings required by section
15.230.06, "Findings", of this chapter, and to preserve the public health,
safety, and general welfare. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.230.08: MAINTENANCE OF PERMIT, EXPIRATION AND REVOCATION:
   A.   The approval timeframe of a conditional use permit shall be consistent
with the timeframes allowed within chapter 13 of this title, unless additional
time is granted based upon consideration of the specific circumstances of the
project. If the conditional use has not been established within the allowed
timeframes, the conditional use permit shall be null and void and such use
shall not be made of the property except upon the granting of a new conditional
use permit.
   B.   A conditional use permit is void one year after the activity granted by
such conditional use permit is discontinued.
   C.   If a conditional use permit is determined to be in violation, the
approval may be subject to revocation, per chapter 14 of this title or
amendment by the final decision making body.
   D.   A conditional use permit may be modified or amended in accordance with
the provisions of section
15.12.04 of this title. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
CHAPTER 231
HOME OCCUPATION AND HOME BASED BUSINESS PERMIT
SECTION:
15.231.01: Purpose
15.231.02: Application Procedure
15.231.03: Additional Provisions For Mobile Businesses
15.231.04: Review By Director
15.231.05: Modification Or Revocation By The Planning Commission
15.231.01: PURPOSE:
   A.   The purpose of the home occupation (HO) and home based business permit
(HBB) provisions is to permit the establishment and operation of businesses
within residential neighborhoods and agricultural areas, in a way to mitigate
anticipated impacts of the businesses on adjacent properties or the general
neighborhood. Home occupations and home based businesses are limited to those
uses meeting the performance requirements outlined in chapter 335 of this
title.
   B.   No home occupation or home based business may occur and no permit for a
home occupation or home based business shall be issued unless the procedures
and criteria specified in this chapter and the performance based standards
listed in chapter 335 of this title are satisfied. It is the applicant's
responsibility to review any applicable codes, covenants and restrictions
(CC&Rs) which may limit the establishment of a home occupation or home based
business. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.231.02: APPLICATION PROCEDURE:
   A.   An application for an HO or an HBB must be filed with the department
concurrently with a business license application.
   B.   The department shall review the request for an HO/HBB permit to ensure
compliance with the criteria for operations established in chapter 335 of this
title. In rendering a decision, the Director shall clearly state, in writing,
any conditions of approval or reasons for denial. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.231.03: ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS FOR MOBILE BUSINESSES:
A mobile business may be permitted as an HBB, provided that the mobile business
is operated pursuant to the conditions of operation described in chapter 335 of
this title, in addition to the following conditions which specifically apply to
mobile businesses:
   A.   The mobile business must comply with all applicable requirements of any
Federal, State or local agency with regulatory or permitting authority over the
conduct of that business.
   B.   Any automotive-related services shall be limited to cleaning,
detailing, and minor replacement or repair to glass or accessory parts; no
mobile business operating under a home occupation permit shall be permitted to
conduct auto repair, auto body or engine work, except on an emergency roadside
repair basis.
   C.   No work shall be conducted in a publicly accessible parking lot;
however, work may be conducted in parking lots which are restricted to
employees only.
   D.   No work shall be conducted on County-owned property, including parks,
parking lots, or public rights-of-way. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.231.04: REVIEW BY DIRECTOR:
The Director may periodically review any HO/HBB to ensure that it is being
operated in a manner consistent with the conditions of operation and in a
manner which is not detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare, or
materially injurious to properties in the vicinity. If, after review, the
Director deems that there is sufficient evidence to warrant a full examination,
then a public hearing date shall be set. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.231.05: MODIFICATION OR REVOCATION BY THE PLANNING COMMISSION:
   A.   If the Director determines that the HO or HBB is not being conducted in
compliance with the requirements of this chapter or in conformance with the
conditions of approval and efforts to achieve compliance with the requirements
or conformance with the conditions fail, the Director shall notify the operator
of the home occupation or home based business of the date for a public hearing
on the operator's compliance with this chapter. Such notice shall be sent by
certified mail and shall state that the commission will be reviewing the HO/HBB
for possible modification or revocation. It shall also state the date, time and
place of the hearing. The public hearing shall be conducted and notice given in
accordance with chapters 9 and 10 of this title.
   B.   The Director shall investigate the evidence and prepare a report to the
commission regarding the reported violation of the HO/HBB requirements. A copy
of the report shall be sent to the operator of the home occupation or business.
Upon conclusion of the hearing per chapter 6 of this title, the commission
shall make one of the following determinations and take such accompanying
action:
      1.   Find that the home occupation or home based business is being
conducted in an appropriate manner and that no action to modify or revoke the
permit is necessary; or
      2.   Find that the home occupation or home based business is not being
conducted in an appropriate manner and impose modifications or conditions as
are necessary to mitigate previously unforeseen impacts upon the surrounding
neighborhood; or,
      3.   Find that the HO or HBB is not being conducted in an appropriate
manner and that measures are not available to mitigate the impacts of the
business. Upon making this determination, the commission shall revoke the HO/
HBB and order the operation to cease and desist in the time specified by the
commission. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
CHAPTER 233
TEMPORARY USE PERMIT
SECTION:
15.233.01: Purpose
15.233.02: General Provisions
15.233.03: Permits Required
15.233.04: Temporary Use Permit Required
15.233.05: Application Procedure
15.233.06: Review Criteria
15.233.01: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate land use activities of a temporary
nature so as to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. The intent of
these regulations is to mitigate potential impacts that are foreseen from a
temporary use to protect the rights of adjacent residents and landowners. (Ord.
603, 11-1-2018)
15.233.02: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Temporary uses shall be permitted only as specified in those zoning
districts where temporary uses are specifically permitted.
   B.   A temporary use or structure which does not have a valid temporary use
permit may be subject to the enforcement provisions of this title and other
applicable laws.
   C.   A change in ownership or operator of a use or structure subject to a
temporary use permit, as specified in this chapter, or an approved change or
modification to the structure or use allowed on a parcel subject to a permit,
shall not affect the time periods established by this chapter to allow the
temporary uses or structures.
   D.   When the last period of time allowed by this chapter has lapsed, the
temporary use permit and any extension is void.
   E.   Noncompliance with the provisions and standards listed in section
15.335.04 of this title and/or the conditions of approval for the temporary use
permit shall be grounds for the reviewing authority to revoke any permit for a
temporary use. The reviewing authority shall give notice of the action, along
with the reasons for the action, to the permittee. The permittee may appeal the
decision by filing an appeal as allowed and specified in chapter 12 of this
title.
   F.   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the Director is
authorized to approve, conditionally approve or deny a permit for a temporary
use. The Director may establish conditions and limitations, including but not
limited to hours of operation, setbacks, provision of parking areas, signing
and lighting, traffic circulation and access, temporary or permanent site
improvements, and other measures necessary to minimize potential effects on
properties adjacent to and in the vicinity of the proposed temporary use.
   G.   The Director may require a cash deposit, letter of credit or other
security to the approval of the Director to defray the costs of cleanup of a
site in the event the applicant fails to leave the property in a presentable
and satisfactory condition or to remove the temporary use. (Ord. 603, 11-1-
2018)
15.233.03: PERMITS REQUIRED:
Applications for temporary uses must be filed with the Director along with the
required fee, and shall be subject to the specified requirements and criteria
and to any other additional conditions required by the County. (Ord. 603, 11-1-
2018)
15.233.04: TEMPORARY USE PERMIT REQUIRED:
A temporary use permit shall be required for the temporary uses listed in
section
15.335.04, table 15.335-2, "Temporary Use Reference", of this title. Temporary
uses shall comply with the provisions of section
15.335.04, "Temporary Uses Permitted Based On Standards", of this title. (Ord.
603, 11-1-2018)
15.233.05: APPLICATION PROCEDURE:
Applications for temporary use permits, as described in this chapter, must be
filed with the Director in a manner prescribed by the Director, along with the
required fee as established by resolution of the Board. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.233.06: REVIEW CRITERIA:
No temporary use shall be approved unless it can be determined that:
   A.   The use will be compatible with adjacent uses and will not
significantly impact the surrounding area by means of noise, odor, dust or
other nuisances;
   B.   Any increase in traffic resulting from the use will not significantly
impact the surrounding area or the County at large;
   C.   The proposed use complies with all applicable policies and ordinances
of the County. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
CHAPTER 234
SITE IMPROVEMENT PERMITS
SECTION:
15.234.01: Site Improvement Permits Defined
15.234.02: Permits Required
15.234.03: Work Exempt From Permit
15.234.04: Site Improvement Permit Procedures
15.234.05: Retention Of Plans
15.234.06: Expiration Of Permits
15.234.07: Fees
15.234.01: SITE IMPROVEMENT PERMITS DEFINED:
A site improvement permit authorizes on-site construction over private property
for single family detached residential subdivisions and multifamily (more than
3 dwelling units) developments prior to the issuance of a permit to construct a
building, and may include improvements within a public roadway associated with
the on-site construction such as site grading, installation of public
utilities, drainage improvements, road improvements including curbs, sidewalks
and related features, up to and including building pad certification. The site
improvement permit is a separate permit which expedites the construction
process for larger developments. A building permit may be issued instead of a
site improvement permit when the building permit submittal includes all on-site
construction work described above in this paragraph. Any work within abutting
rights-of-way requires separate encroachment permits. For detached single
family residential developments, a final subdivision map must be processed
concurrent with an application of a site improvement permit for the detached
single family residential development. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 607, 9-
19-2019; Ord. 633, 1-3-2023)
15.234.02: PERMITS REQUIRED:
A site improvement permit is required for work, including grading, trenching,
or construction of public or private utilities, drainage structures or roads
unless the work is allowed under an existing building permit. (Ord. 603, 11-1-
2018)
15.234.03: WORK EXEMPT FROM PERMIT:
   A.   A site improvement permit is not required for the following:
      1.   Work exempt from building permits pursuant to chapter 239 of this
title;
      2.   Clearing and grubbing, plowing and farrowing on property involved in
active agricultural production;
      3.   Other grading work exempted by section 1803 of the IBC;
      4.   Grading under fifty (50) cubic yards (38.23m3);
      5.   Exploration, extraction and processing of minerals and construction
materials;
      6.   Work specifically approved under a building permit or encroachment
permit issued under this chapter.
   B.   Exemption from the permit requirements of this title does not grant
authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the
provisions of this title or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction.
(Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.234.04: SITE IMPROVEMENT PERMIT PROCEDURES:
   A.   The property owner or his authorized representative must tender a
completed site improvement permit application to the department on a form
furnished by the department. The application must contain the following
information:
      1.   A description of the work to be covered by the permit.
      2.   A legal description of the land on which the proposed work is to be
done, street address or similar description that identifies and definitely
locates the proposed work.
      3.   The application must be accompanied by grading plans, improvement
plans, diagrams, studies, computations and specifications and other data drawn
to scale and clarity to indicate the location, nature and extent of the work
proposed and show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of this
title and all relevant laws, ordinances, rules and regulations.
      4.   An itemized engineer's estimated value of work, signed, stamped and
dated by a Nevada professional engineer where plans, studies or computations
are required to be prepared by a Nevada professional engineer, or an itemized
contractor's executed contract with estimated value of work, signed and dated
with the contractor's license number and limit. A site improvements surety
approved by the District Attorney or a cash deposit to cover one hundred fifty
percent (150%) of the engineer's estimated value of work based on the full
required improvements ("bond") shall be submitted with the application and be
reviewed and approved by the County Engineer prior to commencement of work.
      5.   The signature of the property owner and the applicant or applicant's
authorized representative.
   B.   A site improvement permit may include all site improvements including,
but not limited to grading, utility installation, drainage improvements, and
road construction. The application, plans, specifications, computations and
other data filed by an applicant for a permit must be reviewed by the Director,
the County Engineer, the Utilities Director, the Road Superintendent, and the
Fire Chief of the appropriate Fire District or their respective designees. The
plans shall be reviewed by other departments of this jurisdiction and agencies
to verify compliance with any applicable laws under their jurisdiction. If the
Director finds that the work described in an application for a permit and the
plans, specifications and other data filed with the application conform to the
requirements of this title, other pertinent laws and ordinances, that the plans
have been signed by all responsible agencies where applicable, that security
has been posted, and that all required fees have been paid, the Director shall
issue a site improvement permit.
   C.   Prior to the initiation of site improvement work, a pre- construction
meeting shall be held with the County Engineer and the Utilities Department
Director or their designees.
   D.   The Road Superintendent, Utilities Department Director, Community
Development Director and County Engineer may allow the reduction of the site
improvements bond for portions of the major components of the improvements
installed/completed to the satisfaction/acceptance of the Utilities Department
Director, Community Development Director and County Engineer.
   E.   The Road Superintendent, Utilities Department Director, Community
Development Director and County Engineer or their designees shall inspect and
verify that all of the site improvements have been installed to their
respective satisfaction prior to issuing a Certificate of Completion.
   F.   The site improvements surety bond will be held for one year from the
date of issuance of the Certificate of Completion for the site improvements to
guarantee the quality of the site improvements before being scheduled before
the Board of Commissioners for release. At the end of one year, the site
improvements surety bond will be replaced by a maintenance bond in the amount
of ten percent (10%) of the cost of construction estimate. The maintenance bond
will be held by the County for one year after the date of conversion from the
site improvements bond to the maintenance bond. After the County Engineer has
inspected and deemed the improvements to have been maintained properly, then
the ten percent (10%) maintenance bond may be scheduled before the Board of
Commissioners for release.
   G.   If site improvements are completed, inspected and verified as installed
to the satisfaction of the Road Superintendent, Utilities Department Director,
Community Development Director and County Engineer prior to recording of a
Record of Survey for commercial or industrial subdivisions), then a maintenance
bond in the amount of ten percent (10%) of the cost of construction estimate is
required with a Certificate of Completion signed by the County Engineer. Once
the final Record of Survey for commercial or industrial subdivisions has
recorded and after the County Engineer has inspected and deemed the
improvements to have been maintained properly, then the ten percent (10%)
maintenance bond may be scheduled before the Board of Commissioners for
release. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 607, 9-19-2019)
15.234.05: RETENTION OF PLANS:
   A.   One set of approved stamped plans, specifications and computations must
be retained by the department and one set of approved stamped plans and
specifications must be kept on the site of the construction work at all times
during which the work authorized is in progress.
   B.   The department must retain one permanent set of approved stamped
improvement plans, specifications and computations, including all required "as-
builts".
   C.   Prior to issuance of a Certificate of Completion for the improvements,
release of the site improvement bond and acceptance of the maintenance bond,
the project engineer of record shall provide the County with a digital copy of
all required "as- builts" plans with PDF and DWG (or shape) files containing
the line work for all constructed public utilities and road construction that
are rectified (geo-registered, tied to a grid based coordinate system) drawings
with cross-referenced drawings attached to the AutoCAD file and provide the
scale factor used to coordinate the ground coordinates to grid coordinates.
(Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.234.06: EXPIRATION OF PERMITS:
   A.   Every site improvement permit issued by the department under the
provisions of this title will expire and become void if the work authorized by
the permit is not commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date
of the permit, or if the work authorized by the permit is suspended or
abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of one hundred
eighty (180) days. Before any work can be recommenced, a new permit must be
first obtained and a fee in the amount of one-half (1/2) that required for a
new permit for the work, provided no changes have been made or will be made in
the original plans and specifications for the work, the plans were approved
under the prevailing Development Code provisions, and that any suspension or
abandonment has not exceeded one year. In order to renew action on a permit
after expiration, the permittee must obtain a new permit for the work and pay a
new full permit fee.
   B.   Any permittee holding an unexpired permit may apply for an extension of
the time within which work may commence under that permit when the permittee is
unable to commence work within the time required by this section for good and
satisfactory reason. The Director may extend the time for action by the
permittee for a period not exceeding one hundred eighty (180) days on written
request by the permittee showing that circumstances beyond the control of the
permittee have prevented action from being taken. No permit may be extended
more than once.
   C.   Every site improvement permit issued by the department expires and
becomes void after a period of two (2) years from the date of issuance. When a
180-day extension has been granted for commencement of work, it expires after a
period of two (2) years and six (6) months from the date of issuance. Before
work can be recommenced, a new permit must be obtained, and fee in the amount
of one-half (1/2) that required for a new permit for the work, provided no
changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications
for the work, and provided that the plans were approved under the prevailing
uniform codes. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.234.07: FEES:
Fees for site improvement permits are established by resolution of the Board.
(Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
CHAPTER 235
DESIGN REVIEW
SECTION:
15.235.01: Applicability
15.235.02: Application For Design Review
15.235.03: Procedures For Design Review
15.235.04: Findings
15.235.05: Decision On Design Review And Appeal
15.235.01: APPLICABILITY:
   A.   Except where other provisions of this title required the review of a
conditional use permit or tentative map application which incorporate a similar
level of review as a design review, approval of a design review application, in
accordance with this section shall be required for the development applications
listed below. A design review application may be required as a condition of
approval of another application when additional review may be necessary (e.g.,
for satellite developments located within a large regional commercial
development):
      1.   Any land use and development activities made subject to a design
review under section
15.320.03,
tables 15.320-1,
15.320-2,
15.320-3,
15.320-4 and
15.320-5 of this title.
      2.   Communication facilities as set forth in section
15.236.04,
table 15.236-1 and section
15.239.06 of this title unless exempted in section
15.236.03 of this title.
      3.   Power transmission lines located within a designated utility
corridor as identified in the County's master plan utility corridor map.
      4.   New multi-family residential consisting of three or more dwelling
units.
      5.   New commercial or industrial buildings or building additions that
exceed or in combination with the existing building footprint exceed 4,999
square feet total.
   No building permit shall be issued for a development that is subject to
design review until a design review has been approved in accordance with this
chapter and conditions of approval have been met.
   B.   The following uses are exempt from the design review requirements:
      1.   Interior remodels which do not result in substantial changes in the
character of the occupancy or use, or cause greater impact on traffic, water or
sewer usage, as determined by the Director;
      2.   Repair and maintenance of structures or parking areas constrained by
the existing structure and not altering existing drainage patterns or
easements;
      3.   Replacement or repair of a structure partially destroyed by fire,
flood or other natural occurrence, when the repair of such structure is
determined by the Director to be consistent with the design, use and intensity
of the original structure and consistent with the zoning and master plan
designations;
      4.   Reductions of floor area or building area within a previously
approved design review where it is determined that the modification would not
result in a significant change in site design, building design, or
functionality of the site. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 613, 12-3-2020)
15.235.02: APPLICATION FOR DESIGN REVIEW:
   A.   An application for design review may be submitted by the property owner
or by an agent on the owner's behalf.
   B.   The application shall be submitted and processed in accordance with
this title.
   C.   If the design review is submitted concurrent with a request for a
division of land, an application for a land division permit shall be submitted
in conjunction with the application for design review. Approval of the design
review shall not become effective until final approval of the land division
permit; provided that if the land division is proposed in phases, the approval
of the design review shall take effect upon final approval of the phase of the
land division containing the property on which the design review is to be
located. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.235.03: PROCEDURES FOR DESIGN REVIEW:
The Director shall be the final decision-maker for design review applications.
Design review applications are subject to administrative review and do not
require a public hearing. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.235.04: FINDINGS:
When considering applications for design review, the Director shall evaluate
the impact of the design on and its compatibility with surrounding properties
and neighborhoods to mitigate potential impacts of the development and make the
following findings:
   A.   The proposed development is consistent with the goals and policies
embodied in the adopted master plan and the general purpose and intent of the
applicable zoning district regulations;
   B.   The proposed development is compatible with the character and integrity
of adjacent development and neighborhoods and includes improvements or
modifications either on-site or within the public rights-of-way to mitigate
development related adverse impacts, such as traffic, noise, odors, visual
nuisances, or other similar adverse effects to adjacent development and
neighborhoods;
   C.   The proposed development will not generate vehicular traffic which
cannot be accommodated by the existing, planned or conditioned roadway
infrastructure;
   D.   The proposed development incorporates roadway improvements, traffic
control devices, mechanisms or access restrictions to control traffic flow or
divert traffic as needed to mitigate the development impacts;
   E.   The proposed development incorporates features to address adverse
effects, including visual impacts, of the proposed development on adjacent
properties;
   F.   The proposed development complies with all additional standards imposed
on it by the particular provisions of this title, the Lyon County Design
Criteria and Improvement Standards and all other requirements of this title
applicable to the proposed development and uses within the applicable base
zoning district, including but not limited to, the adequate public facility
policies of chapter 110 of this title; and
   G.   The proposed development will not be materially detrimental to the
public health, safety, and welfare, or result in material damage or prejudice
to other properties in the vicinity. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.235.05: DECISION ON DESIGN REVIEW AND APPEAL:
   A.   The Director shall approve, deny or conditionally approve the design
review within thirty (30) working days of the design review application being
deemed complete in accordance with chapter 3 of this title. Appeal of the
Director's decision shall be to the Planning Commission.
   B.   The Director, in his sole discretion may refer a design review
application for review and decision by the commission in lieu of rendering a
decision. In such event, the commission shall consider the design review at a
public hearing and render its decision in accordance with chapter 6 of this
title. Appeal shall be to the Board in accordance with section
15.06.03 of this title. The commission and the Board shall apply the standards
set forth in this chapter in acting on the design review. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
CHAPTER 236
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
SECTION:
15.236.01: Purpose
15.236.02: Applicability
15.236.03: Exemptions
15.236.04: Uses Permitted
15.236.05: Building Permit (Type 1)
15.236.06: Design Review (Type 2)
15.236.07: Uses Permitted Subject To Conditional Use Review (Type 3)
15.236.08: Submission Requirements
15.236.09: Collocation Protocol
15.236.10: Abandoned Facilities
15.236.01: PURPOSE:
The purpose of these regulations is to ensure that wireless communication
facilities (WCF) are regulated in a manner which: a) minimizes visual impacts;
b) promotes the goal of universal service to all customers; c) encourages
collocation of facilities to minimize the number of new structures required; d)
provides review for structural safety; and e) creates a review process where
all service providers are fairly treated. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.236.02: APPLICABILITY:
The regulations contained in this chapter are applicable to all providers,
facilities, installations, equipment and services involved in the provision of
wireless telecommunications and broadcast communications services, including
cellular telephone, personal communications services (PCS), enhanced or
specialized mobile telephones, commercial paging services, and commercial radio
and television broadcasting, unless exempted by these regulations. All new,
modified, and/or reconstructed facilities subject to these regulations shall
comply with all permit requirements of this title, including where applicable,
development permits, building permits, and business licensing requirements.
(Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.236.03: EXEMPTIONS:
The following uses and activities shall be exempt from these regulations:
   A.   Replacement antennas or equipment, provided the replacement antennas
and/or equipment have a function similar to the replaced antenna and/or
equipment and do not exceed the overall size of the original antenna and/or
equipment.
   B.   Amateur radio towers and antennas, citizen band transmitters and
antennas.
   C.   Whip or other similar antennas no taller than six feet (6') with a
maximum diameter of two inches (2").
   D.   Antennas (including direct-to-home satellite dishes, TV antennas, and
wireless cable antennas) used by viewers to receive video programming signals
from direct broadcast facilities, broadband radio service providers, and TV
broadcast stations regardless of zone category.
   E.   Low-powered networked telecommunications facilities such as microcell
radio transceivers located on existing utility poles and light standards within
public right-of-way. Low-powered networked telecommunications facilities shall
comply with this chapter.
   F.   All military, Federal, State, and local government communication
facilities.
   G.   Cell on wheels (COW), cell on light truck (COLT), repeater and truck
(RAT) and similar temporary mobile equipment as determined by the Director
which are permitted as temporary uses in Nonresidential Zones for a period not
to exceed fourteen (14) days, or during a period of emergency as declared by a
government entity.
   H.   Antennas and equipment and other apparatus completely located within an
existing structure whose purpose is to enhance or facilitate communication
function of other structures on the site.
   I.   Antennas, microwave dishes, associated towers and equipment that is
located on Federal or State owned property and reviewed and regulated through
the State or Federal process, unless the facility is to be located within one
hundred feet (100') of privately held land. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.236.04: USES PERMITTED:
   A.   Collocation Of Antenna(s) On Existing Towers Conforming To The
Requirements Of Table 15.236-1: Installing an antenna(s) on an existing
communication tower of any height is permitted, so long as the additional
antenna(s) do not exceed the height of the structure or tower, no more than
three (3) providers are collocating on the tower or structure, and the color of
the antenna(s) blends with the existing structure or surroundings.
   B.   Collocation Of Antenna(s) On Existing Non-Tower Structures Conforming
To The Requirements Of Table 15.236-1: Installing an antenna(s) on an existing
structure other than a tower, such as a building, water tank, sign, light
fixture or utility pole, is permitted so long as the additional antenna(s) do
not exceed the limits contained in table 15.236-1 of this section, no more than
three (3) providers are collocating on the structure, and the color of the
antenna(s) blends with the existing structure or surroundings.
   C.   Installation Of Accessory Equipment Shelters: Any provider who is
authorized to collocate on an existing tower or non-tower structure as provided
in subsections A and B of this section, shall be allowed to install any
necessary accessory equipment shelters and related equipment at or near the
base of the tower or structure, or within the structure, so long as:
      1.   The accessory equipment shelter and related equipment are either
located completely within the existing structure, or are located within the
fenced area previously approved;
      2.   The equipment shelter and related equipment shall comply with the
development standards, such as setbacks, height limitations and lot coverage,
of the base zone.
   TABLE 15.236-1
Zoning   Building Permit Design Review Conditional Setbacks, Special
District (Type 1)        With Notice   Use Permit  Requirements
                         (Type 2)      (Type 3)    And References
Zoning      Building Permit Design Review    Conditional      Setbacks, Special
District    (Type 1)        With Notice      Use Permit       Requirements
                            (Type 2)         (Type 3)         And References
                                                              Setbacks for type
                                                              1 and type 2
                                                              facilities: equal
                                                              to overall
                            Add-ons up to                     structure or
            0 to 50' in     40' above                         tower height.
AG          height          structure or     >100' in height  Type 3 facilities
                           stand alone to                    and type 2
            Structural      100' in height                    facilities within
                                                              1,000' of any
                                                              State highway:
                                                              twice the overall
                                                              structure or
                                                              tower height
                                                              Setbacks for type
                                                              1 and type 2
                                                              facilities: equal
                                                              to overall
                            Add-ons up to                     structure or
            0 to 50' in     40' above                         tower height.
NIA         height          structure or     >100' in height  Type 3 facilities
                           stand alone to                    and type 2
            Structural      100' in height                    facilities within
                                                              1,000' of any
                                                              State highway:
                                                              twice the overall
                                                              structure or
                                                              tower height
                                                              Setbacks for type
                                                              1 and type 2
                                                              facilities: equal
                                                              to overall
                            Add-ons up to                     structure or
            0 to 50' in     40' above                         tower height.
RL          height          structure or     >100' in height  Type 3 facilities
                           stand alone to                    and type 2
            Structural      100' in height                    facilities within
                                                              1,000' of any
                                                              State highway:
                                                              twice the overall
                                                              structure or
                                                              tower height
                                                              Setbacks for type
                                                              1 and type 2
                                                              facilities: equal
                                                              to overall
                                                              structure or
            Up to 80'                                         tower height.
PL                         >80 to 120' in   >120' in height  Type 3 facilities
            Structural      height                            and type 2
                                                              facilities within
                                                              1,000' of any
                                                              State highway:
                                                              twice the overall
                                                              structure or
                                                              tower height
                            Add-on to                         Setbacks for type
                            existing                          1, type 2, and
                            structures to    New towers to    type 3
RR-20       Structural      10' over height  45' maximum      facilities: equal
                            of structure to  height           to overall
                            45' maximum                       structure or
                            height                            tower height
                            Add-on to                         Setbacks for type
                            existing                          1, type 2, and
                            structures to    New towers to    type 3
RR-10       Structural      10' over height  45' maximum      facilities: equal
                            of structure to  height           to overall
                            45' maximum                       structure or
                            height                            tower height
                            Add-on to                         Setbacks for type
                            existing                          1, type 2, and
                            structures to    New towers to    type 3
RR-5        Structural      10' over height  45' maximum      facilities: equal
                            of structure to  height           to overall
                            45' maximum                       structure or
                            height                            tower height
                            Add-on to                         Setbacks for type
                            existing                          1, type 2, and
                            structures to    New towers to    type 3
RR-2        Structural      10' over height  45' maximum      facilities: equal
                            of structure to  height           to overall
                            45' maximum                       structure or
                            height                            tower height
                            Add-on to                         Setbacks for type
                            existing                          1, type 2, and
                            structures to    New towers to    type 3
RR-1        Structural      10' over height  45' maximum      facilities: equal
                            of structure to  height           to overall
                            45' maximum                       structure or
                            height                            tower height
                            Add-on to                         Setbacks for type
                            existing                          1, type 2, and
                            structures to    New towers to    type 3
SR-2        Structural      10' over height  45' maximum      facilities: equal
                            of structure to  height           to overall
                            45' maximum                       structure or
                            height                            tower height
                            Add-on to                         Setbacks for type
                            existing                          1, type 2, and
                            structures to    New towers to    type 3
SR-1        Structural      10' over height  45' maximum      facilities: equal
                            of structure to  height           to overall
                            45' maximum                       structure or
                            height                            tower height
                            Add-on to                         Setbacks for type
                            existing                          1, type 2, and
                            structures to    New towers to    type 3
SR-1/2      Structural      10' over height  45' maximum      facilities: equal
                            of structure to  height           to overall
                            45' maximum                       structure or
                            height                            tower height
                            Add-on to                         Setbacks for type
                            existing                          1, type 2, and
                            structures to    New towers to    type 3
SR-12000    Structural      10' over height  45' maximum      facilities: equal
                            of structure to  height           to overall
                            45' maximum                       structure or
                            height                            tower height
                            Add-on to                         Setbacks for type
                            existing                          1, type 2, and
                            structures to    New towers to    type 3
SR-9000     Structural      10' over height  45' maximum      facilities: equal
                            of structure to  height           to overall
                            45' maximum                       structure or
                            height                            tower height
                            Add-on to                         Setbacks for type
                            existing                          1, type 2, and
                            structures to    New towers to    type 3
NR          Structural      10' over height  45' maximum      facilities: equal
                            of structure to  height           to overall
                            45' maximum                       structure or
                            height                            tower height
                            Add-ons to                        Setbacks for type
                            existing                          1, type 2, and
                            structures to    New towers to    type 3
MFR         Structural      15' over height  45' maximum      facilities: equal
                            of structure to  height           to overall
                            45' maximum                       structure or
                            height                            tower height
                                                              Setbacks for type
                                                              1 and type 2
                                                              facilities: equal
                            Add-ons to                        to overall
                            existing                          structure or
                            structures to    New towers to    tower height.
RMU         Structural      15' over height  45' maximum      Type 3 facilities
                            of structure to  height           and type 2
                            45' maximum                       facilities within
                            height                            1,000' of any
                                                              State highway:
                                                              twice the overall
                                                              structure or
                                                              tower height
                            Add-ons to                        Setbacks for type
                            existing                          1, type 2, and
                            structures to    New towers to    type 3
NC          Structural      10' over height  45' maximum      facilities: equal
                            of structure to  height           to overall
                            45' maximum                       structure or
                            height                            tower height
                                                              Setbacks for type
                                                              1 and type 2
                            Add-ons to                        facilities: equal
                            existing                          to overall
                            structures up to                  structure or
                            15' over height  New towers to    tower height.
CC          Structural      of structure up  80' maximum      Type 3 facilities
                            to 60' total     height           and type 2
                            height, or stand                  facilities within
                            alone to 60' in                   1,000' of any
                            height                            State highway:
                                                              twice the overall
                                                              structure or
                                                              tower height
                                                              Setbacks for type
                                                              1 and type 2
                            Add-ons to                        facilities: equal
                            existing                          to overall
                            structures up to                  structure or
                            15' over height  New towers to    tower height.
RC          Structural      of structure up  100' maximum     Type 3 facilities
                            to 60' total     height           and type 2
                            height, or stand                  facilities within
                            alone to 60' in                   1,000' of any
                            height                            State highway:
                                                              twice the overall
                                                              structure or
                                                              tower height
TC-H        Structural      Not permitted    Not permitted     
                                                              Setbacks for type
                                                              1 and type 2
                            Add-ons to                        facilities: equal
                            existing                          to overall
                            structures up to                  structure or
                            15' over height  New towers to    tower height.
TC-R        Structural      of structure up  80' maximum      Type 3 facilities
                            to 60' total     height           and type 2
                            height, or stand                  facilities within
                            alone to 60' in                   1,000' of any
                            height                            State highway:
                                                              twice the overall
                                                              structure or
                                                              tower height
                                                              Setbacks for type
                                                              1 and type 2
                            Add-ons to                        facilities: equal
                            existing                          to overall
                            structures up to                  structure or
                            15' over height  New towers to    tower height.
TC-S        Structural      of structure up  80' maximum      Type 3 facilities
                            to 60' total     height           and type 2
                            height, or stand                  facilities within
                            alone to 60' in                   1,000' of any
                            height                            State highway:
                                                              twice the overall
                                                              structure or
                                                              tower height
CMU-H       Structural      Not permitted    Not permitted     
                            Add-on to                         Setbacks for type
                            existing                          1, type 2, and
                            structures to    Towers to 45'    type 3
CMU-R       Structural      10' over height  maximum height   facilities: equal
                            of structure up                   to overall
                            to 45' total                      structure or
                            height                            tower height
                            Add-on to                         Setbacks for type
                            existing                          1, type 2, and
                            structures up to Towers to 60'    type 3
CMU-S       Structural      15' over height  maximum height   facilities: equal
                            of structure to                   to overall
                            60' overall                       structure or
                            height                            tower height
                            Add-on existing                   Setbacks for type
                            structures to                     1, type 2, and
                            10' over height  Towers to 45'    type 3
HMU-R       Structural      of structure up  maximum height   facilities: equal
                            to 45' total                      to overall
                            height                            structure or
                                                              tower height
                            Add-on existing                   Setbacks for type
                            structures up to                  1, type 2, and
                            15' over height  Towers to 60'    type 3
HMU-S       Structural      of structure up  maximum height   facilities: equal
                            to 60' maximum                    to overall
                            height                            structure or
                                                              tower height
                            Add-ons to
                            existing                          Setbacks for type
                            structures up to                  1, type 2, and
                            15' over height  Towers over 60'  type 3
LI-R        Structural      of structure up  to 100' maximum  facilities: equal
                            to 60' total     height           to overall
                            height, or stand                  structure or
                            alone to 60' in                   tower height
                            height
                            Add-ons to
                            existing                          Setbacks for type
                            structures up to                  1, type 2, and
                            15' over height  Towers over 80'  type 3
LI-S        Structural      of structure up  to 100' maximum  facilities: equal
                            to 60' total     height           to overall
                            height, or stand                  structure or
                            alone to 80' in                   tower height
                            height
                                                              Setbacks for type
                            Add-ons up to                     1, type 2, and
                            40' above        Towers over 100' type 3
HI-R        Structural      structure or     in height        facilities: equal
                            stand alone to                    to overall
                            100'                              structure or
                                                              tower height
                                                              Setbacks for type
                            Add-ons up to                     1, type 2, and
                            40' above        Towers over 100' type 3
HI-S        Structural      structure or     in height        facilities: equal
                            stand alone to                    to overall
                            100'                              structure or
                                                              tower height
                            Add-ons to
                            existing                          Setbacks for type
                            structures up to                  1, type 2, and
                            15' over height  Towers over 60'  type 3
SI          Structural      of structure up  to 80' maximum   facilities: equal
                            to 60' total     in height        to overall
                            height, or stand                  structure or
                            alone to 60' in                   tower height
                            height
                            Add-ons to                        Setbacks for type
                            existing                          1, type 2, and
                            structures up to Towers to 60'    type 3
EMU         Structural      15' over height  maximum height   facilities: equal
                            of structure up                   to overall
                            to 60' total                      structure or
                            height                            tower height
                            Add-ons to                        Setbacks for type
                            existing                          1, type 2, and
                            structures up to Towers to 60'    type 3
XX          Structural      10' over height  maximum height   facilities: equal
                            of structure up                   to overall
                            to 45' total                      structure or
                            height                            tower height
                                             Add-ons over
                                             existing height  Setbacks for type
                            Add-ons to an    or towers to     1, type 2, and
                            existing tower   100' maximum     type 3
OS          Structural      not to exceed    height within    facilities: equal
                            height of        500' of WCF in   to overall
                            existing tower   existence as of  structure or
                                             the effective    tower height
                                             date of this
                                             title
                            Add-ons up to                     Setbacks for type
                            20' above                         1, type 2, and
                            structure or     Towers over 80'  type 3
PF          Structural      stand alone to   to 120' maximum  facilities: equal
                            80' maximum      height           to overall
                            height                            structure or
                                                              tower height
                                                              Setbacks for type
                                                              1, type 2, and
                            Add-ons up to                     type 3
                            20' above                         facilities: equal
AO (Airport                 structure to 60' Add-ons and      to overall
Overlay)    Structural      maximum or stand towers over 60'  structure or
                            alone to 60'     in height        tower height.
                            maximum height                    Refer to
                                                              subsection
                                                              15.236.07C of
                                                              this chapter
 
(Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.236.05: BUILDING PERMIT (TYPE 1):
   A.   Uses Permitted: Wireless telecommunications facilities that conform to
the maximum height allowances in each of the various zoning districts shall be
allowed in each zone as a permitted use. It will be necessary that any use be
reviewed under a building permit, as required under chapter 239 of this title.
Wireless telecommunication facilities that meet the type 1 classification shall
be subject to the following requirements:
      1.   Commercial Use: All wireless telecommunications facilities shall be
specifically for the use of the property owner and shall not be for commercial
uses. If a wireless telecommunication facility is proposed for commercial uses
but conforms to all other requirements contained in this section, it shall be
reviewed as a type 2 wireless telecommunication facility.
      2.   Surface And Color: New towers and attached equipment shall have and
maintain a non-reflective surface, be a neutral color that blends in with the
surrounding background or that is the same or similar color as the supporting
structure to make the tower, antennas and related equipment as visually
unobtrusive as possible (unless the tower and antennas are located within an
area adjacent to an airport regulated by the Federal Aviation Administration
("FAA") wherein FAA regulations require non- neutral colors).
      3.   Collocation: No collocation is allowed, unless the additional
facility conforms to subsection A1 of this section.
      4.   Setbacks: Setbacks shall conform to the requirements of section
15.236.04, table 15.236-1 of this chapter.
      5.   Tower Height: No type 1 tower shall exceed the maximum building
height allowance identified in for each zoning district in chapters 310 through
316 of this title unless an alternative height is listed in section
15.236.04, table 15.236-1 of this chapter.
      6.   Lighting: No lighting shall be permitted on type 1 towers or
associated facilities (unless the tower and antennas are located within an area
adjacent to an airport regulated by the Federal Aviation Administration ("FAA")
wherein FAA regulations require lighting).
      7.   Fencing And Security: For security purposes, towers and ancillary
facilities shall be enclosed by a minimum six foot (6') high fence. This
requirement may be waived for joint-use telecommunication facilities sharing a
common site surrounded by public lands with jurisdictional administration and
review by the Federal or State government. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.236.06: DESIGN REVIEW (TYPE 2):
   A.   Uses Permitted: The Director shall review the uses subject to design
review (type 2) on section
15.236.04, table 15.236-1 of this chapter in accordance with the provisions of
chapter 235 of this title, using approval criteria contained in subsection B of
this section. All type 2 reviews shall require notice to property owners in
accordance with the provisions of chapter 9 of this title.
The following uses are subject to approval under this section:
All structures, towers, and accessory buildings identified as subject to
administrative review (type 2).
   B.   Review Criteria: Any use listed on section
15.236.04, table 15.236-1 of this chapter as subject to type 2 review, shall be
evaluated using the following standards:
      1.   Aesthetic:
         a.   New towers and attached equipment shall have and maintain a non-
reflective surface, be a neutral color that blends in with the surrounding
background or that is the same or similar color as the supporting structure to
make the tower, antennas and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as
possible, or if required by the FAA, be painted pursuant to the FAA's
requirements;
         b.   If collocation on an existing tower is requested, the design of
any antenna(s), accessory structures or equipment shall, to the extent
possible, use materials, colors and textures that will match the existing tower
or non-tower structure to which the equipment of the collocating provider is
being attached;
         c.   If collocation on an existing non-tower structure is requested,
the antenna(s) and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment shall be a
neutral color that is the same as the color as the supporting structure so as
to make the antenna(s) and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as
possible.
      2.   Setbacks: Setbacks shall conform to the requirements of section
15.236.04, table 15.236-1 of this chapter.
      3.   Tower Spacing: Towers shall be required to be spaced, at a minimum
the distance equivalent to the height of the tallest tower, plus the radial
distance from the center of the nearest tower to its furthest guywire.
      4.   Tower Height: No tower shall exceed the maximum height listed in
section
15.236.04, table 15.236-1 of this chapter - however, that an additional fifty
feet (50') may be approved as part of the design review upon a finding by the
decision making body that the additional height is necessary and substantiated
by technical documentation showing that the additional height is necessary to
provide the proposed level of service and coverage, or to accomplish
collocation as provided in section
15.236.09 of this chapter.
      5.   Lighting: No lighting shall be permitted on a tower except as
required by the FAA.
      6.   Fencing And Security: For security purposes, towers and ancillary
facilities shall be enclosed by a minimum six foot (6') fence.
      7.   Noise: Noise-generating equipment shall be sound-buffered by means
of baffling, barriers or other suitable means to reduce the sound level
measured at the property line to fifty (50) dBA (day)/forty (40) dBA (night)
when adjacent to residential and commercial land uses and seventy five (75) dBA
(day)/sixty (60) dBA (night) when adjacent to other uses. This requirement is
waived for joint-use telecommunication facilities sharing a common site
surrounded by public lands with jurisdictional administration and review by the
Federal or State government.
   C.   Other Requirements: At the time a provider requests a building permit,
it must demonstrate compliance to all applicable State and Federal regulations.
(Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.236.07: USES PERMITTED SUBJECT TO CONDITIONAL USE REVIEW (TYPE 3):
   A.   Uses Permitted: The commission shall review the uses subject to
conditional use review (type 3), in accordance with the provisions of chapter
230 of this title using approval criteria contained in subsection B of this
section. All type 3 reviews shall require notice to property owners in
accordance with the provisions of chapter 9 of this title.
   B.   Review Criteria: Any use subject to review per subsection A of this
section, shall be evaluated using the following standards:
      1.   Height: Tower height shall not exceed the maximum height listed in
section
15.236.04, table 15.236-1 of this chapter, provided however that an additional
fifty feet (50') may be approved as part of the conditional use permit review
upon a finding by the decision-making body that the additional height is
necessary and substantiated by technical documentation showing that the
additional height is necessary to provide to proposed level of service and
coverage, or to accomplish collocation as provided in section
15.236.09 of this chapter.
      2.   Color: Towers and attached equipment shall have and maintain a non-
reflective surface, be a neutral color that blends in with the surrounding
background or that is the same or similar color as the supporting structure to
make the tower, antennas and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as
possible, or if required by the FAA, be painted pursuant to the FAA's
requirements.
      3.   Setbacks: Towers shall be set back from the property line in
accordance with the requirements of section
15.236.04, table 15.236-1 of this chapter. An adjustment subject to criteria of
approval contained in section
15.330.04, "Alternative Equivalent Compliance", of this title, may be obtained
to reduce this setback.
      4.   Tower Spacing: Towers shall be required to be spaced, at a minimum
the distance equivalent to the height of the tallest tower, plus the radial
distance from the center of the nearest tower to its furthest guywire.
      5.   Lighting: No lighting shall be permitted on a tower except as
required by the FAA.
      6.   Fencing And Security: For security purposes, towers and ancillary
facilities shall be enclosed by a six foot (6') fence or solid wall.
      7.   Noise: Noise-generating equipment shall be sound-buffered by means
of baffling, barriers or other suitable means to reduce the sound level
measured at the property line to fifty (50) dBA (day)/forty (40) dBA (night)
when adjacent to a commercial or residential land use and seventy five (75) dBA
(day)/sixty (60) dBA (night) when adjacent to other uses.
   C.   Proximity To Airports: Wireless communications facilities located on or
adjacent to airports shall comply with Federal or State requirements, including
but not limited to the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), Federal
Communication Commission (FCC), Nevada Department of Transportation (NDOT), as
applicable.
   D.   Other Requirements: At the time a provider requests a building permit,
documentation of the project approval from all State or Federal agencies must
be provided to the department. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.236.08: SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS:
All applications for design review or conditional use permit shall be made on
forms provided by the Community Development Department. Additional information,
specifically necessary to analyze the appropriateness of the proposed project
location may be requested by the Director during review of the application.
(Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.236.09: COLLOCATION PROTOCOL:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this requirement is to create a process that
will allow providers to equitably share publicly- available, non-proprietary
information among themselves, with interested persons and agencies, and with
the County, at the time the provider schedules a pre-application conference
with the approval authority. This collocation protocol is designed to increase
the likelihood that all reasonable opportunities for collocation have been
investigated and the appropriate information has been shared among providers.
The County recognizes that collocation is preferable, where technologically
feasible and visually desirable, as a matter of public policy, but that
collocation of antennas by providers is not always feasible for technical or
business reasons. However, if all licensed providers are made aware of any
pending tower or antenna permit requests, such disclosure will allow providers
to have the maximum amount of time to consider possible collocation
opportunities, and will also assure the County that all reasonable
accommodations for collocation have been investigated. This chapter creates
strong incentives for collocation because proposals for collocation qualify for
a less rigorous approval process.
   B.   Applicability: Requirements for the collocation protocol apply only to
new towers subject to site development review or conditional use.
   C.   Pre-Application Requirement: A pre-application review is required for
all proposed freestanding towers.
   D.   Collocation Request Letter Requirement: At the time a pre- application
review is scheduled, the applicant shall demonstrate that the following notice
was mailed to all other wireless communication providers operating wireless
communications facilities within the County's boundaries:
Pursuant to the requirements of 15.236.09, [name of wireless provider] is
hereby providing you with notice of our intent to meet with representatives of
the Lyon County in a pre-application conference to discuss the location a new
free-standing wireless communication facility that would be located at
[location]. In general, we plan to construct a [type of tower] of [number] feet
in height for the purpose of providing [cellular, PCS] service.
Please inform us whether your company has any existing or pending wireless
facilities located within [distance] of the proposed facility, that may be
available for possible collocation opportunities. Please provide us with this
information within 10 business days after the date of this letter. Your
cooperation is appreciated.
Sincerely [Name of pre-application applicant].
   E.   Applicant's Obligation To Analyze Feasibility Of Collocation: If a
response to a collocation request letter is received by an applicant indicating
an opportunity for collocation on an existing tower of another provider, the
applicant shall make a good faith effort to analyze the feasibility of
collocation. This analysis shall be submitted with an application for a
freestanding tower. A good faith effort to investigate the feasibility of
collocation on an existing facility shall be deemed to have occurred if the
applicant submits all of the following information:
      1.   A statement from a qualified engineer indicating whether the
necessary service can or cannot be provided by collocation at the potential
collocation site;
      2.   Evidence that lessor of the potential collocation site either agrees
or disagrees to collocation on his/her property;
      3.   Evidence that adequate site area exists or does not exist at the
potential collocation site to accommodate ancillary equipment for the second
provider and still meet all of the development standards required in the base
zone;
      4.   Evidence that adequate access does or does not exist at the possible
collocation site.
   F.   Result Of Collocation Feasibility Analysis: If the applicant has
provided information addressing each of the criteria in subsection E of this
section, the collocation protocol shall be deemed complete. The applicant's
tower shall then be permitted subject to the applicable standards and
restrictions contained in this chapter. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.236.10: ABANDONED FACILITIES:
   A.   Abandonment Defined: A wireless communication facility which has been
discontinued for a period of one year or longer is hereby declared abandoned.
   B.   Removal Of Abandoned Facilities: Abandoned facilities as defined in
subsection A of this section shall be removed by the property owner within
ninety (90) days from date of abandonment. A demolition permit shall be
obtained from the Lyon County Building Department prior to removal of the
abandoned facility. Failure to remove an abandoned facility is declared a
public nuisance and is subject to penalties per chapter 15 of this title.
   C.   Extension: Upon written application, prior to the expiration of the one
year (discontinued period) period, the Director may, in writing, grant a one
year extension for reuse of the facility. Additional extensions beyond the one
year extension may be granted by the Director or may be referred on to the
commission, subject to any conditions required to bring the project or facility
into compliance with current regulation(s) and make it compatible with
surrounding development. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
CHAPTER 239
BUILDING PERMITS
SECTION:
15.239.01: Codes Adopted; General Administration
15.239.02: Amendments; Administrative And Technical
15.239.03: Violations And Penalties
15.239.04: Existing Codes
15.239.05: Northern Nevada Amendments
15.239.06: Permits Required
15.239.01: CODES ADOPTED; GENERAL ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 244.105, 278.580, 278.583 and
444.350, Lyon County does hereby adopt the following uniform and specialized
codes, as amended herein, which will be collectively known as the Building
Codes of Lyon County:
      1.   International Building Code, 2024 edition, published by
International Code Council (ICC).
      2.   International Residential Code, 2024 edition, published by ICC.
      3.   International Existing Building Code, 2024 edition, published by
ICC.
      4.   International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2024 edition, published by
ICC.
      5.   International Energy Conservation Code, 2024 edition, published by
ICC.
      6.   International Fuel Gas Code, 2024 edition, published by ICC.
      7.   International Mechanical Code, 2024 edition, published by ICC.
      8.   Uniform Mechanical Code, 2024 edition, published by International
Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials (IAPMO).
      9.   Uniform Plumbing Code, 2024 edition, published by IAPMO.
      10.   National Electrical Code, 2023 edition, National Fire Protection
Association (NFPA) 70.
      11.   International Fire Code, 2018 edition, published by ICC.
      All contents of the above codes are adopted as amended herein.
   B.   Where the word "City" appears in the codes, the word "County" shall be
substituted and wherever the words "City Council" appear, the words "Board of
County Commissioners" shall be substituted.
   C.   The Board is empowered to hear and decide appeals of order, decisions
or determinations made by an official relative to the application and
interpretation of this chapter. The Board is further empowered to adopt rules
and regulations governing the procedures for such appeals. The Board may
delegate this authority to the appropriate Fire District Board for appeals
concerning interpretation and enforcement of the International Fire Code. Any
reference to a "Board of Appeals" and the authority or procedure of said "Board
of Appeals" is hereby deleted from the "Building Codes of Lyon County".
   D.   The Board will establish fees for County permits, services and
inspections provided pursuant to the several codes. Related fee tables
contained in the codes are not adopted for that purpose.
   E.   Any section or provision set forth in the several codes which may be in
conflict with the Nevada State Constitution or Nevada Revised Statutes is not
adopted.
   F.   Where differences occur between the provisions of the published codes
and the requirements of the State or local authority regarding water
distribution or sewage disposal systems, the requirements of the State or local
authority shall apply.
   G.   Where differences occur between the provisions of the published codes
and the requirements of the Nevada Division of Manufactured Housing, Division
of Health, Division of Environmental Protection or the Comstock Historic
District, the more stringent requirements shall apply as determined by the
County building official.
   H.   Where differences occur between the provisions of the published codes
and the requirements of the Nevada State Fire Marshal and appropriate Fire
Protection District, the codes and amendments adopted by the Nevada State Fire
Marshal and the appropriate Fire Protection District shall apply.
   I.   Where differences or code discrepancies occur between the provisions of
the published codes or between the published codes and the titled Lyon County
codes, the more stringent shall apply as determined by the County building
official.
(Ord. 604, 4-4-2019; amd. Ord. 642, 8-7-2025)
15.239.02: AMENDMENTS; ADMINISTRATIVE AND TECHNICAL:
   A.   Section E3901.4.2 of the Residential Code and section 210.52 (2) of the
2023 National Electric Code shall be amended to require the installation of
receptacle outlets at all island countertops in accordance with adopted
electrical safety standards. The use of future wiring provisions as a
substitute for required receptacles shall be prohibited.
   B.   E3901.4.2 shall be amended so receptacle outlets shall not be required
within peninsular countertops measuring less than six feet (6') in length, as
measured from the connecting wall to the outer edge of the countertop. Where
this exception applies, future wiring provisions, such as capped conductors,
conduit stubs, or unused outlet boxes intended for future receptacles in the
peninsular section, are expressly prohibited.
   C.   Table R302.6 of the 2024 International Residential Code and section
406.3.2.1 of the 2024 International Building Code shall be amended to require a
minimum of 5/8-inch Type X gypsum board on the garage side of walls separating
garages from living spaces, and on the ceilings of attached garages, applied
directly to framing members.
   D.   Table R301.2 of the Northern Nevada Amendments shall be amended such
that the Seismic Design Category for Lyon County shall be amended from D1 to
D2.
   E.   All residential projects utilizing prescriptive design methods
specified in the 2024 International Residential Code shall design their project
to Seismic Category D2 in addition to all other Lyon County adopted amendments.
   F.   All projects utilizing non-prescriptive methods shall design their
projects to the 2024 IBC Seismic Design Category D utilizing site specific
criteria in addition to all Lyon County adopted codes and amendments. All
projects utilizing non-prescriptive methods shall have all structural elements
engineered. It shall not be permissible to mix prescriptive and non-
prescriptive.
   G.   Section 609.1 of the 2024 Northern Nevada Amendments shall be amended
such that water lines shall be installed at a minimum depth of twelve inches
(12") below the frost depth per the adopted codes.
   H.   Table R301.2 shall be amended to set the minimum frost line depth at
eighteen inches (18") for elevations less than five thousand feet (5,000') and
twenty-four inches (24") for elevations greater than or equal to five thousand
feet (5,000').
(Ord. 642, 8-7-2025)
15.239.03: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Criminal Penalties:
      1.   Any person who violates any provision of the published codes hereby
adopted shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished by not more than six (6) months' imprisonment in the Lyon County Jail
or by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by both such
fine and imprisonment.
      2.   Any corporation which violates any provision of the published codes
hereby adopted shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
   B.   Civil Penalties:
      1.   Abatement Procedures: If the owner of a noncomplying building or
structure refuses to obey an abatement order made by the Board, the County may
proceed with abatement and levy a lien upon the property for the expense
thereof.
      2.   Business License Revocation: The Lyon County business license of any
person or corporation which, holding such license, violates the provisions
hereof, may be terminated or canceled after a duly noticed public hearing and a
finding that the person or corporation has violated or caused violation of the
provisions hereof. (Ord. 604, 4-4-2019)
15.239.04: EXISTING CODES:
All uniform codes heretofore adopted by reference as part of the Lyon County
Code are repealed and hereby replaced. However, said uniform codes may remain
in effect, temporarily, as a part of the Lyon County Code to the extent that
construction projects that are underway or for which building permits have been
issued pursuant to such codes, may proceed to completion. Upon completion of
such construction projects and/or expiration of such building permits, the said
uniform codes shall be of no further force and effect. (Ord. 604, 4-4-2019)
15.239.05: NORTHERN NEVADA AMENDMENTS:
   A.   Lyon County adopts the 2024 Northern Nevada amendments dated February
20, 2025, as published by the Northern Nevada Chapter of the International Code
Council.
   B.   Lyon County adopts the Northern Nevada amendments to 2018 International
Fire Code dated August 8, 2018.
(Ord. 604, 4-4-2019; amd. Ord. 642, 8-7-2025)
15.239.06: PERMITS REQUIRED:
Except as specified in the adopted codes, as amended, no building or structure
regulated by this chapter may be erected, constructed, enlarged, altered,
repaired, moved, improved, removed, converted or demolished unless a separate
permit for each building or structure has first been obtained from the
Community Development Department. A single permit may be issued covering
building, plumbing, electrical work for a single structure. (Ord. 604, 4-4-
2019)
CHAPTER 240
MASS GRADING PERMITS
SECTION:
15.240.01: Mass Grading Permit Defined
15.240.02: Permit Required
15.240.03: Work Exempt From Mass Grading Permit
15.240.04: Mass Grading Permit Procedures
15.240.05: Expiration of Permits
15.240.06: Fees
15.240.01: MASS GRADING PERMIT DEFINED:
A mass grading permit authorizes the start of construction on private property
for new or alteration of existing non-residential development when the on-site
grading is necessary to create a development pad prior to the issuance of a
building permit for a non-residential development. The mass grading permit is
in lieu of combining the building and site grading approvals into a single
building/site grading permit approval for a non-residential development.
Issuance of a mass grading permit does not provide a guarantee approval of any
other required land use and development permits including, but not limited to
utility site improvement permits, building permits, Conditional Use Permits and
commercial/industrial subdivision maps. (Ord. 630, 8-4-2022)
15.240.02: PERMIT REQUIRED:
A mass grading permit is required for site grading and will only be issued for
projects that have received all of the required Community Development
Department approvals.
A mass grading permit will not be issued for a proposed use that is
inconsistent with the current zoning and allowed land uses for the project
site. (Ord. 630, 8-4-2022)
15.240.03: WORK EXEMPT FROM MASS GRADING PERMIT:
   A.   A mass grading permit is not required for the following:
      1.   Work exempt from building permits pursuant to chapter 239 of this
title;
      2.   Clearing and grubbing, plowing and farrowing on property involved in
active agricultural production;
      3.   Other grading work exempted by section 1803 of the IBC;
      4.   Grading under fifty (50) cubic yards (38.23m3);
      5.   Exploration, extraction and processing of minerals and construction
materials;
      6.   Work specifically approved under a building permit or encroachment
permit issued under this chapter.
   B.   Exemption from the permit requirements of this title does not grant
authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the
provisions of this title or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction.
(Ord. 630, 8-4-2022)
15.240.04: MASS GRADING PERMIT PROCEDURES:
   A.   The property owner or his authorized representative must tender a
completed mass grading permit application to the department on a form furnished
by the department. The mass grading permit application must contain the
following information:
      1.   A description of the work to be covered by the permit.
      2.   A legal description of the land on which the proposed work is to be
done, street address or similar description that identifies and definitely
locates the proposed work.
      3.   The application must be accompanied by grading plans, reclamation
plan, an itemized engineer's estimated value of the reclamation work and
reclamation surety bond. The following items shall be included with the
application submission materials:
         a.   The grading plan shall include the following:
            (1)   The plan sheets must be clean, uncluttered and legible;
            (2)   The plan sheets must be drawn to scale, with a north arrow
and correct scale shown on all sheets;
            (3)   The plan must include the general grading notes;
            (4)   Refer to the geotechnical report, with recommendations
incorporated into the plans
            (5)   Identify any Federal Emergency Management Administration
(FEMA) Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) designated flood zones and Base Flood
Elevations (BFE) shown on all sheets;
            (6)   Identify the limits of the proposed site disturbance and
amount of disturbance (cubic feet);
            (7)   Identify areas of cuts and fills and the cut and fill
earthwork quantities;
            (8)   Show the proposed grading with spot elevations for top of
curb, gutter flow lines, ditch flow lines, and pavement grade breaks;
            (9)   Tie proposed ground contours into existing ground contours
and elevations for the site extending 50-feet beyond the site lot lines;
            (10)   Show the percent of slope for curb and gutters, valley
gutters, ditch flow lines, and paved areas;
            (11)   Show the elevations for top and toe of slopes with slope
steepness shown. 2-feet minimum property line/fence setback from top and toe of
slopes;
            (12)   Show the on-site and off-site storm drain improvements (as
required by the County Engineer);
            (13)   Show the detailed grading for all storm water conveyance and
retention/detention basins (as required by the County Engineer);
            (14)   Identify the temporary and permanent erosion/sedimentation
control measures per the approved Nevada Division of Environmental Protection
Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (NDEP-SWPPP) (may be a separate plan);
            (15)   Any retaining walls (retaining walls over four feet (4') in
height require engineering calculations to be included with the grading permit
submission.
            (16)   Standard and special details for items to be constructed.
Approved and accepted Standard Details for Public Works Construction must not
be modified unless "Modified" is noted and Modifications clearly shown. Border,
date and ownership information must be left intact.
         b.   The reclamation plan shall include the proposed re-grading plan
for the site including` erosion and dust control measures necessary to
stabilize the site should no development of the site go forward.
         c.   An itemized engineer's estimated value of the reclamation work,
signed, stamped and dated by a Nevada professional engineer where plans,
studies or computations are required to be prepared by a Nevada professional
engineer, or an itemized contractor's executed contract with estimated value of
work, signed and dated with the contractor's license number and limit.
         d.   A reclamation surety approved by the District Attorney's Office
or a cash deposit to cover one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the engineer's
estimated value of work based on the full reclamation ("bond") shall be
submitted for review and approval by the County Engineer prior to commencement
of work.
      4.   A mass grading permit application that proposes to disturb more than
one acre (1ac.) or to disturb less than one acre, but is part of a larger
common plan for development or sale that will ultimately disturb one (1) acre
or more shall include as part of the submission of the mass grading permit
documentation of an approved Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) from
the State of Nevada Department of Environmental Protection - Bureau of Water
Pollution Control (NDEP - BWPC).
      5.   A mass grading permit application that proposes to disturb five
acres (5 ac.) or more shall include as part of the submission of the mass
grading permit documentation of a Surface Area Disturbance permit issued by the
State of Nevada Department of Environmental Protection - Bureau of Air
Pollution Control (NDEP - BAPC).
      6.   A mass grading permit application that proposes to disturb a site
located within the Carson River Mercury Superfund Site as delineated by the
state Department of Environmental Protection, Bureau of Corrective Action (NDEP
- BCA) and federal Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Region 9 office shall
provide documentation of approval for proposed site disturbance from NDEP -
BCA.
   B.   The application, plans, specifications, computations and other data
filed by an applicant for a permit must be reviewed by the Director, the County
Engineer, the Utilities Director, the Road Superintendent, and the Fire Chief
of the appropriate Fire District or their respective designees. The plans shall
be reviewed by other departments of this jurisdiction and agencies to verify
compliance with any applicable laws under their jurisdiction. If the Director
finds that the work described in an application for a mass grading permit and
the plans, specifications and other data filed with the application conform to
the requirements of this title, other pertinent laws and ordinances, that the
plans have been signed by all responsible agencies where applicable, that
security has been posted, and that all required fees have been paid, the
Director shall issue a mass grading permit for the property.
   C.   Once the nonresidential building permit for the noncommercial
development site has been issued, construction commenced and the footing/
foundation inspection completed, then the mass grading reclamation bond shall
be released back to the developer. (Ord. 630, 8-4-2022)
15.240.05: EXPIRATION OF PERMITS:
   A.   Every mass grading permit issued by the department under the provisions
of this title will expire and become void if the work authorized by the permit
is not commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of the
permit, or if the work authorized by the permit is suspended or abandoned at
any time after the work is commenced for a period of one hundred eighty (180)
days.
   B.   Within one (1) year from the date of expiration of a mass grading
permit, a new mass grading permit may be obtained subject to a fee in the
amount of one-half (1/2) that required for a new permit for the work, provided
no changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and
specifications for the work, the plans were approved under the prevailing
Development Code provisions, and that any suspension or abandonment has not
exceeded one year.
   C.   In order to renew action on a mass grading permit after expiration for
more than one (1) year, the permittee must obtain a new mass grading permit for
the work and pay a new full mass grading permit fee.
   D.   Any permittee holding an unexpired mass grading permit may apply for an
extension of the time within which work may commence under that permit when the
permittee is unable to commence work within the time required by this section
for good and satisfactory reason. The Director may extend the time for action
by the permittee for a period not exceeding one hundred eighty (180) days on
written request by the permittee showing that circumstances beyond the control
of the permittee have prevented action from being taken. No mass grading permit
may be extended more than once. (Ord. 630, 8-4-2022)
15.240.06: FEES:
Fees for mass grading permits are established by resolution of the Board. (Ord.
630, 8-4-2022)
CHAPTER 270
BURNING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
15.270.01: Definitions
15.270.02: Authority; Authorization Required
15.270.03: Permits Required
15.270.04: Burn Barrels Prohibited
15.270.05: Hours; Ignition; Extinguishment
15.270.06: Exceptions To Provisions
15.270.07: Fire District; Extinguishment Powers
15.270.08: Waiver Of Provisions
15.270.09: Burning Of Trash, Waste, Rubbish Or Toxic Materials
15.270.10: Violation; Penalty
15.270.11: Citation Authority
15.270.01: DEFINITIONS:
FIRE CHIEF: The Fire Chief in each Fire District in Lyon County.
FIRE DISTRICT: As used in this chapter, "Fire District" includes the Central
Lyon County Fire Protection District, the Mason Valley Fire Protection
District, the North Lyon County Fire Protection District and the Smith Valley
Fire Protection District.
Central Lyon County Fire Protection District: The Fire Protection District as
organized pursuant to the provisions of chapter 474 of the Nevada Revised
Statutes ("NRS") and adopted by ordinance 385 on July 15, 1993.
Mason Valley Fire Protection District: The Fire Protection District as
organized pursuant to the provisions of chapter 474 of the Nevada Revised
Statutes ("NRS") and created by election on January 6, 1948.
North Lyon County Fire Protection District: The Fire Protection District as
organized pursuant to the provisions of chapter 474 of the Nevada Revised
Statutes ("NRS") and created by election on April 15, 1952.
Smith Valley Fire Protection District: The Fire Protection District as
organized pursuant to the provisions of chapter 474 of the Nevada Revised
Statutes ("NRS") and created by election on May 5, 1945.
OPEN BURNING: Any fire from which the products of combustion are emitted into
the atmosphere without passing through a stack or chimney. (Ord. 603, 11-1-
2018)
15.270.02: AUTHORITY; AUTHORIZATION REQUIRED:
The Fire Chief or his authorized designee shall establish regulations for open
burning within each Fire District. No person shall kindle or maintain any open
fire for the purpose of weed abatement, conservation, disease control, game or
forest management, personnel training, elimination of hazards, agricultural
purposes and management, recreational, educational or ceremonial purposes or
authorize any such open fire to be kindled or maintained on any public or
private land without first having obtained a permit from the Fire District
having jurisdiction. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.270.03: PERMITS REQUIRED:
Burning under the regulations stated above shall not be done without first
obtaining a burn permit from the Fire Chief or their designee of the Fire
District having jurisdiction. The permittee shall follow the burning
regulations as stated on the burn permit and will be responsible for fire
suppression costs as stated in section
15.270.10 of this chapter. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.270.04: BURN BARRELS PROHIBITED:
The use of burn barrels, where permitted, shall be in compliance with the burn
permit and regulations of the Fire District having jurisdiction. (Ord. 603, 11-
1-2018)
15.270.05: HOURS; IGNITION; EXTINGUISHMENT:
The hours of burning shall be adopted by each Fire District. Before igniting a
fire, the permit holder must comply with procedures adopted by the Fire
District having jurisdiction, which may include contacting the appropriate Fire
District to confirm that burning is allowed for that day. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.270.06: EXCEPTIONS TO PROVISIONS:
Outdoor fires in each Fire District may be used for heating, cooking or
branding in an appropriate approved fireplace or appliance at any time without
permission except as restricted by the Fire Chief or their authorized designee
of the Fire District having jurisdiction. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.270.07: FIRE DISTRICT; EXTINGUISHMENT POWERS:
The Fire District having jurisdiction, its officers and/or agents may without
further process of law extinguish or require to have extinguished any fire
ignited or maintained in violation of the requirements of this chapter. (Ord.
603, 11-1-2018)
15.270.08: WAIVER OF PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this chapter may only be waived under extraordinary
circumstances by written authorization from the Fire Chief or their authorized
designee of the Fire District having jurisdiction. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.270.09: BURNING OF TRASH, WASTE, RUBBISH OR TOXIC MATERIALS:
The burning of garbage, trash, waste, rubbish, toxic materials, construction
debris, plastics or other hydrocarbon products or fuels is prohibited in each
Fire District. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.270.10: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor and is responsible for all costs of response and fire suppression
associated with the violation of this chapter. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.270.11: CITATION AUTHORITY:
The Fire Chief or their designee of the Fire District having jurisdiction is
hereby authorized and empowered to prepare, sign and serve criminal misdemeanor
citations for violations of this chapter. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
CHAPTER 280
STREET NAME CHANGE REQUESTS
SECTION:
15.280.01: Purpose
15.280.02: Street Name Change Request Procedures
15.280.03: Street Name Criteria
15.280.04: Fees
15.280.01: PURPOSE:
A street name change request provides a process authorize the alteration of an
existing public street name or private access name through a public hearing
process. The street name change request provides for a process that allows for
public input as well as a review by the emergency service providers to avoid
confusing or conflicting name that may impair the provision of emergency
services as well as documentation of a formal approval and appeal process per
chapter 15.06 and chapter 15.12 of this title. (Ord. 629, 8-4-2022)
15.280.02: STREET NAME CHANGE REQUEST PROCEDURES:
   A.   A person must tender a completed street name change submission to the
department on a form furnished by the department. The street name change
submission must contain the following information:
      1.   A completed development application form;
      2.   A project description/narrative/justification;
      3.   Street name request form;
      4.   A map of the street segment for which the name change is requested;
and
      5.   The required application filing fee.
   B.   Once a street name change request application is deemed complete, the
application will be forwarded to the reviewing agencies and to the community
advisory board representing the community in which the proposed street name
change request is located for comment.
   C.   Upon completion of the comment period of the reviewing agencies' and
the community advisory board representing the community in which the proposed
street name change request is located, the street name change request will be
scheduled for the next available planning commission for a public hearing to
forward a recommendation to the Board of County Commissioners.
   D.   The Board of County Commissioners shall be the decision making body
subject to the appeal processes as outlined in chapter 15.12 of this title.
(Ord. 629, 8-4-2022)
15.280.03: STREET NAME CRITERIA:
   A.   Street Names: Street names and suffixes shall be designated by the
developer, subject to the approval of the planning commission and in accordance
with the following general policy shall:
      1.   Be short (under 12 letters, if possible) and preferably in one word.
      2.   Have a simple spelling and easy pronunciation.
      3.   Avoid prefixes such as north and south, east and west and upper and
lower, etc.
      4.   Be related to the type and importance of the street. (The suffix
boulevard should not be attached to the name of a minor residential street.)
      5.   Avoid the use of numbers or letters as street names.
      6.   Not be incongruous, offensive or geographically misleading.
      7.   Not be repetitive or similar in sound and character to streets
already in existence in Lyon County.
      8.   Have a single name for a street having a continuous alignment.
      9.   When to be connected in the future into a continuous alignment or
extended, bear the same name as the existing street.
      10.   Have a metal street sign to be erected as specified in the
"Standard Details For Public Works Construction" on at least one corner of
every intersection and shall identify each street name. (Ord. 629, 8-4-2022)
15.280.04: FEES:
Fees for street name change requests are established by the board. (Ord. 629,
8-4-2022)
CHAPTER 300
CHARACTER DISTRICTS AND ZONING DISTRICTS
SECTION:
15.300.01: Character Districts; Rural, Suburbanizing, Historic And General
County
15.300.02: Rural Districts
15.300.03: Suburbanizing Districts
15.300.04: Historic Districts
15.300.05: Future Planning Areas
15.300.06: General County
15.300.07: Zoning Districts
15.300.01: CHARACTER DISTRICTS; RURAL, SUBURBANIZING, HISTORIC AND GENERAL
COUNTY:
Character Districts are a product of, and are delineated on maps adopted in the
Lyon County Comprehensive Master Plan. The Character Districts help define,
maintain, or enhance desired character of development or intensity in
particular areas of the County.
They control and modify the land use designations to achieve the type and
character of development desired in communities. A community may have one or
more Character Districts within its boundary. The following Character Districts
are described in the sections that follow:
   Rural Districts,
   Suburbanizing Districts,
   Historic Districts,
   Future plan areas, and
   General County.
For a complete description of Character Districts and land use designations see
the Lyon County Comprehensive Master Plan - Countywide Component, chapter 3,
Land Use, Economy and Growth. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 607, 9-19-2019)
15.300.02: RURAL DISTRICTS:
Rural Districts include those areas that are predominately undeveloped open
space, in agricultural or resource-based use, or very low-density residential
development with limited neighborhood commercial uses. Zoning district
requirements and the Lyon County development standards reflect the "rural"
character of the area. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 607, 9-19-2019)
15.300.03: SUBURBANIZING DISTRICTS:
Suburbanizing Districts include those areas that are predominately medium to
high-density residential development with regional/community commercial,
neighborhood residential and commercial uses, and industrial and employment
uses. Zoning district requirements and the Lyon County development standards
for uses within this Character District reflect the "suburban" character of
these areas and include requirements for Municipal water and sewer, roadway
design appropriate to the planned land uses, landscaping of public areas, and
pedestrian facilities (sidewalks and paths). (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord.
607, 9-19-2019)
15.300.04: HISTORIC DISTRICTS:
Historic Districts include those areas in and around lands included in the
Comstock Historic District, including Silver City and portions of the Dayton
area, or other future historic designations to preserve existing historic
character or to promote "historic" architectural design elements. Future
Historic Districts may also be designated where the intent is to promote new
compatible development that is in keeping with the "historic" development
patterns and architectural design elements to create more vitality. Tools might
include mixed-use, design guidelines and conservation easements. (Ord. 603, 11-
1-2018; amd. Ord. 607, 9-19-2019)
15.300.05: FUTURE PLANNING AREAS:
Lands in locations where future development may occur, but where additional
planning is necessary because of factors such as large common ownership,
topography, current lack of infrastructure, joint planning areas or other
factors are present which require additional and/or more focused planning
efforts. (Ord. 607, 9-19-2019)
15.300.06: GENERAL COUNTY:
Lands outside the boundaries of defined community boundaries are classified as
General County. These lands are rural, resource or public lands, and are
intended to remain largely undeveloped or with very low intensity development
within the Master Plan's planning horizon. The development standards applicable
to General County lands are the same as those for Rural Character Districts.
(Ord. 603, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 607, 9-19-2019)
15.300.07: ZONING DISTRICTS:
Lyon County is divided into zoning districts in order to classify, regulate and
restrict the location of trade and industry, the location of buildings
designated for specific uses, to protect residential uses, to regulate and
limit the height and bulk of buildings hereafter erected or altered, to
regulate and limit the intensity of the use of lot areas, and to regulate and
determine the areas of yards and open space within and surrounding such
buildings.
The zones, listed in
table 15.300-1 of this section, are intended to guide development and
redevelopment within Lyon County's seven (7) unincorporated communities. The
zoning regulations are intended to preserve and enhance the existing character
of these communities while allowing the opportunity for residents to grow- in-
place.
TABLE 15.300-1
ZONING DISTRICTS
Zoning Map Symbol Name Of Zoning Master Plan Character Area Code Reference
                  District       Designation
Zoning Map    Name Of Zoning    Master Plan       Character Area Code Reference
Symbol        District          Designation
Agricultural and Resource Zones (chapter 310 of this title):
AG            Agriculture       Agriculture       Rural/General  15.310.01
NIA           Non-Irrigated     Agriculture       Rural/General  15.310.02
              Agriculture
RL            Resource Land     Resource          Rural/General  15.310.03
                                (private)
PL            Public Land       Public lands      Rural/General  15.310.04
                                (public)
Rural Residential Zones (chapter 311 of this title):
              Rural
RR-20         Residential, 20   Rural residential Rural          15.311.01
              Acre Minimum
              Rural
RR-10         Residential, 10   Rural residential Rural          15.311.02
              Acre Minimum
              Rural
RR-5          Residential, 5    Rural residential Rural          15.311.03
              Acre Minimum
              Rural             Low density
RR-2          Residential, 2    residential       Rural          15.311.04
              Acre Minimum
              Rural             Low density
RR-1          Residential, 1    residential       Rural          15.311.05
              Acre Minimum
Suburban Residential Zones (chapter 312 of this title):
              Suburban          Low density
SR-2          Residential, 2    residential       Suburban       15.312.01
              Acre Minimum
              Suburban          Low density
SR-1          Residential, 1    residential       Suburban       15.312.02
              Acre Minimum
              Suburban          Suburban
SR-1/2        Residential, 1/   residential       Suburban       15.312.03
              2 Acre Minimum
              Suburban
              Residential,
              12,000 Sq. Ft.
SR-12000; SR- Minimum; Suburban Suburban          Suburban/      15.312.04
12000-H       Residential,      residential       Historic
              12,000 Sq. Ft.
              Minimum -
              Historic
              Suburban
              Residential,
              9,000 Sq. Ft.
SR-9000; SR-  Minimum; Suburban Suburban          Suburban/      15.312.05
9000-H        Residential,      residential       Historic
              9,000 Sq. Ft.
              Minimum -
              Historic
              Neighborhood
              Residential,
              4,500 Sq. Ft.
              Minimum;          Suburban          Suburban/
NR; NR-H      Neighborhood      residential       Historic       15.312.06
              Residential,
              4,500 Sq. Ft.
              Minimum -
              Historic
MFR           Multi-Family      Suburban          Suburban       15.312.07
              Residential       residential
RMU           Residential       Suburban          Suburban       15.312.08
              Mixed- Use        residential
Commercial and Mixed-Use Zones (chapter 313 of this title):
NC            Neighborhood      Commercial        Rural/Suburban 15.313.01
              Commercial
CC            Community         Commercial        Suburban       15.313.02
              Commercial
RC            Regional          Commercial        Suburban       15.313.03
              Commercial
              Tourist
TC-H          Commercial -      Commercial        Historic       15.313.04
              Historic
              Tourist
TC-R          Commercial -      Commercial        Rural          15.313.05
              Rural
              Tourist
TC-S          Commercial -      Commercial        Suburban       15.313.06
              Suburban
CMU-H         Commercial Mixed- Commercial mixed- Historic       15.313.07
              Use - Historic    use
CMU-R         Commercial Mixed- Commercial mixed- Rural          15.313.07
              Use - Rural       use
CMU-S         Commercial Mixed- Commercial mixed- Suburban       15.313.07
              Use - Suburban    use
              Highway Corridor  Highway
HMU-R         Mixed-Use - Rural Commercial mixed- Rural          15.313.08
                                use
              Highway Corridor  Highway
HMU-S         Mixed-Use -       Commercial mixed- Suburban       15.313.09
              Suburban          use
Industrial Zones (chapter 314 of this title):
LI-R          Light Industrial- Industrial        Rural          15.314.01
              Rural
LI-S          Light Industrial- Industrial        Suburban       15.314.01
              Suburban
HI-R          Heavy Industrial- Industrial        Rural          15.314.02
              Rural
HI-S          Heavy Industrial- Industrial        Suburban       15.314.02
              Suburban
Employment Zones (chapter 314 of this title):
SI            Service           Employment        Suburban       15.314.03
              Industrial
EMU           Employment Mixed- Employment        Suburban       15.314.04
              Use
XX            Adult Use         Employment/       Suburban       15.314.05
              District          Industrial
Public/Community Facilities and Other Lands (chapter 316 of this title):
OS            Open Space        Open space        Rural/Suburban 15.316.01
              (Public)
PF            Public Facilities Public/quasi      Suburban/Rural 15.316.02
                                public
Planned Unit Developments (chapter 349 of this title):
                                Rural/low
                                density/suburban
              Planned Unit      residential,
PUD           Development       commercial,       Suburban/Rural 15.349.01
                                commercial mixed
                                use, industrial,
                                employment
 
(Ord. 603, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 607, 9-19-2019)
CHAPTER 310
AGRICULTURE AND RESOURCE ZONING DISTRICTS
SECTION:
15.310.01: Agriculture (AG) Zone
15.310.02: Non-Irrigated Agriculture (NIA) Zone
15.310.03: Resource Land (RL) Zone
15.310.04: Public Land (PL) Zone
15.310.01: AGRICULTURE (AG) ZONE:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of the AG Zone is to implement the Lyon County
master plan, to conserve agricultural resources, retain open spaces and the
rural character of the County, and to direct urbanization into manageable and
identified development areas. This is a low density land use district. Unless
otherwise specified in this title, no more than one primary residence per
parcel is permitted in this land use district.
   B.   Building Placement Requirements:
 
Setback:     
Front       30 feet
Side street 30 feet
Rear        20 feet
Side        10 feet
 
   C.   Building Form Requirements:
 
Building height (see subsection  35 feet
15.330.03E of this title)
Floor area ratio                 n/a
 
   D.   Parking Requirements: See chapter 401, "Off-Street Parking And
Loading", of this title.
   E.   Minimum Lot Requirements:
 
Lot size                            20 gross acres
Lot street frontage width (minimum) 300 feet
 
   F.   Miscellaneous Requirements:
      1.   Cluster development in conformance to the provisions of chapter 343
of this title are permitted subject to the following limitations:
         a.   Minimum parcel size per residential unit is one acre (43,560
square feet).
         b.   Clusters are limited to no more than five (5) contiguous parcels.
         c.   Land separating clusters shall be dedicated as open space in
accordance with the provisions of chapter 343 of this title.
         d.   Clusters shall be served by a shared access to a public road.
         e.   Each parcel shall be served by an individual well and septic
system.
         f.   Density bonuses shall be calculated in accordance with the
provision of section
15.343.04 of this title.
      2.   Accessory dwelling units of no more than one unit per twenty (20)
gross acres are permitted subject to the following limitations:
         a.   Accessory dwelling units in excess of one per parcel are
permitted for the purpose of housing employees and family members engaged in
agricultural pursuits.
         b.   Accessory dwelling units shall not exceed one thousand one
hundred (1,100) square feet livable space.
         c.   Each dwelling unit shall be served by an individual well and
septic system.
         d.   Each dwelling unit shall be separated by no less than fifty feet
(50').
         e.   Accessory dwelling units shall not be entitled to additional
accessory dwelling units.
         f.   Accessory dwelling units shall comply with the performance based
standards contained in section 335.03 A. 1. of this title.
      3.   Farm labor housing for seasonal or temporary employees of the
landowner meeting the requirements of the U.S. Department of Labor standards
contained in 29 CFR part 500 is permitted subject to a conditional use permit
issued in accordance with chapter 230 of this title on land designated by the
Lyon County Assessor as agricultural.
      4.   Any non-agricultural use on a parcel used primarily for agricultural
purposes that is considered to be incidental to the primary agricultural use
may be carried out as a secondary use provided the use meets the performance
based standards of the use contained in chapter 335 of this title. (Ord. 603,
11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 607, 9-19-2019)
15.310.02: NON-IRRIGATED AGRICULTURE (NIA) ZONE:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of the NIA Zone is to implement the Lyon County
master plan, retain rural areas for the purpose of efficiently using land to
conserve forest, mineral and range resources, protect the natural environment,
preserve open spaces, and preserve open areas for grazing and other
agricultural uses for land under private ownership. This is a low density land
use district. Unless otherwise specified in this title, no more than one
primary residence per parcel is permitted in this land use district.
   B.   Building Placement Requirements:
 
Setback:     
Front       30 feet
Side street 30 feet
Rear        20 feet
Side        10 feet
 
   C.   Building Form Requirements:
 
Building height (see subsection  35 feet
15.330.03E of this title)
Floor area ratio                 n/a
 
   D.   Parking Requirements: See chapter 401, "Off-Street Parking And
Loading", of this title.
   E.   Minimum Lot Requirements:
 
Lot size                  20 gross acres
Lot street frontage width 300 feet
 
   F.   Miscellaneous Requirements:
      1.   Cluster development in conformance to the provisions of chapter 343
of this title are permitted subject to the following limitations:
         a.   Minimum parcel size per residential unit is one acre (43,560
square feet).
         b.   Clusters are limited to no more than five (5) contiguous parcels.
         c.   Land separating clusters shall be dedicated as open space in
accordance with the provisions of chapter 343 of this title.
         d.   Clusters shall be served by a shared access to a public road.
         e.   Each parcel shall be served by an individual well and septic
system.
         f.   Density bonuses shall be calculated in accordance with the
provision of section
15.343.04 of this title.
      2.   Accessory dwelling units of no more than one unit per twenty (20)
gross acres are permitted subject to the following limitations:
         a.   Accessory dwelling units in excess of one per parcel are
permitted for the purpose of housing employees and family members engaged in
agricultural pursuits.
         b.   Accessory dwelling units shall not exceed one thousand one
hundred (1,100) square feet livable space.
         c.   Each dwelling unit shall be served by an individual well and
septic system.
         d.   Each dwelling unit shall be separated by no less than fifty feet
(50').
         e.   Accessory dwelling units shall not be entitled to additional
accessory dwelling units.
         f.   Accessory dwelling units shall comply with the performance based
standards contained in section 335.03 A. 1. of this title.
      3.   Farm labor housing for seasonal or temporary employees of the
landowner meeting the requirements of the U.S. Department of Labor standards
contained in 29 CFR part 500 is permitted subject to a conditional use permit
issued in accordance with chapter 230 of this title on land designated by the
Lyon County Assessor as agricultural.
      4.   Any non-agricultural use on a parcel used primarily for agricultural
purposes that is considered to be incidental to the primary agricultural use
may be carried out as a secondary use provided the use meets the performance
based standards of the use contained in chapter 335 of this title. (Ord. 603,
11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 607, 9-19-2019)
15.310.03: RESOURCE LAND (RL) ZONE:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of the RL District is to implement the Lyon County
master plan, establish rural areas for the purpose of efficiently using land to
conserve forest, mineral and range resources, protect the natural environment,
retain open spaces, and preserve open areas for grazing and other agricultural
uses for land under private ownership. This is a low density land use district.
Unless otherwise specified in this title, no more than one primary residence
per parcel is permitted in this land use district.
   B.   Building Placement Requirements:
 
Setback:     
Front       30 feet
Side street 30 feet
Rear        20 feet
Side        10 feet
 
   C.   Building Form Requirements:
 
Building height (see subsection  35 feet
15.330.03E of this title)
Floor area ratio                 n/a
 
   D.   Parking Requirements: See chapter 401, "Off-Street Parking And
Loading", of this title.
   E.   Minimum Lot Requirements:
 
Lot size                  40 gross acres
Lot street frontage width n/a
Average lot width         n/a
Average lot depth         n/a
 
   F.   Miscellaneous Requirements:
      1.   One dwelling unit per forty (40) gross acres or 1/16 of a section as
described by a government land office survey, or per existing parcel at the
time of adoption of this title, if less than forty (40) acres or 1/16 of a
section. Accessory dwelling units are not permitted.
      2.   Any non-agricultural use on a parcel used primarily for agricultural
purposes that is considered to be incidental to the primary agricultural use
may be carried out as a secondary use provided the use meets the performance
based standards of the use contained in chapter 335 of this title.
      3.   Cluster development is not permitted in the Resource Land (RL)
District. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 607, 9-19-2019)
15.310.04: PUBLIC LAND (PL) ZONE:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of the PL District is to implement the Lyon County
master plan, establish rural areas for the purpose of efficiently using land to
conserve forest, mineral and range resources, protect the natural environment,
preserve open spaces, and preserve open areas for grazing and other
agricultural uses for land under predominately in public ownership. This is a
Non- Residential Land Use District.
   B.   Building Placement Requirements:
 
Setback:     
Front       30 feet
Side street 30 feet
Rear        20 feet
Side        10 feet
 
   C.   Building Form Requirements:
 
Building height (see subsection  35 feet
15.330.03E of this title)
Floor area ratio                 n/a
 
   D.   Parking Requirements: See chapter 401, "Off-Street Parking And
Loading", of this title.
   E.   Minimum Lot Requirements:
 
Lot size                  n/a
Lot street frontage width n/a
Average lot width         n/a
Average lot depth         n/a
 
   F.   Miscellaneous Requirements: n/a. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 607,
9-19-2019)
CHAPTER 311
RURAL RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
SECTION:
15.311.01: Rural Residential, 20 Acre Minimum (RR-20)
15.311.02: Rural Residential, 10 Acre Minimum (RR-10)
15.311.03: Rural Residential, 5 Acre Minimum (RR-5)
15.311.04: Rural Residential, 2 Acre Minimum (RR-2)
15.311.05: Rural Residential, 1 Acre Minimum (RR-1)
15.311.01: RURAL RESIDENTIAL, 20 ACRE MINIMUM (RR-20):
   A.   Purpose: This zone is intended to promote the development of single-
family detached units at a density and character compatible with agricultural
and other rural and suburban fringe uses with a minimum lot size of twenty (20)
acres. Unless otherwise specified in this title, no more than one primary
residence per parcel is permitted in this zoning district. The RR-20 Zone
implements the rural residential land use designation of the Master Plan in
Rural Character Districts.
   B.   Building Placement Requirements:
 
Setback:     
Front       30 feet
Side street 30 feet
Rear        20 feet
Side        10 feet
 
   C.   Building Form Requirements:
 
Building height (see subsection  35 feet
15.330.03E of this title)
Floor area ratio                 n/a
 
   D.   Parking Requirements: See chapter 401, "Off-Street Parking And
Loading", of this title.
   E.   Minimum Lot Requirements:
 
Lot size                  20 gross acres
Lot street frontage width 400 feet (30 feet minimum located on a cul-de-sac
                          bulb)
Average lot width         420 feet
Average lot depth         n/a
 
   F.   Miscellaneous Requirements:
      1.   Cluster development in conformance to the provisions of chapter 343
of this title are permitted subject to the following limitations:
         a.   Minimum parcel size per residential unit is one acre (43,560
square feet).
         b.   Minimum of seventy five percent (75%) of the gross parent parcel
shall be reserved as open space.
         c.   Clusters are limited to no more than five (5) contiguous parcels.
         d.   Land separating clusters shall be dedicated as open space in
conformance to the provisions of chapter 343 of this title.
         e.   Clusters shall be served by a shared access to a public road.
         f.   Each parcel within a cluster shall be served by an individual
well and septic system.
Increased density incentives are permitted only to meet hazard reduction and
conservation goals.
      2.   Accessory dwelling units of no more than one unit per twenty (20)
gross acres are permitted subject to the following limitations:
         a.   Accessory dwelling units in excess of one per parcel are
permitted for the purpose of housing employees and family members engaged in
agricultural pursuits.
         b.   Accessory dwelling units shall not exceed one thousand one
hundred (1,100) square feet or fifty percent (50%) of the primary residence's
livable space, whichever is less.
         c.   Each dwelling unit shall be served by an individual well and
septic system.
         d.   Each dwelling unit shall be separated by no less than fifty feet
(50').
         e.   Accessory dwelling units shall not be entitled to additional
accessory dwelling units.
         f.   Accessory dwelling units shall comply with the performance based
standards contained in section 335.03 A. 1. of this title.
      3.   Parcels created by a division of land into large parcels prior to
the adoption of this title containing a minimum of thirty eight (38) gross
acres or a parcel which is 1/16 of a section as described by a government land
office survey may be subdivided into two (2) parcels of equal size. (Ord. 603,
11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 607, 9-19-2019)
15.311.02: RURAL RESIDENTIAL, 10 ACRE MINIMUM (RR-10):
   A.   Purpose: This zone is intended to promote the development of single-
family detached units at a density and character compatible with agricultural
and other rural and suburban fringe uses with a minimum lot size of ten (10)
acres. Unless otherwise specified in this title, no more than one primary
residence per parcel is permitted in this zoning district. The RR-10 Zone
implements the rural residential land use designation of the Master Plan in
Rural Character Districts.
   B.   Building Placement Requirements:
 
Setback:
Front       30 feet
Side street 30 feet
Rear        20 feet
Side        10 feet
 
   C.   Building Form Requirements:
 
Building height (see subsection  35 feet
15.330.03E of this title)
Floor area ratio                 n/a
 
   D.   Parking Requirements: See chapter 401, "Off-Street Parking And
Loading", of this title.
   E.   Minimum Lot Requirements (Minimum):
 
Lot size                  10 gross acres
Lot street frontage width 150 feet (30 feet if located on a cul-de-sac bulb)
 
   F.   Miscellaneous Requirements:
      1.   Cluster development in conformance to the provisions of chapter 343
of this title are permitted subject to the following limitations:
         a.   Minimum parcel size per residential unit is one acre (43,560
square feet).
         b.   Minimum of sixty percent (60%) of the gross parent parcel shall
be reserved as open space.
         c.   Clusters are limited to no more than five (5) contiguous parcels.
         d.   Land separating clusters shall be dedicated as open space in
conformance to the provisions of chapter 343 of this title.
         e.   Clusters shall be served by a shared access to a public road.
         f.   Each parcel within a cluster shall be served by an individual
well and septic system.
Increased density incentives are permitted only to meet hazard reduction and
conservation goals.
      2.   Accessory dwelling units of no more than one unit per ten (10) gross
acres are permitted subject to the following limitations:
         a.   Accessory dwelling units in excess of one per parcel are
permitted for the purpose of housing employees and family members engaged in
agricultural pursuits.
         b.   Accessory dwelling units shall not exceed one thousand one
hundred (1,100) square feet or fifty percent (50%) of the primary residence’s
livable space, whichever is less.
         c.   Each dwelling unit shall be served by an individual well and
septic system.
         d.   Each dwelling unit shall be separated by no less than fifty feet
(50').
         e.   Accessory dwelling units shall not be entitled to additional
accessory dwelling units.
         f.   Accessory dwelling units shall comply with the performance based
standards contained in chapter 335 of this title. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018; amd.
Ord. 607, 9-19-2019)
15.311.03: RURAL RESIDENTIAL, 5 ACRE MINIMUM (RR-5):
   A.   Purpose: This zone is intended to promote the development of single-
family detached units at a density and character compatible with agricultural
and other rural and suburban fringe uses with a minimum lot size of five (5)
gross acres. Unless otherwise specified in this title, no more than one primary
residence per parcel is permitted in this zoning district. The RR-5 Zone
implements the rural residential land use designation of the Master Plan in
Rural Character Districts.
   B.   Building Placement Requirements:
 
Setback:
Front       30 feet
Side street 30 feet
Rear        20 feet
Side        10 feet
 
   C.   Building Form Requirements:
 
Building height (see subsection  35 feet
15.330.03E of this title)
Floor area ratio                 n/a
 
   D.   Parking Requirements: See chapter 401, "Off-Street Parking And
Loading", of this title.
   E.   Minimum Lot Requirements:
 
Lot size                  5 gross acres
Lot street frontage width 150 feet (30 feet if located on a cul-de-sac bulb)
 
   F.   Miscellaneous Requirements:
      1.   Accessory dwelling units of no more than one unit per five (5) gross
acres are permitted subject to the following limitations:
         a.   Accessory dwelling units shall not exceed one thousand one
hundred (1,100) square feet or fifty percent (50%) of the primary residence's
livable space, whichever is less.
         b.   Each dwelling unit shall be served by an individual well and
septic system.
         c.   Each dwelling unit shall be separated by no less than fifty feet
(50').
         d.   Accessory dwelling units shall not be entitled to additional
accessory dwelling units.
         e.   Accessory dwelling units shall comply with the performance based
standards contained in section 335.03 A.1. of this title. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018;
amd. Ord. 607, 9-19-2019)
15.311.04: RURAL RESIDENTIAL, 2 ACRE MINIMUM (RR-2):
   A.   Purpose: This zone is intended for the development of single- family
detached units in suburban fringe and rural settings with a minimum lot size of
two (2) net acres. Unless otherwise specified in this title, no more than one
primary residence per parcel is permitted in this zoning district. The RR-
2 Zone implements the low density residential land use designation of the
Master Plan in Rural Character Districts.
   B.   Building Placement Requirements:
 
Setback:
Front       30 feet
Side street 30 feet
Rear        20 feet
Side        10 feet
 
   C.   Building Form Requirements:
 
Building height (see subsection  35 feet
15.330.03E of this title)
Floor area ratio                 n/a
 
   D.   Parking Requirements: See chapter 401, "Off-Street Parking And
Loading", of this title.
   E.   Minimum Lot Requirements:
 
Lot size                  2 net acres
Lot street frontage width 75 feet (30 feet if located on a cul-de-sac bulb)
 
   F.   Miscellaneous Requirements:
      1.   Accessory dwelling units of no more than one unit per two (2) gross
acres are permitted subject to the following limitations:
         a.   Accessory dwelling units shall not exceed one thousand one
hundred (1,100) square feet or fifty percent (50%) of the primary residence’s
livable space, whichever is less.
         b.   Each dwelling unit shall be served by an individual well and
septic system.
         c.   Each dwelling unit shall be separated by no less than fifty feet
(50').
         d.   Accessory dwelling units shall not be entitled to additional
accessory dwelling units.
         e.   Accessory dwelling units shall comply with the performance based
standards contained in section 335.03 A.1.of this title. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018;
amd. Ord. 607, 9-19-2019)
15.311.05: RURAL RESIDENTIAL, 1 ACRE MINIMUM (RR-1):
   A.   Purpose: This zone is intended for the development of single- family
detached units in suburban fringe and rural settings with a minimum lot size of
one net acre. Unless otherwise specified in this title, no more than one
primary residence per parcel is permitted in this zoning district. The RR-
1 Zone implements the low density residential land use designation of the
Master Plan in Rural Character Districts.
   B.   Building Placement Requirements:
 
Setback:
Front       30 feet
Side street 30 feet
Rear        20 feet
Side        10 feet
 
   C.   Building Form Requirements:
 
Building height (see subsection  35 feet
15.330.03E of this title)
Floor area ratio                 n/a
 
   D.   Parking Requirements: See chapter 401, "Off-Street Parking And
Loading", of this title.
   E.   Minimum Lot Requirements:
 
Lot size                  1 net acre
Lot street frontage width 60 feet (30 feet if located on a cul-de-sac bulb)
 
   F.   Miscellaneous Requirements:
      1.   Accessory dwelling units of no more than one unit per one gross acre
are permitted subject to the following limitations:
         a.   Accessory dwelling units shall not exceed one thousand one
hundred (1,100) square feet or fifty percent (50%) of the primary residence’s
livable space, whichever is less.
         b.   Each dwelling unit shall be served by an individual well and
septic system.
         c.   Each dwelling unit shall be separated by no less than fifty feet
(50').
         d.   Accessory dwelling units shall not be entitled to additional
accessory dwelling units.
         e.   Accessory dwelling units shall comply with the performance based
standards contained in section 335.03 A.1. of this title. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018;
amd. Ord. 607, 9-19-2019)
CHAPTER 312
SUBURBAN RESIDENTIAL ZONES
SECTION:
15.312.01: Suburban Residential, 2 Acre Minimum (SR-2)
15.312.02: Suburban Residential, 1 Acre Minimum (SR-1)
15.312.03: Suburban Residential, 1/2 Acre Minimum (SR-1/2)
15.312.04: Suburban Residential, 12,000 Sq. Ft. Minimum (SR-12000) And Suburban
Residential, Historic District, 12,000 Sq. Ft. Minimum (SR-12000-H)
15.312.05: Suburban Residential, 9,000 Sq. Ft. Minimum (SR-9000) And Suburban
Residential, Historic District, 9,000 Sq. Ft. Minimum (SR-9000-H)
15.312.06: Neighborhood Residential, 4,500 Sq. Ft. Minimum (NR) And
Neighborhood Residential - Historic (NR-H)
15.312.07: Multi-Family Residential (MFR)
15.312.08: Residential Mixed-Use (RMU)
15.312.01: SUBURBAN RESIDENTIAL, 2 ACRE MINIMUM (SR-2):
   A.   Purpose: This zone is intended for the development of single- family
type homes in suburban fringe and rural settings with a minimum lot size of two
(2) net acres. Unless otherwise specified in this title, no more than one
primary residence per parcel is permitted in this zoning district. The SR-
2 Zone implements the low density residential land use designation of the
Master Plan in Suburban Character Districts.
   B.   Building Placement Requirements:
 
Setback:
Front       30 feet
Side street 30 feet
Rear        20 feet
Side        10 feet
 
   C.   Building Form Requirements:
 
Building height (see subsection  35 feet
15.330.03E of this title)
Floor area ratio                 n/a
 
   D.   Parking Requirements: See chapter 401, "Off-Street Parking And
Loading", of this title.
   E.   Minimum Lot Requirements:
 
Lot size                  2 net acres
Lot street frontage width 75 feet (30 feet if located on a cul-de-sac bulb)
 
   F.   Miscellaneous Requirements:
      1.   Accessory dwelling units of no more than one unit per two (2) gross
acres are permitted subject to the following limitations:
         a.   Accessory dwelling units shall not exceed one thousand one
hundred (1,100) square feet or fifty percent (50%) of the primary residence’s
livable space, whichever is less.
         b.   Each dwelling unit shall be served by an individual well and
septic system.
         c.   Each dwelling unit shall be separated by no less than fifty feet
(50').
         d.   Accessory dwelling units shall not be entitled to additional
accessory dwelling units.
         e.   Accessory dwelling units shall comply with the performance based
standards contained in section
15.335.03 A.1. of this title. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 607, 9-19-2019)
15.312.02: SUBURBAN RESIDENTIAL, 1 ACRE MINIMUM (SR-1):
   A.   Purpose: This zone is intended for the development of single- family
units in suburban fringe and rural settings with a minimum lot size of one net
acre, and a maximum density of one unit per gross acre. Unless otherwise
specified in this title, no more than one primary residence per parcel is
permitted in this zoning district. The SR-1 Zone implements the low density
residential land use designation of the Master Plan in Suburban Character
Districts.
   B.   Building Placement Requirements:
 
Setback:
Front       30 feet
Side street 30 feet
Rear        20 feet
Side        10 feet
 
   C.   Building Form Requirements:
 
Building height (see subsection  35 feet
15.330.03E of this title)
Floor area ratio                 n/a
 
   D.   Parking Requirements: See chapter 401, "Off-Street Parking And
Loading", of this title.
   E.   Minimum Lot Requirements:
 
Lot size                  1 net acre
Lot street frontage width 60 feet (30 feet if located on a cul-de-sac bulb)
 
   F.   Miscellaneous Requirements:
      1.   Accessory dwelling units of no more than one unit per one gross acre
are permitted subject to the following limitations:
         a.   Accessory dwelling units shall not exceed one thousand one
hundred (1,100) square feet or fifty percent (50%) of the primary residence’s
livable space, whichever is less.
         b.   Each dwelling unit shall be served by an individual well and
septic system or if available by Municipal water and sewer.
         c.   Each dwelling unit shall be separated by no less than fifty feet
(50').
         d.   Accessory dwelling units shall not be entitled to additional
accessory dwelling units.
         e.   Accessory dwelling units shall comply with the performance based
standards contained in section
15.335.03 A.1. of this title. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 607, 9-19-2019)
15.312.03: SUBURBAN RESIDENTIAL, 1/2 ACRE MINIMUM (SR-1/2):
   A.   Purpose: This zone is intended for the development of a variety of
single-family unit types in a suburban setting in close proximity to
neighborhood service centers that include commercial, social, recreational, and
civic services, with a minimum lot size of one-half (1/2) net acre, and a
maximum density of two (2) units per gross acre. Unless otherwise specified in
this title, no more than one primary residence per parcel is permitted in this
zoning district. The SR-1/2 Zone implements the suburban residential land use
designation of the Master Plan in Suburban Character Districts.
   B.   Building Placement Requirements:
 
Setback:
Front       25 feet
Side street 25 feet
Rear        20 feet
Side        10 feet
 
   C.   Building Form Requirements:
 
Building height (see subsection  35 feet
15.330.03E of this title)
Floor area ratio                 n/a
 
   D.   Parking Requirements: See chapter 401, "Off-Street Parking And
Loading", of this title.
   E.   Minimum Lot Requirements:
 
Lot size                  1/2 acre (net)
Lot street frontage width 60 feet (30 feet if located on a cul-de-sac bulb)
 
   F.   Miscellaneous Requirements:
      1.   Accessory dwelling units of no more than one unit per one-half (1/2)
gross acre are permitted subject to the following limitations:
         a.   Accessory dwelling units shall not exceed one thousand one
hundred (1,100) square feet or fifty percent (50%) of the primary residence’s
livable space, whichever is less.
         b.   Each dwelling unit shall be served by Municipal water and sewer
systems.
         c.   Each dwelling unit shall be separated by no less than fifty feet
(50').
         d.   Accessory dwelling units shall not be entitled to additional
accessory dwelling units.
         e.   Accessory dwelling units shall comply with the performance based
standards contained in section
15.335.03 A.1. of this title. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 607, 9-19-2019)
15.312.04: SUBURBAN RESIDENTIAL, 12,000 SQ. FT. MINIMUM (SR-12000) AND SUBURBAN
RESIDENTIAL, HISTORIC DISTRICT, 12,000 SQ. FT. MINIMUM (SR-12000-H):
   A.   Purpose: This zone is intended for the development of a variety of
single-family unit types in a suburban setting in close proximity to
neighborhood service centers that include commercial, social, recreational, and
civic services, with a minimum lot size of twelve thousand (12,000) square
feet, and a maximum density of 3.63 units per gross acre. Unless otherwise
specified in this title, no more than one primary residence per parcel is
permitted in this zoning district. The SR-12000 Zone implements the suburban
residential land use designation of the Master Plan in Suburban Character
Districts.
   B.   Building Placement Requirements:
 
Setback:
Front       25 feetHD1
Side street 20 feetHD1
Rear        20 feetHD1
Side        10 feetHD1
 
HD1 - In Historic Districts new construction on existing, legal non-conforming
lots shall maintain a minimum five foot (5') setback to the foundation/stem
wall from all property lines. Existing and/or historic structures from the date
of this title enactment shall be allowed to use the existing distances from
building walls to the property lines, so long as they are not encroaching on a
neighboring property or right-of-way.
   C.   Building Form Requirements:
 
Building height (see subsection  35 feet
15.330.03E of this title)
Floor area ratio                 n/a
 
   D.   Parking Requirements: See chapter 401, "Off-Street Parking And
Loading", of this title.
   E.   Minimum Lot Requirements:
 
Lot size                  12,000 square feet net
Lot street frontage width 60 feet (30 feet if located on a cul-de-sac bulb)HD2
 
HD2 - In Historic Districts, lots that are less than the lot street frontage
width and average lot width shall not be considered non-conforming so long as
they were legally established prior to the enactment of this title.
   F.   Miscellaneous Requirements:
      1.   Accessory dwelling units of no more than one unit per twelve
thousand (12,000) square feet gross are permitted subject to the following
limitations:
         a.   Accessory dwelling units shall not exceed one thousand one
hundred (1,100) square feet or fifty percent (50%) of the primary residence’s
livable space, whichever is less.
         b.   Each dwelling unit shall be served by a municipal water and sewer
system.
         c.   Each dwelling unit shall be separated by no less than fifty feet
(50').
         d.   Accessory dwelling units shall not be entitled to additional
accessory dwelling units.
         e.   Accessory dwelling units shall comply with the performance based
standards contained in section
15.335.03 A.1. of this title. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 607, 9-19-2019)
15.312.05: SUBURBAN RESIDENTIAL, 9,000 SQ. FT. MINIMUM (SR-9000) AND SUBURBAN
RESIDENTIAL, HISTORIC DISTRICT, 9,000 SQ. FT. MINIMUM (SR-9000-H):
   A.   Purpose: This zone is intended for the development of a variety of
single-family unit types in a traditional town or suburban settings located
near major transportation facilities, supporting commercial and commercial
mixed-uses, civic uses, and parks with a minimum lot size of nine thousand
(9,000) square feet and a maximum density of 4.84 units per gross acre. Unless
otherwise specified in this title, no more than one primary residence per
parcel is permitted in this zoning district. The SR-9000 Zone implements the
suburban residential land use designation of the Master Plan in Suburban
Character Districts.
   B.   Building Placement Requirements:
 
Setback:
Front       20 feetHD1
Side street 20 feetHD1
Rear        20 feet to building (12 feet to patio/ shade structure eave)HD1
Side        5 feetHD1
 
HD1 - In Historic Districts new construction on existing, legal non-conforming
lots shall maintain a minimum five foot (5') setback from the foundation/stem
wall to all property lines. Existing and/or historic structures from the date
of this title enactment shall be allowed to use the existing distances from
building walls to the property lines, so long as they are not encroaching on a
neighboring property or right-of-way.
   C.   Building Form Requirements:
 
Building height (see subsection  35 feet
15.330.03E of this title)
Floor area ratio                 n/a
 
   D.   Parking Requirements: See chapter 401, "Off-Street Parking And
Loading", of this title.
   E.   Minimum Lot Requirements:
 
Lot size                  9,000 square feet net
Lot street frontage width 40 feetHD2
 
HD2 - In Historic Districts, lots that are less than the lot street frontage
width and average lot width shall not be considered non-conforming so long as
they were legally established prior to the enactment of this title.
   F.   Miscellaneous Requirements:
      1.   Zero lot-line housing development in conformance to the provisions
of chapter 346 of this title is permitted.
      2.   Alley loaded housing development in conformance to the provisions of
chapter 347 of this title is permitted. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.312.06: NEIGHBORHOOD RESIDENTIAL, 4,500 SQ. FT. MINIMUM (NR) AND
NEIGHBORHOOD RESIDENTIAL - HISTORIC (NR-H):
   A.   Purpose: This zone is intended for the development of a variety of
single-family attached and detached units in a traditional town or commercial
mixed-use setting with a minimum lot size of four thousand five hundred (4,500)
square feet and a maximum density of 9.68 units per gross acre. Unless
otherwise specified in this title, no more than one primary residence per
parcel is permitted in this zoning district. The NR Zone implements the
suburban residential land use designation of the Master Plan in Suburban
Character Districts.
   B.   Limitations: The minimum lots size in Neighborhood Residential is 9,000
square foot minimum, unless one or more of the following conditions is met:
      1.   Existing and new development within the Silver City community
boundary for parcels less than 9,000 square feet in size;
      2.   Existing and new development in that portion of Dayton located
within the Comstock Historic District for parcels less than 9,000 square feet
in size;
      3.   Property within the unincorporated area of Lyon County already
having an NR-1 zoning designation (which would utilize the NR land use and
development standards per the Exhibit A - Zoning Consistency Matrix adopted
with Title 15 by the Board of Commissioners on November 18, 2018);
      4.   Those parcels zoned NR (Neighborhood Residential - 4,500 square foot
minimum) as of May 7, 2021;
      5.   As a template for small lot subdivision development standards within
a new Planned Unit Development application.
      6.   Property within the unincorporated area of Lyon County which has a
vested development right for residential lots smaller than 9,000 square feet,
such as an approved specific plan.
Building Placement Requirements:
 
Setback:     
Front       Variable with a minimum of 20 feet to garage/10 feet to houseHD1
Side street 20 feet to garage. May be reduced to 10 feet provided no driveway
            or garage access is permitted in the street side yardHD1
Rear        10 feet subject to the limitations listed below for alley loaded
            housing developmentHD1
Side        5 feetHD1
 
HD1 - In Historic Districts new construction on existing, legal non-conforming
lots shall maintain a minimum five foot (5') setback from the foundation/stem
wall to all property lines. Existing and/or historic structures from the date
of this title enactment shall be allowed to use the existing distances from
building walls to the property lines, so long as they are not encroaching on a
neighboring property or right-of-way.
   C.   Building Form Requirements:
 
Building height (see subsection  35 feet
15.330.03E of this title)
Floor area ratio                 n/a
 
   D.   Parking Requirements: See chapter 401, "Off-Street Parking And
Loading", of this title.
   E.   Minimum Lot Requirements:
 
Lot size                  Variable with a minimum lot size of 4,500 square feet
                          (net)
Lot street frontage width 30 feetHD2
Minimum lot width         40 feet/50 feet for corner lotsHD2
Average lot depth         n/a
 
HD2 - In Historic Districts, lots that are less than the lot street frontage
width and average lot width shall not be considered non-conforming so long as
they were legally established prior to the enactment of this title.
   F.   Miscellaneous Requirements:
      1.   Duplex development in conformance with the provisions of chapter 342
of this title is permitted subject to the following:
         a.   Minimum lot size shall be no less than eight thousand (8,000)
square feet.
      2.   Townhouse development in conformance to the provisions of chapter
345 of this title is permitted subject to the following:
         a.   No fewer than three (3) units per structure shall be permitted
per development site.
      3.   Zero lot-line housing development in conformance to the provisions
of chapter 346 of this title is permitted.
      4.   Alley loaded housing development in conformance to the provisions of
chapter 347 of this title is permitted subject to the following:
         a.   A garage may be constructed on the rear property line, provided
the garage covers no more than forty percent (40%) of the rear lot width.
         b.    Residential structures shall be constructed within the setbacks
established for this zoning district. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 607, 9-
19-2019; Ord. 617, 9-2-2021)
15.312.07: MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (MFR):
   A.   Purpose: This zone is intended for the development of higher- density
residential areas located in close proximity to major transportation
facilities, supporting commercial and commercial mixed-uses, civic uses, and
parks and characterized by attached or detached multi-family units,
condominiums, townhouses or apartments. This zone has a minimum net parcel size
of six thousand (6,000) square feet, and a maximum density of eighteen (18)
units per acre. The MFR Zone implements the suburban residential land use
designation of the Master Plan in Suburban Character Districts.
   B.   Building Placement Requirements:
 
Setback:
Front       20 feet
Side street 20 feet
Rear        20 feet to building (10 feet to eave of patio/shade structure)
Side        10 feet
 
   C.   Building Form Requirements:
 
Building height (see subsection  35 feet
15.330.03E of this title)
Floor area ratio                 n/a
 
   D.   Parking Requirements: See chapter 401, "Off-Street Parking And
Loading", of this title.
   E.   Minimum Lot Requirements:
 
Lot size                  6,000 square feet (net)
Lot street frontage width 45 feet
Average lot width         60 feet
Average lot depth         n/a
 
   F.   Miscellaneous Requirements:
      1.   Multi-family residential housing in conformance with the provisions
of chapter 348 of this title is permitted subject to the following:
         a.   Approval of a design review application per chapter 235 of this
title.
      2.   Cottage housing development in conformance to the provisions of
chapter 344 of this title is permitted subject to the following:
         a.   The project shall be served by public water and sewer system.
      3.   Duplex development in conformance with chapter 342 of this title is
permitted subject to the following:
         a.   Minimum lot size shall be no less than eight thousand (8,000)
square feet.
      4.   Townhouse development in conformance to the provisions of chapter
345 of this title is permitted subject to the following:
         a.   No fewer than three (3) units nor more than nine (9) units per
structure shall be permitted.
         b.   Density shall be no less than six thousand (6,000) square feet
per unit. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 607, 9-19-2019)
15.312.08: RESIDENTIAL MIXED-USE (RMU):
   A.   Purpose: This zone is intended for the development of higher- density
residential areas with a variety of housing options, including small lot
subdivisions when part of a planned development or attached or detached multi-
family units, condominiums, townhouses, apartments, or live-work units in a
traditional town or suburban setting located near major transportation
facilities, supporting commercial and commercial mixed-uses, civic uses, and
parks. This district has a minimum net parcel size of four thousand five
hundred (4,500) square feet with six thousand (6,000) square foot minimum
average, and a maximum density of eighteen (18) units per acre. Secondary uses
within this zone are open space, parks, pathways, schools, and other public
uses. The RMU Zone implements the suburban residential land use designation of
the Master Plan in Suburban Character Districts.
RMU development provides a mix of complementary designed and located
residential uses, including single-family and multifamily uses, attached and
detached, condominiums and special living facilities, with the opportunity for
retail and services as subservient uses on a project and district level (less
than 20 percent of total development). The RMU development should strive to
achieve project sites designed for pedestrian, bicycle and vehicle access and
circulation and connections to the adjacent land uses. It should also create
public focal points and activity centers and provide a sense of community for
the occupants and the neighborhood.
The numbers in parenthesis in subsection B and C of this section are
alternative setbacks for garage versus house and alternative maximum building
height for cottage homes.
   B.   Building Placement Requirements:
 
         Single     Zero       Alley                Cottage  Multi- Commercial
Use      Family     Lot Line   Loaded      Duplex   Cluster  Family Development
         Detached
Setback:                                                       
                    Variable   Variable                             See section
         10'/20'    (20'       (20'                                 15.313.07.2
 Front  for garage minimum    minimum and 20'(15') 20'(15') 15'    of this
                    and 5'     5'                                   title
                    variation) variation)
         10'(20'                                                    See section
 Side   for        20'(10')   20'(10')    20'(10') 20'(10') 15'    15.313.07.2
  street garage)                                                    of this
                                                                    title
                                                                    See section
 Rear   10'        0' and 10' 20'(0')     20'      20'      20'    15.313.07.2
                                                                    of this
                                                                    title
                                                                    See section
 Side   5'         0' and 10' 5'          5'       5'       5'     15.313.07.2
                                                                    of this
                                                                    title
 
   C.   Building Form Requirements:
 
                 Single   Zero     Alley         Cottage  Multi- Commercial
Use              Family   Lot Line Loaded Duplex Cluster  Family Development
                 Detached
Building height  35'      35'      35'    35'    18'(23') 35'    35'
Floor area ratio n/a      n/a      n/a    n/a    n/a      n/a    n/a
 
   D.   Parking Requirements: Refer to chapter 401, "Off-Street Parking And
Loading", of this title.
   E.   Minimum Lot Requirements:
 
           Single     Zero        Alley              Cottage Multi- Commercial
Use        Family     Lot Line    Loaded      Duplex Cluster Family Development
           Detached
           Variable   Variable    Variable
           (4,500'    (4,500'     (4,500'                           See section
           minimum    minimum     minimum                           15.313.07.2
Lot size   with       with 6,000' with 6,000' 8,000' 11,428' 6,000' of this
           6,000'     minimum     minimum                           title
           minimum    average)    average)
           average)
Lot street                                                          See section
frontage   30'        30'         30'         40'    70'     30'    15.313.07.2
width                                                               of this
                                                                    title
           40'/50'                                                  See section
Average    for corner 60'         60'         60'    70'     60'    15.313.07.2
lot width  lots                                                     of this
                                                                    title
                                                                    See section
Average    n/a        n/a         n/a         n/a    n/a     n/a    15.313.07.2
lot depth                                                           of this
                                                                    title
 
   F.   Miscellaneous Requirements:
      1.   The intent of the Mixed Use Residential District is to provide a mix
of residential and commercial uses within one project and throughout the
district. To accomplish this while providing flexibility of design, two (2)
development options are offered:
         a.   Residential development (100 percent) - commercial provision. The
proposed development shall provide for both residential uses and commercial use
(s). The commercial portion of the development may occupy up to a maximum of
twenty percent (20%) of the project site or floor area. When twenty percent
(20%) of the site is dedicated for commercial use, the residential component of
the project is allowed to be built out at a density equivalent to one hundred
percent (100%) of the gross site.
         b.   Mix and location of uses.
            (1)   All RMU development, except those meeting the criteria below
for infill development, shall provide a mix of residential unit types. A
maximum of thirty percent (30%) of any one type of residential units is
allowed. Residential units incorporating home occupations shall not count as a
separate unit type.
            (2)   Up to twenty percent (20%) of the acreage of the RMU
development may be devoted to commercial uses (not including home occupations).
            (3)   Except for home occupations, commercial uses that are
included shall be located along collectors, at corners, or adjacent/across from
common open spaces.
            (4)   Infill development within the RMU District. Where an existing
parcel within the RMU District is one acre or less, development projects may
consist of a single residential unit type or a combination residential and
commercial mix consistent with the development standards contained in this
title.
         c.   Pedestrian connections shall be made from residential uses along
all major streets and from homes to all common open spaces and to all civic and
public uses and landmarks. Pedestrian connections that cannot be made as
sidewalks along vehicle lanes shall be made as alternative access easements
such as trails.
         d.   A hierarchy of interconnected streets that form a grid pattern
shall be provided in any RMU development, including major collectors
(boulevards), local streets, and alleys. In local street patterns, walkable
blocks of five hundred (500) linear feet or less are required.
         e.   New RMU developments must connect to existing neighboring
developments where connections are provided and must provide new connections to
future neighboring developments.
         f.   Street standards shall be consistent with Lyon County Development
Standards.
         g.   The Public Works Director may allow for a reduction of local
street width to forty one feet (41'), based on a cross-section of two (2) 10-
foot vehicle lanes, two (2) 6-inch curbs, two (2) 5- foot planting/utility
strips, and two (2) 5-foot sidewalks.
         h.   Parallel parking may be provided on one or both sides of local
and major streets.
         i.   All RMU developments shall meet parking standards of chapter 401
of this title. Shared parking is encouraged where participating users have
differing peak parking hours. The Director may reduce parking requirements,
when a parking study prepared by a professional transportation engineer
indicates that a reduction in parking will cause no negative impacts to streets
or neighbors.
         j.   All parking, including parking lots, improved or unimproved
parking stalls/spaces, and/or parking garages/structures shall occur in the
rear or side of the lot and shall be located a minimum of ten feet (10') behind
the front building wall of the primary structure, except for parking located
within a mixed use building.
      2.   Mixed use - design standards.
         a.   The design standards of chapters 340, 342, 343, 344, 345, 346,
347, and 348 of this title, residential standards, shall apply to all proposed
residential development within RMU Districts, unless otherwise specified by
this chapter.
         b.   The design standards of the Commercial Zoning District, chapter
360 of this title, design standards, shall apply to all proposed commercial
development within the Mixed Use Zoning Districts, unless otherwise specified
by this chapter.
         c.   The following design standards supplement those found in
subsections F2a and F2b of this section, and shall apply to all development
proposed within the RMU District.
            (1)   Commercial areas should be placed within walking distance (1/
4 mile) of residences;
            (2)   Commercial buildings and uses should be located at the corner
of the intersection of two (2) public streets;
            (3)   Pedestrian-scale elements such as canopies, awnings, porches,
building overhangs and arcades, and outdoor seating are required along
pedestrian-oriented streets;
            (4)   All primary building pedestrian entrances and storefront
windows shall face onto the primary street serving the site. If the site has
multiple street frontages, the more pedestrian- oriented street shall take
precedence;
            (5)   The design character of an individual building should be
compatible (share similar features such as color, scale, massing and height)
with its neighbors but may also include other features or characteristics that
are different;
            (6)   The requirements of chapter 402, "Landscape Standards", of
this title, shall apply to all proposed development within the Mixed Use
Districts;
            (7)   Drive-through facilities are not permitted.
      3.   Cottage housing development in conformance to the provisions of
chapter 344 of this title is permitted.
      4.   Duplex development in conformance to chapter 342 of this title is
permitted.
      5.   Townhouse development in conformance to the provisions of chapter
345 of this title is permitted.
      6.   Zero lot-line housing development in conformance to the provisions
of chapter 346 of this title is permitted.
      7.   Alley loaded housing development in conformance to the provisions of
chapter 347 of this title is permitted.
      8.   Conventional single family detached residential development in
conformance to the provisions of section
15.312.06 of this chapter is permitted.
      9.   Manufactured/mobile home parks in conformance with the provisions of
chapter 352 of this title are permitted subject to the following:
         a.   Density no greater than the Neighborhood Residential (NR)
District (4,500 square feet/unit).
         b.   Up to twenty percent (20%) of the acreage of the RMU development
may be developed as a manufactured/mobile home park.
         c.   The manufactured/mobile home park development shall be served by
public water and sewer. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
CHAPTER 313
COMMERCIAL/MIXED-USE ZONING DISTRICTS
SECTION:
15.313.01: Neighborhood Commercial (NC)
15.313.02: Community Commercial (CC)
15.313.03: Regional Commercial (RC)
15.313.04: Tourist Commercial - Historic (TC-H)
15.313.05: Tourist Commercial - Rural (TC-R)
15.313.06: Tourist Commercial- Suburban (TC-S)
15.313.07: Commercial Mixed-Use - Rural (CMU-R), Commercial Mixed-Use -
Suburban (CMU-S), And Commercial Mixed-Use - Historic (CMU-H)
15.313.07.1: Commercial Mixed-Use - Rural (CMU-R)
15.313.07.2: Commercial Mixed-Use - Suburban (CMU-S)
15.313.07.3: Commercial Mixed-Use - Historic (CMU-H)
15.313.08: Highway Corridor Mixed-Use
15.313.08.1: Highway Corridor Mixed-Use - Rural (HMU-R)
15.313.08.2: Highway Corridor Mixed-Use - Suburban (HMU-S)
15.313.01: NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL (NC):
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this district is to provide a range of
services, ranging in scale and character from small, limited use centers that
are fully integrated into the surrounding neighborhood to larger centers that
may function independently of the surrounding neighborhood with ample parking
and numerous retail and service stores. The NC District implements the
commercial land use designation of the Master Plan in Rural and Suburban
Character Districts.
   B.   Building Placement Requirements:
 
Setback:                                  
 From property lines abutting           30 feet
  residential uses
 From property lines abutting adjacent  20 feet subject to chapter 360 of this
  public ROW                             title, commercial design standards
  From front property line if the        10 feet subject to chapter 360 of this
 building is oriented toward the street title, commercial design standards
  and accesses the public sidewalk
 From property lines abutting           0 feet subject to applicable Building
  Commercial or Industrial Zones or uses and Fire Codes
 Rear                                   10 feet; 0 feet with alley
 
   C.   Building Form Requirements:
 
Building height  35 feet subject to subsection
                 15.330.03E of this title
Floor area ratio n/a
 
   D.   Parking Requirements: See chapter 401 of this title, parking and
loading.
   E.   Minimum Lot Requirements:
 
                          5,000 square feet (net); except within approved
Lot size                  commercial subdivisions; there is no minimum lot size
                          for commercial subdivisions provided all other zoning
                          and development standards are met
Lot street frontage width 50 feet
Average lot width         n/a
Average lot depth         n/a
 
   F.   Miscellaneous Requirements:
      1.   Requirements In Suburban Character Districts:
See section
15.320.03, table 15.320-2 of this title, table of allowed uses - Suburban
Residential and Commercial Districts NC.
See chapter 360 of this title, commercial design standards.
See appendix B, Lyon County Development Standards on file in the County.
      2.   Requirements In Rural Character Districts:
See section
15.320.03, table 15.320-1 of this title, table of allowed uses Rural
Residential, Commercial, and Agricultural Districts NC.
See chapter 360 of this title, commercial design standards.
See appendix B, Lyon County Design Criteria and Improvement Standards on file
in the County. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.313.02: COMMUNITY COMMERCIAL (CC):
   A.   Purpose: Community Commercial occurs in Suburban Character Districts
and provides a mix of commercial and retail services in a concentrated and
unified center that serves the local community. The CC District implements the
commercial land use designation of the Master Plan in Suburban Character
Districts.
   B.   Building Placement Requirements:
 
Setback:
 From property lines abutting           20 feet
  residential uses
 From property lines abutting adjacent  20 feet subject to chapter 360 of this
  public ROW                             title, commercial design standards
  From front property line if the        10 feet subject to chapter 360 of this
 building is oriented toward the street title, commercial design standards
  and accesses the public sidewalk
 From property lines abutting           0 feet subject to applicable Building
  Commercial or Industrial Zones or uses and Fire Codes
 Rear                                   10 feet; 0 feet with alley
 
   C.   Building Form Requirements:
 
Building height  45 feet subject to subsection
                 15.330.03E of this title
Floor area ratio n/a
 
   D.   Parking Requirements: See chapter 401 of this title, parking and
loading.
   E.   Minimum Lot Requirements:
 
Lot size                  n/a
Lot street frontage width 50 feet
Average lot width         n/a
Average lot depth         n/a
 
   F.   Miscellaneous Requirements:
See section
15.320.03, table 15.320-2 of this title, suburban character area land use.
See chapter 360 of this title, commercial design standards.
See appendix B, Lyon County Design Criteria and Improvement Standards on file
in the County. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.313.03: REGIONAL COMMERCIAL (RC):
   A.   Purpose: Regional Commercial occurs in Suburban Character Districts and
provides a mix of commercial and retail services in large retail centers with
unique stores and characteristics that serve a regional market. The RC District
implements the commercial land use designation of the Master Plan.
   B.   Building Placement Requirements:
 
Setback:
 From property lines abutting           40 feet
  residential uses
 From property lines abutting adjacent  20 feet subject to chapter 360 of this
  public ROW                             title, commercial design standards
  From front property line if the        10 feet subject to chapter 360 of this
 building is oriented toward the street title, commercial design standards
  and accesses the public sidewalk
 From property lines abutting           0 feet subject to applicable Building
  Commercial or Industrial Zones or uses and Fire Codes
 Rear                                   10 feet; 0 feet with alley
 
   C.   Building Form Requirements:
 
Building height  45 feet subject to subsection
                 15.330.03E of this title
Floor area ratio n/a
 
   D.   Parking Requirements: See chapter 401 of this title, parking and
loading.
   E.   Minimum Lot Requirements:
 
Lot size                  n/a
Lot street frontage width n/a
Average lot width         n/a
Average lot depth         n/a
 
   F.   Miscellaneous Requirements: The minimum project area shall be twenty
(20) gross acres; individual lots/pad areas of a commercial subdivision within
a regional commercial project have no minimum lot size.
See section
15.320.03, table 15.320-2 of this title, suburban character area land use.
See chapter 360 of this title, commercial design standards.
See appendix B, Lyon County Design Criteria and Improvement Standards on file
in the County. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.313.04: TOURIST COMMERCIAL - HISTORIC (TC-H):
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this district is to provide suitable areas for
tourist related commercial and retail services, including nonrestricted gaming,
as defined in Nevada Revised Statutes 463, lodges, resorts and small specialty
shops in Historic Character Districts. The TC-H District implements the
commercial land use designation of the Master Plan.
   B.   Building Placement Requirements:
 
Setback:
 From property lines abutting           20 feet
  residential uses
 From property lines abutting adjacent  20 feet subject to chapter 360 of this
  public ROW                             title, commercial design standards
  From front property line if the        10 feet subject to chapter 360 of this
 building is oriented toward the street title, commercial design standards
  and accesses the public sidewalk
 From property lines abutting           0 feet subject to applicable Building
  Commercial or Industrial Zones or uses and Fire Codes
                                         10 feet; 0 feet with alley (unless
 Rear                                   building(s) are pre-existing and
                                         developed to a setback of less than 5
                                         feet)
 
   C.   Building Form Requirements:
 
Building height  45 feet subject to subsection
                 15.330.03E of this title
Floor area ratio n/a
 
   D.   Parking Requirements: See chapter 401 of this title, parking and
loading; no off-street parking is required for non- residential uses unless the
use exceeds three thousand (3,000) square feet of gross floor area in which
case one off-street parking space is required for every three hundred (300)
square feet beyond three thousand (3,000) square feet.
   E.   Minimum Lot Requirements:
 
Lot size                  n/a
Lot street frontage width n/a
Average lot width         n/a
Average lot depth         n/a
 
   F.   Miscellaneous Requirements:
The projects must be architecturally compatible with and enhance the
surrounding historic character neighborhood.
A residential or commercial use existing on the date of adoption of this
section may continue as a permitted use indefinitely, provided that the
residential use is not expanded by the addition of new residential occupancies.
New construction on existing, legal non-conforming lots shall maintain a
minimum five foot (5') setback from the foundation/stem wall to all property
lines. Existing and/or historic structures from the date of this title
enactment shall be allowed to use the existing distances from building walls to
the property lines, so long as they are not encroaching on a neighboring
property or right-of-way.
See section
15.320.03, table 15.320-3 of this title, historic character area land use.
See chapter 360 of this title, commercial design standards.
See appendix B, Lyon County Design Criteria and Improvement Standards on file
in the County.
Refer to Nevada Revised Statutes 463 - Licensing and Control of Gaming. (Ord.
603, 11-1-2018)
15.313.05: TOURIST COMMERCIAL - RURAL (TC-R):
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this district is to provide suitable areas for
tourist related commercial and retail services, including nonrestricted gaming,
as defined in Nevada Revised Statutes 463, lodges, resorts and small specialty
shops in Rural Character Districts. The TC-R District implements the commercial
land use designation of the Master Plan.
   B.   Building Placement Requirements:
 
Setback:
 From property lines abutting           30 feet
  residential uses
 From property lines abutting adjacent  20 feet subject to chapter 360 of this
  public ROW                             title, commercial design standards
  From front property line if the        10 feet subject to chapter 360 of this
 building is oriented toward the street title, commercial design standards
  and accesses the public sidewalk
 From property lines abutting           0 feet subject to applicable Building
  Commercial or Industrial Zones or uses and Fire Codes
 Rear                                   20 feet
 
   C.   Building Form Requirements:
 
Building height  45 feet subject to subsection
                 15.330.03E of this title
Floor area ratio n/a
 
   D.   Parking Requirements: See chapter 401 of this title, parking and
loading.
   E.   Minimum Lot Requirements:
 
Lot size                  1 net acre
Lot street frontage width n/a
Average lot width         n/a
Average lot depth         n/a
 
   F.   Miscellaneous Requirements:
See section
15.320.03, table 15.320-1 of this title, rural character area land use.
See chapter 360 of this title, commercial design standards.
See appendix B, Lyon County Design Criteria and Improvement Standards on file
in the County.
Refer to Nevada Revised Statutes 463 - Licensing and Control of Gaming. (Ord.
603, 11-1-2018)
15.313.06: TOURIST COMMERCIAL - SUBURBAN (TC-S):
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this district is to provide suitable areas for
tourist related commercial and retail services, including casinos, including
nonrestricted gaming as defined in Nevada Revised Statutes 463, hotels, RV
parks, and resorts in Suburban Character Districts. The TC-S District
implements the commercial land use designation of the Master Plan.
   B.   Building Placement Requirements:
 
Setback:
 From property lines abutting           20 feet
  residential uses
 From property lines abutting adjacent  20 feet subject to chapter 360 of this
  public ROW                             title, commercial design standards
  From front property line if the        10 feet subject to chapter 360 of this
 building is oriented toward the street title, commercial design standards
  and accesses the public sidewalk
 From property lines abutting           0 feet subject to applicable Building
  Commercial or Industrial Zones or uses and Fire Codes
 Rear                                   10 feet; 0 feet with alley
 
   C.   Building Form Requirements:
 
Building height  55 feet subject to subsection
                 15.330.03E of this title
Floor area ratio n/a
 
   D.   Parking Requirements: See chapter 401 of this title, parking and
loading.
   E.   Minimum Lot Requirements:
 
Lot size                  1 net acre
Lot street frontage width n/a
Average lot width         n/a
Average lot depth         n/a
 
   F.   Miscellaneous Requirements:
See section
15.320.03, table 15.320-2 of this title, suburban character area land use.
See chapter 360 of this title, commercial design standards.
See appendix B, Lyon County Design Criteria and Improvement Standards on file
in the County.
Refer to Nevada Revised Statutes 463 - Licensing and Control of Gaming. (Ord.
603, 11-1-2018)
15.313.07: COMMERCIAL MIXED-USE - RURAL (CMU-R), COMMERCIAL MIXED-USE -
SUBURBAN (CMU-S), AND COMMERCIAL MIXED-USE - HISTORIC (CMU-H):
15.313.07.1: COMMERCIAL MIXED-USE - RURAL (CMU-R):
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this district is to provide areas which
integrate compatible commercial uses with single family residential uses
through proper design. Situated within a commercial mixed-use land use
designation in the master plan, the goal of the district is to provide for a
better jobs-housing balance, preserve and enhance the unique characteristics of
small rural centers, encourage development of community oriented commercial
centers, conserve land resources, reduce commuter trips, and provide
opportunities for affordable housing. The district is also intended to provide
for a traditional settlement land use pattern with mixed commercial and
residential uses arranged horizontally and/or vertically within a parcel and/or
district. The CMU-R District can be used for in-fill projects and as a
redevelopment/revitalization tool. The projects must be architecturally
compatible with and enhance the surrounding neighborhood. Projects should
integrate the residential and commercial uses, either vertically or
horizontally. The residential density must not exceed six (6) units per gross
acre. The CMU-R District implements the commercial mixed-use land use
designation of the Master Plan in Rural Character Districts.
   B.   Building Placement Requirements:
 
Commercial use setbacks:
 From property lines abutting           10 feet
  residential uses
 From property lines abutting adjacent  0 feet
  public ROW
 From property lines abutting           0 feet, subject to applicable Fire and
  Commercial or Industrial Zones or uses Building Codes
 Rear                                   20 feet; 0 feet with alley, subject to
                                         applicable Fire and Building Codes
                                         Conform to the corresponding zoning
Residential use setbacks                 district that is closest to the
                                         proposed lot sizes
 
   C.   Building Form Requirements:
 
Building height  35 feet
Floor area ratio Between 0.35 and 0.5
 
   D.   Parking Requirements: See chapter 401 of this title, parking and
loading.
   E.   Minimum Lot Requirements:
                          0.5 acre when served by a community water system and
                          individual sewage disposal system (see also
Lot size, residential     Miscellaneous Requirements)
                          1 acre when served by well and individual sewage
                          disposal system
                          (Minimum lot sizes subject to NAC 444.790)
                          5,000 square feet (net) when served by a community
                          water and sewer systems
                          0.5 acre when served by a community water system and
Lot size, commercial      individual sewage disposal system (see also
                          Miscellaneous Requirements)
                          1 acre when served by well and individual sewage
                          disposal system
                          (Minimum lot sizes subject to NAC 444.790)
Lot street frontage width n/a
Average lot width         50 feet minimum
Average lot depth         n/a
 
   F.   Miscellaneous Requirements:
Projects must be architecturally compatible with and enhance the surrounding
neighborhood.
Projects should integrate the residential and commercial uses, either
vertically or horizontally.
The residential density must not exceed six (6) units per gross acre.
Parcels containing an area of 0.25 acre (10,890 square feet) or more and
legally created before January 1, 2000, may be developed when served by a
community water system and individual sewage disposal system subject to NAC
444.790.
See section
15.320.03, table 15.320-1 of this title, table of allowed uses Rural
Residential, Commercial and Agricultural Districts.
See chapter 340, "Residential Design Standards", of this title.
See chapter 360, "Commercial And Mixed-Use Design Standards", of this title.
See appendix B, Lyon County Design Criteria and Improvement Standards on file
in the County. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.313.07.2: COMMERCIAL MIXED-USE - SUBURBAN (CMU-S):
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this district is to provide areas which
integrate compatible commercial uses with high density single family and multi-
family residential uses through proper design. Situated within a commercial
mixed-use land use designation in the master plan, the goal of the district is
to provide for a better jobs-housing balance, encourage development of
community oriented commercial centers, conserve land resources, reduce commuter
trips, and provide opportunities for affordable housing. The CMU-S District can
be used for in-fill projects and as a redevelopment/revitalization tool. In
suburban character areas between thirty percent (30%) and seventy percent (70%)
of the total project floor area must be devoted to commercial uses, with thirty
percent (30%) to seventy percent (70%) of the project floor area devoted to
residential uses. The projects must be architecturally compatible with and
enhance the surrounding neighborhood. Projects should integrate the residential
and commercial uses, either vertically or horizontally. The residential density
must not exceed sixteen (16) units per gross acre. The CMU-S District
implements the commercial mixed-use land use designation of the Master Plan in
Suburban Character Districts.
   B.   Building Placement Requirements:
 
Commercial use setbacks:
 From property lines abutting           10 feet
  residential uses
 From property lines abutting adjacent  0 feet
  public ROW
  From front property line if the
 building is oriented toward the street 0 feet
  and accesses the public sidewalk
 From property lines abutting           0 feet, subject to applicable Fire and
  Commercial or Industrial Zones or uses Building Codes
 Rear                                   10 feet; 0 feet with alley, subject to
                                         applicable Fire and Building Codes
                                         Conform to the corresponding zoning
Residential use setbacks                 district that is closest to the
                                         proposed lot sizes
 
   C.   Building Form Requirements:
 
Commercial building height  45 feet
Residential building height 35 feet
Floor area ratio            Between 0.35 and 3.0
 
   D.   Parking Requirements: See chapter 401 of this title, parking and
loading.
   E.   Minimum Lot Requirements:
 
                  4,500 square feet (net); except within approved commercial
Lot size          subdivisions (no minimum provided all other zoning and
                  development standards are met)
Average lot width n/a
Average lot depth n/a
 
   F.   Miscellaneous Requirements:
Floor area requirements: Between thirty percent (30%) and seventy percent (70%)
of the total project floor area must be devoted to commercial uses, with the
remaining thirty percent (30%) to seventy percent (70%) of the project floor
area devoted to residential uses.
The projects must be architecturally compatible with and enhance the
surrounding neighborhood.
Projects should integrate the residential and commercial uses, either
vertically or horizontally.
The multi-family residential density must not exceed sixteen (16) units per
gross acre. Single family residential density shall be no greater than one
dwelling unit per four thousand five hundred (4,500) square feet of net lot
area provided the minimum requirements for commercial development are met.
A residential use existing on the date of adoption of this section may continue
as a permitted use indefinitely, provided that the residential use is not
expanded by the addition of new residential occupancies. When an existing
residential use is expanded to add additional residential occupancies, then at
least thirty percent (30%) to seventy percent (70%) of the total project floor
area shall be developed for commercial use.
See section
15.320.03, table 15.320-2 of this title, table of allowed uses - Suburban
Residential and Commercial Districts.
See chapter 340, "Residential Design Standards", of this title.
See chapter 360, "Commercial And Mixed-Use Design Standards" of this title.
See Lyon County Design Criteria and Improvement Standards on file in the
County. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.313.07.3: COMMERCIAL MIXED-USE - HISTORIC (CMU-H):
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this district is to provide flexibility in
allowed uses such that single or multi-family and/or commercial uses may be
individually provided or may be combined on a Historic District parcel.
Situated within a commercial mixed-use land use designation in the master plan,
the goals of the district include the preservation and enhancement of the
unique characteristics of Historic Districts and the conservation of land/
historic resources. The CMU-H District can be used for in-fill projects and as
a rehabilitation tool for selective properties. The projects must be
architecturally compatible with and enhance the surrounding historic character.
The residential density must not exceed twelve (12) units per gross acre. The
CMU-H District implements the commercial mixed- use land use designation of the
Master Plan in designated Historic Character Districts.
   B.   Building Placement Requirements:
 
Setback:
  From property lines abutting           5 feet (unless building(s) are pre-
 residential uses                       existing and developed to a setback of
                                         less than 5 feet)
 From property lines abutting adjacent  0 feet
  public ROW
  From front property line if the
 building is oriented toward the street 0 feet
  and accesses the public sidewalk
 From property lines abutting           0 feet
  Commercial or Industrial Zones or uses
                                         10 feet; 0 feet with alley (unless
 Rear                                   building(s) are pre-existing and
                                         developed to a setback of less than 5
                                         feet)
 
   C.   Building Form Requirements:
 
Building height  45 feet
Floor area ratio n/a
 
   D.   Parking Requirements: See chapter 401 of this title, parking and
loading. No off-street parking is required for non- residential uses unless the
use exceeds three thousand (3,000) square feet of gross floor area in which
case one off-street parking space is required for every three hundred (300)
square feet beyond three thousand (3,000) square feet.
   E.   Minimum Lot Requirements:
 
Lot size                  n/a
Lot street frontage width n/a
Average lot width         n/a
Average lot depth         n/a
 
   F.   Miscellaneous Requirements:
The projects must be architecturally compatible with and enhance the
surrounding historic character.
The residential density must not exceed twelve (12) units per gross acre.
A residential or commercial use existing on the date of adoption of this
section may continue as a permitted use indefinitely provided that the use is
not expanded.
See section
15.320.03, table 15.320-3, "Table Of Allowed Uses - Historic Zoning Districts",
of this title.
See chapter 340, "Residential Design Standards", of this title.
See chapter 360, "Commercial And Mixed-Use Design Standards", of this title.
See appendix B, Lyon County Design Criteria and Improvement Standards on file
in the County. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.313.08: HIGHWAY CORRIDOR MIXED-USE:
15.313.08.1: HIGHWAY CORRIDOR MIXED-USE - RURAL (HMU-R):
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this district is to discourage strip commercial
development and encourage traditional settlement land use patterns with mixed
residential and commercial uses arranged horizontally and/or vertically in
existing areas of highway commercial development. Uses include mixed
neighborhood commercial consisting of small retail, services, live/work, and
low density residential. Civic and social uses such as schools, parks, and
places of worship may be permitted. The HMU-R District implements the highway
corridor mixed-use land use designation of the Master Plan in Rural Districts.
   B.   Building Placement Requirements:
 
Commercial setbacks:
 From property lines abutting           10 feet
  residential uses
 From property lines abutting adjacent  20 feet subject to chapter 360 of this
  public ROW                             title, commercial design standards
  From front property line if the        10 feet subject to chapter 360 of this
 building is oriented toward the street title, commercial design standards
  and accesses the public sidewalk
 From property lines abutting           0 feet subject to applicable Building
  Commercial or Industrial Zones or uses and Fire Codes
 Rear                                   10 feet; 0 feet with alley
                                         Conform to the corresponding zoning
Residential setbacks                     district that is closest to the
                                         proposed lot sizes
 
   C.   Building Form Requirements:
 
Commercial building height  45 feet subject to subsection
                            15.330.03E of this title
Residential building height 35 feet
Floor area ratio            n/a
 
   D.   Parking Requirements: See chapter 401 of this title, parking and
loading.
   E.   Minimum Lot Requirements:
 
                                     0.5 net acre when served by a community
                                     water system and individual sewage
                                     disposal system (see also Miscellaneous
Lot size, residential and commercial Requirements)
                                     1 net acre when served by well and
                                     individual sewage disposal system
                                     (Minimum lot sizes subject to NAC 444.790)
                                     n/a for commercial uses. Residential uses
                                     must conform to the corresponding lot
Lot street frontage width            street frontage width for the zoning
                                     district that is closest to the proposed
                                     lot sizes
                                     n/a for commercial uses. Residential uses
                                     must conform to the corresponding lot
Average lot width                    street frontage width for the zoning
                                     district that is closest to the proposed
                                     lot sizes
                                     N/A for commercial uses. Residential uses
                                     must conform to the corresponding lot
Average lot depth                    street frontage width for the zoning
                                     district that is closest to the proposed
                                     lot sizes
 
   F.   Miscellaneous Requirements:
See section
15.320.03, table 15.320-1 of this title, rural character area land use.
See chapter 360 of this title, commercial design standards.
See appendix B, Lyon County Design Criteria and Improvement Standards on file
in the County. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.313.08.2: HIGHWAY CORRIDOR MIXED-USE - SUBURBAN (HMU-S):
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this district is to discourage strip commercial
development and encourage traditional settlement land use patterns with mixed
residential and commercial uses arranged horizontally and/or vertically in
existing areas of highway commercial development. Uses include mixed
neighborhood commercial consisting of small retail, services, live/work, and
medium density residential (including limited multi-family residential). Civic
and social uses such as schools, parks, senior housing, and places of worship
may be permitted. The HMU-S District implements the highway corridor mixed-use
land use designation of the Master Plan in Suburban Character Districts.
   B.   Building Placement Requirements:
 
Commercial setbacks:
 From property lines abutting           10 feet
  residential uses
 From property lines abutting adjacent  20 feet subject to chapter 360 of this
  public ROW                             title, commercial design standards
  From front property line if the        10 feet subject to chapter 360 of this
 building is oriented toward the street title, commercial design standards
  and accesses the public sidewalk
 From property lines abutting           0 feet subject to applicable Building
  Commercial or Industrial Zones or uses and Fire Codes
 Rear                                   10 feet; 0 feet with alley
                                         Conform to the corresponding zoning
Residential setbacks                     district that is closest to the
                                         proposed lot sizes
 
   C.   Building Form Requirements:
 
Commercial building height  45 feet subject to subsection
                            15.330.03E of this title
Residential building height 35 feet
Floor area ratio            Between 0.35 and 1.5
 
   D.   Parking Requirements: See chapter 401 of this title, parking and
loading.
   E.   Minimum Lot Requirements:
 
                          0.5 net acre when served by community water and sewer
                          systems
                          0.5 net acre when served by a community water system
Lot size                  and individual sewage disposal system (see also
                          Miscellaneous Requirements)
                          1 net acre when served by well and individual sewage
                          disposal system
                          (Minimum lot sizes subject to NAC 444.790)
                          n/a for commercial uses. Residential uses must
Lot street frontage width conform to the corresponding lot street frontage
                          width for the zoning district that is closest to the
                          proposed lot sizes
                          n/a for commercial uses. Residential uses must
Average lot width         conform to the corresponding lot street frontage
                          width for the zoning district that is closest to the
                          proposed lot sizes
                          n/a for commercial uses. Residential uses must
Average lot depth         conform to the corresponding lot street frontage
                          width for the zoning district that is closest to the
                          proposed lot sizes
 
   F.   Miscellaneous Requirements:
See section
15.320.03, table 15.320-2 of this title, suburban character area land use.
See chapter 360 of this title, commercial design standards.
See appendix B, Lyon County Design Criteria and Improvement Standards on file
in the County.
      1.   Manufactured/mobile home parks in conformance with the provisions of
chapter 352 of this title are permitted subject to the following:
         a.   Density no greater than the Neighborhood Residential (NR)
District (4,500 square feet/unit).
         b.   Up to twenty percent (20%) of the acreage of the HMU-
S development may be developed as a manufactured/mobile home park.
         c.   The manufactured/mobile home park development shall be served by
public water and sewer. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
CHAPTER 314
INDUSTRIAL AND EMPLOYMENT ZONING DISTRICTS
SECTION:
15.314.01: Light Industrial - Rural (LI-R) And Light Industrial - Suburban (LI-
S)
15.314.02: Heavy Industrial - Rural (HI-R) And Heavy Industrial - Suburban (HI-
S)
15.314.03: Service Industrial (SI)
15.314.04: Employment Mixed-Use (EMU)
15.314.05: Adult Use District (XX)
15.314.01: LIGHT INDUSTRIAL - RURAL (LI-R) AND LIGHT INDUSTRIAL - SUBURBAN (LI-
S):
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this district is to provide areas for the
development of research, light industrial, warehouse and distribution centers.
The LI-R and LI-S Zoning Districts implement the industrial land use
designation of the Master Plan in Rural and Suburban Character Districts.
   B.   Building Placement Requirements:
 
Setback:
 From property lines abutting            25 feet
  residential uses
 From property lines abutting adjacent   20 feet
  public ROW
  From front property line if the
 building is oriented toward the street  20 feet
  and accesses the public sidewalk
 From property lines abutting Commercial 0 feet subject to applicable Building
  or Industrial Zones                     and Fire Codes
 Rear                                    0 feet subject to applicable Building
                                          and Fire Codes
 
   C.   Building Form Requirements:
 
Building height  See Miscellaneous Requirements
Floor area ratio n/a
 
   D.   Parking Requirements: See chapter 401 of this title, parking and
loading.
   E.   Minimum Lot Requirements:
 
Lot size                  7,000 square feet (dependent on availability of water
                          and sewer)
Lot street frontage width See Miscellaneous Requirements
Average lot width         50 feet
Average lot depth         n/a
 
   F.   Miscellaneous Requirements:
      1.   Minimum Lot Frontage: For the purpose of dividing property, minimum
lot frontage shall be sufficient to provide adequate access and utility
development, and meet applicable building setback, buffer, and development
standards of the district. In no case shall the frontage be less than thirty
feet (30') unless a property is served off a common driveway that is
perpetuated through a recorded easement with the width acceptable to the
applicable Fire District.
      2.   Height Limitations: No maximum height is established; however, when
building height exceeds thirty five feet (35'), the setback requirements shall
be increased by two feet (2') for each one foot (1') of building height in
excess of thirty five feet (35'), as applicable to all setbacks. Subject to
subsection
15.330.03E of this title.
      3.   Open Space: A minimum ten foot (10') landscape strip shall be
provided along the street frontage consisting of drought tolerant, low water
consumptive plantings.
      4.   Buffer Area: When a parcel situated within this district adjoins any
Agriculture or Resource Zoning District contained in chapter 310 of this title
or any Residential Zoning District contained in chapters 311 and 312 of this
title a buffer area shall be provided unless adjoining an Agriculture or
Resource Zoning District, said buffer area (minus any area necessary for fire
access around the building) shall be landscaped consistent with the
requirements of chapter 401 of this title. If any part of the buffer area is
separated from or sold to any contiguous or adjacent owner, lessee or user, the
parcel so separated or sold shall be used only as a buffer area in accordance
with the above requirements.
      5.   Performance Standards: See chapter 337 of this title, industrial
performance requirements.
      6.   Design Standards: See appendix B, Lyon County Design Criteria and
Improvement Standards on file in the County.
      7.   Requirements In Rural Character Districts:
         a.   See section
15.320.03, table 15.320-4 of this title, table of allowed uses Employment and
Industrial Districts LI-R.
      8.   Requirements In Suburban Character Districts:
         a.   See section
15.320.03, table 15.320-4 of this title, table of allowed uses Employment and
Industrial Districts LI-S. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.314.02: HEAVY INDUSTRIAL - RURAL (HI-R) AND HEAVY INDUSTRIAL - SUBURBAN (HI-
S):
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this district is to provide suitable areas for
the development of general manufacturing and heavy industrial uses. The HI-
R and HI-S Zoning Districts implement the industrial land use designation of
the Master Plan in Rural and Suburban Character Districts.
   B.   Building Placement Requirements:
 
Setback:
 From property lines abutting            50 feet
  residential uses
 From property lines abutting adjacent   20 feet
  public ROW
  From front property line if the
 building is oriented toward the street  20 feet
  and accesses the public sidewalk
 From property lines abutting Commercial 0 feet subject to applicable Building
  or Industrial Zones or uses             and Fire Codes
 Rear                                    0 feet subject to applicable Building
                                          and Fire Codes
 
   C.   Building Form Requirements:
 
Building height  See Miscellaneous Requirements
Floor area ratio n/a
 
   D.   Parking Requirements: See chapter 401 of this title, parking and
loading.
   E.   Minimum Lot Requirements:
 
Lot size                  7,000 square feet (dependent on availability of water
                          and sewer)
Lot street frontage width See Miscellaneous Requirements
Average lot width         50 feet
Average lot depth         n/a
 
   F.   Miscellaneous Requirements:
      1.   Minimum Lot Frontage: For the purpose of dividing property, minimum
lot frontage shall be sufficient to provide adequate access and utility
development, and meet applicable building setback, buffer, and development
standards of the district. In no case shall the frontage be less than thirty
feet (30'), unless a property is served off a common driveway that is
perpetuated through a recorded easement with a width acceptable to the
applicable Fire District.
      2.   Height Limitations: No maximum height is established; however, when
building height exceeds forty five feet (45'), the setback requirements shall
be increased by two feet (2') for each one foot (1') of building height in
excess of forty five feet (45'), as applicable to all setbacks. Subject to
subsection
15.330.03E of this title.
      3.   Open Space: A minimum ten foot (10') landscape strip shall be
provided along the street frontage, consisting of drought tolerant, low water
consumptive plantings.
      4.   Buffer Area: When a parcel situated within this district adjoins an
Agriculture or Resource Zoning District contained in chapter 310 of this title
or any Residential Zoning District contained in chapter 311 or 312 of this
title a buffer area shall be provided. Unless adjoining an Agriculture or
Resource Zoning District, said buffer area (minus any area necessary for fire
access around the building) shall be landscaped consistent with the
requirements of chapter 401 of this title. If any part of the buffer area is
separated from or sold to any contiguous or adjacent owner, lessee or user, the
parcel so separated or sold shall be used only as a buffer area in accordance
with the above requirements.
      5.   Performance Standards: See chapter 337 of this title, industrial
performance requirements.
      6.   Design Standards: See appendix B, Lyon County Design Criteria and
Improvement Standards on file in the County.
      7.   Requirements In Rural Character Districts:
         a.   See section
15.320.03, table 15.320-4 of this title, table of allowed uses Employment and
Industrial Districts HI-R.
      8.   Requirements In Suburban Character Districts:
         a.   See section
15.320.03, table 15.320-4 of this title, table of allowed uses Employment and
Industrial Districts HI-S. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.314.03: SERVICE INDUSTRIAL (SI):
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this district is to provide areas for light
manufacturing, distribution, indoor and outdoor storage, and a wide range of
industrial uses with a mix of supporting commercial and retail uses. The SI
Zoning District implements the employment land use designation of the Master
Plan in Suburban Character Districts.
   B.   Building Placement Requirements:
 
Setback:
 From property lines abutting            20 feet
  residential uses
 From property lines abutting adjacent   10 feet
  public ROW
  From front property line if the
 building is oriented toward the street  10 feet
  and accesses the public sidewalk
 From property lines abutting Commercial 0 feet subject to applicable Building
  or Industrial Zones or uses             and Fire Codes
 Rear                                    0 feet subject to applicable Building
                                          and Fire Codes
 
   C.   Building Form Requirements:
 
Building height  See Miscellaneous Requirements
Floor area ratio n/a
 
   D.   Parking Requirements: See chapter 401 of this title, parking and
loading.
   E.   Minimum Lot Requirements:
 
Lot size                  7,000 square feet (dependent on availability of water
                          and sewer)
Lot street frontage width See Miscellaneous Requirements
Average lot width         50 feet
Average lot depth         n/a
 
   F.   Miscellaneous Requirements:
      1.   Minimum Lot Frontage: For the purpose of dividing property, minimum
lot frontage shall be sufficient to provide adequate access and utility
development, and meet applicable building setback, buffer, and development
standards of the district. In no case shall the frontage be less than thirty
feet (30') unless a property is served off a common driveway that is
perpetuated through a recorded easement with a width acceptable to the
applicable Fire District.
      2.   Height Limitations: No maximum height is established; however, when
building height exceeds thirty five feet (35'), the setback requirements shall
be increased by one foot (1') for each foot of building height in excess of
thirty five feet (35'), as applicable to all setbacks. Subject to subsection
15.330.03E of this title.
      3.   Open Space: A minimum ten foot (10') landscape strip shall be
provided along the street frontage, consisting of drought tolerant, low water
consumptive plantings.
      4.   Buffer Area: When a parcel situated within this district adjoins any
Agriculture or Resource Zoning District contained in chapter 310 of this title
or any Residential Zoning District contained in chapter 311 or 312 of this
title a buffer area shall be provided. Unless adjoining an Agriculture or
Resource Zoning District, said buffer area (minus any area necessary for fire
access around the building) shall be landscaped consistent with the
requirements of chapter 401 of this title. If any part of the buffer area is
separated from or sold to any contiguous or adjacent owner, lessee or user, the
parcel so separated or sold shall be used only as a buffer area in accordance
with the above requirements.
      5.   CMU Design Standards: See chapter 360, "Commercial And Mixed- Use
Design Standards", of this title.
      6.   Performance Standards: See chapter 337 of this title, industrial
performance requirements.
      7.   Allowed Uses: See chapter 320 of this title, tables of allowed uses.
      8.   Design Standards: See appendix B, Lyon County Design Criteria and
Improvement Standards on file in the County. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.314.04: EMPLOYMENT MIXED-USE (EMU):
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this district is to provide concentrated areas
of employment, combined with a mix of complementary commercial and residential
uses. Office/research park developments may be incorporated into a master
planned neighborhood, or located in close proximity to suburban residential
areas. Small live-work complexes consisting of a single building or multiple
structures that are not located within a typical office or industrial park
setting may be established on infill sites within established suburbanizing
areas. The EMU Zoning District implements the employment land use designation
of the Master Plan in Suburban Character Districts.
   B.   Building Placement Requirements:
 
Setback:
 From property lines abutting            20 feet
  residential uses
 From property lines abutting adjacent   10 feet
  public ROW
  From front property line if the
 building is oriented toward the street  10 feet
  and accesses the public sidewalk
 From property lines abutting Commercial 0 feet subject to applicable Building
  or Industrial Zones or uses             and Fire Codes
 Rear                                    0 feet subject to applicable Building
                                          and Fire Codes
 
   C.   Building Form Requirements:
 
Building height  See Miscellaneous Requirements
Floor area ratio n/a
 
   D.   Parking Requirements: See chapter 401 of this title, parking and
loading.
   E.   Minimum Lot Requirements:
 
Lot size                  7,000 square feet (dependent on availability of water
                          and sewer)
Lot street frontage width See Miscellaneous Requirements
Average lot width         50 feet
Average lot depth         n/a
 
   F.   Miscellaneous Requirements:
      1.   Minimum Lot Frontage: For the purpose of dividing property, minimum
lot frontage shall be sufficient to provide adequate access and utility
development, and meet applicable building setback, buffer, and development
standards of the district. In no case shall the frontage be less than thirty
feet (30') unless a property is served off a common driveway that is
perpetuated through a recorded easement with a width acceptable to the
applicable Fire District.
      2.   Height Limitations: No maximum height is established; however, when
building height exceeds thirty five feet (35'), the setback requirements shall
be increased by one foot (1') for each foot of building height in excess of
thirty five feet (35'), as applicable to all setbacks. Subject to subsection
15.330.03E of this title.
      3.   Open Space: A minimum ten foot (10') landscape strip shall be
provided along the street frontage, consisting of drought tolerant, low water
consumptive plantings.
      4.   Buffer Area: When a parcel situated within this district adjoins any
Agriculture or Resource Zoning District contained in chapter 310 of this title
or any Residential Zoning District contained in chapter 311 or 312 of this
title a buffer area shall be provided. Unless adjoining an Agriculture or
Resource Zoning District, said buffer area (minus any area necessary for fire
access around the building) shall be landscaped consistent with the
requirements of chapter 401 of this title. If any part of the buffer area is
separated from or sold to any contiguous or adjacent owner, lessee or user, the
parcel so separated or sold shall be used only as a buffer area in accordance
with the above requirements.
      5.   CMU Design Standards: See chapter 360, "Commercial And Mixed- Use
Design Standards", of this title.
      6.   Performance Standards: See chapter 337 of this title, industrial
performance requirements.
      7.   Residential Standards: See chapters 340 thru 352 of this title,
residential development standards and requirements.
      8.   Design Standards: See appendix B, Lyon County Design Criteria and
Improvement Standards on file in the County.
      9.   Allowed Uses: See chapter 320 of this title, tables of allowed uses.
(Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.314.05: ADULT USE DISTRICT (XX):
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this district is to provide for the location
and operation of houses of prostitution and adult oriented businesses. The XX
Zoning District is restricted to the employment or industrial land use
designations of the Master Plan in Suburban Character Districts located in
Mound House.
   B.   Building Placement Requirements:
 
Setback:
 From property lines                                                 30 feet
 From property lines abutting adjacent public ROW                    10 feet
 From property lines abutting Commercial or Industrial Zones or uses 30 feet
 Rear                                                                30 feet
 
   C.   Building Form Requirements:
 
Building height  35 feet subject to subsection
                 15.330.03E of this title
Floor area ratio n/a
 
   D.   Parking Requirements: See chapter 401 of this title, parking and
loading.
   E.   Minimum Lot Requirements:
 
Lot size                  7,000 square feet
Lot street frontage width 60 feet
Average lot width         n/a
Average lot depth         n/a
 
   F.   Miscellaneous Requirements:
See title 5, chapter 3, "Prostitution", of this Code.
See title 5, chapter 8, "Adult Characterized Businesses", of this Code.
Must conform to all State and Federal laws, as applicable. (Ord. 603, 11-1-
2018)
CHAPTER 316
PUBLIC/COMMUNITY FACILITIES AND OTHER LANDS
SECTION:
15.316.01: Open Space (OS) Zone
15.316.02: Public Facilities (PF) Zone
15.316.01: OPEN SPACE (OS) ZONE:
   A.   Purpose:
      1.   Generally: Open space provides recreational linkages between
different areas of the County; floodplain, wetland, drainage or view
protection; and/or wildlife habitat. Public access may be provided with
designated trails or bicycle facilities. In other areas lands may be left
undeveloped to provide visual buffers along an important scenic area or between
community boundaries. Open space may be granted to or purchased outright by the
County for public use, donated to private land trusts, or protected using
another method, such as conservation easements, signage restrictions, and
design controls.
      2.   Primary Uses: Publicly owned/managed and accessible lands preserved
by the County, other government agencies, or quasi- public (land trusts, non-
profit organizations, etc.) for conservation, resource protection, or
recreational use. Does not include lands that are part of a private development
(e.g., planned unit development).
May also be preserved without public access to protect sensitive natural areas
such as wetlands, floodplains and wildlife habitat.
      3.   Secondary Uses: Utilities (e.g., Municipal wells or other public or
quasi-public utility facilities/structures).
   B.   Building Placement Requirements:
 
Setback:
 Front       30 feet
 Side street 30 feet
 Rear        30 feet
 Side        20 feet
 
   C.   Building Form Requirements:
 
Building height  35 feet subject to subsection
                 15.330.03E of this title
Floor area ratio n/a
 
   D.   Parking Requirements: See chapter 401, "Off-Street Parking And
Loading", of this title.
   E.   Minimum Lot Requirements:
 
Lot size                      No minimum
Lot width ratio (w:d minimum) n/a
Lot street frontage width     n/a
Average lot width             n/a
Average lot depth             n/a
 
   F.   Miscellaneous Requirements: See section
15.320.03, table 15.320-5 of this title, table of allowed uses (public and
community facilities). (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.316.02: PUBLIC FACILITIES (PF) ZONE:
   A.   Purpose: The Public Facilities Zoning District provides for the
provision of schools, government offices, community centers, fire stations,
airports, libraries, hospitals, cemeteries, etc., to meet the needs of the
community in which the facilities are located as well as the larger County-wide
and regional community. Also included are facilities needed for essential
public services such as electrical substations, water and wastewater
facilities, and other similar uses.
Public facilities also include parks and recreation facilities for the active
and passive recreational needs of the community.
   B.   Building Placement Requirements:
 
Setback:
 Front       30 feetHD1
 Side street 30 feetHD1
 Rear        30 feetHD1
 Side        20 feetHD1
 
HD1 - In Historic Districts new construction on existing, legal non-conforming
lots shall maintain a minimum five foot (5') setback from the foundation/stem
wall to all property lines. Existing and/or historic structures from the date
of this title enactment shall be allowed to use the existing distances from
building walls to the property lines, so long as they are not encroaching on a
neighboring property or right-of-way.
   C.   Building Form Requirements:
 
Building height  35 feet subject to subsection
                 15.330.03E of this title
Floor area ratio n/a
 
   D.   Parking Requirements: See chapter 401, "Off-Street Parking And
Loading"HD2, of this title.
HD2 - No off-street parking is required for non-residential uses unless the use
exceeds three thousand (3,000) square feet of gross floor area in which case
one off-street parking space is required for every three hundred (300) square
feet beyond three thousand (3,000) square feet.
   E.   Minimum Lot Requirements:
 
Lot size                      No minimum
Lot width ratio (w:d minimum) n/a
Lot street frontage width     n/a
Average lot width             n/a
Average lot depth             n/a
 
   F.   Miscellaneous Requirements: See section
15.320.03, table 15.320-5 of this title, table of allowed uses (public and
community facilities). (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
CHAPTER 320
LAND USE TABLES
SECTION:
15.320.01: Purpose
15.320.02: Applicability
15.320.03: Land Use Tables By District
15.320.01: PURPOSE:
This chapter lists the land uses that may be allowed within the zoning
districts established by chapters 300 through 319 of this title (zoning
districts), and determines the type of permit/approval required for each use.
All land uses conducted within Lyon County must be carried out in a manner that
promotes the public interest, health, safety, convenience and general welfare;
reduces traffic congestion and hazards in the streets; preserves recognized
values of historic and community appearance, charm and character; provides
light and air for all buildings; safeguards and enhances property values;
avoids undesirable concentrations of population; prevents overcrowding of land;
facilitates adequate provision of transportation, water, sewage, schools, park
and other facilities and services; and provides the economic and social
advantages gained from a comprehensively planned use of land resources. (Ord.
603, 11-1-2018)
15.320.02: APPLICABILITY:
Land uses identified on the following land use tables are classified as
"permitted", "conditionally permitted", "temporarily permitted", or "not
permitted".
Land uses identified in this title as "permitted" (P) must be conducted in
conformance with the specific performance standards established by this title,
or if no performance standard has been established, in a manner that meets the
purposes of this chapter outlined above.
Land uses identified as "conditionally permitted" (C) are permitted subject to
a conditional use permit issued in accordance with the provisions of chapter
230 of this title.
Land uses identified as "temporarily permitted" (T) are permitted for a limited
duration subject to a temporary use permit issued in accordance with the
provisions of chapter 233 of this title.
Land uses identified as "not permitted" (-) within a specific zoning district
are prohibited.
Land uses not listed on the table of uses may be considered in accordance with
the provisions of chapter 221, "Unlisted Uses", of this title. (Ord. 603, 11-1-
2018)
15.320.03: LAND USE TABLES BY DISTRICT:
 
Table 15.320-1 Table Of Allowed Uses - Rural Residential, Commercial Mixed Use,
               Commercial And Agricultural/Resource Zoning Districts
Table 15.320-2 Table Of Allowed Uses - Suburban Residential, Mixed Use And
               Commercial Zoning Districts
Table 15.320-3 Table Of Allowed Uses - Historic Zoning Districts
Table 15.320-4 Table Of Allowed Uses - Employment And Industrial Zoning
               Districts
Table 15.320-5 Table Of Allowed Uses - Open Space And Public Facilities Zoning
               Districts
 
TABLE 15.320-1
TABLE OF ALLOWED USES - RURAL RESIDENTIAL, COMMERCIAL MIXED USE, COMMERCIAL AND
AGRICULTURAL/RESOURCE ZONING DISTRICTS
P = Permitted; C = Conditional use permit required; T = Temporary use permit
required; - = Not permitted
              Rural Residential   Commercial Agricultural/ Commercial
                                  Mixed-Use  Resource                 Use
         Use                                                          Specific
Use      Type RR- RR- RR- RR- RR- CMU-                                Regulations
Category      20  10  5   2   1   R    HMU-R AG NIA RL PL  NC TC-R    (Code
                                                                      Reference)
                              Rural Residential   Commercial Agricultural/ Commercial
                                                  Mixed-Use  Resource                Use Specific
               Use Type                                                              Regulations
Use Category                  RR- RR- RR- RR- RR- CMU- HMU-R AG NIA RL PL  NC TC-R   (Code
                              20  10  5   2   1   R                                  Reference)

Residential                                                             
uses:
Single- family Accessory      P   P   P   P   P   P    P     P  P   P  -   -  -      Subsection
residential    dwelling unit                                                         15.335.03A1
               Home based     P   P   P   P   P   P    P     P  P   P  -   -  -      Subsection
               business                                                              15.335.03X
               Home           P   P   P   P   P   P    P     P  P   P  -   -  -      Subsection
               occupation                                                            15.335.03W
               Residential                                                           Subsections
               accessory use  P   P   P   P   P   P    P     P  P   P  -   -  -      15.335.03A2
               or building                                                           and B
               Single family  P   P   P   P   P   P    P     P  P   P  -   -  -      Chapters 340
               detached                                                              and 341
               Farm labor     C   -   -   -   -   -    -     C  C   -  -   -  -      15.331.03E
               housing
               Group living                                                          Subsection
Multi-family   facility,                                                             15.335.03NN
residential    small (10 or   P   P   P   P   P   P    P     -  -   -  -   -  -      and design
               fewer                                                                 review
               residents)
               Group living
               facility,
               large (11 or   C   C   C   C   C   C    C     -  -   -  -   -  -      Chapter 230
               more
               residents)
               Manufactured/
               mobile home    -   -   -   -   -   -    -     -  -   -  -   -  -      Chapter 352
               park
               Multi-family,  -   -   -   -   -   P    P     -  -   -  -   -  -      Chapter 342
               2 units
               Multi-family,                                                         Chapter 345
               3 or 4 units   -   -   -   -   -   -    -     -  -   -  -   -  -      or 348 and
                                                                                     design review
               Multi-family,                                                         Chapter 345
               5 or more      -   -   -   -   -   -    -     -  -   -  -   -  -      or 348 and
               units                                                                 design review
Public,
institutional,                                                          
and civic
uses:
Community and  Government                                                            Subsection
cultural       administrative -   -   -   -   -   P    P     -  -   P  P   P  -      15.335.03V
facilities     and civic                                                             and design
               buildings                                                             review
               Museums        -   -   -   -   -   P    P     -  -   -  P   P  P      Design review
               Public                                                                Subsection
               assembly,                                                             15.335.03JJ
               including                                                             and design
               churches                                                              review (use
               (total         -   -   P   P   P   P    P     -  -   -  -   P  -      of a
               worship/hall                                                          commercial
               seating                                                               coach
               capacity 350                                                          requires a
               or less)                                                              CUP)
               Public                                                                Chapter 336
               assembly,                                                             (use of a
               including                                                             commercial
               churches       -   -   C   C   C   C    C     -  -   -  -   C  -      coach
               (total                                                                requires a
               worship/hall                                                          CUP)
               exceeds 350)
               Public safety  P   P   P   P   P   P    P     P  P   P  P   P  P      Design review
               facility
               Social,                                                               Subsection
               fraternal      -   -   -   -   -   P    P     -  -   -  -   P  P      15.335.03K
               lodges                                                                and design
                                                                                     review
               Adult or child
Day-care       daycare, in-                                                          Subsection
facilities     home, 6 or     P   P   P   P   P   P    P     P  P   -  -   -  -      15.335.03W
               fewer adults
               or children
                                                                                     Use is
                                                                                     permitted in
                                                                                     commercial
                                                                                     and
                                                                                     conditional
                                                                                     in
                                                                                     residential
                                                                                     uses;
                                                                                     subsection
               Adult or child                                                        15.335.03CC
               daycare, 7 to                                                         for
               12 adults or   C   C   C   C   C   P    P     -  -   -  -   P  -      commercial
               children                                                              properties
                                                                                     and chapter
                                                                                     336 for
                                                                                     residential
                                                                                     properties;
                                                                                     use is not
                                                                                     allowed in
                                                                                     residential
                                                                                     portion of
                                                                                     Mixed-Use
                                                                                     Zoned areas
                                                                                     Use is
                                                                                     permitted in
                                                                                     commercial
                                                                                     and
                                                                                     conditional
                                                                                     in
                                                                                     residential
                                                                                     uses;
                                                                                     subsection
               Adult or child                                                        15.335.03CC
               daycare                                                               for
               center, more   C   C   C   C   C   P    P     -  -   -  -   P  -      commercial
               than 12 adults                                                        properties
               or children                                                           and chapter
                                                                                     336 for
                                                                                     residential
                                                                                     properties;
                                                                                     use is not
                                                                                     allowed in
                                                                                     residential
                                                                                     portion of
                                                                                     Mixed-Use
                                                                                     Zoned areas;
                                                                                     design review
Health care    Hospital       -   -   -   -   -   C    C     -  -   -  -   -  -      Chapter 336
facilities
               Intermediate
               care facility, -   -   -   -   -   -    C     -  -   -  -   -  -      Chapter 336
               nursing home,
               rehab center
               Medical                                                               Chapter 336;
               marijuana      -   -   -   -   -   -    -     -  -   -  -   C  -      NRS 453A
               dispensary
               Medical or
               dental office                                                         Subsection
               or clinic      -   -   -   -   -   P    P     -  -   -  -   P  -      15.335.03DD
               25,000 square
               feet or less
               Medical or
               dental office
               or clinic,     -   -   -   -   -   C    C     -  -   -  -   C  -      Chapter 336
               greater than
               25,000 square
               feet
Recreational   Archery range  -   -   -   -   -   -    -     C  C   -  C   -  C      Chapter 336
facilities
               Athletic                                                              Subsection
               fields and     P   P   P   P   P   P    P     P  P   P- P   -  -      15.335.03JJJ
               courts
               Campground     -   -   -   -   -   -    -     C  C   -  C   -  C      Chapter 336
               Community      P   P   P   P   P   P    P     P  P   P  P   -  P      Subsection
               gardens                                                               15.335.03L
               Equestrian     P   P   P   -   -   -    -     P  P   P  P   -  P      Subsection
               facility                                                              15.335.03AA A
                                                                                     Subsection
                                                                                     15.335.03T;
               Golf course or P   P   P   P   P   P    P     -  -   -  -   -  P      subsection
               driving range                                                         15.335.03O
                                                                                     and design
                                                                                     review
               Indoor                                                                Subsection
               recreation/    -   -   -   -   -   P    P     -  -   -  -   P  P      15.335.03HH
               sports/fitness                                                        and design
               facility                                                              review
               Outdoor                                                               Subsection
               concerts,      -   -   -   -   -   T    T     C  C   C  C   -  T/C    15.335.04D9
               special events                                                        or chapter
               or festivals                                                          336
               Paintball                                                             Subsection
               facility -     -   -   -   -   -   P    P     -  -   -  -   -  P      15.335.03HH
               indoor
               Paintball
               facility -     -   -   -   -   -   -    -     C  C   C  C   -  C      Chapter 336
               outdoor
               Parks          P   P   P   P   P   P    P     -  -   P  P   -  P      Subsection
                                                                                     15.335.03JJJ
               Playground     P   P   P   P   P   P    P     -  -   P  P   -  P      Subsection
                                                                                     15.335.03JJJ
               Private                                                               Subsection
               residential    P   P   P   P   P   P    P     -  -   -  -   -  C      15.335.03HH
               recreation                                                            and design
               facility                                                              review
               Private Use    C   C   -   -   -   -    -     C  C   C  C      C      Chapter 330
               Airstrip
               Racetrack      -   -   -   -   -   -    -     C  C   C  C   -  -      Chapter 336
                                                                                     Chapter 336
               Rodeo          C   C   -   -   -   -    -     C  C   C  C   -  C      and Title 7,
                                                                                     chapter 1
               Shooting range -   -   -   -   -   -    P     -  -   -  -   -  P      Subsection
               - indoor                                                              15.335.03XX
               Shooting range -   -   -   -   -   -    -     C  C   C  C   -  -      Chapter 336
               - outdoor
               Skeet/trap
               shooting       -   -   -   -   -   -    -     C  C   -  C   -  C      Chapter 336
               range/course
                                                                                     Chapter 336
               School, K - 12                                                        (use of a
Educational    (public or     C   C   C   C   C   C    C     -  -   C  C   -  -      commercial
facilities     private)                                                              coach
                                                                                     requires a
                                                                                     CUP)
               Post-
               secondary,
               trade, or      -   -   -   -   -   C    C     -  -   -  -   -  -      Chapter 336
               technical
               education
Agricultural                                                            
uses:
               Animal keeping                                                        Subsection
               - livestock,   P   P   P   P   P   -    -     P  P   P  P   -  -      15.335.03GGG
               poultry, etc.
                                                                                     Subsection
Animal raising Commercial     P   C   C   -   -   -    -     P  P   P  P   -  P      15.335.03AAA
and production stable                                                                and design
                                                                                     review
               Small poultry/
               small meat     -   -   -   -   -   -    -     C  C   C  -   -  -      Section
               processing                                                            15.336.14
               facility
Crop
production,
horticulture,  Field crops    P   P   P   P   P   -    -     P  P   P  P   -  P       
orchards, and
vineyards
               Plant nursery  P   P   P   P   P   -    -     P  P   P  -   -  P       
               Vineyard       P   P   P   P   P   -    -     P  P   P  P   -  -      Subsection
                                                                                     15.335.03KKK
Agriculture    Agricultural   -   -   -   -   -   -    P     P  P   P  -   -  -      Subsection
related uses   machine shop                                                          15.335.03LL
               Agricultural                                                          Subsection
               supplies and   -   -   -   -   -   P    P     P  P   P  -   P  -      15.335.03MMM
               support                                                               and design
               services                                                              review
                                                                                     Subsection
               Agricultural   C   C   C   -   -   -    -     P  P   P  -   -  P      15.335.03MMM
               tourism                                                               and design
                                                                                     review
               Agriculture
               related        P   C   C   -   -   -    -     P  P   P  -   -  -      Subsection
               industry - on                                                         15.335.03MMM
               farm
                                                                                     Subsection
               Artisan/craft                                                         15.335.03TTT
               product                                                               for non-
               manufacturing  P   P   P   P   P   P    P     P  P   -  -   P  P      residential
               and processing                                                        areas, only
                                                                                     and design
                                                                                     review
                                                                                     Subsection
               Farm market    C   C   -   -   -   C    C     C  C   -  -   -  C      15.335.03R
                                                                                     and design
                                                                                     review
               Milk
               processing,
               cheese         -   -   -   -   -   -    -     C  C   -  -   -  -      Chapter 336
               manufacturing,
               etc.
                                                                                     NRS 369 and
                                                                                     597;
               Winery         P   P   P   -   -   -    -     P  P   P  -   -  -      subsection
                                                                                     15.335.03MMM
                                                                                     and design
                                                                                     review
Commercial                                                              
uses:
Animal related Animal rescue                                                         Chapter 336
services       facility       C   C   -   -   -   -    -     C  C   C  -   -  -      and title 7,
                                                                                     chapter 1
                                                                                     Subsection
               Kennel         C   C   C   -   -   -    C     C  C   -  -   -  -      15.335.03Y,
                                                                                     and title 7,
                                                                                     chapter 1
               Veterinary                                                            Subsection
               clinic/        -   -   -   -   -   -    P     P  P   -  -   -  -      15.335.03Y
               hospital -                                                            and title 7,
               large animal                                                          chapter 1
               Veterinary
               clinic/                                                               Subsection
               hospital -     -   -   -   -   -   P    P     -  -   -  -   P  -      15.335.03Y
               small animal                                                          and title 7,
               (with outdoor                                                         chapter 1
               kennel)
               Veterinary
               clinic/                                                               Subsection
               hospital -                                                            15.335.03Y
               small animal   -   -   -   -   -   P    P     -  -   -  -   P  -      and title 7,
               (without                                                              chapter 1
               outdoor
               kennel)
                                                                                     Chapter 336
               Zoo            -   -   -   -   -   -    -     C  C   C  C   -  -      and title 7,
                                                                                     chapter 1
Business       Copy center,                                                          Subsection
services       mail/ parcel   -   -   -   -   -   P    P     -  -   -  -   P  -      15.335.03RR
               services, etc.
               Event or                                                              Subsection
               conference     C   -   -   -   -   C    P     C  C   -  -   -  P      15.335.03NNN,
               center                                                                chapter 336
Financial      Stand alone    -   -   -   -   -   P    P     -  -   -  -   P  P      Subsection
services       ATM                                                                   15.335.03F
               With drive-    -   -   -   -   -   P    P     -  -   -  -   P  -      Subsection
               thru                                                                  15.335.03F
               Without drive- -   -   -   -   -   P    P     -  -   -  -   P  -      Subsection
               thru                                                                  15.335.03F
Food and                                                                             Subsection
beverage       Bar or         -   -   -   -   -   P    P     -  -   -  -   P  P      15.335.03OOO;
services       nightclub                                                             title 5,
                                                                                     chapter 2
                                                                                     Subsection
               Brew pub/craft -   -   -   -   -   P    P     -  -   -  -   P  P      15.335.03OOO;
               distillery                                                            NRS 597.230,
                                                                                     597.235, 369
                                                                                     Subsections
               Food trucks/   C/T -   -   -   -   C/T  C/T   C/ C/T -  -   C/ C/T    15.335.03QQ
               food carts                                    T             T         and
                                                                                     15.335.04D6
               Restaurant,                                                           Subsection
               with drive-    -   -   -   -   -   C    P     -  -   -  -   C  P      15.335.03PP
               thru
               Restaurant,                                                           Subsection
               without drive- -   -   -   -   -   P    P     -  -   -  -   P  P      15.335.03OO
               thru
Lodging                                                                              Subsection
facilities     B&B or inn     C   C   C   C   -   C    C     C  C   -  -   -  C      15.335.03H;
                                                                                     chapter 336
               Guest/dude                                                            Subsection
               ranch          C   -   -   -   -   -    -     C  C   -  -   -  P      15.335.03H;
                                                                                     chapter 336
               Hotel, motel   -   -   -   -   -   C    C     -  -   -  -   -  P      Subsection
               or lodge                                                              15.335.03PPP
               RV park        -   -   -   -   -   -    C     -  -   -  -   -  C      Chapter 353
Offices,       Office, 25,000                                                        Subsection
business and   square feet or -   -   -   -   -   P    P     -  -   -  -   P  -      15.335.03DD
professional   less
               Office,
               greater than   -   -   -   -   -   C    C     -  -   -  -   C  -      Chapter 336
               25,000 square
               feet
               Laundromat,
Personal       dry cleaning   -   -   -   -   -   P    P     -  -   -  -   P  -       
services       pick-up and
               drop-off
               Massage or     -   -   -   -   -   P    P     -  -   -  -   P  P       
               tanning salon
               Personal care  -   -   -   -   -   P    P     -  -   -  -   P  P       
               Shoe repair    -   -   -   -   -   P    P     -  -   -  -   P  -       
Entertainment  Adult          -   -   -   -   -   -    -     -  -   -  -   -  -      Title 5,
facilities     entertainment                                                         chapter 8
                                                                                     Chapter 336
               House of       -   -   -   -   -   -    -     -  -   -  -   -  -      and title 5,
               prostitution                                                          chapters 3
                                                                                     and 8
                                                                                     Chapter 336;
               Nonrestricted  -   -   -   -   -   -    -     -  -   -  -   -  C      title 5,
               gaming                                                                chapter 1 and
                                                                                     NRS 463
                                                                                     Subsection
               Performance                                                           15.335.03GG;
               hall or movie  -   -   -   -   -   P    P     -  -   -  -   -  P      chapter 336
               theater                                                               and design
                                                                                     review
               Restricted                                                            Title 5,
               gaming         -   -   -   -   -   P    P     -  -   -  -   P  P      chapter 1 and
                                                                                     NRS 463
               Convenience                                                           Subsection
Retail sales   store with     -   -   -   -   -   P    P     -  -   -  -   P  P      15.335.03M
               petroleum                                                             and design
               sales                                                                 review
               Convenience
               store without  -   -   -   -   -   P    P     -  -   -  -   P  P      Subsection
               petroleum                                                             15.335.03N
               sales
               General
               retail, less   -   -   -   -   -   P    P     -  -   -  -   P  P      Subsection
               than 25,000                                                           15.335.03RR
               square feet
               General
               retail,
               greater than   -   -   -   -   -   P    P     -  -   -  -   P  P       
               25,000 square
               feet
                                                                                     Subsection
               Grocery store  -   -   -   -   -   P    P     -  -   -  -   P  P      15.335.03RR
                                                                                     and design
                                                                                     review
               Recreational                                                          Chapter 336;
               marijuana      -   -   -   -   -   -    -     -  -   -  -   C  -      NRS 453D
               sales
               Automobile,                                                           Subsection
Vehicles and   motorcycle, RV -   -   -   -   -   P    P     -  -   -  -   -  -      15.335.03KK
equipment      or boat repair                                                        and design
               shop                                                                  review
               Automobile,
               motorcycle,
               RV,                                                                   Subsection
               manufactured   -   -   -   -   -   -    P     -  -   -  -   -  -      15.335.03E
               home or boat                                                          and design
               sales and                                                             review
               service (new
               and used)
               Gasoline sales -   -   -   -   -   C    P     -  -   -  -   C  P      Subsection
                                                                                     15.335.03S
                                                                                     Subsection
               Self storage/  -   -   -   -   -   C    -     -  -   -  -   C  -      15.335.03W W
               RV storage                                                            and design
                                                                                     review
Industrial
uses (also see
table 15.320-                                                           
4 of this
section):
               Aggregate,
               sand and
Resource       gravel
extraction and extraction and C   C   -   -   -   -    -     -  -   C  C   -  -      Chapters 336
processing     processing                                                            and 337
               (including
               asphalt batch
               plants)
               Wood treatment -   -   -   -   -   -    -     -  -   -  -   -  -      Chapter 337
               Fossil or
Energy         alternative
production and fuel           -   -   -   -   -   -    -     -  -   C  C   -  -      Chapter 337
distribution   generating
               facility,
               commercial
                                                                                     Section
                                                                                     15.336.09 -
                                                                                     non-
                                                                                     commercial
                                                                                     (i.e.,
               Geothermal                                                            private)
               generating     C   -   -   -   -   -    -     C  C   C  C   -  -      geothermal
               systems,                                                              systems are
               commercial                                                            allowed in
                                                                                     all zoning
                                                                                     districts
                                                                                     without a
                                                                                     conditional
                                                                                     use permit
               Power          C   C   -   -   -   -    -     C  C   C  C   -  -      Section
               substations                                                           15.336.11
                                                                                     15.336.10 -
                                                                                     Power
                                                                                     transmission
                                                                                     lines
                                                                                     (greater than
                                                                                     60 kV)
               Power                                                                 located
               transmission   C/P C/P C/P C/P C/P C/P  C/P   C/ C/P C/ C/  C/ C/P    within a
               lines (60 kV                                  P      P  P   P         designated
               or greater)                                                           utility
                                                                                     corridor
                                                                                     identified in
                                                                                     Master Plan
                                                                                     are permitted
                                                                                     subject to
                                                                                     design review
                                                                                     Section
                                                                                     15.336.11 -
                                                                                     non-
                                                                                     commercial
                                                                                     (i.e.,
               Solar power                                                           private)
               generating                                                            solar power
               facility,      C   -   -   -   -   -    -     C  C   C  C   -  -      generating
               commercial                                                            facilities
                                                                                     are allowed
                                                                                     in all zoning
                                                                                     districts
                                                                                     without a
                                                                                     conditional
                                                                                     use permit
                                                                                     Section
                                                                                     15.336.16 and
                                                                                     Section
                                                                                     15.336.12
                                                                                     noncommercial
               Energy storage                                                        (i.e.,
               systems        C   -   -   -   -   -    -     C  C   C  C   -  -      private)
                                                                                     energy
                                                                                     storage
                                                                                     facilities
                                                                                     are allowed
                                                                                     in all zoning
                                                                                     districts
                                                                                     Chapter 336 -
                                                                                     non-
                                                                                     commercial
                                                                                     wind energy
                                                                                     conversion
                                                                                     systems are
                                                                                     allowed in
                                                                                     all zoning
                                                                                     districts
                                                                                     without a
                                                                                     conditional
               Wind energy                                                           use permit -
               conversion,    C   -   -   -   -   -    -     C  C   C  C   -  -      refer to
               commercial                                                            subsection
                                                                                     15.335.03FFF
                                                                                     - commercial
                                                                                     wind energy
                                                                                     conversion
                                                                                     systems are
                                                                                     allowed with
                                                                                     approval of a
                                                                                     conditional
                                                                                     use permit,
                                                                                     where
                                                                                     identified in
                                                                                     this table
               Agricultural                                                          Subsection
Industrial     equipment and  -   -   -   -   -   P    P     P  P   -  -   -  -      15.335.03LL
services       truck sales                                                           and design
               and service                                                           review
               Building                                                              Chapters 336
               material sales -   -   -   -   -   -    C     -  -   -  -   -  -      and 337
               and storage
               Contractor or                                                         Subsection
               trade shops/   -   -   -   -   -   -    -     -  -   P  -   -  -      15.335.03P
               yards                                                                 and design
                                                                                     review
               Machine shops,
               welding,       -   -   -   -   -   -    -     -  -   -  -   -  -      Chapter 337
               plumbing, etc.
               Moving van,                                                           Subsection
               truck, trailer -   -   -   -   -   -    P     -  -   -  -   -  -      15.335.03BB
               or equipment                                                          and design
               rental                                                                review
                                                                                     Subsection
               Transfer       C   -   -   -   -   -    -     -  C   C  P   -  -      15.335.03QQQ
               station                                                               and chapter
                                                                                     336
Manufacturing  Agricultural                                                          Chapters 337
and production product        C   -   -   -   -   -    -     C  C   C  -   -  -      and 336
               processing
               Assembly,      -   -   -   -   -   -    -     -  -   -  -   -  -       
               light
               Brewery        C   C   -   -   -   -    -     C  C   C  -   -  -      Chapter 336
               Craft          C   C   -   -   -   -    -     C  C   C  -   -  C      Chapter 336
               distillery
               Estate         C   C   -   -   -   -    -     C  C   C  -   -  -      Chapter 336
               distillery
               Hazardous
               material       -   -   -   -   -   -    -     -  -   -  -   -  -       
               storage
               Hazardous
               waste          -   -   -   -   -   -    -     -  -   -  -   -  -       
               processing
               Manufacturing
               and            -   -   -   -   -   -    -     -  -   -  -   -  -       
               fabrication,
               light
               Medical/
               recreational                                                          15.337, NRS
               marijuana                                                             453A, 453D
               cultivation/   -   -   -   -   -   -    -     -  -   -  -   -  -      and design
               processing/                                                           review
               testing
               facility
               Tank farm,
               over 100,000   -   -   -   -   -   -    -     -  -   -  -   -  -       
               gallons
 
TABLE 15.320-2
TABLE OF ALLOWED USES - SUBURBAN RESIDENTIAL, MIXED USE AND COMMERCIAL ZONING
DISTRICTS
P = Permitted; C = Conditional use permit required; T = Temporary use permit
required; - = Not permitted
              Suburban Residential              Mixed Use/Commercial   Specific
                                                                       Use
Use      Use  SR- SR- SR- SR-   SR-                      TC- CMU- HMU- Regulations
Category Type 2   1   1/2 12000 9000 NR MFR RMU NC CC RC S   S    S    (Code
                                                                       Reference)
                              Suburban Residential              Mixed Use/Commercial   Specific Use
                                                                                       Regulations
Use Category   Use Type       SR- SR- SR- SR-   SR-  NR MFR RMU NC CC RC TC- CMU- HMU- (Code
                              2   1   1/2 12000 9000                     S   S    S    Reference)

Residential                                                              
uses:
Single-family  Home based     P   P   P   P     P    P  P   P   -  -  -  -   P    P    Subsection
residential    business                                                                15.335.03X
               Home           P   P   P   P     P    P  P   P   -  -  -  -   P    P    Subsection
               occupation                                                              15.335.03W
               Residential                                                             Subsections
               accessory use  P   P   P   P     P    P  P   P   -  -  -  -   P    P    15.335.03A2
               or structure                                                            and B
               Accessory      P   P   P   P     P      -      -  -  -  -           Subsection
               dwelling unit                                                           15.335.03A1
               Single-family  P   P   P   P     P    P  -   P   -  -  -  -   P    P    Chapters 340
               detached                                                                and 341
               Group living                                                            Subsection
Multi-family   facility,                                                               15.335.03NN;
residential    small (10 or   P   P   P   P     P    P  -   P   -  -  -  -   P    P    chapters 330
               fewer                                                                   and 360 and
               residents)                                                              design review
               Group living                                                            Subsection
               facility,                                                               15.335.03CC;
               large (11 or   C   C   C   C     C    -  C   C   -  -  -  -   C    C    chapters 360
               more                                                                    and 336
               residents)
               Manufactured/
               mobile home    -   -   -   -     -    C  -   C   -  -  -  -   -    C    Chapter 352
               park
               Multi-family,  -   -   -   P     P    P  P   P   -  -  -  -   P    P    Chapter 342
               2 units
               Multi-family,                                                           Chapter 345
               3 or 4 units   -   -   -   -     -    -  P   P   -  -  -  -   P    P    or 348 and
                                                                                       design review
               Multi-family,                                                           Chapter 345
               5 or more      -   -   -   -     -    -  P   P   -  -  -  -   P    P    or 348 and
               units                                                                   design review
Public,
institutional,                                                           
and civic
uses:
Community and  Government                                                              Subsection
cultural       administrative -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   P  P  P  -   P    P    15.335.03III
facilities     and civic                                                               and design
               buildings                                                               review
               Museums        -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   P  P  P  P   P    P    Design review
               Public                                                                  Subsection
               assembly,                                                               15.335.03JJ
               including                                                               and design
               churches                                                                review (Use
               (total         P   P   P   P     P    P  P   -   P  P  P  -   P    P    of a
               worship/hall                                                            commercial
               seating                                                                 coach
               capacity 350                                                            requires a
               or less)                                                                CUP)
               Public
               assembly,                                                               Chapter 336
               including                                                               (Use of a
               churches                                                                commercial
               (total         C   C   C   C     C    C  C   -   C  C  C  -   C    C    coach
               worship/hall                                                            requires a
               seating                                                                 CUP)
               capacity
               exceeds 350)
               Public safety  P   P   P   P     P    P  P   -   P  P  P  P   P    P    Design review
               facility
                                                                                       Subsection
               Social,                                                                 15.335.03K,
               fraternal      -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   -  P  P  -   P    P    and chapter
               lodges                                                                  336 and
                                                                                       design review
               Adult or child
Day-care       daycare, in-                                                            Subsection
facilities     home, 6 or     P   P   P   P     P    P  -   P   -  -  -  -   P    P    15.335.03W
               fewer adults
               or children
                                                                                       Use is
                                                                                       permitted in
                                                                                       commercial
                                                                                       and
                                                                                       conditional
                                                                                       in
                                                                                       residential
                                                                                       uses;
                                                                                       subsection
               Adult or child                                                          15.335.03CC
               daycare, 7 to                                                           for
               12 adults or   C   C   -   -     -    -  -   P   P  P  P  -   P    P    commercial
               children                                                                properties
                                                                                       and chapter
                                                                                       336 for
                                                                                       residential
                                                                                       properties;
                                                                                       use is not
                                                                                       allowed in
                                                                                       residential
                                                                                       portion of
                                                                                       Mixed-Use
                                                                                       Zoned areas
                                                                                       Use is
                                                                                       permitted in
                                                                                       commercial
                                                                                       and
                                                                                       conditional
                                                                                       in
                                                                                       residential
                                                                                       uses;
                                                                                       subsection
               Adult or child                                                          15.335.03CC
               daycare                                                                 for
               center, more   C   C   -   -     -    -  -   P   P  P  P  -   P    P    commercial
               than 12 adults                                                          properties
               or children                                                             and chapter
                                                                                       336 for
                                                                                       residential
                                                                                       properties;
                                                                                       use is not
                                                                                       allowed in
                                                                                       residential
                                                                                       portion of
                                                                                       Mixed-Use
                                                                                       Zoned areas
Health care    Hospital       -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   -  C  C  -   -    C    Chapter 336
facilities
               Intermediate
               care facility, -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   -  C  C  -   C    C    Chapter 336
               nursing home,
               rehab center
               Medical                                                                 Chapter 336;
               marijuana      -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   C  C  C  -   C    C    NRS 453A
               dispensary
               Medical or                                                              Subsection
               dental office                                                           15.335.03DD
               or clinic      -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   P  P  P  -   P    P    and design
               25,000 square                                                           review
               feet or less
               Medical or
               dental office
               or clinic,     -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   C  C  C  C   C    C    Chapter 336
               greater than
               25,000 square
               feet
Recreational   Archery range  -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   -  -  -  -   -    -     
facilities
               Athletic                                                                Subsection
               fields and     P   P   P   P     P    P  P   P   -  -  -  -   P    P    15.335.03JJJ
               courts
               Campground     -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   -  -  -  -   -    -     
               Community      P   P   P   P     P    P  P   P   P  P  P  P   P    P    Subsection
               gardens                                                                 15.335.03L
               Equestrian     -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   -  -  -  -   -    -     
               facility
                                                                                       Subsections
               Golf course or P   P   P   P     P    -  -   P   -  -  -  P   P    P    15.335.03T
               driving range                                                           and O and
                                                                                       design review
               Indoor                                                                  Subsection
               recreation/    -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   P  P  P  P   P    P    15.335.03HH
               sports/fitness                                                          and design
               facility                                                                review
               Outdoor                                                                 Subsection
               concerts,      -   -   -   -     -    -  -   T   -  T/ T/ T/C T    T    15.335.04D9
               special events                                      C  C                or chapter
               or festivals                                                            336
               Paintball                                                               Subsection
               facility -     -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   -  P  P  P   P    P    15.335.03HH
               indoor                                                                  and design
                                                                                       review
               Paintball
               facility -     -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   -  -  -  -   -    -     
               outdoor
               Parks          P   P   P   P     P    P  P   P   -  P  P  P   P    P    Subsection
                                                                                       15.335.03JJJ
               Playground     P   P   P   P     P    P  P   P   P  P  P  P   P    P    Subsection
                                                                                       15.335.03JJJ
               Private                                                                 Subsection
               residential    P   P   P   P     P    P  P   P   -  -  -  -   P    P    15.335.03HH
               recreation                                                              and design
               facility                                                                review
                                                                                       Chapter 336
               Rodeo          -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   -  -  -  T/C -    -    and Title 7,
                                                                                       chapter 1
               Shooting range -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   -  P  P  P   -    P    Subsection
               - indoor                                                                15.335.03XX
               Skeet/trap
               shooting       -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   -  -  -  -   -    -     
               range/course
                                                                                       Chapter 336
               School, K - 12                                                          (Use of a
Educational    (private or    C   C   C   C     C    C  C   -   -  -  -  -   C    C    commercial
facilities     public)                                                                 coach
                                                                                       requires a
                                                                                       CUP)
               Post-
               secondary,
               trade, or
               technical      -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   -  C  C  -   C    C    Chapter 336
               education
               (private or
               public)
Agricultural                                                             
uses:
Animal raising Animal keeping                                                          Subsection
and production - livestock,   P   P   -   -     -    -  -   -   -  -  -  -   -    -    15.335.03GGG
               poultry, etc.
               Equestrian     -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   -  -  -  -   -    -    Subsection
               facilities                                                              15.335.03AAA
Crop
production,                                                                            Subsection
horticulture,  Field crops    P   P   -   -     -    -  -   -   -  -  -  -   -    -    15.335.03KKK
orchards, and
vineyards
               Plant nursery  P   P   -   -     -    -  -   -   -  -  -  -   -    -    Subsection
                                                                                       15.335.03LLL
               Vineyard       P   P   -   -     -    -  -   -   -  -  -  -   -    -    Subsection
                                                                                       15.335.03KKK
Agriculture    Agricultural   -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   -  -  -  -   -    -     
related uses   machine shop
               Agricultural
               supplies and   -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   -  -  -  -   -    -     
               support
               services
               Agricultural   -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   -  -  -  -   -    -     
               tourism
               Agriculture
               related        -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   -  -  -  -   -    -     
               industry - on
               farm
               Artisan/craft                                                           Subsection
               product                                                                 15.335.03TTT
               manufacturing  -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   P  P  P  -   P    P    for non-
               and processing                                                          residential
                                                                                       areas, only
                                                                                       Subsection
               Farm market    -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   P  P  P  P   P    P    15.335.03R
                                                                                       and design
                                                                                       review
                                                                                       NRS 369 and
                                                                                       597;
               Winery         -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   -  P  P  P   P    P    subsection
                                                                                       15.335.03MMM
                                                                                       and design
                                                                                       review
Commercial                                                               
uses:
Animal related Animal rescue                                                           Subsection
services       facility       -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   C  C  C  -   C    C    15.336 and
                                                                                       Title 7
               Kennel         -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   -  -  -  -   -    -     
               Veterinary
               clinic/                                                                 Subsection
               hospital -     -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   P  P  P  -   P    P    15.335.03Y
               small animal                                                            and design
               (with outdoor                                                           review
               kennel)
               Veterinary
               clinic/
               hospital -                                                              Subsection
               small animal   -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   P  P  P  -   P    P    15.335.03Y
               (without
               outdoor
               kennel)
               Veterinary
               clinic/        -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   -  C  C  -   C    C    Chapter 336
               hospital -
               large animal
                                                                                       15.336 and
               Zoo            -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   -  -  -  -   -    -    Title 7,
                                                                                       chapter 1
Business       Copy center,                                                            Subsection
services       mail/ parcel   -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   P  P  P  -   P    P    15.335.03RR
               services, etc.
               Event or                                                                Subsection
               conference     -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   -  -  P  P   -    P    15.335.03NNN
               center                                                                  and design
                                                                                       review
Financial      Bank with      -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   P  P  P  -   P    P    Subsection
services       drive-thru                                                              15.335.03F
               Bank without   -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   P  P  P  -   P    P    Subsection
               drive-thru                                                              15.335.03F
               Stand alone    -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   P  P  P  P   P    P    Subsection
               ATM                                                                     15.335.03F
Food and                                                                               Subsection
beverage       Bar or         -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   P  P  P  P   P    P    15.335.03OOO;
services       nightclub                                                               title 5,
                                                                                       chapter 2
                                                                                       Subsection
                                                                                       15.335.03OOO
               Brew pub/craft -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   C  P  P  P   C    C    and design
               distillery                                                              review; NRS
                                                                                       597.230,
                                                                                       597.235, 369
                                                                                       Subsection
                                                                                       15.335.04D6
               Food trucks/                                     C/ C/ C/               for temporary
               food carts     -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   T  T  T  C/T C/T  C/T  use and
                                                                                       chapter 336
                                                                                       for permanent
                                                                                       use
               Restaurant,                                                             Subsection
               with drive-    -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   C  P  P  P   C    P    15.335.03PP
               thru                                                                    and chapter
                                                                                       336
               Restaurant,                                                             Subsection
               without drive- -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   P  P  P  P   P    P    15.335.03OO
               thru
Lodging                                                                                Subsection
facilities     B&B or inn     C   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   -  -  -  C   C    C    15.335.03H;
                                                                                       chapter 336
               Guest/dude     -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   -  -  -  -   -    -     
               ranch
               Hotel, motel   -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   P  P  P  P   P    P    Subsection
               or lodge                                                                15.335.03PPP
               RV park        -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   -  -  C  C   -    C    Chapter 353
Offices,       Office, 25,000                                                          Subsection
business and   square feet or -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   P  P  P  -   P    P    15.335.03DD
professional   less
               Office,
               greater than   -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   C  C  C  -   C    C    Chapter 336
               25,000 square
               feet
               Laundromat,
Personal       dry cleaning   -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   P  P  P  -   P    P     
services       pick-up and
               drop-off
               Massage or     -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   P  P  P  P   P    P     
               tanning salon
               Personal care  -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   P  P  P  -   P    P     
               Shoe repair    -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   P  P  P  -   P    P     
Entertainment  Adult                                                                   Chapter 336
facilities     entertainment  -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   -  -  -  C   -    -    and title 5,
                                                                                       chapter 8
               House of       -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   -  -  -  -   -    -     
               prostitution
                                                                                       Chapter 336;
               Nonrestricted  -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   -  C  C  C   C    C    title 5,
               gaming                                                                  chapter 1;
                                                                                       and NRS 463
                                                                                       Subsection
               Performance                                                             15.335.03GG;
               hall or movie  -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   -  P  P  P   C    P    chapter 336
               theater                                                                 and design
                                                                                       review
               Restricted                                                              Title 5,
               gaming         -   -   -   -     -    -  -   P   P  P  P  P   P    P    chapter 1 and
                                                                                       NRS 463
Retail sales   Art gallery    -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   P  P  P  P   P    P    Subsection
                                                                                       15.335.03RR
               Convenience                                                             Subsection
               store with                                                              15.335.03M;
               petroleum      -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   C  P  P  P   P    P    chapter 336
               sales                                                                   and design
                                                                                       review
               Convenience
               store without  -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   P  P  P  P   P    P    Subsection
               petroleum                                                               15.335.03N
               sales
               General
               retail, less   -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   P  P  P  -   P    P    Subsection
               than 25,000                                                             15.335.03RR
               square feet
               General
               retail,
               greater than   -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   C  C  C  -   C    C    Chapter 336
               25,000 square
               feet
                                                                                       Subsection
                                                                                       15.335.03RR;
               Grocery store  -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   C  P  P  -   C    P    chapter 336
                                                                                       and design
                                                                                       review
               Recreational                                                            Chapter 336;
               marijuana      -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   C  C  C  -   C    C    NRS 453D
               sales
               Automobile,
Vehicles and   motorcycle, RV -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   -  P  P  -   P    P    Subsection
equipment      or boat repair                                                          15.335.03KK
               shop
               Automobile,
               motorcycle,
               RV,                                                                     Subsection
               manufactured   -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   -  P  P  -   -    P    15.335.03E
               home or boat                                                            and design
               sales, service                                                          review
               and rental
               (new and used)
               Gasoline/      -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   P  P  P  -   -    P    Subsection
               diesel sales                                                            15.335.03S
                                                                                       Subsection
               Self storage/  -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   C  C  C  -   C    C    15.335.03WW
               RV storage                                                              and design
                                                                                       review
               Truck stop     -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   -  C  C  C   -    C    Subsection
                                                                                       15.335.03HHH
Industrial
uses (also see
table 15.320-                                                            
4 of this
section):
               Aggregate,
               sand and
Resource       gravel
extraction and extraction and -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   -  -  -  -   -    -     
processing     processing
               (including
               asphalt batch
               plants)
               Mining and
               mineral        -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   -  -  -  -   -    -     
               extraction and
               batch plant
               Wood treatment -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   -  -  -  -   -    -     
               Fossil or
Energy         alternative
production and fuel           -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   -  -  -  -   -    -     
distribution   generating
               facility,
               commercial
                                                                                       Non-
                                                                                       commercial
                                                                                       (i.e.,
                                                                                       private)
               Geothermal                                                              geothermal
               generating     -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   -  -  -  -   -    -    systems are
               systems                                                                 allowed in
                                                                                       all zoning
                                                                                       districts
                                                                                       without a
                                                                                       conditional
                                                                                       use permit
               Power          C   C   C   C     C    C  C   C   C  C  C  C   C    C    Section
               substations                                                             15.336.11
                                                                                       Section
                                                                                       15.336.10;
                                                                                       power
                                                                                       transmission
                                                                                       lines
                                                                                       (greater than
               Power                                                                   60kV) located
               transmission   C/P C/P C/P C/P   C/P  C/ C/P C/P C/ C/ C/ C/P C/P  C/P  within a
               lines (60kV or                        P          P  P  P                designated
               greater)                                                                utility
                                                                                       corridor
                                                                                       identified in
                                                                                       Master Plan
                                                                                       are permitted
                                                                                       subject to
                                                                                       design review
                                                                                       Non-
                                                                                       commercial
                                                                                       (i.e.,
                                                                                       private)
                                                                                       solar power
               Solar power                                                             generating
               generating     -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   -  -  -  -   -    -    facilities
               facility                                                                are allowed
                                                                                       in all zoning
                                                                                       districts
                                                                                       without a
                                                                                       conditional
                                                                                       use permit
                                                                                       Non-
                                                                                       commercial
                                                                                       (i.e.,
                                                                                       private) wind
                                                                                       energy
                                                                                       conversion
                                                                                       systems are
               Wind energy    -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   -  -  -  -   -    -    allowed in
               conversion                                                              all zoning
                                                                                       districts
                                                                                       without a
                                                                                       conditional
                                                                                       use permit -
                                                                                       refer to
                                                                                       subsection
                                                                                       15.335.03FFF
               Agricultural
Industrial     equipment and  -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   -  -  -  -   -    -     
services       truck sales
               and service
               Building
               material sales -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   -  -  -  -   -    -     
               and storage
               Contractor or
               trade shops/   -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   -  -  -  -   -    -     
               yards
               Equipment      -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   -  -  -  -   -    -     
               rental
               Machine shops,
               welding,       -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   -  -  -  -   -    -     
               plumbing, etc.
               Self-storage/  -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   -  -  -  -   -    -     
               RV storage
               Transfer       -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   -  -  -  -   -    -     
               station
Manufacturing  Agricultural
and production product        -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   -  -  -  -   -    -     
               processing
               Assembly,      -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   -  -  -  -   -    -     
               light
               Hazardous
               material       -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   -  -  -  -   -    -     
               storage
               Hazardous
               waste          -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   -  -  -  -   -    -     
               processing
               Manufacturing
               and            -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   -  -  -  -   -    -     
               fabrication,
               light
               Medical/
               recreational
               marijuana                                                               NRS 453A,
               cultivation,   -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   -  -  -  -   -    -    453D
               processing,
               testing
               facilities
               Tank farm,
               over 100,000   -   -   -   -     -    -  -   -   -  -  -  -   -    -     
               gallons
 
TABLE 15.320-3
TABLE OF ALLOWED USES - HISTORIC ZONING DISTRICTS
P = Permitted; C = Conditional use permit required; T = Temporary use permit
required; - = Not permitted
              Residential                       Mixed- Non-
                                                Use    Residential  Use
Use      Use                                                        Specific
Category Type RR- RR-           SR-   SR-                           Regulations
              5   2   RR-1 SR-1 12000 9000 NR-H CMU-H  PF-H HI TC-H (Code
                                                                    Reference)
                             Residential                    Mixed- Non-
                                                            Use    Residential Use Specific
Use Category  Use Type                                                         Regulations
                             RR- RR- RR- SR- SR-   SR-  NR- CMU-H  PF- HI TC-H (Code
                             5   2   1   1   12000 9000 H          H           Reference)

Single-family Accessory      P   P   P   P   P     P    P   P      -   -  -    Subsection
residential   dwelling unit                                                    15.335.03A1
              Home based     P   P   P   P   P     P    P   P      -   -  -    Subsection
              business                                                         15.335.03X
              Home           P   P   P   P   P     P    P   P      -   -  -    Subsection
              occupation                                                       15.335.03W
              Residential                                                      Subsections
              accessory use  P   P   P   P   P     P    P   P      -   -  -    15.335.03A2
              or building                                                      and B
              Single family  P   P   P   P   P     P    P   P      -   -  -    Chapters 340
              detached                                                         and 341
              Group living                                                     Subsection
              facility,                                                        15.335.03NN
              small (10 or   P   P   P   P   P     P    P   P      -   -  -    and design
              fewer                                                            review
              residents)
              Group living                                                     Subsection
              facility,                                                        15.335.03CC;
              large (11 or   C   C   C   C   C     C    -   C      -   -  -    chapters 330,
              more                                                             360, and 336
              residents)
Multi-family  Manufactured/
residential   mobile home    -   -   -   -   -     -    -   -      -   -  -     
              park
              Multi-family,  -   -   -   -   -     -    P   P      -   -  -    Chapter 342
              2 units
              Multi-family,                                                    Chapter 345
              3 or 4 units   -   -   -   -   -     -    P   P      -   -  -    or 348 and
                                                                               design review
              Multi-family,                                                    Chapter 345
              5 or more      -   -   -   -   -     -    P   P      -   -  -    or 348 and
              units                                                            design review
Community and Government                                                       Subsection
cultural      administrative -   -   -   -   -     -    -   P      P   -  -    15.335.03III
facilities    and civic                                                        and design
              buildings                                                        review
              Public                                                           Subsection
              assembly,                                                        15.335.03JJ
              including                                                        and design
              churches                                                         review (Use
              (total         P   P   P   P   P     P    P   P      -   -  P    of a
              worship/hall                                                     commercial
              seating                                                          coach
              capacity 350                                                     requires a
              or less)                                                         CUP)
              Public
              assembly,                                                        Chapter 336
              including                                                        (Use of a
              churches                                                         commercial
              (total         C   C   C   C   -     -    -   -      C   -  -    coach
              worship/hall                                                     requires a
              seating                                                          CUP)
              capacity
              exceeds 350)
              Public safety                                                    Subsection
              facility       P   P   P   P   P     P    P   P      P   P  P    15.335.03DD
              (25,000 square                                                   and design
              feet or less)                                                    review
              Public safety
              facility
              (greater than  C   C   C   C   C     C    C   C      C   C  C    Chapter 336
              25,000 square
              feet)
              Social,                                                          Subsection
              fraternal      -   -   -   -   -     -    -   P      -   -  P    15.335.03K
              lodges                                                           and design
                                                                               review
              Adult or child
Day-care      daycare, in-   P   P   P   P   P     P    P   P      -   -  -    Subsection
facilities    home, 6 or                                                       15.335.03W
              fewer children
                                                                               Use is
                                                                               permitted in
                                                                               commercial
                                                                               and
                                                                               conditional
                                                                               in
                                                                               residential
                                                                               uses;
                                                                               subsection
              Adult or child                                                   15.335.03CC
              daycare, 7 to                                                    for
              12 adults or   C   C   C   C   -     -    -   P      P   -  -    commercial
              children                                                         properties
                                                                               and chapter
                                                                               336 for
                                                                               residential
                                                                               properties;
                                                                               use is not
                                                                               allowed in
                                                                               residential
                                                                               portion of
                                                                               Mixed-Use
                                                                               Zoned areas
                                                                               Use is
                                                                               permitted in
                                                                               commercial
                                                                               and
                                                                               conditional
                                                                               in
                                                                               residential
                                                                               uses;
                                                                               subsection
              Adult or child                                                   15.335.03CC
              daycare                                                          and design
              center, more   C   C   C   C   -     -    -   P      P   -  -    review for
              than 12 adults                                                   commercial
              or children                                                      properties
                                                                               and chapter
                                                                               336 for
                                                                               residential
                                                                               properties;
                                                                               use is not
                                                                               allowed in
                                                                               residential
                                                                               portion of
                                                                               Mixed-Use
                                                                               Zoned areas
Health care   Hospital       -   -   -   -   -     -    -   -      -   -  -     
facilities
              Intermediate
              care facility, -   -   -   -   -     -    -   C      C   -  -    Chapter 336
              nursing home,
              rehab center
              Medical                                                          Chapter 336;
              marijuana      -   -   -   -   -     -    -   C      -   -  -    NRS 453A
              dispensary
              Medical or
              dental office                                                    Subsection
              or clinic,     -   -   -   -   -     -    -   P      P   -  -    15.335.03DD
              25,000 square
              feet or less
              Medical or
              dental office
              or clinic,     -   -   -   -   -     -    -   C      C   -  -    Chapter 336
              greater than
              25,000 square
              feet
Recreational  Athletic                                                         Subsection
facilities    fields and     P   P   P   P   P     P    P   P      P   -  -    15.335.03JJJ
              courts
              Community      P   P   P   P   P     P    P   P      P   -  P    Subsection
              gardens                                                          15.335.03L
              Indoor                                                           Subsection
              recreation/    -   -   -   -   -     -    -   P      -   -  P    15.335.03HH
              sports/fitness                                                   and design
              facility                                                         review
              Outdoor                                                          Subsection
              concerts,      -   -   -   -   -     -    -   T      T/C -  T/C  15.335.04D9
              special events                                                   or chapter
              or festivals                                                     336
              Parks          P   P   P   P   P     P    P   P      P   -  -    Subsection
                                                                               15.335.03JJJ
              Playground     P   P   P   P   P     P    P   P      P   -  -    Subsection
                                                                               15.335.03JJJ
              Private                                                          Subsection
              residential    P   P   P   P   P     P    P   P      -   -  -    15.335.03HH
              recreation                                                       and design
              facility                                                         review
                                                                               Chapter 336
              School, K - 12                                                   (Use of a
Educational   (private or    C   C   C   C   C     C    C   C      C   -  -    commercial
facilities    public)                                                          coach
                                                                               requires a
                                                                               CUP)
              Post-
              secondary,
              trade, or      -   -   -   -   -     -    -   P      -   -  -     
              technical
              education
              Veterinary
              clinic/
Animal        hospital -                                                       Subsection
related       small animal   -   -   -   -   -     -    -   P      -   -  -    15.335.03Y
services      (without
              outdoor
              kennel)
Business      Copy center,                                                     Subsection
services      mail/parcel    -   -   -   -   -     -    -   P      -   -  -    15.335.03RR
              services, etc.
              Event or                                                         Subsection
              conference     -   -   -   -   -     -    -   P      P   -  P    15.335.03NNN
              center                                                           and design
                                                                               review
Financial     Bank with      -   -   -   -   -     -    -   P      -   -  -    Subsection
services      drive-thru                                                       15.335.03F
              Bank without   -   -   -   -   -     -    -   P      -   -  -    Subsection
              drive-thru                                                       15.335.03F
              Stand alone    -   -   -   -   -     -    -   P      -   -  P    Subsection
              ATM                                                              15.335.03F
Food and                                                                       Subsection
beverage      Bar or         -   -   -   -   -     -    -   P      -   -  P    15.335.03OOO;
services      nightclub                                                        title 5,
                                                                               chapter 2
                                                                               Subsection
                                                                               15.335.03OOO
              Brew pub/craft -   -   -   -   -     -    -   P      -   -  P    and design
              distillery                                                       review; NRS
                                                                               597.230,
                                                                               597.235, 369
              Food trucks/   -   -   -   -   -     -    -   T      -   -  T    Subsection
              food carts                                                       15.335.04D6
              Restaurant,
              with drive-    -   -   -   -   -     -    -   -      -   -  -     
              thru
              Restaurant,                                                      Subsection
              without drive- -   -   -   -   -     -    -   P      -   -  P    15.335.03OO
              thru
Lodging       B&B or inn     C   C   C   C   C     C    -   C      -   -  C    Subsection
facilities                                                                     15.335.03H
              Hotel, motel   -   -   -   -   -     -    -   P      -   -  P    Subsection
              or lodge                                                         15.335.03PPP
                                                                               Chapter 353
              RV park        -   -   -   -   -     -    -   -      -   -  C    and design
                                                                               review
Offices,      Office, 25,000                                                   Subsection
business and  square feet or -   -   -   -   -     -    -   P      -   -  -    15.335.03DD
professional  less
              Office,                                                          Subsection
              greater than   -   -   -   -   -     -    -   P      -   -  -    15.335.03DD
              25,000 square                                                    and design
              feet                                                             review
              Laundromat,
Personal      dry cleaning   -   -   -   -   -     -    -   P      -   -  -    Subsection
services      pick-up and                                                      15.335.03RR
              drop-off
              Massage or     -   -   -   -   -     -    -   P      -   -  P    Subsection
              tanning salon                                                    15.335.03RR
              Personal care  -   -   -   -   -     -    -   P      -   -  P    Subsection
                                                                               15.335.03RR
              Shoe repair    -   -   -   -   -     -    -   P      -   -  -    Subsection
                                                                               15.335.03RR
Entertainment Adult                                                            Chapter 336
facilities    entertainment  -   -   -   -   -     -    -   -      -   -  C    and title 5,
                                                                               chapter 8
                                                                               Chapter 336
              House of       -   -   -   -   -     -    -   -      -   -  -    and title 5,
              prostitution                                                     chapters 3
                                                                               and 8
                                                                               Chapter 336;
              Nonrestricted  -   -   -   -   -     -    -   -      -   -  C    title 5,
              gaming                                                           chapter 1;
                                                                               and NRS 463
              Performance                                                      Subsection
              hall or movie  -   -   -   -   -     -    -   P      -   -  P    15.335.03GG
              theater                                                          and design
                                                                               review
              Restricted                                                       Title 5,
              gaming         -   -   -   -   -     -    -   P      -   -  P    chapter 1 and
                                                                               NRS 463
Retail sales  Art gallery    -   -   -   -   -     -    -   P      -   -  P    Subsection
                                                                               15.335.03RR
              Convenience
              store with     -   -   -   -   -     -    -   P      -   P  -    Subsection
              petroleum                                                        15.335.03M
              sales
              Convenience
              store without  -   -   -   -   -     -    -   P      -   -  P    Subsection
              petroleum                                                        15.335.03N
              sales
              General
              retail, less   -   -   -   -   -     -    -   P      -   -  -    Subsection
              than 25,000                                                      15.335.03RR
              square feet
              General
              retail,
              greater than   -   -   -   -   -     -    -   C      -   -  -    Chapter 336
              25,000 square
              feet
              Grocery store  -   -   -   -   -     -    -   P      -   -  -    Subsection
                                                                               15.335.03RR
              Recreational                                                     Chapter 336;
              marijuana      -   -   -   -   -     -    -   C      -   -  -    NRS 453D
              sales
              Automobile,
Vehicles and  motorcycle, RV -   -   -   -   -     -    -   C      -   C  -    Chapter 336
equipment     or boat repair
              shop
              Automobile,
              motorcycle,
              RV, manu-                                                        Subsection
              factured home  -   -   -   -   -     -    -   -      -   -  -    15.335.03E
              or boat sales
              and service
              (new and used)
              Gasoline sales -   -   -   -   -     -    -   C      -   C  -    Chapter 336
              Aggregate,
              sand and
Resource      gravel
extraction    extraction and C   -   -   -   -     -    -   -      -   C  -    Chapter 336
and           processing
processing    (including
              asphalt batch
              plants)
              Wood treatment -   -   -   -   -     -    -   -      -   -  -     
Industrial    Truck, and
services      equipment      C   -   -   -   -     -    -   -      -   C  -    Chapter 336
              repair
 
TABLE 15.320-4
TABLE OF ALLOWED USES - EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
P = Permitted; C = Conditional use permit required; T = Temporary use permit
required; - = Not permitted
                                                    Specific Use
Use Category Use Type LI-R LI-S HI-R HI-S SI EMU XX Requirements
                                                    (Code Reference)
                                                                Specific Use
Use Category    Use Type        LI-R LI-S HI-R HI-S SI  EMU XX  Requirements
                                                                (Code
                                                                Reference)
Residential                                              
uses:
Single-family   Accessory       -    -    -    -    -   P   -   Subsection
residential     dwelling unit                                   15.335.03A1
                Home based      -    -    -    -    -   P   -   Subsection
                business                                        15.335.03X
                Home occupation -    -    -    -    -   P   -   Subsection
                                                                15.335.03W
                Residential                                     Subsections
                accessory use   -    -    -    -    -   P   -   15.335.03A2 and
                or structure                                    B
                Single family   -    -    -    -    -   P   -   Chapters 340
                detached                                        and 341
                Watchman’s    P    P    P    P    -   -   -   15.351.03C and
                quarters                                        design review
                Group living                                    Subsection
Multi-family    facility, small -    -    -    -    -   P   -   15.335.03NN and
residential     (10 or fewer                                    design review
                residents)
                Group living
                facility, large -    -    -    -    -   -   -    
                (11 or more
                residents)
                Manufactured/
                mobile home     -    -    -    -    -   -   -    
                park
                Multi-family, 2 -    -    -    -    -   P   -   Chapter 342
                units
                Multi-family, 3                                 Chapters 345,
                or 4 units      -    -    -    -    -   P   -   348 and design
                                                                review
                Multi-family, 5                                 Chapters 345,
                or more units   -    -    -    -    -   P   -   348 and design
                                                                review
Public,
institutional,                                           
and civic uses:
Community and   Government                                      Subsection
cultural        administrative  P    P    -    -    P   P   -   15.335.03III
facilities      and civic                                       and design
                buildings                                       review
                Public                                          Subsection
                assembly,                                       15.335.03JJ and
                including                                       design review
                churches (total -    -    -    -    -   P   -   (Use of a
                worship/hall                                    commercial
                seating                                         coach requires
                capacity 350 or                                 a CUP)
                less)
                Public
                assembly,                                       Chapter 336
                including                                       (Use of a
                churches (total -    -    -    -    -   C   -   commercial
                worship/hall                                    coach requires
                seating                                         a CUP)
                capacity
                exceeds 350)
                Public safety   P    P    P    P    P   P   -   Design review
                facility
                Social,
                fraternal       -    -    -    -    -   C   -   Chapter 336
                lodges
                General
                Aviation        C    C    C    C    -   -   -   Chapter 330
                Airport
Day-care        Adult day care,
facilities      6 or fewer      -    -    -    -    -   P   -    
                clients
                Adult day care,                                 Subsection
                7 or more       -    -    -    -    -   P   -   15.335.03CC and
                clients                                         design review
                Child care
                center, 7 or    -    -    -    -    -   C   -   Chapter 336
                more children
                Child care, in-                                 Subsection
                home, 6 or      -    -    -    -    -   P   -   15.335.03W
                fewer children
Health care     Hospital        C    C    -    -    C   C   -   Chapter 336
facilities
                Intermediate
                care facility,  -    -    -    -    C   C   -   Chapter 336
                nursing home,
                rehab center
                Medical
                marijuana       -    -    -    -    -   -   -   NRS 453A
                dispensary
                Medical or
                dental office                                   Subsection
                or clinic,      P    P    -    -    P   P   -   15.335.03DD
                25,000 square
                feet or less
                Medical or
                dental office
                or clinic,      C    C    -    -    C   C   -   Chapter 336
                greater than
                25,000 square
                feet
Recreational    Archery range - P    P    P    P    P   P   -   Subsection
facilities      indoor                                          15.335.03HH
                Archery range - C    C    C    C    -   -   -   Chapter 336
                outdoor
                Athletic fields -    -    -    -    -   P   -   Subsection
                and courts                                      15.335.03JJJ
                Campground      -    -    -    -    -   -   -    
                Community       -    -    -    -    -   P   -   Subsection
                gardens                                         15.335.03L
                Equestrian      -    -    -    -    -   -   -    
                facility
                                                                Subsections
                Golf course or  -    -    -    -    -   P   -   15.335.03T, O
                driving range                                   and design
                                                                review
                Indoor                                          Subsection
                recreation/     P    P    -    -    P   P   -   15.335.03HH and
                sports/fitness                                  design review
                facility
                Outdoor
                concerts,       T    T    -    -    T   T   -   Chapter 233
                special events
                or festivals
                Paintball                                       Subsection
                facility -      P    P    P    P    P   P   -   15.335.03HH and
                indoor                                          design review
                Paintball
                facility -      -    -    -    -    -   -   -    
                outdoor
                Parks           -    -    -    -    -   P   -   Subsection
                                                                15.335.03JJJ
                Playground      -    -    -    -    -   P   -   Subsection
                                                                15.335.03JJJ
                Private                                         Subsection
                residential     -    -    -    -    -   P   -   15.335.03HH and
                recreation                                      design review
                facility
                                                                15.336 and
                Rodeos          -    -    -    -    -   -   -   Title 7,
                                                                chapter 1
                Shooting range  P    P    P    P    P   P   -   Subsection
                - indoor                                        15.335.03XX
                Shooting range  -    -    -    -    -   -   -    
                - outdoor
                Skeet/trap
                shooting range/ -    -    -    -    -   -   -    
                course
                                                                Chapter 336
Educational     School, K - 12                                  (Use of a
facilities      (public or      -    -    -    -    -   C   -   commercial
                private)                                        coach requires
                                                                a CUP)
                Post-secondary,
                trade, or       C    C    -    -    C   C   -   Chapter 336
                technical
                education
Agricultural                                             
uses:
Animal raising  Animal keeping
and production  - livestock,    -    -    -    -    -   -   -    
                poultry, etc.
                Small poultry/
                small meat      C    C    C    C    -   -   -   Section
                processing                                      15.336.14
                facility
                Milk
Agriculture     processing,                                     Section
related         cheese          C    C    C    C    C   -   -   15.336.13
processing      manufacturing,
                etc.
Crop
production,                                                     Subsection
horticulture,   Field crops     P    -    P    -    -   -   -   15.335.03KKK
orchards, and
vineyards
                Plant nursery   P    -    P    -    -   -   -   Subsection
                                                                15.335.03LLL
                Vineyard        P    -    P    -    -   -   -   Subsection
                                                                15.335.03KKK
Agriculture     Agricultural    P    -    P    -    -   -   -   Subsection
related uses    machine shop                                    15.335.03TTT
                Agricultural
                supplies and    P    -    P    -    -   -   -   Subsection
                support                                         15.335.03MMM
                services
                Agricultural    -    -    -    -    -   -   -    
                tourism
                Agriculture
                related         -    -    -    -    -   -   -   Subsection
                industry - on                                   15.335.03MMM
                farm
                                                                Subsection
                Artisan/craft                                   15.335.03TTT;
                product         P    P    P    P    P   P   -   in EMU, allowed
                manufacturing                                   for non-
                and processing                                  residential
                                                                areas only
                Farm market     P    -    -    -    P   P   -   Subsection
                                                                15.335.03R
                Stable          -    -    -    -    -   -   -    
                                                                NRS 369 and
                                                                597; subsection
                Winery          P    P    -    -    P   P   -   15.335.03MMM
                                                                and design
                                                                review
Commercial                                               
uses:
Animal related  Animal rescue   C    C    -    -    C   -   -   15.336
services        facility
                                                                Subsection
                                                                15.335.03Y;
                Kennel          C    C    -    -    C   -   -   design review
                                                                and title 7,
                                                                chapter 1
                Veterinary
                clinic/hospital                                 Subsection
                - small animal  P    P    -    -    P   -   -   15.335.03Y and
                (with outdoor                                   design review
                kennel)
                Veterinary
                clinic/hospital                                 Subsection
                - small animal  P    P    -    -    P   P   -   15.335.03Y
                (without
                outdoor kennel)
                Veterinary                                      Subsection
                clinic/hospital P    P    -    -    P   -   -   15.335.03Y and
                - large animal                                  design review
Business        Copy center,                                    Subsection
services        mail/parcel     P    P    -    -    P   P   -   15.335.03RR
                services, etc.
                Event or                                        Subsection
                conference      -    -    -    -    P   P   -   15.335.03NNN
                center                                          and design
                                                                review
Financial       Bank with       P    P    -    -    P   P   -   Subsection
services        drive-thru                                      15.335.03F
                Bank without    P    P    -    -    P   P   -   Subsection
                drive-thru                                      15.335.03F
                Stand alone ATM P    P    -    -    P   P   -   Subsection
                                                                15.335.03F
Food and                                                        Subsection
beverage        Bar or          P    P    -    -    P   P   P   15.335.03OOO;
services        nightclub                                       title 5,
                                                                chapter 2
                                                                Subsection
                                                                15.335.03OOO
                Brew pub/craft  P    P    -    -    P   P   P   and design
                distillery                                      review; NRS
                                                                597.230,
                                                                597.235, 369
                                                                Subsection
                                                                15.335.04D6 for
                Food trucks/    C/T  C/T  C/T  C/T  C/T T   -   temporary use
                food carts                                      and chapter 336
                                                                for conditional
                                                                use
                Restaurant,     P    P    -    -    P   P   -   Subsection
                with drive-thru                                 15.335.03PP
                Restaurant,                                     Subsection
                without drive-  P    P    -    -    P   P   -   15.335.03OO
                thru
Lodging         B&B or inn      -    -    -    -    -   -   -    
facilities
                Guest/dude      -    -    -    -    -   -   -    
                ranch
                                                                Subsection
                Hotel, motel or -    -    -    -    P   P   -   15.335.03PPP
                lodge                                           and design
                                                                review
                RV park         -    -    -    -    -   C   -   Chapter 353
Offices,        Office, 25,000                                  Subsection
business and    square feet or  P    P    P    P    P   P   -   15.335.03DD
professional    less
                Office, greater
                than 25,000     C    C    C    C    C   C   -   Chapter 336
                square feet
Personal        Laundromat, dry                                 Subsection
services        cleaning pick-  P    P    -    -    P   P   -   15.335.03RR
                up and drop-off
                Massage or      P    P    -    -    P   P   -   Subsection
                tanning salon                                   15.335.03RR
                Personal care   P    P    -    -    P   P   -   Subsection
                                                                15.335.03RR
                Shoe repair     P    P    -    -    P   P   -   Subsection
                                                                15.335.03RR
                Tattoo parlors  P    P    -    -    P   P   -   15.335.03RR
Entertainment   Adult                                           Chapter 336 and
facilities      entertainment   C    C    -    -    C   -   C   title 5,
                                                                chapter 8
                                                                Chapter 336 and
                House of        -    -    -    -    -   -   C   title 5,
                prostitution                                    chapters 3 and
                                                                8
                Nonrestricted   -    -    -    -    -   C   -    
                gaming
                Performance                                     Subsection
                hall or movie   -    -    -    -    -   P   -   15.335.03GG and
                theater                                         design review
                Restricted                                      Title 5,
                gaming          -    -    -    -    -   P   -   chapter 1 and
                                                                NRS 463
Retail sales    Art gallery     P    P    -    -    P   P   -   Subsection
                                                                15.335.03RR
                Convenience                                     Subsection
                store with      P    P    P    P    P   P   -   15.335.03M
                petroleum sales
                Convenience                                     Subsection
                store without   P    P    P    P    P   P   -   15.335.03N
                petroleum sales
                General retail,
                less than       P    P    -    -    P   P   -   Subsection
                25,000 square                                   15.335.03RR
                feet
                General retail,
                greater than    C    C    -    -    C   C   -   Chapter 336
                25,000 square
                feet
                Grocery store   -    -    -    -    -   P   -   Subsection
                                                                15.335.03RR
                Recreational    -    -    -    -    -   -   -   15.336, NRS
                marijuana sales                                 453D
                Automobile,
Vehicles and    truck or        P    P    P    P    P   -   -   Subsection
equipment       motorcycle                                      15.335.03KK
                repair shop
                Automobile,
                truck or
                motorcycle, RV,                                 Subsection
                manufactured    P    P    -    -    P   -   -   15.335.03E and
                home, or boat                                   design review
                sales and
                service (new
                and used)
                Gasoline/diesel P    P    P    P    P   P   -   Subsection
                sales                                           15.335.03S
                Truck stop      P    P    P    P    P   P   -   Subsection
                                                                15.335.03HHH
Industrial                                               
uses:
                Aggregate, sand
                and gravel
Resource        extraction and
extraction and  processing      C    C    C    C    -   -   -   Chapter 336
processing      (including
                asphalt batch
                plants)
                Wood treatment  -    -    C    C    -   -   -   Chapter 336
                Fossil or
Energy          alternative
production and  fuel generating -    -    C    C    -   -   -   Chapter 336
distribution    facility,
                commercial
                Geothermal                                      Non-commercial
                generating                                      geothermal
                systems,                                        systems are
                commercial                                      allowed in all
                (non-           C    C    C    C    C   -   -   zoning
                commercial -                                    districts
                see specific                                    without a
                use                                             conditional use
                requirements)                                   permit
                Power
                distribution    P    P    P    P    P   P   P    
                lines, less
                than 60kV
                Power           C    C    C    C    C   -   -   Chapter 336
                substations
                                                                Chapter 336;
                                                                power
                                                                transmission
                                                                lines (greater
                                                                than 60kV)
                Power                                           located within
                transmission    C/P  C/P  C/P  C/P  C/P C/P C/P a designated
                lines, 60kV or                                  utility
                greater                                         corridor
                                                                identified in
                                                                Master Plan are
                                                                permitted
                                                                subject to
                                                                design review
                                                                Non-commercial
                Solar power                                     solar power
                generating                                      generating
                facility,                                       facilities are
                commercial      C    C    C    C    C   -   -   allowed in all
                (non-commercial                                 zoning
                - see specific                                  districts
                use                                             without a
                requirements)                                   conditional use
                                                                permit
                                                                Non-commercial
                                                                wind energy
                Wind energy                                     conversion
                conversion,                                     systems are
                commercial                                      allowed in all
                (non-commercial C    C    C    C    C   -   -   zoning
                - see specific                                  districts
                use                                             without a
                requirements)                                   conditional use
                                                                permit - refer
                                                                to subsection
                                                                15.335.03FFF
                                                                Section
                                                                15.336.16 and
                                                                Section
                                                                15.336.12 non-
                Energy storage                                  commercial
                systems         -    -    C    C    -   -   -   (i.e., private)
                                                                energy storage
                                                                facilities are
                                                                allowed in all
                                                                zoning
                                                                districts
                Agricultural                                    Subsections
Industrial      equipment and   P    P    P    P    P   -   -   15.335.03E, KK,
services        truck sales and                                 LL
                service
                Building
                material sales  C    C    C    C    C   -   -   Chapter 336
                and storage
                Contractor or                                   Subsection
                trade shops/    P    P    P    P    P   -   -   15.335.03P
                yards
                Equipment       P    P    P    P    P   -   -   Subsection
                rental                                          15.335.03BB
                Machine shops,                                  Subsection
                welding,        P    P    P    P    P   -   -   15.335.03TTT
                plumbing, etc.
                Salvage yard    -    -    P    P    -   -   -   Subsection
                                                                15.335.03SS
                Self storage/RV                                 Subsection
                storage         P    P    P    P    P   P   -   15.335.03WW and
                                                                design review
                Transfer        C    C    C    C    -   -   -   Chapter 336
                station
Manufacturing   Assembly, heavy C    C    P    P    -   -   -   Chapter 336
and production
                Assembly, light P    P    P    P    P   P   -   Subsection
                                                                15.335.03UUU
                Brewery, estate                                 Chapter 336;
                distillery,     C    C    C    C    C   -   -   NRS 369, 597
                winery
                Hazardous waste -    -    C    C    -   -   -   Chapter 336
                processing
                Manufacturing
                and             C    C    P    P    -   -   -   Chapter 336
                fabrication,
                heavy
                Manufacturing
                and             P    P    P    P    P   P   -   Subsection
                fabrication,                                    15.335.03UUU
                light
                Medical/
                recreational
                marijuana                                       Design review;
                cultivation/    P    P    P    P    P   -   -   NRS 453A, 453D
                processing/
                testing
                facility
                Outdoor         C    C    C    C    C   C   C   15.336
                processing
                Hazardous
Warehousing     material        -    -    C    C    -   -   -   Chapter 336
                storage
                Tank farm, over -    -    C    C    -   -   -   Chapter 336
                100,000 gallons
                Warehouse and                                   Subsection
                distribution    P    P    P    P    P   -   -   15.335.03EEE
                facilities
 
TABLE 15.320-5
TABLE OF ALLOWED USES - OPEN SPACE AND PUBLIC FACILITIES ZONING DISTRICTS
P = Permitted; C = Conditional use permit required; T = Temporary use permit
required; - = Not permitted
Use Category Use Type Open Space Public Facilities Use Specific Regulations
                                                   (Code Reference)
                                             Public     Use Specific
Use Category     Use Type         Open Space Facilities Regulations
                                                        (Code Reference)
Public,
institutional,                                        
and civic uses:
Community and    Adult or child
cultural         care, 6 or fewer -          P           
facilities       adults/children
                 Adult or child                         Subsection
                 care, 7 or more  -          P          15.335.03CC and
                 adults/children                        design review
                 General Aviation -          C          Chapter 330
                 Airport
                 Government                             Subsection
                 administrative   -          P          15.335.03III and
                 and civic                              design review
                 buildings
                 Public assembly,                       Subsection
                 including                              15.335.03JJ and
                 churches (total  -          P          design review
                 worship/hall                           (Use of a
                 seating capacity                       commercial coach
                 350 or less)                           requires a CUP)
                 Public assembly,
                 including                              Chapter 336 (Use
                 churches (total  -          C          of a commercial
                 worship/seating                        coach requires a
                 capacity exceeds                       CUP)
                 350)
                 Public safety                          Subsection
                 facility         -          P          15.335.03III and
                                                        design review
                 Social,          -          -           
                 fraternal lodges
Health care      Hospital         -          C          Chapter 336
facilities
                 Intermediate
                 care facility,   -          C          Chapter 336
                 nursing home,
                 rehab center
                 Medical
                 marijuana        -          -          15.336, NRS 453A
                 dispensary
                 Medical or
                 dental office or                       Subsection
                 clinic (25,000   -          P          15.335.03DD
                 square feet or
                 less)
                 Medical or
                 dental office or
                 clinic (greater  -          C          Chapter 336
                 than 25,000
                 square feet)
Recreational     Athletic fields  P          P          Subsection
facilities       and courts                             15.335.03JJJ
                 Campground       C          C          Chapter 336
                 Community        P          P          Subsection
                 gardens                                15.335.03L
                 Equestrian                             Subsection
                 facilities       P          P          15.335.03AAA and
                                                        design review
                 Golf course or                         Subsections
                 driving range    -          P          15.335.03O, T and
                                                        design review
                 Indoor                                 Subsection
                 recreation/      -          P          15.335.03HH and
                 sports/fitness                         design review
                 facility
                 Outdoor                                Subsection
                 concerts, rodeo,                       15.335.04D9
                 special events   T          T          (Rodeos must
                 or festivals                           comply with title
                                                        7, chapter 1)
                 Paintball
                 facility -       C          C          Chapter 336
                 outdoor
                 Parks            P          P          Subsection
                                                        15.335.03JJJ
                 Playground       P          P          Subsection
                                                        15.335.03JJJ
                 Private
                 residential      -          -           
                 recreation
                 facility
                 Shooting range - C          C          Chapter 336
                 outdoor
                 Skeet/trap
                 shooting range/  C          C          Chapter 336
                 course
                                                        Chapter 336 (Use
Educational      School, K - 12   -          C          of a commercial
facilities                                              coach requires a
                                                        CUP)
                 Post-secondary,
                 trade, or        -          C          Chapter 336
                 technical
                 education
                 Fossil or
                 alternative fuel
Public utilities generating       -          C          Chapter 336
                 facility,
                 commercial
                 Geothermal
                 generating       -          C          Chapter 336
                 systems,
                 commercial
                                                        Non-commercial
                                                        geothermal
                 Geothermal                             systems are
                 generating       -          P          allowed in all
                 systems, non-                          zoning districts
                 commercial                             without a
                                                        conditional use
                                                        permit
                                                        Power
                 Power                                  distribution
                 distribution     P          P          lines less than
                 lines (less than                       60kV are allowed
                 60kV)                                  in all zoning
                                                        districts
                 Power            -          C          Chapter 336
                 substations
                                                        Chapter 336;
                                                        power
                 Power                                  transmission
                 transmission                           lines located
                 lines and                              within a
                 substations      C/P        C/P        designated
                 (60kV or                               utility corridor
                 greater)                               identified in
                                                        Master Plan are
                                                        permitted subject
                                                        to design review
                 Public drinking
                 water - pumping,                       Subsection
                 storage,         P          P          15.335.03VVV and
                 treatment and                          design review
                 distribution
                 Public service
                 equipment                              Subsection
                 facility -       -          P          15.335.03P and
                 maintenance and                        design review
                 storage
                 Public sewage -
                 collection,
                 treatment,       C          C          Chapter 336
                 storage, and
                 disposal
                 Solar power
                 generating       -          C          Chapter 336
                 facility,
                 commercial
                                                        Non-commercial
                                                        solar power
                 Solar power                            generating
                 generating                             systems are
                 facility, non-   -          P          allowed in all
                 commercial                             zoning districts
                                                        without a
                                                        conditional use
                                                        permit
                 Wind energy                            Section
                 conversion,      -          C          15.336.07
                 commercial
                                                        Non-commercial
                                                        wind energy
                                                        conversion
                                                        systems are
                 Wind energy                            allowed in all
                 conversion, non- -          P          zoning districts
                 commercial                             without a
                                                        conditional use
                                                        permit - refer to
                                                        subsection
                                                        15.335.03FFF
 
(Ord. 603, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 607, 9-19-2019; Ord. 613, 12-3-2020; Ord. 628,
7-7-2022; Ord. 631, 8-4-2022; Ord. 632, 10-6-2022; Ord. 634, 6-1-2023; Ord.
637, 11-7-2024; Ord. 640, 6-18-2025)
CHAPTER 330
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
SECTION:
15.330.01: Purpose
15.330.02: Development Standards By Development Type
15.330.03: Standards Applicable To All Districts
15.330.04: Alternative Equivalent Compliance
15.330.01: PURPOSE:
The standards contained in this title are adopted to achieve the following:
   A.   Encourage greater variety of housing types, development styles, site
planning and density mixes in order to provide more diversity and visual
interest in the County's residential development, while preserving the
character of each community.
   B.   Encourage the development of neighborhoods that provide a high quality
living environment and generate civic pride.
   C.   Encourage residential development that reinforces a strong community-
oriented identity.
   D.   Encourage building design that complements surrounding development.
   E.   Encourage building design that respects the predominant characteristics
of neighborhood development in areas that possess strong existing development
character, such as height, massing, setbacks, materials and architectural
style.
   F.   Encourage designs that minimize views of garages and utilize side and
rear entry garages, as well as detached garages.
   G.   Encourage facades to be designed so as to include entries, porches and
other architectural elements that relate to the human scale.
   H.   Encourage residential entries to be located on the front facade with
direct access to the sidewalk or street. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.330.02: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS BY DEVELOPMENT TYPE:
The following development standards are contained in this title and shall be
applicable as indicated by the type of development undertaken in accordance
with this title.
Chapter Standards
Chapter    Standards
335        Land use performance based standards
337        Industrial development and performance standards
340        Residential design standards general
341        Single family residential design standards
342        Residential duplex development design standards
343        Residential cluster development standards
344        Residential cottage housing development standards
345        Residential townhouse development standards
346        Residential zero lot line development standards
347        Residential alley loaded development standards
348        Multi-family residential development standards
349        Planned unit development standards
351        Manufactured housing standards
352        Manufactured housing park development standards
360        Commercial development and performance standards
401        Parking and loading requirements
402        Landscape standards
403        Reserved
404        Lighting standards
405        Access and circulation
800        Floodplain management
Appendix B Design Criteria and Improvement Standards on file in the County
 
(Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.330.03: STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO ALL DISTRICTS:
In addition to the development standards listed below, the property owner/
developer/operator shall be responsible for knowledge of and compliance with
any and all Federal and/or State regulations in association with their business
operation.
   A.   Calculation Of Average Lot Width And Depth:
      1.   Average lot width: The distance between the side lot lines measured
at right angles to the lot depth at a point midway between the front and rear
line.
      2.   Average lot depth: Measured as the distance between the front and
rear lot lines measured in the mean direction of the side lines.
   B.   Density:
      1.   Acre, gross means a measure of land area (43,560 square feet).
      2.   Density means the number of dwelling units allowed for each gross
acre of land, and is determined by dividing the number of dwelling units on a
site by the gross acreage of the site, including dedicated rights-of-way,
private streets, and open space set asides and any other portions of the
originally undivided parcel.
In the determination of the number of residential units to be allowed on a
specific parcel of land, a fractional unit equal to or greater than one-half
(1/2) of a unit shall be rounded up to equal a full unit.
      3.   The number of dwelling units allowed on a site is based on the
presumption that all other applicable standards of this title shall be met. The
maximum density established for a zoning district is not a guarantee that such
densities may be obtained, nor a valid justification for varying or modifying
other dimensional or development standards.
   C.   Lot Size:
      1.   Minimum Lot Dimensions: Any lot that is created, developed, used, or
occupied shall meet the minimum lot size and frontage requirements for the
zoning district in which it is located, except as otherwise established in this
title for particular uses.
      2.   Number Of Principal Buildings Or Uses Per Lot:
         a.   Only one principal building that functions as the primary
residence for single-family or duplex use, with permitted accessory buildings,
may be located upon a lot or unplatted tract. Every dwelling shall face or
front upon and have legal means of access to a street or officially approved
place.
         b.   Where a lot or tract of land is used for multiple-family, mixed
use, commercial, or industrial purposes, more than one principal building
containing the residential, residential/commercial, commercial or industrial
use may be located upon the lot but only when such principal buildings conform
to all requirements of this title applicable to the uses and district, and when
all principal buildings face upon and have legal means of access to a street or
officially approved place.
   D.   Setbacks:
      1.   Required Setbacks:
         a.   A building, structure, or lot shall not be developed, used, or
occupied unless it meets the minimum setback requirements set forth in
subsections B of sections
15.310.01 through
15.316.02 of this title for the zoning district in which it is located, except
as otherwise established in this title or unless a variance or minor
modification has been granted. Setbacks shall be measured from the property
lines (as shown in the diagram below).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b3e37bf04674f7b3738d62883ef5a27ed6aa631/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2337.jpg]
 
         b.   Setbacks shall be unoccupied and unobstructed by any permanent
structure or portion of a permanent structure from thirty inches (30") above
grade.
         c.   As used in this section, the term "building" includes any
structure that by nature of its size, scale, bulk, dimension, or use
constitutes a visual obstruction or generates activity similar to that usually
associated with a building. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing,
the following structures shall be deemed to fall within this description:
            (1)   Gas pumps and overhead canopies or roofs.
            (2)   Fences running along lot boundaries adjacent to public
rights-of-way that exceed six feet (6') in height and are substantially opaque.
      2.   Projections Into Required Setbacks, General: The following
structures may project into required front, side, or rear setbacks as specified
in this subsection:
         a.   Paved Terraces: Paved terraces may project into any required
setback, provided that no structures placed there shall violate other
requirements of this title and are at least five feet (5') from the lot line.
         b.   Unroofed Landings, Decks, Stairs And Balconies: Unroofed landing,
decks, and stairs may project into required setbacks, provided that no portion
other than a handrail shall extend higher than thirty inches (30") above the
finished grade level. Unroofed balconies may project into a required side or
rear yard provided these projections are at least five feet (5') from the
property line.
         c.   Incidental Architectural Features: Cornices, eaves, canopies,
sunshades, gutters, chimneys, flues, belt courses, headers, sills, pilasters,
lintels, ornamental features, and other similar architectural features may
project not more than two feet (2') into any required setback provided these
projections are at least 7.5 feet from the lot line.
         d.   Roofs Over Porches And Other Exterior Approaches: Roofs over
porches, stairways, landings, terraces, or other exterior approaches to
pedestrian doorways may encroach up to five feet (5') into a front setback. The
covered porch or entrance area encroaching into the setback shall remain
exterior to the building and enclosed by no more than a railing.
         e.   Projections Into Easements And Rights-Of-Ways Prohibited:
Projections shall not extend or encroach into any public or private easement(s)
or right(s)-of-way.
         f.   Handicap Ramps: Handicap access ramps may be located within the
required front, side, and rear setbacks.
      3.   Contextual Front Setbacks: The following exceptions to the front
setback requirements for dwellings abutting local streets, not collector or
arterial streets, are authorized for a lot in any district.
         a.   If there are dwellings on both abutting lots with front setbacks
of less than the required depth for the district, the front setback of the lot
need not exceed the average front setback of the abutting dwellings.
         b.   If there is a dwelling on one abutting lot with a front setback
of less than the required depth for the district, the front setback for the lot
need not exceed a depth one-half (1/2) way between the depth of the abutting
lot and the required front setback depth.
      4.   Double-Frontage Lots: In the case of double-frontage lots, front
setbacks shall be provided on both frontages.
   E.   Building Height:
      1.   Height Requirements Generally: No building shall be erected or
altered that will exceed the height limit for the respective zoning district,
unless otherwise provided in this chapter or elsewhere in this title.
      2.   Height Exceptions For Appurtenances: Except as specifically provided
elsewhere in this title, the height limitations contained in this title do not
apply to cupolas, flagpoles, chimneys, parapets, antennas, heating and
ventilation equipment, stairwell towers or similar appurtenances and religious
symbols such as crosses; provided, however, the following:
         a.   The appurtenance does not interfere with Federal Aviation
Regulations;
         b.   The appurtenance does not extend more than five feet (5') above
the maximum permitted building height, except for flagpoles, church belfries,
and antennas that must be of greater height in order to function;
         c.   The appurtenance is not constructed for the purpose of providing
additional floor area in the building; and
         d.   The appurtenance is functional.
      3.   Exceptions To Height Limits: The height limits of buildings and
structures contained in this title may be modified as follows:
         a.   In a Residential Zoning District with a height limit of less than
forty five feet (45'), public and quasi-public buildings, schools, houses of
worship, hospitals and other institutions permitted in the zone, may be erected
to a maximum height of forty five feet (45'); provided, that all required
setbacks shall be increased by two feet (2') for each additional one foot (1')
of height that the building exceeds the maximum height of the zone and the
appropriate fire protection district verifies that the building has complied
with the adopted fire codes and sufficient access to allow for emergency
vehicles to maneuver around the building.
         b.   In an Agriculture, Non-Irrigated Agriculture, Resource, Public
Land or the larger lot Rural Residential Zoning Districts (RR-20, RR-10 and RR-
5) with a height limit of less than forty five feet (45'), structures may be
erected to a maximum of forty five feet (45'); provided, that all required
setbacks shall be increased by two feet (2') for each additional one foot (1')
of height that the structure exceeds the maximum height of the zone. The
following typical non- residential structures, such as (including, but limited
to) barns, silos, mine head frames, hay sheds are allowed up to seventy five
feet (75') in height. Any such typical non-residential structures that exceed
seventy five feet (75') would be subject to the review of a conditional use
permit, following the application requirements and procedures contained in
chapter 230 of this title and the appropriate fire protection district verifies
that the building has complied with the adopted fire codes and sufficient
access to allow for emergency vehicles to maneuver around the building.
         c.   In Suburban Commercial/Mixed-Use Zoning Districts with a height
limit of less than forty five feet (45'), structures may be erected to a
maximum of forty five feet (45'); provided, that the exterior vertical wall of
each floor above the second story or twenty feet (20'), whichever is greater,
shall be set back from the ground floor exterior wall a minimum distance of two
feet (2') for each additional one foot (1') of height that the structure
exceeds the maximum height of the zone.
      4.   Measurement: The height of buildings and structures shall be the
distance measured vertically from any point on a proposed or existing top of
structure, roof or eaves to the natural or finished grade (whichever is more
restrictive) located directly below said point of the top of structure, roof or
eaves. Within any building footprint, height shall be measured vertically from
any point on a proposed or existing top of structure, roof or eaves (including
but not limited to the roofing material) to the natural grade directly below
said point on a proposed or existing top of structure, roof or eave (refer to
example below).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b3e37bf04674f7b3738d62883ef5a27ed6aa631/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2339.jpg]
 
   F.   Sidewalks:
      1.   The owner of residential and nonresidential property is responsible
for:
         a.   The repair and reconstruction of a sidewalk in the public right-
of-way that abuts their property if the owner has caused the need for such
repair or reconstruction; and
         b.   The general maintenance of the sidewalk including without
limitation, sweeping, removal of snow, ice and weeds and maintenance of any
grass, shrubs or trees that encroach on the sidewalk. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018;
amd. Ord. 607, 9-19-2019)
15.330.04: ALTERNATIVE EQUIVALENT COMPLIANCE:
   A.   Purpose And Scope: To encourage creative and unique design,
"alternative equivalent compliance" allows development to occur in a manner
that meets or exceeds the intent of this title, yet would do so through an
alternative design that does not strictly adhere to this title's standards.
This is not a general waiver of regulations. Rather, this authorizes a site-
specific plan that can be quantified as equal to or better than the strict
application of the standard listed in this title.
   B.   Applicability: The alternative equivalent compliance procedure is
available only for the following chapters of this title:
      1.   Chapter 236: "Wireless Communications Facilities";
      2.   Chapter 335: "Performance Based Standards";
      3.   Chapter 336: "Performance Standards For Conditional Uses";
      4.   Chapter 337: "Performance Requirements For Industrial Uses";
      5.   Chapter 340: "Residential Design Standards";
      6.   Chapter 348: "Multi-Family Residential Design Standards";
      7.   Chapter 360: "Commercial And Mixed-Use Design Standards";
      8.   Chapter 401: "Off-Street Parking And Loading";
      9.   Chapter 402: "Landscape Standards";
      10.   Chapter 404: Exterior Lighting;
      11.   Chapter 405: Access and circulation.
   C.   Pre-Application Conference Required: An applicant proposing alternative
equivalent compliance shall request and attend a pre- application conference
(per chapter 201 of this title) prior to submitting application materials for
the applicable permit(s) to discuss the project, the applicable code standards,
and the proposed method of alternative equivalent compliance. The application
should include sufficient explanation and justification, in both written and
graphic form, for the requested alternative equivalent compliance.
   D.   Decision-Making Responsibility: Final approval of any alternative
equivalent compliance proposed under this section shall be the responsibility
of the decision-making body responsible for the final decision upon the type of
application for which the alternative equivalent compliance is being proposed.
Administratively approved projects/projects containing uses identified as
"permitted" in the land use tables contained in chapter 320 of this title which
proposed alternative equivalent compliance methods shall receive written
approval of the alternative equivalent compliance from the Director.
   E.   Criteria: Alternative equivalent compliance may be approved if the
applicant demonstrates that the following criteria have been met by the
proposed alternative and would:
      1.   Achieve the intent of the subject standard to the same or higher
degree than the subject standard;
      2.   Advance the goals and policies of the Comprehensive Master Plan and
this title to the same or higher degree than the subject standard;
      3.   Result in benefits to the community that are equivalent to or
greater than benefits associated with the subject standard; and
      4.   Impose no greater impacts on adjacent properties than would occur
through compliance with the specific requirements of this title.
   F.   Effect Of Approval: Alternative compliance shall apply only to the
specific site for which it is requested and shall not establish a precedent for
approval of any other development requests for alternative equivalent
compliance. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
CHAPTER 335
PERFORMANCE BASED STANDARDS
SECTION:
15.335.01: Introduction
15.335.02: How To Use This Chapter
15.335.03: Uses Permitted Based On Standards
15.335.04: Temporary Uses Permitted Based On Standards
15.335.01: INTRODUCTION:
The purpose of this chapter is to describe those uses, which may be approved
administratively by the Director, known as performance based standards ("PBS")
uses. Performance based uses are those which can be made compatible within a
given zoning district as long as pre-established standards are met which will
mitigate for identified potential negative effects of the use. PBS uses provide
landowners with more flexibility and certainty in using their property yet
afford protection from anticipated impacts to neighboring landowners. (Ord.
603, 11-1-2018)
15.335.02: HOW TO USE THIS CHAPTER:
The uses based on performance standards are listed in section
15.335.03, table 15.335-1 of this chapter. At the beginning of each section is
a statement showing which zoning districts allow the performance based use. The
standards that must be met to permit the use are then listed. It should be
emphasized that the performance standards are in addition to the regular
development standards that all development is obligated to comply with under
the terms of this title, such as off-street parking requirements (chapter 401
of this title) and landscaping requirements (chapter 402 of this title).
Uses that do not meet the performance based standards contained in this chapter
may be considered as a conditional use under the requirements of chapter 230 of
this title unless specifically prohibited on the Table of Allowed Uses.
Prior to establishment of any use permitted by this chapter subject to design
review as specified in section
15.320.03, "Land Use Tables By District", of this title, the user shall submit
and receive approval of a design review application pursuant to chapter 235 of
this title. The applicant must acknowledge the requirements of this chapter and
agree to discontinue or modify any use not in compliance with the requirements
contained herein. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.335.03: USES PERMITTED BASED ON STANDARDS:
TABLE 15.335-1
PERMITTED USE REFERENCE
Land Use Reference
Land Use                                                          Reference
Accessory building                                                15.335.03A2
Accessory dwelling unit                                           15.335.03A1
Accessory uses                                                    15.335.03B
Adult or child daycare, 7 or more adults or children              15.335.03CC
Agricultural auction house                                        15.335.03C
Agricultural machine shop                                         15.335.03TTT
Agricultural related industry, on farm                            15.335.03MMM
Agricultural supplies and support services                        15.335.03MMM
Agricultural tourism                                              15.335.03MMM
Animal keeping - livestock, poultry, etc.                         15.335.03GGG
Art gallery                                                       15.335.03RR
Artisan product manufacturing and processing                      15.335.03TTT
Assembly, light                                                   15.335.03UUU
Athletic fields and courts                                        15.335.03JJJ
Automobile, motorcycle, RV or boat repair shop                    15.335.03KK
Automobile, motorcycle, RV or boat sales, new and used            15.335.03E
Automobile rental                                                 15.335.03D
Bank, financial institution, automated teller machine (ATM),      15.335.03F
freestanding automated teller machine (ATM)
Bar or nightclub                                                  15.335.03OOO
Barn, greenhouse, as primary structure                            15.335.03G
Bed and breakfast or inn                                          15.335.03H
Brew pub/craft distillery                                         15.335.03OOO
Catering service                                                  15.335.03I
Cemetery                                                          15.335.03J
Community garden                                                  15.335.03L
Contractor or trade shops/yards and public service equipment      15.335.03P
facility - maintenance and storage
Convenience store with petroleum sales                            15.335.03M
Convenience store without petroleum sales                         15.335.03N
Copy center, mail/parcel services, etc.                           15.335.03RR
Country club with golf course                                     15.335.03O
Day camp, summer camp, civic group camp facility                  15.335.03Q
Equestrian facilities                                             15.335.03AAA
Equipment rental                                                  15.335.03BB
Event or conference center                                        15.335.03NNN
Farm market                                                       15.335.03R
Field crops                                                       15.335.03KKK
Gasoline/diesel sales                                             15.335.03S
General retail, less than 25,000 square feet                      15.335.03RR
Golf course, public or private                                    15.335.03T
Government administrative and civic buildings                     15.335.03III
Government buildings, storage only                                15.335.03U
Government buildings, storage only, with outdoor storage area     15.335.03V
Grocery store                                                     15.335.03RR
Group living, 10 or fewer residents                               15.335.03NN
Guest/dude ranch                                                  15.335.03H
Home based business                                               15.335.03X
Home occupation, general                                          15.335.03W
Hospital                                                          15.335.03RRR
Hotel, motel or lodge                                             15.335.03PPP
Kennel and veterinary clinics/hospitals                           15.335.03Y
Laundromat, dry cleaning pick-up and drop-off                     15.335.03RR
Machine shops, welding, plumbing, etc.                            15.335.03TTT
Manufacturing and fabrication, light                              15.335.03UUU
Massage or tanning salon                                          15.335.03RR
Milk processing, cheese manufacturing, etc.                       15.335.03SSS
Multifamily residential                                           15.335.03AA
Museums                                                           15.335.03III
Office, professional/medical/dental/clinic, 25,000 square feet or 15.335.03DD
less
Outdoor display and sales                                         15.335.03EE
Outdoor storage                                                   15.335.03FF
Parks                                                             15.335.03JJJ
Performance hall or movie theater                                 15.335.03GG
Personal care                                                     15.335.03RR
Plant nursery                                                     15.335.03LLL
Playgrounds                                                       15.335.03JJJ
Public assembly, including churches (total worship/hall seating   15.335.03JJ
capacity 350 or less)
Public drinking water - pumping, storage, treatment and           15.335.03VVV
distribution
Public safety facility                                            15.335.03III
Recreational facility, indoor                                     15.335.03HH
Recyclable materials drop off                                     15.335.03II
Repair shop, farm machinery                                       15.335.03LL
Repair shop, small engine                                         15.335.03MM
Restaurant, excluding drive-thru                                  15.335.03OO
Restaurant with drive-thru facility                               15.335.03PP
Restaurants, mobile - food trucks, outdoor vendors and carts      15.335.03QQ
Salvage yard                                                      15.335.03SS
Sawmill, firewood processing and wood chipping operations         15.335.03TT
Scientific research and development                               15.335.03VV
Scientific research and development, accessory to agriculture     15.335.03UU
Self storage/RV storage                                           15.335.03WW
Shoe repair                                                       15.335.03RR
Shooting range, indoor                                            15.335.03XX
Social, fraternal lodges                                          15.335.03K
Sports and recreation instruction or camps                        15.335.03YY
Storage building sales, with display area                         15.335.03ZZ
Swim club, tennis club, country club                              15.335.03BBB
Towing service, with salvage                                      15.335.03CCC
Towing service, with towed vehicle storage yard, no salvage or    15.335.03DDD
part sales
Transfer station                                                  15.335.03QQQ
Truck stop                                                        15.335.03HHH
Vineyard                                                          15.335.03KKK
Warehouse and/or distribution                                     15.335.03EEE
Wind energy conversion systems, accessory use, on site use only   15.335.03FFF
Winery                                                            15.335.03MMM
 
   A.   Accessory Dwelling Units And Accessory Buildings:
      1.   Accessory Dwelling Unit:
         a.   Accessory dwelling units in Agricultural, Resource, Residential,
Commercial/Mixed-Use, and Employment Districts shall not exceed fifty percent
(50%) of the square footage of the livable area of the primary structure or one
thousand one hundred (1,100) square foot of gross floor area, whichever is
less. Only one (1) accessory dwelling unit is permitted per individual parcel.
One property owner of several parcels cannot aggregate all of the accessory
dwelling units permitted for each individual parcel onto one or more parcel
under the same ownership.
         b.   “Tiny houses”, as defined by the 2018 International Residential
Code (IRC), are “a dwelling that is 400 square feet or less in floor area
excluding lofts” and as “a single unit providing complete independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation”. Tiny Houses, as defined in this
provision, are permitted in zoning districts that permit accessory dwelling
units provided the units are constructed in accordance with IRC standards and
are placed upon a foundation design stamped by a NV-licensed professional
engineer.
         c.   In Residential Districts, the accessory dwelling unit shall be
sited to the rear of the primary structure or to the side as a secondary
option.
         d.   Accessory dwelling units shall meet the principal building
setbacks listed in chapters 310 through 314 of this title for the zoning
district.
         e.   The accessory dwelling unit height shall not exceed the height of
the principal structure.
         f.   The exterior of the accessory dwelling unit must be compatible
with the principal residence in terms of color, siding, roof pitch, window
detailing, roofing materials, and foundation or skirting appearance as
determined by the Director.
         g.   Adequate off-street parking must be provided for any vehicles
owned by occupants of the accessory unit.
      2.   Accessory Building:
         a.   Accessory building on lots less than two (2) acres:
            (1)   The total square footage for all accessory building
footprints on a lot shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the total lot area
provided all required setbacks are maintained.
            (2)   Accessory buildings shall not be located closer to an
adjacent road than the principal structure. Exception - double frontage lots
may place an accessory building to the rear of the principal structure so long
as the principal building setback is met along the property lines adjacent to
the street.
            (3)   Accessory buildings up to fifteen feet (15') in height shall
meet the front setback requirements of the principal structure. The side and
rear setback shall be no less than five feet (5'). Buildings greater than
fifteen feet (15') in height shall meet the principal building setbacks listed
in chapters 310 through 314 of this title.
            (4)   Accessory buildings shall be subject to all other
dimensional, impermeable and structural coverage requirements listed in
chapters 310 through 316 of this title.
         b.   Accessory buildings on lots two (2) acres or greater:
            (1)   The total square footage for all accessory building
footprints on a lot shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the total area.
            (2)   Accessory buildings shall not be located closer to an
adjacent road than the principal structure. Exception - for lots five (5) acres
or larger, accessory buildings may be located at least one hundred feet (100')
from a road. Exception - double frontage lots may place an accessory building
to the rear of the principal structure so long as the principal building
setback is met along the property lines adjacent to the street.
            (3)   Accessory buildings up to fifteen feet (15') in height shall
meet the front and side setback requirements of the principal structure. The
rear setbacks shall be no less than five feet (5'). Accessory structures
greater than fifteen feet (15') in height shall meet the setback requirements
of the principal structure.
            (4)   Accessory buildings shall be subject to all other
dimensional, impermeable and structural coverage requirements listed in
chapters 310 through 316 of this title.
   B.   Accessory Uses: All accessory uses shall comply with the following
general standards:
      1.   Compliance With This Title:
         a.   Dimensional Requirements And Specific Standards: All accessory
uses are subject to the dimensional requirements of the applicable zoning
district as well as the use specific standards in chapters 335, 340 and 350 of
this title. In the case of any conflict between the accessory use/structure
standards of this section and any other requirement of this title, the more
restrictive standards as determined by the Director shall control.
         b.   Standards Applicable To Principal Use: Accessory uses shall
comply with all standards of this title applicable to the principal use with
which they are associated. Parking requirements shall be met for both the
principal use and any accessory use per chapter 401 of this title unless the
applicant can demonstrate no additional parking is required or alternative
methods will address the parking demand as outlined in chapter 401 of this
title.
         c.   Barnyard Animals: No person shall keep any livestock or barnyard
animals except as provided below.
            (1)   On parcels zoned Rural Residential and Suburban Residential
greater than or equal to one gross acre in land area:
               (A)   Barnyard animals may be kept on lots or parcels one gross
acre or greater in land area.
               (B)   On lots or parcels greater than or equal to one-half (1/2)
gross acre but less than one gross acre in size existing as of September 1,
1995 located within the Mark Twain Estates Unit 10 Subdivision as described by
map number 32781, barnyard animals may be kept. Only two (2) horses per lot or
parcel are permitted under this provision.
               (C)   The number of barnyard animals including poultry kept on
property shall be limited to:
                  (i)   The quantity that will cause no harm to the animal(s);
                  (ii)   The quantity that will cause no harm to the
environment or ground water; and
                  (iii)   The quantity that will cause no harm to neighboring
lots or parcels and/or owners.
            (2)   On parcels zoned Suburban Residential where lots or parcels
are less than one gross acre in land area, a maximum of two (2) rabbits or four
(4) female chickens may be kept subject to the standards listed below. Lots or
parcels greater than or equal to one-half (1/2) gross acre but less than one
gross acre existing as of September 1, 1995 located within the Mark Twain
Estates Unit 10 Subdivision as described by map number 32781 are exempt from
this provision as per subsection B1c(1)(B) of this section.
               (A)   Rabbits and female chickens may be kept subject to the
following requirements:
                  (i)   The animals are kept in accordance with standards for
good animal husbandry practices;
                  (ii)   Coops, hutches and enclosures that house the barnyard
animals shall be cleaned regularly to prevent offensive odors from becoming a
nuisance;
                  (iii)   Coops, hutches and enclosures shall be located a
minimum of ten feet (10') from any property line; and
                  (iv)   The barnyard animals shall not be permitted to roam
free beyond the property line.
      2.   Dimensional Standards For Accessory Buildings And Structures:
         a.   Same Lot: The accessory use shall be conducted and/or located on
the same lot(s) as the principal use.
      3.   Same Ownership Required: The principal use and the accessory use
shall be under the same ownership.
      4.   Same Utility Meter Required: The principal use and the accessory use
shall utilize the same utility meter with the exception of an approved
accessory dwelling unit.
   C.   Agricultural Auction House:
      1.   An auction house, which includes any percentage livestock sales, may
not be sited within five hundred feet (500') of a residential use, measurement
to begin at the outermost facility housing animals. Auction houses not
featuring livestock sales will meet the standard setbacks of the zone.
      2.   Applicable in Rural Residential Zones only, an auction house must
front on either arterials or collector roads (major or minor, in each case).
      3.   Signs shall be permitted in accordance with chapter 403 of this
title.
      4.   All outside storage areas including dumpsters must be:
         a.   Sited to the rear of the building,
         b.   Within the setbacks required of the building's underlying zone,
and
         c.   Designed such that they are concealed from all adjacent
properties and public rights-of-way through installation of either fencing and/
or vegetative screening.
   D.   Automobile Rental:
      1.   The outdoor display area may not exceed sixty thousand (60,000)
square feet.
      2.   All outside storage areas including dumpsters must be:
         a.   Sited to the rear of the building,
         b.   Compliant with the setbacks required of the building's underlying
zone, and
         c.   Designed such that they are concealed from all adjacent
properties and public rights-of-way through installation of either fencing and/
or vegetative screening.
   E.   Automobile, Motorcycle, RV Or Boat Sales, Service And Rental (New And
Used):
      1.   The outdoor display area may not exceed sixty thousand (60,000)
square feet.
      2.   All outside storage areas including dumpsters must be:
         a.   Sited to the rear of the building,
         b.   Compliant with the setbacks required of the building's underlying
zone, and
         c.   Designed such that they are concealed from all adjacent
properties and public rights-of-way through installation of either fencing and/
or vegetative screening.
      3.   The facility must provide a buffer yard as described in chapter 402
of this title on all sides of the parking lot abutting public rights-of-way.
   F.   Bank, Financial Institution, Automated Teller Machine (ATM),
Freestanding Automated Teller Machine (ATM):
      1.   The use must front on either arterial or collector roads (major or
minor, in each case).
      2.   ATMs, freestanding ATMs as accessory use:
         a.   The facility's lighting shall be shielded to prevent light and
glare spillover onto adjacent residential properties.
         b.   Shall be located so that internal circulation for primary use is
not disturbed.
         c.   Materials shall be compatible with design and building materials
of the primary structure(s) on the site.
   G.   Barn, Greenhouse, As Primary Structure:
      1.   Permitted only when agriculture is the primary use of the parcel and
no residential use is present.
      2.   May not be used as a dwelling unit.
      3.   Must meet setbacks of zoning district for primary structure.
      4.   Electric hookup is allowed to provide power to the structure,
provide power for a well pump or other associated agricultural uses needing
electric power as deemed acceptable by the Director. However, septic is not
allowed until a residential use is approved on the property.
   H.   Bed And Breakfast, Lodge Or Inn, Guest/Dude Ranch:
      1.   The facility shall be operated at all times by the resident owner or
the caretaker of the facility.
      2.   The facility shall meet the requirements of all other applicable
local and State regulatory agencies, including the State Board of Health.
      3.   No room shall be rented for a period longer than twenty one (21)
consecutive days at a time.
      4.   The decision-making body may approve the following accessory uses
when these accessory uses are included as a part of the request submitted by
the property owner and any potential impacts to neighboring properties have
been adequately mitigated:
         a.   Weddings;
         b.   Civic, business, corporate and religious or other retreats;
         c.   Seminars;
         d.   Private catered dinners; and
         e.   Small seasonal parties.
      5.   The decision-making body may limit the total number of guests
permitted at any time during the accessory events.
      6.   The hours of operation for events that occur outdoors and include
amplification equipment must end no later than eight o'clock (8:00) P.M.
      7.   Any area to be used as a party, reception, garden or other guest
amenity area shall be located a minimum of fifty feet (50') from the property
line of any Residentially zoned or used property.
      8.   The facility must provide at a minimum one parking space per guest
bedroom and one parking space for each two (2) employees. Additional parking
may be required in order to have accessory uses as listed above.
      9.   The facility must provide a buffer yard as described in chapter 402
of this title on all sides of the parking lot abutting public rights-of-way.
   I.   Catering Service:
      1.   The maximum total square footage shall not exceed five thousand
(5,000) square feet for all enclosed structures.
      2.   All outside storage areas including dumpsters must be:
         a.   Sited to the rear of the building,
         b.   Within the setbacks required of the building's underlying zone,
and,
         c.   Designed such that they are concealed from all adjacent
properties and public rights-of-way through installation of either fencing and/
or vegetative screening.
   J.   Cemetery:
      1.   The cemetery shall be sited so as to be within the primary setbacks
required for buildings in the district.
      2.   A boundary plat depicting the property to be used for interment
shall be recorded with the Office of the County Recorder and a copy provided to
the department.
      3.   A buffer shall be provided when the adjacent property is
Residentially zoned or used. See chapter 402 of this title.
      4.   Columbaria are permitted within Suburban Residential and Commercial
Districts when accessory to a religious institutional use.
   K.   Social, Fraternal Lodges:
      1.   All outside storage areas including dumpsters must be:
         a.   Sited to the rear of the building,
         b.   Compliant with the setbacks required of the building's underlying
zone, and,
         c.   Designed such that they are concealed from all adjacent
properties and public rights-of-way through installation of either fencing and/
or vegetative screening.
      2.   Parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of
chapter 401 of this title.
      3.   Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of
chapter 402 of this title.
      4.   The decision-making body may approve the following accessory uses
when these accessory uses are included as a part of the request submitted by
the property owner and any potential impacts to neighboring properties have
been adequately mitigated:
         a.   Weddings;
         b.   Civic, business, corporate and religious or other retreats;
         c.   Seminars;
         d.   Private catered dinners; and
         e.   Small seasonal parties.
      5.   The decision-making body may limit the total number of guests
permitted at any time during the accessory events.
      6.   The hours of operation for events that occur outdoors and include
amplification equipment must end no later than eight o'clock (8:00) P.M.
      7.   Any area to be used as a party, reception, garden or other guest
amenity area shall be located a minimum of fifty feet (50') from the property
line of any Residentially zoned or used property.
   L.   Community Garden, Accessory Use:
      1.   The primary use parking area shall serve as the parking area for the
community garden.
      2.   Emergency service access to the community garden site shall be
maintained if on street parking is utilized.
   M.   Convenience Store With Petroleum Sales:
      1.   The store must be located on a State highway, arterial or collector
roadway.
      2.   A conditional use permit is required if a convenience store with
petroleum sales is located on a parcel directly adjacent to Residentially zoned
property.
      3.   The store's lighting shall be shielded to prevent light and glare
spillover onto adjacent properties.
      4.   All outside storage areas including dumpsters must be:
         a.   Sited to the rear of the building,
         b.   Compliant with the setbacks required of the building's underlying
zone, and,
         c.   Designed such that they are concealed from all adjacent
properties and public rights-of-way through installation of either fencing and/
or vegetative screening.
   N.   Convenience Store Without Petroleum Sales:
      1.   The store must be located on a State highway, arterial or collector
roadway.
      2.   A conditional use permit is required if a convenience store with
petroleum sales is located on a parcel directly adjacent to Residentially zoned
property.
      3.   The store's lighting shall be shielded to prevent light and glare
spillover onto adjacent properties.
      4.   All outside storage areas including dumpsters must be:
         a.   Sited to the rear of the building,
         b.   Compliant with the setbacks required of the building's underlying
zone, and,
         c.   Designed such that they are concealed from all adjacent
properties and public rights-of-way through installation of either fencing and/
or vegetative screening.
   O.   Country Club With Golf Course:
      1.   Clubhouses shall meet the primary setbacks for the zoning district.
      2.   There shall be a one hundred foot (100') minimum setback between any
accessory buildings, swimming pool, lighted tennis court or any amenity area
and adjacent Residentially zoned or used property.
      3.   Parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of
chapter 401 of this title.
      4.   Lighting for amenity areas shall be designed such that it does not
spill over onto adjacent properties.
      5.   Outdoor swimming pools shall be protected by a fence, a minimum of
four feet (4') in height and equipped with a self- closing and positive self-
latching gate provided with hardware for permanent locking.
   P.   Contractor Or Trade Shops/Yards And Public Service Equipment Facility -
Maintenance And Storage:
      1.   All outside storage areas including dumpster areas must be:
         a.   Sited behind the rear wall of the building;
         b.   In compliance with the required setbacks of the zoning district
that the use is located in, and outside any required buffer yard;
         c.   Enclosed with a fence that is at least six feet (6') high;
         d.   Screened from adjacent properties, and from public and private
rights-of-way.
      2.   Such uses may not be located in any watershed protection area.
      3.   Uses shall meet all applicable landscaping standards in chapter 402
of this title. When occupying an existing structure, landscaping shall be
upgraded to meet requirements of chapter 402 of this title.
   Q.   Day Camp, Summer Camp, Civic Group Camp Facility:
      1.   Play areas, sports fields and parking areas must be a minimum of
five hundred feet (500') from any adjacent Residentially zoned or used property
line.
      2.   Parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of
chapter 401 of this title.
   R.   Farm Market:
      1.   Parking shall be provided so as to meet the requirements set forth
in chapter 401 of this title.
      2.   If the farm market uses an existing parking lot area serving
businesses or other uses, the parking required for the farmers market must not
take away from the required parking for the primary/other established uses on
the property. A parking analysis (as determined by the Director) may be
required to verify that parking requirements will be met.
      3.   The facility's lighting shall be shielded to prevent light and glare
spillover onto adjacent properties.
      4.   All vendors at the farmer's market, plus the farmer's market
organizer must possess a valid Lyon County business license.
      5.   Farm market booths and pedestrian areas shall not interfere with the
circulation or parking of vehicles in any required parking area of the site on
which the farm market is established.
         a.   Garbage receptacles shall be provided in convenient areas for use
by customers and emptied at a frequency so as to minimize any trash blowing
onto adjacent properties.
      6.   Farm markets shall comply with the requirements of Nevada Revised
Statutes 446.017 - 446.945, inclusive and NAC 446.732 - 446.759, inclusive.
      7.   Farm market areas shall be kept clean and free of trash, debris,
garbage and other refuse.
      8.   Garbage receptacles shall be provided in convenient areas for use by
customers and emptied at a frequency so as to minimize any trash blowing onto
adjacent properties.
   S.   Gasoline Sales:
      1.   The facility must front on a State highway, arterial or collector
roadway.
      2.   The facility's lighting shall be shielded to prevent light and glare
spillover onto adjacent properties.
      3.   All outside storage areas including dumpsters must be:
         a.   Sited to the rear of the building,
         b.   In compliance with the setbacks required of the building's
underlying zone, and,
         c.   Designed such that they are concealed from all adjacent
properties and public rights-of-way through installation of either fencing and/
or vegetative screening.
   T.   Golf Course, Public Or Private:
      1.   Clubhouses shall meet the primary setbacks for the zoning district.
      2.   Parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of
chapter 401 of this title.
      3.   Lighting for amenity areas shall be designed such that it does not
spillover onto adjacent properties.
   U.   Government Buildings, Storage Only:
      1.   Parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of
chapter 401 of this title.
      2.   Lighting for outdoor storage areas shall be designed such that it
does not spill over onto adjacent properties.
   V.   Government Buildings, Storage Only, With Outdoor Storage Area:
      1.   Outside storage areas shall be located a minimum of fifty feet (50')
from any Residentially zoned or used property.
      2.   Parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of
chapter 401 of this title.
      3.   Lighting for outdoor storage areas shall be designed such that it
does not spill over onto adjacent properties.
   W.   Home Occupation, General: The following list identifies those
occupations which may be conducted from a residence in any district. The
purpose of the list is to function both as a guide and also to illustrate the
spirit and intent of what is a legitimate home occupation. Essentially, the
home occupation is conceived of as being reasonably permitted in a residential
setting because it does not compromise the residential character of the area. A
reasonable home occupation would not generate conspicuous traffic, would not
visually call unusual attention to the home nor would it ever generate
nonresidential level noise.
      Accounting, bookkeeping.
      Appraisal.
      Architecture.
      Computer repair/programming.
      Cottage food operations, conformant all requirement within Nevada Revised
Statutes 446.866.
      Daycare with six (6) or less children or adults.
      Drafting services.
      Dressmaking, alteration services, tailoring.
      Engineering and surveying.
      Financial planning and investment services.
      Fine arts or artisan's studio (creation of individual works only, no mass
production).
      Insurance sales.
      Interior decoration (no studio permitted).
      Legal services.
      Mail order business (order taking only, no stock in trade).
      Musical instruction, voice or instrument.
      Office work.
      One chair beauty or barber shop.
      Pet grooming (enclosed).
      Photo laboratory (no studio work).
      Planning.
      Real estate sales.
      Tutoring.
      Similar, low impact endeavors.
      1.   The use must be conducted entirely within the interior of the
residence, must be clearly incidental and secondary to residential occupancy,
and may not change the residential character of the dwelling.
      2.   The use of the dwelling for a home occupation may not exceed up to
twenty five percent (25%) of one floor of the principal building.
      3.   Residents of the dwelling must be engaged in the home occupation
with no more than one nonresident assistant employed.
      4.   No activity can take place as a home occupation which involves any
outdoor storage.
      5.   All parking needs brought about by the operation of the home
occupation must be met through off street parking (including any customer
parking). Driveways may be used to meet this requirement, however the driveway
used to provide off-street parking shall be provided on the parcel being used
for the home occupation use to the satisfaction of the Director.
      6.   All uses allowed under home occupations must maintain a valid County
business license and any State and/or Federal licenses (if necessary).
   X.   Home Based Business: The following lists those occupations, which may
be conducted as a home based business (HBB). The home based business differs
from the home occupation in that it is not required to be conducted within the
residence proper, but may be conducted in another building accessory to the
residence. Slightly more intense uses may occur within the HBB since it is
sited within less densely settled areas.
      Building contractor's storage yard including electrical, plumbing, and
mechanical.
      Cottage food operations, subject to compliance with Nevada Revised
Statutes 446 and inspections/licenses from State Health Department.
      Farm equipment repair work (on RR-10 and RR-20 zoned parcels with active
agricultural exemption only)
      Farm-To-Fork events, subject to compliance with Nevada Revised Statutes
446 and inspection/license from State Health Department.
      Fine arts or artisan's studio (not using equipment larger than hand
tools).
         Jewelry making.
         Leatherwork.
         Metalwork.
         Pottery work.
         Or similar fine art manufacture.
      Gunsmith.
      Homemade clothing.
      Landscape contractor.
      Lapidary.
      Limited equine boarding.
      Painting.
      Sculpture.
      Sign painting.
      Woodworking.
      Similar, low impact endeavors.
      1.   The home based business may be carried out in no more than one
building separate from the primary residence. Storage of materials used with
the home based business in a second accessory shed is permissible.
      2.   All outside storage areas including dumpsters must be:
         a.   Sited to the rear of the building,
         b.   In compliance with the setbacks required of the building's
underlying zone, and,
         c.   Designed such that they are concealed from all adjacent
properties and public rights-of-way through installation of either fencing and/
or vegetative screening.
      3.   All outdoor stored or used equipment and materials must be fully
screened either by fencing or landscaping from any abutting residential use or
public rights-of-way.
      4.   The accessory building in which the HBB is conducted may not exceed
the square footage of the footprint of the residence but in no event exceed the
allowances contained in subsection A of this section.
      5.   Nonresident employees may work in the HBB as follows:
         a.   Up to one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor space - One
nonresident employee.
         b.   One thousand (1,000) and over square feet of floor space - Two
(2) nonresident employees.
      6.   Hours of any HBB associated outdoor noise shall be limited to times
from dawn to dusk in any residential area.
      7.   Parcel must meet the standard minimum size requirements for the
district in which it is located.
      8.   Home based businesses which allow clients or customers to visit the
business may be subject to accessibility standards. Applicants should contact
the Building Department for requirements prior to applying for the home based
business permit.
      9.   All parking needs for employees of an HBB and any clients or
customers that may come to the HBB must be met through off-street parking.
      10.   All uses allowed under home based business must maintain a valid
business license and any State and/or Federal licenses (if necessary).
   Y.   Kennels - Breeder's And Commercial And Veterinary Hospital/Clinics:
      1.   Any kennel or veterinary facility which is not wholly enclosed
within a building shall be enclosed by a security fence at least six feet (6')
in height.
      2.   Animal odors shall not be detectable beyond the lot lines of the
property wherein the kennel or veterinary facility is located.
      3.   Dust and drainage from the kennel or veterinary facility enclosure
shall not create a nuisance or a hazard to adjoining property or uses.
      4.   Grooming services for the animals being boarded is allowed as an
incidental use provided the grooming services are conducted indoors.
      5.   All kennels or veterinary facility shall comply with the standards
set forth in title 7 of this Code, incorporated herein by reference.
      6.   The minimum distance between the outer edge of any buildings, animal
enclosures or fenced areas must be at least three hundred feet (300') from the
parcel boundary of any Residentially zoned or used properties. This includes
adjacent parcels and parcels located across street rights-of-way.
      7.   The number of animals boarded outside or partially outside of the
facility shall not exceed ten (10) animals over six (6) months of age. Animals
boarded entirely inside shall not be counted as part of this limitation.
      8.   The primary use, including all outside boarding areas, shall meet
the buffer standards of chapter 402 of this title.
      9.   This use shall be required to be separated from educational
institutions and places of worship by a distance of one thousand feet (1,000').
This distance shall be measured from the exterior property lines of the
facility to the nearest property line of the educational institution or place
of worship.
      10.   All outdoor lights must be shielded to direct light and glare onto
the facility's premises and may be of sufficient intensity to ensure security.
Lighting and glare must be deflected, shaded and focused away from any
adjoining property.
      11.   All storage areas including dumpsters must be:
         a.   Sited to the rear of the building,
         b.   In compliance with the setbacks required of the building's
underlying zone; and,
         c.   Designed such that they are concealed from all adjacent
properties and public rights-of-way through installation of either fencing and/
or vegetative screening.
   Z.   Reserved.
   AA.   Multifamily Residential:
      1.   The maximum allowed density for multifamily residential units in
Rural Commercial Mixed-Use Zoning Districts shall be six (6) dwelling units per
acre, and twelve (12) dwelling units per acre in Suburban Commercial Mixed-Use
Districts.
      2.   A density bonus of two (2) dwelling units per acre will be allowed
for projects which can successfully demonstrate the concept of a mixed-use
development as defined in chapter 1200 of this title, appendix A. This can
generally be accomplished through the submission of a site plan and appropriate
architectural drawings.
      3.   Must meet the adequate public facility standards within chapter 110
of this title.
      4.   Must meet the multi-family residential design standards contained in
chapter 348 of this title.
   BB.   Moving Van, Truck, Trailer Or Equipment Rental:
      1.   The outdoor display area may not exceed sixty thousand (60,000)
square feet.
      2.   All outside storage areas including dumpsters must be:
         a.   Sited to the rear of the building,
         b.   In compliance with the setbacks required of the building's
underlying zone with all primary and accessory structures, and
         c.   Designed such that they are concealed from all adjacent
properties and public rights-of-way through installation of either fencing and/
or vegetative screening.
      3.   Parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of
chapter 401 of this title.
      4.   Lighting for outdoor storage areas shall be designed such that it
does not spill over onto adjacent properties.
   CC.   Adult Or Child Daycare, Seven Or More Adults Or Children:
      1.   Use is not permitted in any residential portion of a mixed-use
development, unless the residential parcel is one acre or larger.
      2.   A copy of the Nevada State license issued to the facility is
required to be submitted to the Director.
      3.   Evidence that all necessary encroachment permits have been issued
for the facility. Applicant shall submit copies of the site plan as part of the
application.
      4.   Adequate access to and from the site to accommodate traffic
generated, including any required roadway improvements, shall be shown on the
site plan.
      5.   Drop off and pick up areas shall be interior to the site, out of the
public right-of-way, and designed so as not to interfere with internal
circulation and ingress/egress to the site.
      6.   The facility must have access to a County or State maintained road.
      7.   The facility must have a valid Lyon County business license.
   DD.   Office, Professional/Medical/Dental/Clinic:
      1.   Maximum square footage shall not exceed twenty five thousand
(25,000) square feet for all enclosed structures, if square footage threshold
is exceeded, a conditional use permit will be required.
      2.   All outside storage areas including dumpsters must be:
         a.   Sited to the rear of the building,
         b.   In compliance with the setbacks required of the building's
underlying zone, and
         c.   Designed such that they are concealed from all adjacent
properties and public rights-of-way through installation of either fencing and/
or vegetative screening.
      3.   Parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of
chapter 401 of this title.
   EE.   Outdoor Display And Sales:
      1.   Accessory To Commercial Use: Outdoor display and/or sale of
merchandise may be allowed as an accessory use for all commercial uses. It is
the intent of this title to allow the display of merchandise for sale, but not
where the display of such items impedes the flow of pedestrian or vehicular
traffic or creates an unsafe condition. The display of goods shall meet all of
the following requirements.
      2.   Where Permitted:
         a.   All outdoor display of goods shall be located immediately
adjacent to the storefront and not in drive aisles, loading zones, fire lanes,
or parking lots.
         b.   The area used for outdoor display or sales shall not occur on the
sides and rear of buildings and shall be limited to no more than one-quarter
(1/4) of the length of the store front, unless increased by the Director after
taking into account aesthetic and safety concerns or other relevant factors. In
the case of a shopping center, the "storefront" shall include the entire
frontage of the shopping center, meaning that the total amount of display for
all the in-line tenants combined shall not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of
the aggregate store front of the overall shopping center.
         c.   No goods shall be attached to a building's wall surface.
         d.   The height of the outdoor display shall not exceed six feet (6'),
unless an exception to this provision has been granted by the Director.
         e.   The outdoor display area shall take place on an improved surface
such as the sidewalk or pavement.
         f.   No outdoor displays shall be allowed in required landscape areas.
      3.   No Pedestrian Obstruction: At least five feet (5') along the parking
lot side of the display shall be maintained free of obstruction to allow for
pedestrian and handicap movement, such that handicapped pedestrians and others
do not have to enter the parking lot or drive aisle to walk around the display.
   FF.   Outdoor Storage: Outdoor storage may be allowed as an accessory use
through the development plan review process and subject to compliance with the
following requirements:
      1.   Each outdoor storage area shall be incorporated into the overall
design of the primary structure on the site and shall be located at the rear of
the primary structure.
      2.   Goods stored in an approved outdoor storage area shall be limited to
those sold on the premises as part of an associated primary use.
      3.   Each outdoor storage area shall be screened from view from all
property lines and adjacent rights-of-way by an opaque fence or wall that
incorporates at least one of the predominant materials and one of the
predominant colors used in the primary structure. The fence shall be of the
appropriate height that all outdoor storage areas are effectively screened.
Materials may not be stored higher than the height of the primary structure. A
landscaped earthen berm may be used instead of or in combination with a
required fence or wall.
      4.   No materials may be stored in areas intended for vehicular or
pedestrian circulation.
   GG.   Performance Hall Or Movie Theater:
      1.   Facility must provide entertainment, indoors. If outdoor
performances or theater is proposed, a conditional use permit will be required.
      2.   Facility must provide off-street parking in accordance with the
provisions of chapter 401 of this title.
      3.   Outdoor performances may be subject to the requirements of title 5,
chapter 7 of this Code and require an outdoor festival permit rather than a
conditional use permit.
      4.   All outside storage areas including dumpsters must be:
         a.   Sited to the rear of the building,
         b.   In compliance with the setbacks required of the building's
underlying zone, and
         c.   Designed such that they are concealed from all adjacent
properties and public rights-of-way through installation of either fencing and/
or vegetative screening.
      5.   When located adjacent to Residentially used or zoned property,
buffering shall be provided as referenced in section
15.402.04 of this title.
   HH.   Recreational Facility, Indoor:
      1.   All outside storage areas including dumpsters must be:
         a.   Sited to the rear of the building,
         b.   In compliance with the setbacks required of the building's
underlying zone, and
         c.   Designed such that they are concealed from all adjacent
properties and public rights-of-way through installation of either fencing and/
or vegetative screening.
      2.   Parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of
chapter 401 of this title.
   II.   Recyclable Materials Drop Off:
      1.   Must be designed such that adequate off loading and turn space exist
to allow for safe ingress and egress from site.
      2.   The drop-off area must meet the primary setbacks of the zone.
      3.   When located adjacent to Residentially zoned or used property, a
buffer in conformance to the requirements of chapter 402 of this title shall be
maintained.
   JJ.   Public Assembly, Including Churches:
      1.   Facilities with a seating capacity/worship hall at three hundred
fifty (350) or less are permitted by right. Facilities with a seating capacity/
worship hall of greater than three hundred fifty (350) require review and
approval of a conditional use permit as per chapter 230 of this title.
      2.   The use must front on an arterial or collector road.
      3.   Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
provisions of chapter 401 of this title.
      4.   The use must be located within the commercial/non-residential
portion of property if proposed in a Mixed Use Zone.
      5.   The decision-making body may approve the following accessory uses
when these accessory uses are included as a part of the request submitted by
the property owner and any potential impacts to neighboring properties have
been adequately mitigated:
         Civic, business, corporate and religious or other retreats.
         Private catered dinners.
         Seminars.
         Small seasonal parties.
         Weddings.
      6.   The decision-making body may limit the total number of guests
permitted at any time during the accessory events.
      7.   The hours of operation for events that occur outdoors and include
amplification equipment must end no later than eight o'clock (8:00) P.M.
      8.   Any area to be used as a party, reception, garden or other guest
amenity area shall be located a minimum of fifty feet (50') from the property
line of any Residentially zoned or used property.
   KK.   Automobile, Motorcycle, RV Or Boat Repair Shop:
      1.   All outside storage areas including dumpsters must be:
         a.   Sited to the rear of the building,
         b.   In compliance with the setbacks required of the building's
underlying zone, and,
         c.   Designed such that they are concealed from all adjacent
properties and public rights-of-way through installation of either fencing and/
or vegetative screening.
      2.   A buffer in conformance with chapter 402 of this title shall be
maintained.
   LL.   Repair Shop, Farm Machinery:
      1.   All outside storage areas including dumpsters must be:
         a.   Sited to the rear of the building,
         b.   In compliance with the setbacks required of the building's
underlying zone, and
         c.   Designed such that they are concealed from all adjacent
properties and public rights-of-way through installation of either fencing and/
or vegetative screening.
      2.   In the event the use abuts Residentially used or zoned property,
storage areas must be either screened by a solid fence or wall with a minimum
height of six feet (6') or must be set back from the adjacent residential
property line the distance of the minimum setback distance. Buildings and
storage areas shall be located a minimum of one hundred feet (100') from the
property line.
Note: If the use occurs on a large tract of land five (5) acres or more, the
buildings and storage areas are screened by existing vegetation or site
topography from adjacent properties and are not visible from any road right-of-
ways, the buffer requirement may be waived by the Director.
   MM.   Repair Shop, Small Engine:
      1.   All outside storage areas including dumpsters must be:
         a.   Sited to the rear of the building,
         b.   In compliance with the setbacks required of the building's
underlying zone, and
         c.   Designed such that they are concealed from all adjacent
properties and public rights-of-way through installation of either fencing and/
or vegetative screening.
      2.   In the event the use abuts Residentially used or zoned property,
buildings and storage areas shall be located a minimum of one hundred feet
(100') from the property line.
      3.   A buffer in conformance with chapter 402 of this title shall be
maintained.
Note: In the AG, NIA, RL, RR-20 and RR-10 Districts, if the use occurs on a
tract of land five (5) acres or more, the buildings and storage areas are
screened by existing vegetation or site topography from adjacent properties and
are not visible from any road right-of-ways, the buffer requirement may be
waived.
   NN.   Group Living, Ten Or Fewer Residents:
      1.   One group living facility may not locate within five hundred feet
(500') of another group living facility. Distance shall be measured from the
property line of the existing home.
      2.   Parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of
chapter 401 of this title.
      3.   Must obtain a Lyon County business license prior to establishment of
use.
      4.   Must obtain and maintain all necessary permits and approvals
required through State and/or Federal regulations.
      5.   Documentation of State and Federal permit approvals must be provided
to Lyon County Community Development prior to establishment of use.
      6.   Annual proof of State and Federal permits and/or licensing must be
provided to Lyon County Community Development Department. If permitting and
licensing is not provided, Lyon County can require shutdown of operation until
proof of all necessary State/Federal permitting and licensing is provided.
   OO.   Restaurant, Excluding Drive-Thru:
      1.   Use must front on an arterial or collector road.
      2.   Parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of
chapter 401 of this title.
      3.   Landscaping and buffering/screening shall be provided in accordance
with the requirements of chapter 402 of this title.
      4.   All outside storage areas including dumpsters must be:
         a.   Sited to the rear of the building,
         b.   In compliance with the setbacks required of the building's
underlying zone, and
         c.   Designed such that they are concealed from all adjacent
properties and public rights-of-way through installation of either fencing and/
or vegetative screening.
   PP.   Restaurant With Drive-Thru Facility:
      1.   All drive-thru entrances and exits must be at least two hundred
fifty feet (250') from an intersection.
      2.   Parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of
chapter 401 of this title.
      3.   Landscaping and buffering/screening shall be provided in accordance
with the requirements of chapter 402 of this title.
      4.   Adequate stacking shall be provided in drive-thru lanes so that
traffic is contained on site and does not interfere with circulation internally
or on any adjacent road or street right- of-way.
      5.   All outside storage areas including dumpsters must be:
         a.   Sited to the rear of the building,
         b.   In compliance with the setbacks required of the building's
underlying zone, and
         c.   Designed such that they are concealed from all adjacent
properties and public rights-of-way through installation of either fencing and/
or vegetative screening.
      6.   In the event the restaurant with a drive through locates adjacent to
any Residentially zoned parcel, the site plan must incorporate visual screening
along the property perimeter to visually conceal the drive through and vehicle
stacking lane from the adjacent residential property. Such screening shall be
provided to the satisfaction of the Director.
      7.   Menu order boards with speakers shall not be oriented toward any
directly adjacent Residentially zoned parcels.
   QQ.   Restaurants, Mobile - Food Trucks, Outdoor Vendors And Carts:
      1.   May not be located on a public sidewalk.
      2.   Must not impede safe movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic,
parking lot circulation or access to any public right- of-way or sidewalk.
      3.   Hours of operation limited to the hours between six o'clock (6:00)
A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. Extended hours may be permitted by temporary
use permit.
      4.   Must pick up all litter and provide a suitable container for litter
and trash.
      5.   Must be attended at all times.
      6.   Must prominently display all applicable licenses and permits.
      7.   All signs must be attached to the vehicle or cart.
      8.   Provide written permission from the property owner where setting up.
      9.   Secure a business license from the Lyon County Clerk's Office prior
to operating.
   RR.   General Retail, Less Than Twenty Five Thousand Square Feet: General
retail is inclusive of the following uses:
      Art gallery.
      Copy center, mail/parcel services, etc.
      Grocery store.
      Laundromat, dry cleaning pick-up and drop-off.
      Massage or tanning salon.
      Personal care.
      Shoe repair.
      Uses as determined by the Director to be similar in nature.
      1.   Parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of
chapter 401 of this title.
      2.   Landscaping and buffering/screening shall be provided in accordance
with the requirements of chapter 402 of this title.
      3.   The store's lighting shall be shielded to prevent light and glare
spillover onto adjacent residential properties.
      4.   Outside storage shall not be permitted.
   SS.   Salvage Yard:
      1.   Materials may not be vertically stacked so as to be visible to the
passing motorist.
      2.   All outside storage areas including dumpsters must be:
         a.   Sited to the rear of the building,
         b.   In compliance with the setbacks required of the building's
underlying zone for the primary and accessory buildings, and
         c.   Designed such that they are concealed from all adjacent
properties and public rights-of-way through installation of either fencing and/
or vegetative screening.
      3.   In the event the use abuts Residentially used or zoned property,
buildings and storage areas shall be located a minimum of one hundred fifty
feet (150') from the property line.
   TT.   Sawmill, Firewood Processing And Wood Chipping Operations:
      1.   A minimum of two (2) acres is required.
      2.   Any and all mechanized sawing/splitting/chipping equipment must be
located a minimum of one hundred feet (100') from boundary lines.
   UU.   Scientific Research And Development, Accessory To Agriculture:
      1.   Research must be related to agricultural activity occurring on site.
      2.   All outside storage areas including dumpsters must be:
         a.   Sited to the rear of the building,
         b.   In compliance with the setbacks required of the building's
underlying zone for the primary and accessory structures and facilities, and
         c.   Designed such that they are concealed from all adjacent
properties and public rights-of-way through installation of either fencing and/
or vegetative screening.
      3.   The facility shall be designed such that it absorbs or dissipates
noise to the greatest extent possible. Where facilities are adjacent to
Residentially zoned or used property; noise shall be reduced to within five (5)
decibels of the average ambient noise level at the property line.
      4.   The owner/operator must comply with State regulations regarding
wastewater treatment and air quality permitting.
   VV.   Scientific Research And Development:
      1.   All outside storage areas including dumpsters must be:
         a.   Sited to the rear of the building,
         b.   In compliance with the setbacks required of the building's
underlying zone, and
         c.   Designed such that they are concealed from all adjacent
properties and public rights-of-way through installation of either fencing and/
or vegetative screening.
      2.   When located adjacent to Residentially zoned or used property, any
outdoor research or experiment areas shall be located a minimum of one hundred
feet (100') from the property line.
      3.   The facility shall be designed such that it absorbs or dissipates
noise to the greatest extent possible. Where facilities are adjacent to
Residentially zoned or used property; noise shall be reduced to within five (5)
decibels of the average ambient noise level at the property line.
      4.   The owner/operator must comply with State regulations regarding
wastewater treatment and air quality permitting.
   WW.   Self Storage/RV Storage:
      1.   No separate individual business operation is allowed to operate
within an individual storage space/unit. No space/unit shall be converted into
a residential use.
      2.   All self-storage buildings shall be permanent structures built or
assembled on-site.
      3.   The perimeter of the facility shall be screened by a solid masonry
wall in the Community Commercial, Neighborhood Commercial, Regional Commercial,
Commercial Mixed Use, Highway Corridor Mixed-Use, Employment Mixed Use, and
Service Industrial zoning districts.
      4.   A minimum six foot (6') high perimeter fence is required in light
and heavy industrial zoning districts. Portions of the fence, which are
adjacent to residential zoning districts or which face arterial streets,
residential streets, and state highways must be a solid masonry wall.
      5.   A minimum of ten-foot-wide landscape buffer shall be provided along
the entire side of the facility between any street or highway and the required
wall. The landscaping shall include screening trees as required by chapter 402.
      6.   All storage shall be within an enclosed building except for the
storage of recreational vehicles.
      7.   The surface of the area to be used for outdoor storage shall be
paved with a non-permeable material such as asphalt or concrete or, in the case
of the storage of heavy equipment, covered with a material acceptable to the
administrator which will control fugitive dust.
      8.   One parking space is required for every one hundred (100) storage
units with a minimum of three (3) spaces required for the facility office.
      9.   One-way interior travel lanes must have a minimum width of fifteen
feet (15') in addition to the ten foot (10') wide parking lane. All two-way
interior travel lanes serving storage units must have two (2) 12-foot wide
travel lanes and be provided with a ten foot (10') wide parking/loading lane.
      10.   The height of the storage buildings shall be governed by the
maximum height permitted for the zoning district. See chapter 300 of this
title, zoning districts and standards for dimensional requirements.
      11.   All outdoor lights must be shielded to direct light and glare only
onto the facility's premises and may be of sufficient intensity to discourage
vandalism and theft. Lighting and glare must be deflected, shaded and focused
away from any adjoining residential property.
      12.   Minimum and maximum lot sizes.
         a.   Community Commercial and Neighborhood Commercial:
            (1)   Minimum lot size: One acre.
            (2)   Maximum lot size: Three (3) acres.
         b.   Regional Commercial, Commercial Mixed Use, Highway Corridor
Mixed-Use, Employment Mixed Use, and Service Industrial:
            (1)   Minimum lot size: One acre.
            (2)   Maximum lot size: Ten (10) acres.
         c.   Light Industrial:
            (1)   Minimum lot size: One acre.
            (2)   Maximum lot size: None.
      13.   All self service storage facilities are subject to the buffering
and landscaping set forth in chapter 402 of this title.
      14.   A minimum six foot (6') high perimeter fence is required. Portions
of the fence, which face arterial or residential streets, must be solid or
semisolid and decorative.
      15.   No outside storage, other than the storage of RVs, boats, and other
items specifically approved via a Conditional Use Permit, is permitted in the
Neighborhood Commercial, Community Commercial, Regional Commercial, Commercial
Mixed-Use, Highway Mixed-Use, Service Industrial or Employment Mixed-Use
Districts.
      16.   All outdoor storage areas must be screened through the installation
of fencing or vegetative screening. When located adjacent to Residentially
zoned or used property or street right- of-ways, additional screening and/or
landscape measures may be required by the Director.
      17.   A single watchman's quarters is permitted either incorporated into
one of the buildings or as a stand-alone structure as an accessory use to the
self storage/Rv storage facility.
   XX.   Shooting Range, Indoor:
      1.   Facility design shall be such that it absorbs or dissipates noise
from the firing of weapons and/or any mechanical equipment.
      2.   The facility shall be located a minimum of one hundred fifty feet
(150') from the property line of any residentially used or Residentially zoned
property.
      3.   All applicable local, State and Federal permits must be obtained
prior to zoning permitting.
   YY.   Sports And Recreation Instruction Or Camps:
      1.   Parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of
chapter 401 of this title.
      2.   Where adjacent to Residentially zoned or used property, a buffer
yard in conformance to chapter 402 of this title shall be installed.
      3.   All activity must end by ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. when adjacent to
residential property.
      4.   Lighting shall be shielded to prevent light and glare spillover onto
adjacent residential properties.
   ZZ.   Storage Building Sales, With Display Area:
      1.   Display area shall not exceed forty thousand (40,000) square feet.
      2.   Buildings shall be arranged so that sight triangles are
unobstructed.
   AAA.   Equestrian Facilities:
      1.   The proposed site must be at least five (5) acres.
      2.   The following setbacks are required in addition to those of the
zoning district:
         a.   No activity area, including pastures or runs, shall be located
closer than twenty feet (20') to any property line.
         b.   Any building housing animals shall be located a minimum of three
hundred feet (300') from any Residentially zoned property.
         c.   A vegetative strip at least one hundred feet (100') wide shall be
maintained between any corrals, manure piles or manure application areas and
any surface water or well in order to minimize runoff, prevent erosion and
promote nitrogen absorption.
         d.   Manure piles must be kept a minimum of one hundred feet (100')
from any adjacent property line.
         e.   Manure must either be transported off-site for disposal or may be
composted using Best Management Practices and techniques for composting.
      3.   Retail sales of small-scale accessory equestrian merchandise (such
as grooming, bits, halters, bridle and tack, feed, clothing, etc.) and
souvenirs is permitted on-site.
      4.   Boarding, classes, training, lessons are permitted uses associated
with an equestrian facility.
      5.   Special events associated with the equestrian nature of the facility
are permitted subject to compliance with this chapter. If food service is
proposed, then documentation of compliance with the State health regulations is
required prior to the approval of the special event.
      6.   All outside storage areas including dumpsters must be:
         a.   Sited to the rear of the building,
         b.   In compliance with the setbacks required of the building's
underlying zone, and
         c.   Designed such that they are concealed from all adjacent
properties and public rights-of-way through installation of either fencing and/
or vegetative screening.
   BBB.   Swim Club, Tennis Club, Country Club:
      1.   In any Residential District, the minimum area shall be one acre.
      2.   Clubhouses shall meet the primary setbacks for the zoning district.
      3.   There shall be a twenty foot (20') minimum setback between any
accessory buildings, swimming pool, lighted tennis court or any amenity area
and adjacent Residentially zoned or used property.
      4.   Parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of
chapter 401 of this title.
      5.   Lighting for amenity areas shall be designed such that it does not
spill over onto adjacent properties.
      6.   Outdoor swimming pools shall be protected by a fence, a minimum of
four feet (4') in height and equipped with a self- closing and positive self-
latching gate provided with hardware for permanent locking.
   CCC.   Towing Service, With Salvage:
      1.   Materials may not be vertically stacked so as to be visible to a
passing motorist.
      2.   All outside storage areas including dumpsters must be:
         a.   Sited to the rear of the building,
         b.   Within the setbacks required of the building's underlying zone,
and
         c.   Designed such that they are concealed from all adjacent
properties and public rights-of-way through installation of either fencing and/
or vegetative screening.
      3.   In the event the use abuts Residentially used or zoned property,
buildings and storage areas shall be located a minimum of one hundred feet
(100') from the property line.
   DDD.   Towing Service, With Towed Vehicle Storage Yard, No Salvage Or Part
Sales:
      1.   All outside storage areas including dumpsters must be:
         a.   Sited to the rear of the building,
         b.   In compliance with the setbacks required of the building's
underlying zone, and
         c.   Designed such that they are concealed from all adjacent
properties and public rights-of-way through installation of either fencing and/
or vegetative screening.
      2.   The vehicle storage area may not exceed sixty thousand (60,000)
square feet.
      3.   In the event the use abuts Residentially used or zoned property,
buildings and storage areas shall be located a minimum of one hundred feet
(100') from the property line.
   EEE.   Warehouse And/Or Distribution:
      1.   Provide adequate traffic flow (including but not limited to road
entrances and exits, queuing areas, holding areas for inspections, location of
the scale house, and traffic routes) that demonstrate adequate parking and
queuing space for trucks and customers as well as enough space for safe
equipment movement in light of truck and customer traffic through the site.
      2.   Outside stacking of materials should not be visible to the passing
motorist traveling any adjacent external road.
      3.   All outside storage areas including dumpsters must be:
         a.   Sited to the rear of the building,
         b.   In conformance with the setbacks required of the building's
underlying zone, and,
         c.   Designed such that they are concealed from all adjacent
properties and public rights-of-way through installation of either fencing and/
or vegetative screening.
   FFF.   Wind Energy Conversion System, Accessory Use, On Site Use Only: All
private WECS are subject to and must comply with the following:
      1.   Setbacks: Minimum setbacks for private use wind machines shall be:
         a.   A minimum of one times the total extended height from the
property lines.
         b.   Wind machines shall not be located within the front yard setback
nor within the street side setback of any parcel of land in Nonrural
Residential Zoning Districts.
         c.   Guywires may not extend closer than ten feet (10') from any
property line and shall be clearly visible to a minimum height of six feet
(6').
         d.   No part of a private WECS shall be located within or over
drainage, utility or other established easements.
      2.   Height: The maximum total extended height of private WECS is eighty
feet (80') on parcels of five (5) acres net or less and one hundred feet (100')
on parcels greater than five (5) acres net, provided all required setbacks and
other standards of this section are met. "Total extended height" shall mean the
height above adjacent grade to a blade tip at its highest point of travel and
including any other portion of the WECS.
      3.   Lighting: Wind machine towers shall not be artificially lighted
above ten feet (10') above grade unless required, in writing, by the Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA) or other applicable authority that regulates air
safety.
      4.   Access: To hinder unauthorized access, all wind machine towers/
structures must comply with the following provisions:
         a.   Any tower shall be designed and installed so that there shall be
no exterior step bolts or a ladder on the tower readily accessible to the
public for a minimum height of twelve feet (12') above the ground. For lattice
or guyed towers a barrier shall be provided such that it cannot be readily
climbed.
         b.   All ground mounted electrical and control equipment shall be
labeled or secured to prevent unauthorized access.
      5.   Rotor Safety: Each wind machine shall be equipped with both manual
and automatic controls to limit the rotational speed of the blade within the
design limits of the rotor. An external, manual shutoff switch shall be
included with the installation. The minimum distance between the ground and any
protruding blades utilized on a private wind machine shall be ten feet (10') as
measured at the lowest point of the arc of the blades.
      6.   Noise: All wind machines shall comply with the noise requirements in
this section. These levels, however, may be exceeded during short term events
such as utility outages and severe windstorms. A manufacturer's sound report
shall be required with a building permit application.
         a.   No wind machine or combination of wind machines on a single
parcel shall create noise that exceeds a maximum of fifty five (55) decibels
(dBA) at any property line.
         b.   Any wind machine(s) exceeding these levels shall immediately
cease operation upon notification by Lyon County and may not resume operation
until the noise levels have been reduced in compliance with the required
standards and verified by an independent third party inspector, approved by
Lyon County, at the property owner's expense. Upon review and acceptance of the
third party noise level report, Lyon County will allow operation of the
affected wind machine(s).
      7.   Installation: Private WECS should be installed by qualified persons
possessing the appropriate Nevada State contractor's license and Lyon County
business license.
         a.   The design of the structure and foundation of the private WECS
must be reviewed and approved (sealed) by an engineer licensed in Nevada. This
includes attachment of the wind machine to any building or structure.
         b.   Wind machines shall be sited in such a manner to minimize shadow
flicker on a roadway and on buildings located off the property on which the
wind machine is constructed. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to
modify operations to restrict shadow flicker on existing occupied buildings.
         c.   Roof mounted wind machines shall be located so that in the event
of failure, no part of the machine will cross any parcel line onto adjacent
property.
         d.   All electric wires not within or on a building leading from the
wind machine to electrical control facilities shall be located underground per
the currently adopted National Electric Code (NEC).
      8.   Maintenance And Repair: Wind machines shall be maintained in good
repair, as recommended by the manufacturer.
         a.   Any wind energy conversion system determined to be unsafe by the
building official shall immediately cease operation upon notification and shall
be repaired by the owner to meet all Federal, State and local safety standards
or be removed.
         b.   When a private WECS is removed from a site, all associated
equipment, batteries, devices, structures or support(s) excluding foundations
for that system shall also be removed.
      9.   FAA Compliance: Private WECS must comply with applicable Federal
Aviation Administration regulations including any approvals required for
installations.
      10.   Variances: Variances to the standards established by this chapter
must be pursued in accordance with chapter 203 of this title.
      11.   Comstock Historic District: In addition to all other requirements,
all proposed private WECS located within the Comstock Historic District, as
established by the Comstock Historical Commission pursuant to Nevada Revised
Statutes chapter 384, shall receive a review, approval and a certificate of
appropriateness from the Comstock Historic District Commission prior to
submitting an application for a building permit.
      12.   Produced Energy: Energy produced must be used on the same parcel.
      13.   Decommissioning Plan: A decommissioning plan shall be provided that
describes the anticipated life of the facility, estimated decommissioning costs
and responsible party for decommissioning the facility.
      14.   Maintenance Plan: A maintenance plan shall be provided describing
the maintenance schedule for the structure including the name, address and
phone number of responsible party for maintenance.
   GGG.   Animal Keeping - Livestock, Poultry, Etc.:
      1.   Number: The number of barnyard animals or poultry kept on a property
shall be limited to: a) a quantity that will cause no harm to the animals, b) a
quantity that will cause no harm to the environment or ground water, and c) a
quantity that will cause no harm to neighboring lots, parcels and/or owners.
      2.   Barnyard Animals: No person shall keep any livestock or barnyard
animals except as provided below.
         a.   On parcels zoned Rural Residential and Suburban Residential
greater than or equal to one gross acre in land area:
            (1)   Barnyard animals may be kept on lots or parcels one gross
acre or greater in land area.
            (2)   On lots or parcels greater than or equal to one-half (1/2)
gross acre but less than one gross acre in size existing as of September 1,
1995 located within the Mark Twain Estates Unit 10 Subdivision as described by
map number 32781, barnyard animals may be kept. Only two (2) horses per lot or
parcel are permitted under this provision.
            (3)   The number of barnyard animals including poultry kept on
property shall be limited to:
               (A)   The quantity that will cause no harm to the animal(s);
               (B)   The quantity that will cause no harm to the environment or
ground water; and
               (C)   The quantity that will cause no harm to neighboring lots
or parcels and/or owners.
   The barnyard animals shall not be permitted to roam free beyond the property
line.
         b.   On parcels zoned Suburban Residential where lots or parcels are
less than one gross acre in land area, a maximum of two (2) rabbits or four (4)
female chickens may be kept subject to the standards listed below. Lots or
parcels greater than or equal to one-half (1/2) gross acre but less than one
gross acre existing as of September 1, 1995 located within the Mark Twain
Estates Unit 10 Subdivision as described by map number 32781 are exempt from
this provision as per subsection GGG2a(2) of this section.
            (1)   Rabbits and female chickens may be kept subject to the
following requirements:
               (A)   he animals are kept in accordance with standards for good
animal husbandry practices;
               (B)   Coops, hutches and enclosures that house the barnyard
animals shall be cleaned regularly to prevent offensive odors from becoming a
nuisance;
               (C)   Coops, hutches and enclosures shall not be located a
minimum of ten feet (10') from any property line.
   HHH.   Truck Stop:
      1.   If permitted subject to approval of a conditional use permit, the
standards listed below shall be required of the facility.
         a.   The facility must front on a State highway, arterial or collector
roadway.
         b.   The facility's lighting shall be shielded to prevent light and
glare spillover onto adjacent properties.
         c.   All outside storage areas including dumpsters must be:
            (1)   Sited to the rear of the building,
            (2)   In conformance with the setbacks required of the building's
underlying zone, and,
            (3)   Designed such that they are concealed from all adjacent
properties and public rights-of-way through installation of either fencing and/
or vegetative screening.
         d.   Accessory uses such as truck scales, truck tire sales, transient
lodging, showers, lockers, washer/dryers, restaurants and accessory retail
sales may be allowed if any potentially negative impacts have been addressed
through the site layout and design of the structures.
         e.   The facility must not be adjacent to any Residentially zoned
property unless the Director has determined there is sufficient buffering and
screening to be installed that would address noise, light and odor impacts.
   III.   Government Administrative And Civic Buildings, Public Safety
Facilities, Museums:
      1.   The facility's lighting shall be shielded to prevent light and glare
spillover onto adjacent properties.
      2.   All outside storage areas including dumpsters must be:
         a.   Sited to the rear of the building,
         b.   In conformance with the setbacks required of the building's
underlying zone, and,
         c.   Designed such that they are concealed from all adjacent
properties and public rights-of-way through installation of either fencing and/
or vegetative screening.
      3.   Parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of
chapter 401 of this title.
   JJJ.   Athletic Fields And Courts, Parks, Playgrounds:
      1.   The facility's lighting shall be shielded to prevent light and glare
spillover onto adjacent properties.
      2.   Facility shall provide adequate safety lighting during nighttime
non-activity hours to the acceptance of the Lyon County Sheriff's Office.
      3.   Garbage receptacles must be provided, located conveniently for ease
of use and emptied as regularly as required by the use level of the facility.
      4.   If facility is a community or regional park facility, parking shall
be provided conformant with the requirements set forth in chapter 401 of this
title.
   KKK.   Field Crops, Vineyards:
      1.   During active planting, harvesting or other intensive work efforts
in the crop or vineyard, portable restroom facilities must be provided for use
by the laborers.
   LLL.   Plant Nursery:
      1.   Storage of planting materials such as soil amendments, compost,
fertilizers, bark, etc., shall meet storm drainage run- off and control
requirements to protect against pollutants entering the stormwater collection
system.
      2.   All outside storage areas including dumpsters, pallet and used plant
container storage areas must be:
         a.   Sited to the rear of the building,
         b.   In compliance within the setbacks required of the building's
underlying zone, and,
         c.   Made unnoticeable from both adjacent properties and public
rights-of-way through installation of either fencing or vegetative screening,
designed such that they are concealed from all adjacent properties and public
rights-of-way.
      3.   The facility shall provide off-street parking to meet the
requirements set forth in chapter 401 of this title.
   MMM.   Agricultural Related Industry (On-Farm), Agricultural Supplies And
Support Services, Agricultural Tourism, Winery:
      1.   Storage of planting materials such as soil amendments, compost,
fertilizers, bark, etc., shall meet storm drainage run- off and control
requirements to protect against pollutants entering the stormwater collection
system.
      2.   All outside storage areas including dumpsters, pallet and used plant
container storage areas must be:
         a.   Sited to the rear of the building,
         b.   Compliant within the setbacks required of the building's
underlying zone, and,
         c.   Made unnoticeable from both adjacent residential properties and
public rights-of-way through installation of either solid fencing or vegetative
screening.
      3.   The facility shall provide off-street parking to meet the
requirements set forth in chapter 401 of this title.
      4.   Restrooms shall be provided that are available to customers.
      5.   Garbage receptacles shall be provided in convenient areas for use by
customers and emptied at a frequency so as to minimize any trash blowing onto
adjacent properties.
      6.   The facility's lighting shall be shielded to prevent light and glare
spillover onto adjacent properties.
      7.   The facility shall provide off-street parking to meet the
requirements set forth in chapter 401 of this title.
      8.   A winery must conform to State regulations contained in Nevada
Revised Statutes 369 and 597.
   NNN.   Event Or Conference Center:
      1.   The event or conference center must contain all events,
entertainment or other activities, indoors. If any outdoor events,
entertainment or other activities are proposed or provided, a temporary use
permit will be required.
      2.   Outdoor performances may be subject to the requirements of title 5,
chapter 7 of this Code and require an outdoor festival permit in addition to a
temporary use permit.
      3.   All equipment loading area/truck docks or similar and garbage
dumpster areas must be:
         a.   Sited to the rear of the building,
         b.   In compliance with the setbacks required of the building's
underlying zone, and
         c.   Designed such that they are concealed from all adjacent
properties and public rights-of-way through installation of either fencing and/
or vegetative screening.
      4.   Parking must be provided in conformance with the requirements set
forth in chapter 401 of this title.
      5.   Landscaping, buffering and screening must be provided in conformance
with chapter 402 of this title.
   OOO.   Bar Or Nightclub, Brew Pub/Craft Distillery:
      1.   Liquor Control: Bars, nightclubs, brewpub/craft distillery uses are
subject to the requirements of title 5, chapter 2 of this Code.
      2.   Parking: Parking must be provided in conformance with the
requirements set forth in chapter 401 of this title.
      3.   Outside Storage: All outside storage areas including dumpsters must
be:
         a.   Sited to the rear of the building,
         b.   In conformance with the setbacks required of the building's
underlying zone, and,
         c.   Designed such that they are concealed from all adjacent
properties and public rights-of-way through installation of either fencing and/
or vegetative screening.
      4.   Temporary Outdoor Events:
         a.   If any temporary (less than 24 hours in duration) outdoor
activities including but not limited to drinking, cooking, music or other
outdoor use is anticipated or planned, the owner/operator must provide an
operational plan to the Community Development Department for acceptance. The
plan shall incorporate any necessary improvements/restrictions to address
potential impacts to surrounding properties (noise, light, odor, parking,
domestic water service, sewage disposal, duration of event, hours of
operation).
         b.   The temporary event shall provide documentation showing
conformance with the State requirements contained in Nevada Revised Statutes
369, 446 and 597, as applicable.
      5.   Brew Pubs And Craft Distilleries: For brew pubs and craft
distilleries, the owner/operator must comply with State regulations in Nevada
Revised Statutes 369, and 597.
   PPP.   Hotel, Motel Or Lodge:
      1.   Guest rooms or suites shall be occupied on a transient basis with no
provisions for cooking in the individual units.
      2.   Parking must be provided in conformance with the requirements set
forth in chapter 401 of this title.
      3.   All outside storage areas including dumpsters must be:
         a.   Sited to the rear of the building,
         b.   In conformance with the setbacks required of the building's
underlying zone, and,
         c.   Designed such that they are concealed from all adjacent
properties and public rights-of-way through installation of either fencing and/
or vegetative screening.
      4.   The owner/operator must comply with State regulations regarding
public accommodation as contained in Nevada Revised Statutes 447 and 651.
   QQQ.   Transfer Station:
      1.   Parking must be provided in conformance with the requirements set
forth in chapter 401 of this title.
      2.   All outside storage areas including fuel storage and dumpsters must
be:
         a.   Sited to the sides and rear of the building,
         b.   In conformance with the setbacks required of the building's
underlying zone, and,
         c.   Designed such that they are concealed from all adjacent
properties and public rights-of-way through installation of either fencing and/
or vegetative screening.
      3.   The owner/operator must comply with State regulations regarding
sanitation as contained in Nevada Revised Statutes 444 and NAC 444, as
applicable.
      4.   Provide adequate traffic flow (including but not limited to road
entrances and exits, queuing areas, holding areas for inspections, location of
the scale house, and traffic routes) that demonstrate adequate parking and
queuing space for trucks and customers as well as enough space for safe
equipment movement in light of truck and customer traffic through the site.
      5.   Provide buffer areas (open space, landscaping, berms, and/or walls)
that reduce the transfer station's impacts to surrounding properties and
separation distance from adjacent watercourses (ditches, sloughs, streams,
rivers, ponds and lakes).
      6.   Transfer stations shall not be located within a designated floodway
or floodplain.
   RRR.   Hospitals:
      1.   Parking must be provided in conformance with the requirements set
forth in chapter 401 of this title.
      2.   All outside storage areas including dumpsters and biohazard disposal
areas must be:
         a.   Sited to the sides or rear of the building,
         b.   In conformance with the setbacks required of the building's
underlying zone, and,
         c.   Designed such that they are concealed from all adjacent
properties and public rights-of-way through installation of either fencing and/
or vegetative screening.
      3.   Site design must consider the 24-hour operation of the hospital and
orient the facilities (including but not limited to emergency room location,
helipads, exterior site and building lighting, location of utilities/central
plant area and outdoor storage) with consideration of the existing surrounding
land uses.
   SSS.   Milk Processing, Cheese Manufacturing, Etc.:
      1.   The owner/operator must comply with State regulations regarding
wastewater treatment and air quality permitting.
      2.   Parking must be provided in conformance with the requirements set
forth in chapter 401 of this title.
      3.   All outside storage areas including dumpsters must be:
         a.   Sited to the sides or rear of the building,
         b.   In conformance with the setbacks required of the building's
underlying zone, and,
         c.   Designed such that they are concealed from all adjacent
properties and public rights-of-way through installation of either fencing and/
or vegetative screening.
   TTT.   Artisan Product Manufacturing And Processing, Machine Shops, Welding,
Plumbing, Etc., Agricultural Machine Shop:
      1.   In residential developments, no public display of stock in trade
shall be allowed within the dwelling or accessory buildings nor shall the
residential character of the residential dwelling or residential neighborhood
be allowed.
      2.   In commercial or commercial mixed use developments, the use shall
not change the retail nature of the store or shop. There shall be no public
display of stock in trade allowed within a dwelling unit and the use shall not
change the nature of the character of the neighborhood.
      3.   The use shall not create a noticeable and objectionable amount of
noise, dust, odor, smoke, glare, vibration or electrical interference at the
property line.
      4.   All outdoor storage, including dumpsters must be:
         a.   Sited to the sides or rear of the building,
         b.   In conformance to the setbacks required of the building's
underlying zone, and
         c.   Designed such that they are concealed from all adjacent
properties and public rights-of-way through the installation of either fencing
and/or vegetative screening.
      5.   Parking must be provided in conformance with the requirements set
forth in chapter 401 of this title.
   UUU.   Assembly (Light), Manufacturing And Fabrication (Light):
      1.   The owner/operator must comply with State regulations regarding
wastewater treatment and air quality permitting.
      2.   Parking must be provided in conformance with the requirements set
forth in chapter 401 of this title.
      3.   All outside storage areas including dumpsters must be:
         a.   Sited to the sides or rear of the building,
         b.   In conformance with the setbacks required of the building's
underlying zone, and,
         c.   Designed such that they are concealed from all adjacent
properties and public rights-of-way through installation of either fencing and/
or vegetative screening.
   VVV.   Public Drinking Water - Pumping, Storage, Treatment And Distribution:
      1.   Parking must be provided in conformance with the requirements set
forth in chapter 401 of this title when employees are located on-site for more
than maintenance or inspection purposes.
      2.   All outdoor storage, including dumpsters must be:
         a.   Sited to the sides or rear of the building,
         b.   In conformance to the setbacks required of the building's
underlying zone, and
         c.   Designed such that they are concealed from all adjacent
properties and public rights-of-way through the installation of either fencing
and/or vegetative screening.
      3.   Exterior building elevations shall reflect the surrounding existing
development insofar as building materials, colors and architectural elements.
This standard is not applicable to water storage tanks.
      4.   Security fencing shall be required when the public drinking water
facility involves a building. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 607, 9-19-2019;
Ord. 613, 12-3-2020; Ord. 628, 7-7-2022; Ord. 635, 1-4-2024)
15.335.04: TEMPORARY USES PERMITTED BASED ON STANDARDS:
The temporary use permit is a mechanism to allow a use on a short-term basis
and certain seasonal or transient uses not otherwise allowed. Prior to
conducting or establishing a temporary use or structure, approval of a
temporary use permit is required pursuant to chapter 233 of this title.
All temporary uses listed in this section require a temporary use permit. The
Director shall not approve an application for a temporary use permit unless the
following criteria, specific regulations and time limitations are met in
addition to the standards for any particular temporary use specified below.
The allowance of temporary uses shall not be detrimental to the public health,
safety and general welfare, and the use shall be consistent with the purpose
and intent of this title and the specific zoning district in which it will be
located. The use shall be compatible in intensity, character and appearance
with existing land uses in the immediate vicinity of the temporary use. The
neighborhood and street network surrounding the temporary use shall not be
adversely affected by the use or activities associated with it. In addition to
those listed herein, factors such as location, noise, odor, light, dust control
and hours of operation shall be considered.
TABLE 15.335-2
TEMPORARY USE REFERENCE
Temporary Use Section Reference
Temporary Use                                                Section Reference
Food trucks/food carts                                       15.335.04D6
Mobile personal storage unit, renovation                     15.335.04D8
Mobile personal storage unit, vacant or occupied premises    15.335.04D7
Outdoor concerts, special events or festivals                15.335.04D9
Similar uses not specified                                   15.335.04D10
Real estate development and construction related             15.335.04C
Contractor office, construction equipment storage            15.335.04C1
Real estate office in a construction trailer or temporary    15.335.04C4
modular unit, commercial or mixed use projects
Real estate office in model home                             15.335.04C3
Real estate sales office in a construction trailer or        15.335.04C2
temporary modular unit, residential projects
Temporary dwelling for large construction projects           15.335.04C5
Temporary residence in recreational vehicle during           15.335.04C6
construction of new home on same site
Temporary residence post-disaster in recreational vehicle/
manufactured home during construction of new home on same    15.335.04C7
site
Temporary retail sales related                               15.335.04B
Promotional activities involving the display of goods or     15.335.04B1
merchandise
Temporary signs                                              15.335.04E
Temporary construction sign                                  15.335.04E1
For profit temporary sign                                    15.335.04E2
Temporary agricultural sign (seasonal sales on site)         15.335.04E3
Temporary use standards (general)                            15.335.04A
Other temporary uses                                         15.335.04D
Amusement enterprise                                         15.335.04D1
Auction, estate or asset liquidation                         15.335.04D2
Auction, livestock                                           15.335.04D3
Events, tent or other temporary structure                    15.335.04D4
FEMA trailers, natural disaster or significant weather event 15.335.04D5
 
   A.   Temporary Use Standards (General):
      1.   The use shall not take place on publicly or privately owned property
unless the applicant first obtains written approval from the owner. The
original signed letter shall be provided as part of the temporary use permit
application and review process.
      2.   The location of the temporary use shall be such that adverse impacts
on surrounding properties will be minimal, particularly regarding any type of
traffic generated impact upon traffic circulation in the area.
      3.   Adequate off-street parking shall be provided to serve a temporary
use. Temporary uses shall not displace the required off-street parking spaces
or loading areas of the principal permitted use(s) on the site. Sales and
display areas shall be designed to prevent traffic hazards and nuisances to
normal traffic patterns and internal circulation for the site.
      4.   Structures and display areas shall comply with primary setback
requirements for the zoning district. The items shall be displayed so as to not
interfere with the sight triangle of the intersection of the curb line of any
two (2) streets or a driveway and a street. Display of items or conducting
business in a public right-of-way, emergency access lane or fire lane is not
permitted.
      5.   Unless specifically stated, only one temporary use permit shall be
issued for a parcel at any given time.
      6.   Unless specifically stated, the period of time between temporary use
permits on a parcel shall be three (3) months (expiration date and new issue
date). This restriction shall not apply to real estate development and
construction related temporary uses.
      7.   Recreational vehicles shall not be permitted as a temporary use or
be permitted as part of a temporary use.
   B.   Temporary Retail Sales Related:
      1.   Promotional activities involving the display of goods or
merchandise:
         a.   Such activities may be conducted at a business for a period of
not more than fifteen (15) consecutive days.
         b.   Merchandise and display area shall not interfere with emergency
ingress/egress, sight triangles or required parking.
         c.   If a private sidewalk or pedestrian way in front of the building
is used for display of merchandise, a minimum width of four feet (4') must
remain unobstructed for pedestrian use.
         d.   A temporary use permit for promotional activities may be renewed
four (4) times during any calendar year, for a maximum of sixty (60) days per
calendar year.
   C.   Real Estate Development And Construction Related:
      1.   Contractor Office, Construction Equipment Storage:
         a.   Accessory to an active construction project, permitted in any
zoning district. Placement of such temporary use is limited to a period of time
determined by an estimated project completion date. The permit may be extended
for up to one year if approved by the Director.
         b.   A construction trailer or modular unit may be used as a
contractor's office or for the storage of equipment or materials. In the event
that multiple builders are involved in a new construction project, one
construction trailer or temporary modular unit may be permitted per builder for
office or for storage.
         c.   All temporary buildings and trailers shall be completely removed
from the site within thirty (30) days of the final Certificate of Occupancy
being issued for the project.
      2.   Real Estate Sales Office In A Construction Trailer Or Temporary
Modular Unit, Residential Projects:
         a.   Temporary structures, construction trailers or temporary modular
units may be used as real estate sales offices in any active residential
construction project for the sale of units within that project only.
         b.   In the event that multiple builders are involved in a new
construction project, one construction trailer or temporary modular unit may be
permitted as a sales office per builder.
         c.   Each individual trailer or modular unit shall be located on an
individual lot. In no case shall multiple permits be issued for the same
Assessor's parcel number (APN).
         d.   The permit shall be valid until the project is complete. All
temporary structures shall be removed within thirty (30) days of final sale.
      3.   Real Estate Office In Model Home:
         a.   Accessory to construction of a new residential development. Model
homes must be located on individual parcels. Limited to a period of time to
coincide with the sale of all lots within the approved development.
         b.   The permit shall be valid until the project is complete. All
temporary structures shall be removed within thirty (30) days of final sale.
      4.   Real Estate Office In A Construction Trailer Or Temporary Modular
Unit, Commercial Or Mixed Use Projects: Temporary structures, such as
construction trailers or temporary modular units, may be used as real estate
sales offices in any active commercial or mixed use construction project for
the sale or leasing of units within that project only. In the event that
multiple builders are involved in a new construction project, one construction
trailer or temporary modular unit may be permitted as a sales or leasing office
per builder. All temporary structures shall be removed within thirty (30) days
after final sale.
      5.   Temporary Dwelling For Large Construction Projects: During the
active construction period (after a site improvement permit, grading permit
and/or building permit has been issued) for projects involving a non-
residential use or a residential development for more than five (5) units at
any one time, one single section manufactured home may be allowed on the same
property to be used as a temporary residence by a night watchman for a period
not to exceed twelve (12) months or the active construction period, whichever
is less. The temporary unit shall be removed from the site within fourteen (14)
days of issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy for a non-residential
structure or the occupancy of the first residential unit if within a
residential development.
   6.   Temporary Residence In A Recreational Vehicle During Construction Of
New Home On Same Site: In the event that a new single-family residential
dwelling is being constructed on a parcel in the AG, NIA, RL, RR-20, RR-10, RR-
5, RR-2, RR-1, SR-2, or SR-1 Zoning Districts, the director may permit as part
of the formal building permit application the temporary use of a single
recreational vehicle as a temporary residence on the parcel while construction
of the new single family residential dwelling proceeds. The temporary use of a
recreational vehicle may remain for the duration of the building process for
the new single family residential dwelling subject to the following conditions:
      a.   The permittee owns the property on which the recreational vehicle is
to be placed;
      b.   The permittee has applied for and been issued a permit to build a
single family residential dwelling for their own use on the property on which
the recreational vehicle is to be placed;
      c.   The director or their designee shall clearly note as part of the
approval of the single family residential dwelling building permit the
temporary use of a recreational vehicle during construction of the single
family residential dwelling.
      d.   The property on which the permittee proposes to place the
recreational vehicle has been improved with both water and sewer/septic system
facilities or has made arrangements such that water and sewage disposal are
provided for to the approval of the director;
      e.   A copy of the approved building permit and approval of the temporary
use of the recreational vehicle shall be clearly posted where visible to the
building inspectors and other County officials;
      f.   No external additions such as skirting, porches, etc., or
modifications that render the recreational vehicle immobile are permitted;
      g.   Approval for the temporary use of the recreational vehicle is valid
for one (1) year; however the temporary use of the recreational vehicle may be
renewed only once for a period not to exceed six (6) months;
      h.   During the period of use of the recreational vehicle on-site,
construction on the single family dwelling must be on-going with progress
towards completion evident; and
      i.   The permittee shall allow the county to remove, or have removed, the
recreational vehicle if any of these conditions are not complied with.
   The recreational vehicle shall be disconnected from water and sewage
disposal systems and stored on-site or removed within thirty (30) days of the
date of the Certificate of Occupancy. In no case shall the new single family
residential dwelling and the recreational vehicle be occupied at the same time.
   7.   Temporary Residence Post-Disaster In Recreational Vehicle/Manufactured
Home During Construction Of New Home On Same Site: In the event of a
catastrophic natural (wildfire, earthquake, flood, etc.) or man- made (fire,
collapse, explosive, environmental, etc.) disaster that destroys more than
fifty percent (50%) of a permanent single family dwelling, the property owner
may utilize a single recreational vehicle or a manufactured home to reside on-
site while reconstructing a permanent single family dwelling on the property
subject to approval of a temporary use permit. The time limit for the temporary
use permit may be extended for consecutive six-month periods not to exceed a
total timeframe of three (3) years maximum subject to the following
requirements and submittal of documentation demonstrating progress towards
completion to the satisfaction of the Director:
         a.   The permittee owns the property on which the recreational
vehicle/manufactured home is to be placed;
         b.   The permittee has applied and been issued a permit to build a
single-family dwelling for his own use on the property on which the
recreational vehicle/manufactured home is to be placed;
         c.   The land on which permittee wishes to place the recreational
vehicle/manufactured home has been improved with both water and sewer/septic
facilities or has arrangements such that water and sewage disposal are provided
for to the approval of the Director;
         d.   During the period that the permit is in effect, construction on
the permanent single family dwelling must be ongoing;
         e.   The permittee must disconnect the recreational vehicle/
manufactured home from all utilities, and discontinue using the recreational
vehicle/manufactured home for residence purposes, when the permit expires or
when the dwelling is complete, whichever comes first;
         f.   The permittee shall remove or allow the County to remove the
recreational vehicle/manufactured home if any of the above conditions are not
complied with.
   D.   Other Temporary Uses:
      1.   Amusement Enterprise: Carnivals, circuses, fairs, festivals and
amusement rides may be allowed in any Non-Residential Zoning District for a
period not to exceed thirty (30) days, up to four (4) times per calendar year.
This classification excludes events conducted in a permanent entertainment
facility. The event planner shall provide written information as to the
provision of drinking water, sewage disposal and sanitation (hand-washing
stations, food services, garbage and refuse disposal, etc.) in compliance with
State health requirements and regulations.
      2.   Auction, Estate Or Asset Liquidation: Estate or asset liquidation
auctions are permitted in any zoning district for a period not to exceed three
(3) days. Patron parking shall be located so as to not interfere with
neighborhood traffic and so that emergency access is maintained for the street
right-of-way and to the auction site. The event planner shall provide written
information as to the provision of drinking water, sewage disposal and
sanitation (hand-washing stations, food services, garbage and refuse disposal,
etc.) in compliance with State health requirements and regulations.
      3.   Auction, Livestock: Livestock auctions are permitted in the AG, NIA,
RL, RR-20, and RR-10 Zoning Districts at existing agriculture sites for a
period not to exceed three (3) days. Patron parking shall be located so as to
not interfere with traffic and so that emergency access is maintained for the
street right-of-way and to the auction site. If used, temporary holding pens
shall be located a minimum of one hundred fifty feet (150') from any adjacent
residentially used or zoned property. The event planner shall provide written
information as to the provision of drinking water, sewage disposal and
sanitation (hand-washing stations, food services, garbage and refuse disposal,
etc.) in compliance with State health requirements and regulations.
      4.   Events, Tent Or Other Temporary Structure: Events in a tent or other
temporary structure may be allowed in any Non-Residential Zoning District for a
period not to exceed sixty (60) days. The tent or temporary structure shall be
removed within forty eight (48) hours of the end of the event.
      5.   FEMA Trailers, Natural Disaster Or Significant Weather Event: FEMA
trailers may be used as temporary housing in any Residential Zoning District
following a natural disaster or significant weather event. Should a non-
conforming residential use exist at the time of a natural disaster or
significant weather event in a district other than Residential, a FEMA trailer
may be used as temporary housing in that zoning district. FEMA trailers shall
be removed within ninety (90) days of completion of new construction.
      6.   Food Trucks/Food Carts: Food trucks/food carts are permitted on an
on-going basis subject to a temporary use permit subject to the following:
         a.   Food truck/food carts must have a valid Lyon County business
license, State Health Department permit and any required inspections for
operation.
         b.   All licenses and permit must be prominently displayed.
         c.   Temporary permits for food trucks may be issued annually and may
include multiple locations.
         d.   Food trucks/food carts must be attended at all times.
         e.   Transaction of business shall only occur on private property with
the written permission of the subject property owner.
         f.   Hours of operation are limited to six o'clock (6:00) A.M. to ten
o'clock (10:00) P.M. Extended hours may be requested so long as reasonable
justification (such as a special event) is provided. Approval of the extension
of hours of operation shall be to the determination of the Director.
         g.   Food trucks/food carts shall not be located closer than three
hundred feet (300') of a brick-and-mortar restaurant establishment selling
taxable food, as defined in Nevada Revised Statutes 372.284 as may be amended,
during the establishment's hours of operation (as measured from the closest
point of the building containing the food establishment to the food truck/food
cart).
         h.   Food trucks/food carts shall designate a legally permitted clean-
out location to be used by the food truck/food cart vendor prior to the
issuance of a business license/temporary use permit. Clean out of the food
truck/food cart shall only occur at the designated legally permitted clean out
location.
         i.   Food trucks/food carts shall not interfere with the circulation
or parking of vehicles in the required parking area of any site.
         j.   Food trucks/food carts shall not interfere with the safe and
convenient passage of pedestrians.
         k.   Food trucks/food carts shall provide a venue free from excessive
noise. Food trucks/food carts shall not broadcast any music during set up and
operating on-site.
         l.   The use of flood lights, strobe lights or other similar devices
used to attract attention to the food truck/food cart is prohibited. Lighting
shall be limited to only the level necessary to conduct business and
transactions in association with the food truck or cart.
         m.   All signs must be attached to the food truck or cart.
         n.   Food trucks/food carts shall keep the set-up sites clean and free
of trash, debris, garbage and other refuse.
         o.   Food trucks/food carts shall provide appropriate trash
receptacles for their customers' use. The receptacles shall move from place to
place with the vendor and shall be emptied at an appropriate location, as
necessary.
         p.   Food trucks/food carts shall comply with the requirements of
Nevada Revised Statutes 446.017 - 446.945, inclusive and NAC 446.732 - 446.759,
inclusive.
      7.   Mobile Personal Storage Unit, Vacant Or Occupied Premises: One
personal mobile storage unit permitted per parcel in any zoning district. The
unit may be stored on site for up to thirty (30) days to allow the current
owner or tenant to vacate the premises or to allow a new owner or tenant to
occupy the premises. In no case shall this type of unit be permitted or used
for permanent storage on a site.
      8.   Mobile Personal Storage Unit, Renovation: One personal mobile
storage unit permitted per parcel in any zoning district. The unit may be
stored on site for up to ninety (90) days to allow for temporary storage during
renovation or remodeling projects. In no case shall this type of unit be
permitted or used for permanent storage or use of any inhabitance on a site.
      9.   Outdoor Concerts, Special Events Or Festivals:
         a.   Outdoor concerts, special events or festivals are required to
secure an outdoor festival license pursuant to title 5, chapter 7 of this Code.
         b.   Outdoor concerts, special events and festivals shall be limited
to maximum of one thousand (1,000) attendees at one time. Expected attendance
beyond that level at one time shall require a conditional use permit per
chapter 230 of this title.
         c.   Parking plans shall be submitted to the department with an
application for temporary use permit. No more than fifty percent (50%) of the
necessary parking shall be provided on-street. Use of off-street parking not on
the event site shall be verified as allowed via a lease or signed letter/
agreement from the property owner identifying that the parking for the event
shall be allowed and is acceptable.
         d.   Hours of operation shall be clearly identified, noting the time
that workers will be arriving for set-up, when the general public shall be
allowed to enter the concert or event, when the event will end and the amount
of time needed to deconstruct or clean up the venue. When a concert is planned
within one-half (1/2) mile of Residentially zoned property, the concert shall
end by ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. Later hours of operation may be requested
through the review and approval of a conditional use permit, per chapter 230 of
this title.
         e.   The event planner shall provide written information in regard to
the proposed methods of provision of drinking water, sewage disposal and
sanitation (hand-washing stations, food services, garbage and refuse disposal,
etc.) in compliance with State health requirements and regulations.
         f.   Special events and activities conducted on public property, such
as school sites and public parks, may be exempt from the provisions of this
chapter but must comply with any guidelines, regulations and permitting
processes required by the authorizing agency.
         g.   The event planner shall provide written correspondence of
notification of the date, time and that coordination with the Lyon County
Sheriff's Office and/or Nevada Highway Patrol has commenced in the planning of
the concert/event. Additionally, the event planner shall provide a traffic
control plan approved by the Sheriff's Office, Nevada Department of
Transportation and Nevada Highway Patrol and a parking plan shall be provided
sufficient to meet the demand from attendees.
         h.   The outdoor concerts, special events or festivals at which one
thousand (1,000) or more persons are projected to be in attendance at the same
time shall meet the requirements and conform to the State laws contained in
Nevada Revised Statutes 450B.
         i.   If the event or venue is already covered by a special use permit,
any requirements for the event or venue contained in this section shall defer
to the conditions of approval of the approved, valid special use permit.
      10.   Similar Uses Not Specified: If a particular temporary use is not
listed in this chapter, the Director shall have the authority to grant a
temporary use permit for a "similar use". Similar uses not specified are those
uses which are similar to those allowed as temporary uses in this section.
Determination of what constitutes similar shall be made by the Director. The
applicant shall provide the following information for consideration: type of
use, number of employees, parking/circulation, hours of operation, general site
description, and duration of operation. If the Director determines that the use
is not similar, the applicant may appeal the decision to the commission in
accordance with chapter 4 of this title. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 607,
9-19-2019)
CHAPTER 336
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR CONDITIONAL USES
SECTION:
15.336.01: Introduction
15.336.02: How To Use This Chapter
15.336.03: Conditional Uses
15.336.04: Reserved
15.336.05: Reserved
15.336.06: Energy Storage Systems
15.336.07: Wind Energy Conversion Systems, Commercial
15.336.08: Geothermal Generating Systems
15.336.09: Solar Generation, Commercial
15.336.10: Power Transmission Lines
15.336.11: Power Substations
15.336.12: Decommissioning And Reclamation Of Commercial Wind Conversion
Systems, Geothermal Generating Systems, Commercial Solar Generation, And
Commercial Energy Storage Systems
15.336.13: Small Agricultural Production/Food Processing Facility
15.336.14: Small Poultry/Small Meat Processing Facility
15.336.15: Meat Processing Facility
15.336.16: Facilities For Use, Manufacture, Processing, Transfer Or Storage Of
Explosives Or Certain Other Substances
15.336.01: INTRODUCTION:
The purpose of this chapter is to describe the minimum performance standards
for uses that may be permitted through the approval of a conditional use permit
(CUP) in accordance with the requirements of chapter 230 of this title. (Ord.
603, 11-1-2018)
15.336.02: HOW TO USE THIS CHAPTER:
Land uses that require a CUP are listed in section
15.336.03, table 15.336-1 of this chapter. Column 1 of this table identifies
the specific land use requiring a conditional use permit, and column 2 of this
table provides a reference to the standard(s) applicable to the land use.
In many cases, the minimum standards for a conditional use are the same as
those established in chapter 335 of this title for permitted uses. Where no
specific reference to a standard appears in column 2 of this table, the
development standards outlined in section
15.330.03 of this title shall be utilized as applicable to the specific use.
The approving authority may consider additional appropriate standards and
establish additional specific conditions of approval where warranted by the
specific use and its locality.
In addition to the minimum use standards listed on section
15.336.03, table 15.336-1 of this chapter conditional uses must comply with all
requirements of this title and applicable development standards.
Following section
15.336.03, table 15.336-1 of this chapter, sections 15.336.03 et seq., of this
chapter identify specific requirements for the review and approval of certain
CUPs.
Conditional uses that do not meet the minimum performance standards of this
chapter shall not be permitted.
Prior to the establishment of any conditional use the user shall comply with
the requirements of chapter 230 of this title. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.336.03: CONDITIONAL USES:
TABLE 15.336-1
CONDITIONAL USE REFERENCE TABLE
Conditional Use Reference
Conditional Use                           Reference
Residential uses:                          
Group living facility, 11 or more         Chapter 360; NRS 449
residents
Manufactured/mobile home park             Chapter 352; NRS 461A
Public, institutional and civic uses:      
Adult or child day care, 7 or more        Chapter 330
clients
Archery range                             Subsection
                                          15.335.03YY; chapters 330, 360
Campground                                Chapter 330
Commercial coaches associated with        Chapter 330
Public, Institutional and Civic Uses
Government administration and civic       Chapter 330
buildings
General aviation airports                 Chapter 330
Hospital                                  Chapter 330
Intermediate care facility, nursing home, Chapter 330
rehab center
Post-secondary, trade or technical        Chapter 330
education
Public assembly, including churches       Subsection 15.335.03 JJ; chapter 330
School, K - 12 (public or private)        Chapter 330
Social, fraternal lodges                  Subsection 15.335.03 K; chapter 330
Recreational facilities                    
Equestrian facility                       Chapters 330, 360
Golf course or driving range              Subsection
                                          15.335.03T; chapters 330, 360
Indoor recreation/sports/fitness facility Subsection
                                          15.335.03HH; chapters 330, 360
Medical marijuana dispensary              NRS 453A
Outdoor concerts, special events, rodeos  Chapters 330, 360 (Rodeos must comply
or festivals                              with title 7, chapter 1)
Paintball facility, indoor                Subsection
                                          15.330.03HH; chapter 360
Paintball facility, outdoor               Chapters 330, 360
Private residential recreation facility   Chapters 330, 360
Private use airstrips                     Chapter 330
Shooting range, indoor                    Subsection
                                          15.335.03XX; chapters 330, 360
Shooting range, outdoor                   Chapters 330, 360
Skeet/trap shooting range or course       Subsection
                                          15.335.03YY; chapters 330, 360
Agricultural uses:                         
Agricultural tourism                      Chapters 330, 360
Commercial coaches associated with        Chapter 330
agriculture related industry
Equestrian facilities                     Subsection
                                          15.335.03AAA; chapter 330
Farm market                               Chapters 330, 360
Milk processing, cheese manufacturing,    Section
etc.                                      15.336.04; chapter 330
Commercial uses:                           
Animal rescue facility                    Chapters 330, 360, Title 7
B&B/lodge or inn                          Subsection
                                          15.335.03H; chapters 330, 360
Bar or nightclub                          Chapters 330, 360
Convenience store with petroleum sales    Subsection
                                          15.335.03M; chapters 330, 360
Convenience store without petroleum sales Subsection
                                          15.335.03N; chapters 330, 360
Event or conference center                Chapters 330, 360
Grocery store                             Chapters 330, 360
Guest/dude ranch                          Subsection
                                          15.335.03H; chapters 330, 360
Kennel, breeder and commercial            Chapters 330, 360
Movie theater/performance hall            Chapters 330, 360
Office, greater than 25,000 square feet   Chapters 330, 360
RV park                                   Chapters 330, 360
Recreational marijuana retail sales       NRS 453D
Truck stop                                Subsection
                                          15.335.03HHH; chapters 330, 360
Veterinary clinic/hospital, small animal  Chapters 330, 360
with outdoor kennel
Veterinary clinic/hospital, small animal  Chapters 330, 360
without outdoor kennel
Veterinary clinic/hospital, large animal  Chapters 330, 360
Zoo                                       Chapters 330, 360, Title 7
Industrial uses:                           
Aggregate extraction, crushing, asphalt   Chapter 330; Section
batch plants, ore milling and processing  15.336.05
Facilities for use, manufacture,          Section
processing, transfer or storage of        15.336.16; NRS 278.147
explosives or certain other substances
Fossil or alternative fuel generating     Chapter 330
facility, commercial
Geothermal generating systems             Section
                                          15.336.08; chapter 330; NRS 534A
Meat processing facility                  Section
                                          15.336.15; chapter 330
Power substations                         Section
                                          15.336.11; chapter 330
Power transmission lines                  Section
                                          15.336.10; chapters 235, 330
Small agricultural production/food        Section
production facility                       15.336.13; chapter 330
Small poultry/small meat processing       Section
facility                                  15.336.14; chapter 330
Solar generation, commercial              Section
                                          15.336.09; chapter 330
Wind energy conversion, commercial        Section
                                          15.336.07; chapter 330
 
Note: The uses identified in this table may be "permitted uses" in other zoning
districts. See section
15.320.03,
tables 15.320-1 through
15.320-5 of this title tables of allowed uses for a complete list of permitted
uses, conditionally permitted uses, temporary uses and prohibited uses by
zoning district. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 607, 9-19-2019; Ord. 637, 11-
7-2024)
15.336.04: RESERVED:
(Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.336.05: RESERVED:
(Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.336.06: ENERGY STORAGE SYSTEMS:
   A.   Purpose: The intent of this section is to regulate the development of
Energy Storage Systems (ESS) to protect the public health, safety and general
welfare.
   B.   Definitions:
   COMMERCIAL ENERGY STORAGE SYSTEM (ESS): A system that uses mechanical,
chemical, hydrological or thermal processes to store energy that was generated
at one time for use at a later time and is designed to have a storage capacity
of over ten (10) megawatt hours for the entire facility. Commercial Energy
Storage System does not include Energy Storage Systems that are used to provide
back-up power to manufacturing and/or data center uses, and are accessory to
the primary use of manufacturing or data center, if located on the same parcel.
   LITHIUM ION BATTER ENERGY STORAGE SYSTEM (LiBESS): Is a commercial Energy
Storage System (ESS) that uses Lithium ion Batteries as a component of the
energy storage system. Lithium Ion Battery Energy Storage System does not
include LiBESS that are used to provide back-up power to manufacturing and/or
data center uses, and are accessory to the primary use of manufacturing or data
center, if located on the same parcel.
   C.   Conditional Use Permit: A conditional use permit shall be required for
an ESS project that is located in Lyon County in order to review, identify and
develop mitigation measures that reduce the potential negative impacts to
abutting properties.
   D.   Siting Requirements:
      1.   Parcel Size: A minimum parcel size of ten (10) acres net is
required. No part of the ESS or LiBESS shall be located within or over
drainage, utility or other established easements.
      2.   Setback: Each LiBESS must be set a minimum of one mile (5,280 feet)
from a trail easement, highway, river, perennial or intermittent stream, lake
and/or property with an existing residential use. The Board of County
Commissioners may, at their sole discretion, approve setbacks that are less
than the setbacks outlined in this chapter if the project is a part of a
Planned Unit Development (PUD).
      3.   Components: All components of the ESS must be set back from the
property boundary a minimum of thirty feet (30').
      4.   Comstock Historic District: In addition to all other requirements,
all proposed ESS located within the Comstock Historic District, as established
by the Comstock Historical Commission pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes
chapter 384, shall receive a review, approval and a certificate of
appropriateness from the Comstock Historic District Commission prior to
submitting an application for a conditional use permit.
      5.   Height: Unless otherwise approved the total extended height of a
commercial ESS shall not exceed twenty-four feet (24'). The system must be in
compliance with FAA regulations regarding height and lighting.
      6.   Minimum Standards: Standards for access, noise, design and
installation, etc., shall meet or exceed the requirements of chapter 337,
"Performance Requirements for Industrial Uses", of this title. However,
conditions placed on the conditional use permit may be more restrictive than
the minimum standards provided in this chapter.
      7.   Building Permit: A permit from the County Building Department is
required to install an ESS in Lyon County. In evaluating whether to approve a
building permit, the building official may request and consider:
         a.   Supporting technical data;
         b.   Test reports; and
         c.   Appropriate documentation from approved sources.
      8.   Road Impacts:
         a.   Developer shall be responsible for all roadway improvements
necessary to support all construction and ongoing operations of the ESS, to the
satisfaction of the Lyon County Road Director.
         b.   The project shall require two (2) separate traffic studies: one
traffic study for the construction phase of the project and a second traffic
study for the operations and maintenance phase of the project. Traffic studies
shall be provided at the time of application for the Conditional Use Permit or
Planned Unit Development process.
         c.   ESS projects shall not block, re-route, or restrict access to
public roads, including but not limited to RS 2477 roads, which provide access
to public lands. The developer may propose an alternate route as a part of the
Conditional Use Permit process or Planned Unit Development process which the
Board may approve at their sole discretion. Factors considered when determining
approval of an alternate route include but are not limited to changes in travel
distance/time, terrain, maintenance, granting of right-of-way, and impact to
surrounding properties.
      9.   Visual Appearance: Placement of facilities shall minimize the visual
impact of the development from surrounding properties and public rights-of-way.
      10.   Drainage: All improvements, including necessary road improvements,
shall comply with the most recent version of the Lyon County Drainage
Guidelines.
      11.   Fire Protection: All ESS projects located outside of the boundaries
of a Fire Protection District must enter into an agreement with the nearest
Fire Protection District to provide fire protection, inspection, and emergency
medical services. LiBESS projects must receive approval from the appropriate
Fire Protection District prior to construction. LiBESS projects must provide
the necessary equipment and training, as the Fire Protection District may
require, to effectively fight a fire at the facility. If the Fire Protection
District chooses not to provide fire protection, inspection, and/or emergency
medical services to the project, the project proponent must provide a plan for
how they will provide for those services.
      12.   Decommission And Reclamation Plan: Developer shall submit a
reclamation plan to the department as a part of a Conditional Use Permit
application. The reclamation plan shall identify the life expectancy of the
project and a decommissioning timeline with milestones and shall comply with
all requirements in L.C.C. 15.336.12.
      13.   Reclamation: The project must be reclaimed in accordance with the
reclamation plan once the project has reached the end of its useful life. If
the project owner takes steps to increase the useful life of the project, the
project owner must notify the Department in writing and submit a new
reclamation plan reflecting the increased project life.
      14.   Variance: Deviations from the standards established by this chapter
shall require a variance in accordance with chapter 203 of this title.
(Ord. 603, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 640, 6-18-2025)
15.336.07: WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS, COMMERCIAL:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to regulate commercial wind
energy conversion systems (WECS) to protect the public health, safety and
welfare while encouraging the development of wind energy within Lyon County.
   B.   Acknowledgment/Approval: Written acknowledgment and general approval
from the property owner as well as the public utility whose transmission lines
to which the commercial WECS is proposed to connect into must be included in
all commercial WECS applications.
   C.   Siting Requirements:
      1.   Parcel Size: A minimum parcel size of ten (10) acres net is
required. No part of the commercial WECS shall be located within or over
drainage, utility or other established easements.
      2.   Setback: Each wind machine must be set back a minimum of two (2)
times the total extended height from any property line, railroad, aboveground
utility lines or public roads. Setback increases to a minimum of one half mile
(2,640 feet) from a trail easement, highway, and/or adjacent properties with an
existing residential use. Setback increases to one mile (5,280 feet) from an
airport, river, perennial or intermittent stream, and/or lake. The Board of
County Commissioners may, at their sole discretion, approve setbacks that are
less than the setbacks outlined in this chapter if the project is a part of a
Planned Unit Development (PUD).
      3.   Comstock Historic District: In addition to all other requirements,
all proposed commercial WECS located within the Comstock Historic District, as
established by the Comstock Historical Commission pursuant to Nevada Revised
Statutes chapter 384, shall receive a review, approval and a certificate of
appropriateness from the Comstock Historic District Commission prior to
submitting an application for a conditional use permit.
      4.   Height: Unless otherwise approved, the total extended height of the
wind machine shall not exceed two hundred feet (200'). The system must be in
compliance with FAA regulations regarding height and lighting. Projects located
in an area with military airspace shall comply with military height and
lighting regulations.
      5.   Minimum Standards: Remaining standards regarding such things as
access, noise, design and installation, etc., shall meet or exceed those of
private wind energy systems (see subsection
15.335.03FFF of this title). However, conditions placed on the conditional use
permit may be more restrictive than the minimum standards provided in this
chapter.
      6.   Building Permit: A permit from the County Building Department is
required to install an alternative energy system in Lyon County. In evaluating
whether to approve a building permit, the building official may request and
consider:
         a.   Supporting technical data,
         b.   Test reports, and
         c.   Appropriate documentation from approved sources.
      7.   Road Impacts:
         a.   Developer shall be responsible for all roadway improvements
necessary to support all construction and ongoing operations of the WECS, to
the satisfaction of the Lyon County Road Director.
         b.   The project shall require two (2) separate traffic studies: one
traffic study for the construction phase of the project and a second traffic
study for the operations and maintenance phase of the project. Traffic Studies
shall be provided at the time of application for the conditional use permit or
Planned Unit Development process.
         c.   WECS projects shall not block, re-route, or restrict access to
public roads, including but not limited to RS 2477 roads, which provide access
to public lands. The developer may propose an alternate route as a part of the
conditional use permit process or Planned Unit Development process which the
Board may approve at their sole discretion. Factors considered when determining
approval of an alternate route include but are not limited to changes in travel
distance/time, terrain, maintenance, granting of right-of-way, and impact to
surrounding properties.
      8.   Drainage: All improvements, including necessary road improvements,
shall comply with the most recent version of the Lyon County Drainage
Guidelines.
      9.   Fire Protection: All WECS projects located outside of the boundaries
of a Fire Protection District must enter into an agreement with the nearest
Fire Protection District to provide fire protection, inspection, and emergency
medical services. If the Fire Protection District chooses not to provide fire
protection, inspection, and/or emergency medical services to the project, the
project proponent must provide a plan for how they will provide for those
services.
      10.   Decommission And Reclamation Plan: Developer shall submit a
reclamation plan to the department as a part of a conditional use permit
application. The reclamation plan shall identify the life expectancy of the
project and a decommissioning timeline with milestones and shall comply with
all requirements in L.C.C.
15.336.12.
      11.   Reclamation: The project must be reclaimed in accordance with the
reclamation plan once the project has reached the end of its useful life. If
the project owner takes steps to increase the useful life of the project, the
project owner must notify the Department in writing and submit a new
reclamation plan reflecting the increased project life.
      12.   Variance: Deviations from the standards established by this chapter
shall require a variance in accordance with chapter 203 of this title.
(Ord. 603, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 640, 6-18-2025)
15.336.08: GEOTHERMAL GENERATING SYSTEMS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to manage the exploration,
development and use of geothermal resources in Lyon County.
   B.   Other Permits: All geothermal projects shall be required to obtain all
necessary permits from the regulatory agencies with authority over such
developments including, but not limited to the State Division of Minerals, the
State Department of Environmental Protection, the State Division of Water
Resources, the State Health Department, U.S. Forest Service, Nevada State
Lands, and the U.S. Bureau of Land Management prior to the issuance of any
building/grading permits for the project.
   C.   Consultant Services: If required, outside consulting services for data
and modeling reviews shall be the financial responsibility of the applicant.
The applicant and County shall enter into an agreement regarding the fees and
confidentiality prior to the chosen consultant's review of the data and
modeling. The chosen consultant shall act as the County's designated agent.
   D.   Geothermal Exploration Project: A geothermal exploration project is for
the purpose of evaluating the presence and characteristics of geothermal
resources prior to starting a geothermal field development project.
      1.   Prior to commencing a geothermal exploration project, the developer
shall provide Lyon County Community Development Department with a written
notice of intent including the following:
         a.   A description of the project including a map of appropriate scale
showing the location of the proposed wells and effluent disposal.
         b.   A description of the potential impacts to the local community,
existing authorized uses, and natural environment, and proposed measures to
mitigate impacts.
         c.   Statement in which the applicant agrees to provide the County
access to the data used to develop the conceptual aquifer model.
      2.   The Community Development Department shall not take possession of
the written notice of intent; rather the applicant shall make the information
available for inspection by County officials or their designated agents
provided the County officials and/or designated agents agree not to disclose
the information contained in the notice of intent or disseminate the
information to the public.
      3.   Prior to commencing a geothermal exploration project, grading
permits and a reclamation plan shall be submitted to Community Development for
approval prior to beginning exploration activities. Any grading (including
temporary access roads, drilling pads etc.) that exceeds fifty (50) cubic yards
must have a mass grading plan approved.
   E.   Geothermal Well Field Gathering Systems And Power Generation
Facilities: In order to establish a geothermal well field gathering system and/
or power generation facility, the following items shall be submitted to the
Community Development Department:
      1.   Monitoring Plan: A modeling plan shall be submitted in compliance
with 40 CFR part 146 underground injection control program (unless waived by
the County based upon the review of the conceptual aquifer model). Prior to
commencement of any operations of the geothermal well field and power
generating facilities, baseline data representation and collection shall be
established to the satisfaction of the County. Projection of geothermal fluids
use and injection will be presented to the County as well as a conceptual
model. The monitoring plan must be approved by the County and their designated
agent prior to the operation of the facilities.
      2.   Numeric Aquifer Model: A numeric aquifer model shall be submitted
based on the collection of three (3) years of data following the commencement
of operations. The numeric aquifer model shall be designed to show
hydrogeological and thermal data to enable modeling of impacts of pumping and
injection to the aquifer and potential mitigation actions. The model shall
include data on the following:
         a.   Thermal properties of the aquifer including local and large-
scale impacts to local aquifers;
         b.   Potential subsidence impacts based on analysis of existing and
predicted conditions using the pumping and injection volumes proposed for the
project;
         c.   Changes in the radioactive characteristics from pumping (if any);
and
         d.   Groundwater aquifer physical and chemical changes before and
after the project completion including pressure, temperature trends, volumes
and water chemistry.
         e.   The County and their authorized representative will review and if
necessary revise the numeric aquifer model.
      3.   Siting Of Geothermal Well Field Gathering Systems And Power
Generation Facilities: Geothermal well field gathering systems and related
power generation facilities shall be sited in areas with the appropriate zoning
district as designated in the land use table contained in section 15.320.03 of
this title. If necessary, a zone change application as described in chapter 220
of this title must be requested and approved prior to any permits for the
geothermal well field system being issued.
      4.   Proximity To Domestic Wells: Geothermal temperature gradient and
exploration/development test wells shall be located a minimum of three thousand
feet (3,000') from any adjacent private domestic or agricultural well(s) unless
a lease agreement exists between the domestic well owner and the geothermal
developer, and a minimum of three thousand feet (3,000') from State- permitted
municipal and industrial or quasi-municipal and industrial purpose wells. A
variance request as outlined in chapter 203 of this title from this separation
standards may be submitted if supported by the outcome of the conceptual
aquifer models results.
      5.   Minimum Siting Requirements And Standards: A geothermal well field
gathering system and all related above-ground structures related to power
generation shall comply with the following minimum standards:
         a.   Visual Appearance: Placement of facilities shall endeavor to
minimize the visual impact of the development from surrounding properties and
public rights-of-way.
         b.   Height Limits: The maximum height of structures shall comply with
the maximum building height listed in the underlying zoning district as listed
in chapter 330 of this title.
         c.   Screening And Lighting: Screening and/or buffering treatments may
be required to mitigate visual and noise impacts. Where possible, all equipment
shall be of a color that blends into the natural surroundings. Lighting shall
include light shields that minimize light pollution by eliminating glare into
adjoining properties and minimizes light visible from public rights-of- way.
         d.   Noise: Geothermal well field gathering systems' wells and power
generation equipment shall not generate noise levels that exceed sixty five
(65) dBA time weighted average as measured at the property line located closest
to the wells and/or power generation equipment or one-half (½) mile from the
facility, whichever is closer. Adjustments for ambient noise will be acceptable
and irregular short periods of exceeding the sixty five (65) dBA standard in
association with operational anomalies or maintenance is permissible.
Acoustical shielding may be required for well heads and power generation
equipment in order to comply with this development standard.
         e.   Road Impacts:
      1.   Developer shall be responsible for all roadway improvements
necessary to support all construction and ongoing operations of the Geothermal
Generating System, to the satisfaction of the Lyon County Road Director.
      2.   The project shall require two (2) separate traffic studies: one
traffic study for the construction phase of the project and a second traffic
study for the operations and maintenance phase of the project. Traffic studies
shall be provided at the time of application for the conditional use permit or
Planned Unit Development process.
      3.   Geothermal Generation projects shall not block, re-route, or
restrict access to public roads, including but not limited to RS 2477 roads,
which provide access to public lands. The developer may propose an alternate
route as a part of the conditional use permit process or Planned Unit
Development process which the Board may approve at their sole discretion.
Factors considered when determining approval of an alternate route include but
are not limited to changes in travel distance/time, terrain, maintenance,
granting of right-of-way, and impact to surrounding properties.
         a.   Drainage: All improvements, including necessary road
improvements, shall comply with the most recent version of the Lyon County
Drainage Guidelines.
         b.   Fire Protection: All Geothermal projects located outside of the
boundaries of a Fire Protection District must enter into an agreement with the
nearest Fire Protection District to provide fire protection, inspection, and
emergency medical services. If the Fire Protection District chooses not to
provide fire protection, inspection, and/or emergency medical services to the
project, the project proponent must provide a plan for how they will provide
for those services.
         c.   Decommission And Reclamation Plan: Developer shall submit a
reclamation plan to the department as a part of a conditional use permit
application. The reclamation plan shall identify the life expectancy of the
project and a decommissioning timeline with milestones and shall comply with
all requirements in L.C.C. 15.336.12.
         d.   Reclamation: The project must be reclaimed in accordance with the
reclamation plan once the project has reached the end of its useful life. If
the project owner takes steps to increase the useful life of the project, the
project owner must notify the Department in writing and submit a new
reclamation plan reflecting the increased project life.
   F.   Geothermal Direct Use Wells: Geothermal direct use wells for commercial
or industrial space heating, food dehydration, or other similar such uses shall
be subject to the standards listed in this chapter and Nevada Revised Statutes
534A.
(Ord. 603, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 640, 6-18-2025)
15.336.09: SOLAR GENERATION, COMMERCIAL:
   A.   Purpose: The intent of this section is to encourage the development of
commercial solar energy conversion systems (SECS) while protecting the public
health, safety and general welfare.
   B.   Definitions:
   SOLAR ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS (SECS): A facility for the generation of
electricity utilizing the energy in sunlight for the purpose of producing
electricity to be used on site and/or sold and distributed through the
established commercial power grid. Technologies include photovoltaics and
concentrated solar power generators. SECS does not include facilities that are
used to provide power to manufacturing and/or data center uses, and are
accessory to the primary use of manufacturing or data center, if located on the
same parcel or entitled through a common conditional use permit or Planned Unit
Development.
   C.   Shade Structures: Non-commercial building-mounted solar systems,
including solar energy conversion systems (SECS) used as parking lot shade
structures, shall not require a CUP provided the structure is conforming,
houses or is accessory to a permitted use, and meets all Building Code
requirements.
   D.   Acknowledgment/Approval: Written acknowledgment and general approval
from the public utility must be included in all commercial SECS applications.
   E.   Siting Requirements:
      1.   Parcel Size: A minimum parcel size of ten (10) acres net is
required. No part of the commercial SECS shall be located within or over
drainage, utility or other established easements.
      2.   Setback: Each commercial SECS array must be set a minimum of one
half mile (2,640 feet) from a trail easement, highway and/or adjacent
properties with an existing residential use. Setback increases to one mile
(5,280 feet) from an airport, river, perennial or intermittent stream, and/or
lake. An SECS may be placed closer than 2,640 feet from a property with an
existing residential use, trail easement, or highway if it is separated by a
geologic feature or building of a height sufficient to completely obstruct
views of the commercial SECS from a point sixteen (16) vertical feet above the
boundary of any Residential Zoning District. The Board of County Commissioners
may, at their sole discretion, approve setbacks that are less than the setbacks
outlined in this chapter if the project is a part of a Planned Unit Development
(PUD).
      3.   Components: All components of the commercial SECS must be set back
from the property boundary a minimum of thirty feet (30').
      4.   Comstock Historic District: In addition to all other requirements,
all proposed commercial SECS located within the Comstock Historic District, as
established by the Comstock Historical Commission pursuant to Nevada Revised
Statutes chapter 384, shall receive a review, approval and a certificate of
appropriateness from the Comstock Historic District Commission prior to
submitting an application for a conditional use permit.
      5.   Height: Unless otherwise approved the total extended height of a
commercial SECS shall not exceed twenty four feet (24'). The system must be in
compliance with FAA regulations regarding height and lighting.
      6.   Minimum Standards: Standards for access, noise, design and
installation, etc., shall meet or exceed the requirements of chapter 337,
"Performance Requirements For Industrial Uses", of this title. However,
conditions placed on the conditional use permit may be more restrictive than
the minimum standards provided in this chapter.
      7.   Building Permit: A permit from the County Building Department is
required to install a commercial SEC system in Lyon County. In evaluating
whether to approve a building permit, the building official may request and
consider:
         a.   Supporting technical data,
         b.   Test reports, and
         c.   Appropriate documentation from approved sources.
      8.   Road Impacts:
         a.   Developer shall be responsible for all roadway improvements
necessary to support all construction and ongoing operations of the SECS, to
the satisfaction of the Lyon County Road Director.
         b.   The project shall require two (2) separate traffic studies: one
traffic study for the construction phase of the project and a second traffic
study for the operations and maintenance phase of the project. Traffic studies
shall be provided at the time of application for the conditional use permit or
Planned Unit Development process.
         c.   SECS projects shall not block, re-route, or restrict access to
public roads, including but not limited to RS 2477 roads, which provide access
to public lands. The developer may propose an alternate route as a part of the
conditional use permit or Planned Unit Development process which the Board may
approve at their sole discretion. Factors considered when determining approval
of an alternate route include but are not limited to changes in travel
distance/time, terrain, maintenance, granting of right-of-way, and impact to
surrounding properties.
      9.   Visual Appearance: Placement of facilities shall minimize the visual
impact of the development from surrounding properties and public rights-of-way.
SECSs shall be constructed and/or screened as to not unreasonably infringe upon
the use and enjoyment of the surrounding properties and rights-of-way. There
shall be no reflection or glare permitted to impact any public rights-of-way.
Developers shall submit a visual impact study to the Community Development
Department at the time of the conditional use permit application or Planned
Unit Development process.
      10.   Drainage: All improvements, including necessary road improvements,
shall comply with the most recent version of the Lyon County Drainage
Guidelines.
      11.   Fire Protection: All SECS projects located outside of the
boundaries of a Fire Protection District must enter into an agreement with the
nearest Fire Protection District to provide fire protection, inspection, and
emergency medical services. If the Fire Protection District chooses not to
provide fire protection, inspection, and/or emergency medical services to the
project, the project proponent must provide a plan for how they will provide
for those services.
      12.   Decommission And Reclamation Plan: Developer shall submit a
reclamation plan to the department as a part of a conditional use permit
application or Planned Unit Development process. The reclamation plan shall
identify the life expectancy of the project and a decommissioning timeline with
milestones and shall comply with all requirements in L.C.C. 15.336.12.
      13.   Reclamation: The project must be reclaimed in accordance with the
reclamation plan once the project has reached the end of its useful life. If
the project owner takes steps to increase the useful life of the project, the
project owner must notify the Department in writing and submit a new
reclamation plan reflecting the increased project life.
      14.   Variance: Deviations from the standards established by this chapter
shall require a variance in accordance with chapter 203 of this title.
(Ord. 603, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 640, 6-18-2025)
15.336.10: POWER TRANSMISSION LINES:
   A.   Purpose: It is the intent of this section to provide for the delivery
of electrical power in an efficient and effective manner to the utility's
customers allowing for an expedited review process for new power transmission
lines to be located within designated transmission corridors within the
County's master plan while requiring approval of a conditional use permit for
new transmission lines located outside of designated transmission corridors as
per Nevada Revised Statutes 278.26503. Power transmission lines are permitted
in all zoning districts due to the linear nature of transmission lines either
through the design review process if located within a designated utility
corridor in the County's master plan or as a conditional use permit.
   B.   Other Permits: Typically transmission lines cross through a combination
of private and public lands in order to tie into other existing or proposed
utility infrastructure (e.g., substations or switching stations, connecting
transmission lines). If the aboveground utility project is located on land
administered by any agency of the Federal government the applicant shall notify
the County of its intent to submit an application concurrent with the Federal
review and permit application process, and attend a pre-submittal conference
with County staff to discuss the project and specific application requirements.
Subsequent to the pre-application meeting, the applicant shall submit as the
application the appropriate documents related to the environmental review by
State and Federal land management agencies. If the applicant is required to
apply for a permit to construct under the Utility Environmental Protection Act
from the Public Utilities Commission of Nevada, then the applicant's NEPA
application shall constitute the environmental review documents for the
conditional use permit application.
   C.   Conditional Use Permit: A conditional use permit shall be required for
a power transmission line project that is located outside a designated
aboveground utility corridor as identified in the public facilities/services
component of the Lyon County comprehensive master plan. In addition to the
requirements of this chapter the applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed
project meets the following criteria:
      1.   Corridors must not conflict with any existing or planned
infrastructure or utility projects;
      2.   Proximity of the proposed corridor to any school, hospital, or urban
residential area with a dwelling density greater than two (2) units per acre
must be taken into consideration and setbacks conforming to the requirements of
the National Electric Safety Code (NESC) established by easement; and
      3.   The proposed aboveground utility corridor is in conformance with the
goals and policies of the public utilities/services component of the Lyon
County comprehensive master plan. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.336.11: POWER SUBSTATIONS:
   A.   Purpose: It is the intent of this section to provide for the delivery
of electrical power in an efficient and effective manner to the utility's
customers allowing for a timely review process for new power substations to be
located within the County.
   B.   Other Permits: Power substations may be located on either private or
public lands in order to tie into other existing or proposed utility
infrastructure (e.g., connecting transmission lines). If the power substation
project is located on land administered by any agency of the Federal government
the applicant shall notify the County of its intent to submit an application
concurrent with the Federal review and permit application process, and attend a
pre-submittal conference with County staff to discuss the project and specific
application requirements. Subsequent to the pre-application meeting, the
applicant shall submit as the application the appropriate documents related to
the environmental review by State and Federal land management agencies. If the
applicant is required to apply for a permit to construct under the Utility
Environmental Protection Act from the Public Utilities Commission of Nevada,
then the applicant's NEPA application shall constitute the environmental review
documents for the conditional use permit application.
   C.   Conditional Use Permit: A conditional use permit shall be required for
a power substation project that is located on private land in order to review,
identify and develop mitigation measures that reduce the potential negative
impacts to abutting properties. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.336.12: DECOMMISSIONING AND RECLAMATION OF COMMERCIAL WIND CONVERSION
SYSTEMS, GEOTHERMAL GENERATING SYSTEMS, COMMERCIAL SOLAR GENERATION, AND
COMMERCIAL ENERGY STORAGE SYSTEMS:
   A.   Purpose: The intent of this section is to regulate and ensure the
proper decommissioning and reclamation of commercial wind conversion systems,
geothermal generating systems, commercial solar generation, and commercial
energy storage systems to protect the public health, safety and general
welfare.
   B.   Decommissioning And Reclamation: The conditional use permit for
commercial wind conversion systems, geothermal generating systems, commercial
solar generation, and commercial energy storage systems shall include the
submission of a Detailed Decommissioning Plan. Prior to the issuance of
construction permits, the cost estimate for the complete removal of non-
operational above and below ground improvements must be submitted and financial
assurance must be posted.
      1.   Decommissioning Plan: The Decommissioning Plan will address the
following items:
         a.   All physical improvements, materials, and equipment related to
solar energy generation, transmission, and storage must be removed from the
surface and the subsurface to a minimum depth of forty-eight (48") inches. The
pre-existing soil grade shall also be restored following disturbance caused in
the removal process. These shall include, but are not limited to, structures,
buildings, equipment, cabling and wiring, solar electric systems, electrical
components, security barriers, foundations, pilings, berms, storm water
improvements, and any other associated facilities.
         b.   All fencing shall be removed and recycled or reused unless the
Community Development Director grants approval for any existing perimeter
fencing to remain in place, in which case, the Nevada Department of Wildlife
will be consulted to ensure that the remaining fence will not negatively impact
wildlife.
         c.   All access roads located within the Project Area shall be removed
unless the road was in existence prior to the development or the Community
Development Director approves a written request from the current or purchasing
landowner to allow a portion of the access roads and associated culverts or
related materials to remain.
         d.   For any part of the facility on leased property, the
Decommissioning Plan may propose to incorporate agreements with landowners
regarding the retainment of driveways, roads, landscaping, berms, fences, gates
or repurposed buildings or other structures with approval by the Board of
County Commissioners. However, any proposed use of remaining buildings or other
structures must be in conformance with the regulations for the zoning district
in effect at the time of Board of County Commissioners approval.
         e.   Ground cover and screening established as part of the Facility
Development Plan and other existing vegetation may remain as part of the
Decommissioning Plan. Land disturbed as part of the decommissioning process
must be reseeded and re-vegetated with certified weed free native seed mixes or
other plant species suitable to the area. A list of such appropriate plant
materials shall be provided by the Community Development Director. Such
planting and associated grading or other land disturbance must be completed
within one (1) year of removal of Facility structures and equipment, in
accordance with the Decommissioning Plan approved and adopted by the Board of
County Commissioners.
         f.   Disposal and recycling of all facility materials and equipment,
including but not limited to, PV panels, inverters, and batteries must fully
comply with all applicable County, state and federal laws, regulations, and
code requirements, which includes a County-approved demolition permit for work
to be performed by a licensed contractor and an approved location for disposal
of such materials and equipment.
         g.   Guaranteed Funds: Financial assurance for the estimated cost of
decommissioning and reclamation, which may include the possibility of salvage
value if allowed by the Board of County Commissioners must be guaranteed by the
owner or operator of the Facility prior to issuance of construction permits to
ensure that decommissioning and reclamation can successfully occur. Should
another authority having jurisdiction (e.g., NDEP, Bureau of Land Management,
etc.) also require financial assurance for decommissioning and reclamation, the
Board of County Commissioners may consider accepting the same or portions of
the same financial assurance to satisfy both requirements, so long as the
assurance meets the specifications of both Lyon County and the separate
authority. Upon issuance of the financial assurance, the applicant shall name
the County as a party to the financial assurance. The applicant may choose one
of the following options (either the full cost option or the tiered
securitization option) to provide financial assurance.
         h.   Full Decommissioning Cost: The full cost of decommissioning and
reclamation will be guaranteed by one or any combination of the following as
determined acceptable by the Board of County Commissioners.
            (1)   Trust Fund: The owner or operator of the Facility shall
establish a trust fund into which money specifically earmarked for
decommissioning and reclamation is deposited. The Facility conditional use
permits and the terms of the trust fund shall prohibit the release of these
funds without the written consent of the County. The County shall consent to
the release of the funds upon compliance with the Decommissioning Plan approved
by the Board of County Commissioners.
            (2)   Payment Surety Bond: The owner or operator of the Facility
shall obtain a surety bond satisfactory to and approved by the County in an
amount equal to the estimated cost of decommissioning and reclamation. A
standby trust fund must be established into which the surety company will make
payments if the owner or operator fails to comply with their financial
responsibilities. This money deposited into the standby trust fund shall be
used to pay a third party to perform the work described in the Decommissioning
Plan approved by the Board of County Commissioners.
            (3)   Letter Of Credit: A letter of credit issued by a financial
institution that has a credit rating of at least A- or higher by Standard and
Poor's or A3 or higher by Moody's; and financial ratios and capitalization
requirements that are acceptable to the County, in the full amount of the
decommissioning and reclamation estimate.
            (4)   Tiered Securitization: An amount equal to, or more than, ten
(10%) percent of the approved decommissioning and reclamation cost estimate
shall be either: deposited into a cash escrow account at a financial
institution acceptable to the County; or an amount equal to, or more than, ten
(10%) percent of the decommissioning and reclamation cost estimate in the form
of a payment surety bond or a letter of credit issued by a financial
institution that has a credit rating of at least A- from Standard & Poor's or
A3 from Moody's and assets (50%) and capital surplus (50%) totaling at least
ten billion dollars ($10,000,000,000.00), or an A.M. Best financial strength
rating of at least A- (Excellent) or other credit rating and capitalization
reasonably acceptable to the County shall be obtained. The amount deposited in
the cash escrow account, or the amount of the surety bond or letter of credit,
shall increase by an additional ten (10%) percent each year on the anniversary
of the commencement of operation of the Facility for nine (9) additional years
until one hundred (100%) percent of the full cost estimate of decommissioning
and reclamation is achieved.
         i.   Cost Estimate Update: The estimated decommissioning and
reclamation costs must be recalculated at an interval no sooner than every year
but not later than every five (5) years by an independent third-party Nevada
licensed engineer, following the requirements for the original decommissioning
cost estimate, and using the most current industry standards. The cost of
preparing this update must be paid by the owner or operator.
         j.   If the recalculated estimated cost of decommissioning and
reclamation exceeds the original estimated cost by two percent (2%) or greater,
then the Facility owner or operator shall deposit additional funds into the
trust fund or cash escrow account or make an update to the payment surety bond
or letter of credit to meet the new cost estimate.
         k.   If the recalculated estimated cost of decommissioning and
reclamation is less than ninety-eight percent (98%) of the original estimated
cost, then the County may consider approval of a written request by the owner
or operator to reduce the required deposits or, payment surety bond, or letter
of credit to the recalculated estimate of decommissioning and reclamation cost.
         l.   Any increase or decrease in the decommissioning and reclamation
securitization shall be funded by the applicant or refunded to the applicant
(if permissible by the form of security) within ninety (90) calendar days and
shall be similarly readjusted for every subsequent five (5)-year
decommissioning cost estimate update.
   C.   Amendment To Decommissioning Plan: Any amendment must be approved by
the Board of County Commissioners prior to beginning decommissioning and
reclamation. Applications for an amendment shall require a public hearing under
the same procedures as required for the Facility conditional use permit.
Required timeframes for completion of decommissioning and reclamation shall not
be extended due to the amendment application process.
   D.   Partial Decommissioning: If decommissioning is triggered for a portion,
but not the entire Facility, then the owner or operator shall complete
decommissioning and reclamation in accordance with the Decommissioning Plan for
the applicable portion of the Solar Facility. The remaining portion of the
Solar Facility shall continue to be subject to the Decommissioning Plan.
   E.   Date Of Decommissioning: If the Solar Facility is to be decommissioned
and reclaimed, the Facility owner or operator must notify the Community
Development Director in writing of the proposed date of discontinued operations
and plans for removal.
   F.   Abandonment Of Facility: Unless otherwise approved by the Community
Development Director (e.g., to allow time to repair damage from severe weather
or to update equipment), Facilities that have not been in active and continuous
service for a period of twelve (12) months, as determined by the Community
Development Director based upon receipt of a valid Land Use complaint, an
unsatisfactory report from a state of federal agency, unsatisfactory annual
life and fire safety inspections and/or unsatisfactory self-inspection of
battery units, or a failure to provide any of these reports, shall be
decommissioned and reclaimed at the Facility owner or operator's expense.
However, following the first six (6) months of failure to maintain the site,
the County will have the option to hire appropriate professionals to perform
needed maintenance using the surety funds required by the conditional use
permit.
   G.   The owner or operator or their successors, within six (6) months after
the complete cessation of use of the Facility and at their sole expense, shall
initiate and provide continuous decommissioning of the Facility in accordance
with the approved Decommissioning Plan.
      1.   Following the completion of decommissioning of the entire Facility
and payment for any such costs arising out of a default by the owner or
operator or their successors, any remaining securitized funds held by the
County shall be distributed to the project owner(s) in the same percentage of
the securitized funds matched with the percentage of the project owner's
acreage ownership of the Facility.
   H.   Default Decommissioning And Reclamation By The County: If the owner or
operator, or their successors, fail to decommission the Facility pursuant to
the approved Decommissioning Plan, and the County has not approved a repowering
of the Facility, the County shall have the right, but not the obligation, to
commence decommissioning and reclamation activities and shall have access to
the property, and shall have the right to draw on securitized funds up to the
amount of the actual decommissioning costs, and the rights to the generation
equipment and ESS equipment and materials remaining on the property. If
applicable, any excess decommissioning and reclamation securitized funds shall
be returned to the current owner(s) of the property after the County has
completed the decommissioning and reclamation activities and paid all
outstanding invoices, divided according to the percentage of the property
owner's acreage ownership of the Solar Facility. Nothing herein shall limit
other rights or remedies that may be available to the County to enforce the
obligations of the owner or operator or their successors, including under the
County's zoning powers.
(Ord. 640, 6-18-2025)
15.336.13: SMALL AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTION/FOOD PROCESSING FACILITY:
   A.   Purpose: It is the intent of this section to provide for a viable non-
animal derived food processing industry within appropriately zoned areas of
Lyon County, and ensure that food processing operations are properly sited,
maintained and managed.
   B.   Applicability:
      1.   This section applies to all food processing operations that are
commercial in nature and that manufacture, package, label, or store food for
human consumption, but does not provide food directly to a consumer, including
any establishment that:
         a.   Cans food;
         b.   Packages food in packaging with a modified atmosphere;
         c.   Processes vitamins, food supplements, food additives, spices,
tea, coffee, salsa, jelly or jam, honey, condiments or candy.
      2.   The harvesting and minimal packing of whole produce for sale is not
considered food processing. Food processing includes:
         a.   Washing (as ready to eat);
         b.   Cutting;
         c.   Blending or mixing;
         d.   Drying;
         e.   Durably packaging and labelling of cut, mixed, blended or dried
produce;
         f.   Other handling and manufacturing processes.
      3.   Registered Farm-to-Fork operations and cottage food operations are
considered to be home based businesses and are exempt from the provisions of
this section.
      4.   Animal derived farm products shall comply with the provisions of
this section.
   C.   Conditional Use Permit: Any person who owns, operates, or proposes to
own or operate a small agricultural production/food processing facility as
defined herein shall obtain a conditional use permit in compliance with chapter
230 of this title whenever the following occurs:
      1.   A new small agricultural production/food processing facility
exceeding the definition of a home based business is proposed where one does
not exist; or
      2.   An existing home based business operating as a small agricultural
production/food processing facility expands beyond the definition of a home
based business.
   D.   Standards For Small Agricultural Production/Food Processing Facilities:
Small agricultural production/food processing facilities shall be designed,
located, established and operated in full consideration to their proximity to
all adjacent uses, their effect upon adjacent and surrounding properties, to
the reduction of noise, odor, dust, and other similar nuisance factors, and in
accordance with the following standards:
      1.   Required Minimum Setbacks For New And Expanded Small Agricultural
Production/Food Processing Facilities: Setbacks are the distance between the
listed structure or use and the nearest point on the perimeter of the small
agricultural production/food processing facility.
      TABLE 15.336.13-1
      SETBACK REQUIREMENTS
 
                                                      AG, NIA, RL And RR-20
                                                      Zoning Districts
Churches, businesses and Commercially zoned area      50 feet
Established residences not including owners/operators 50 feet
Federal, State or County road ROW                     50 feet
Flood Hazard Zones                                    Prohibited
Source Water Protection Zones                         Prohibited
 
      2.   Modification Of Setback: The setbacks listed in table 15.336.13-1 of
this section are minimums, and may be increased under the terms of a CUP based
on considerations and characteristics of the neighborhood, including but not
limited to adjoining or nearby uses within the same or different districts and
prevailing wind direction.
      3.   Fly, Vector And Odor Control: Small agricultural production/food
processing facilities shall dispose of all food waste and wastewater in such a
manner as to control odors, flies and other vectors. Solid food waste shall be
kept in covered air tight containers and be removed and disposed of at least
weekly.
      4.   Unloading Areas: Unloading areas shall be located at the rear of the
facility.
      5.   Enclosed Building Required For Operations: All operations other than
shipping and receiving shall be conducted in an enclosed building.
      6.   Hours: The hours and days of operation as specified by the
commission.
      7.   Federal And State Licenses: The operator shall maintain all required
Federal and State licenses, permits and registrations.
      8.   Development Standards: All activities shall conform to the standards
established for industrial uses in chapter 337 of this title and the Lyon
County Design Criteria and Improvement Standards.
      9.   Additional Conditions: The commission may impose, in addition to the
standards and requirements set forth in these regulations, additional
conditions which are reasonable and related to the use being controlled.
      10.   Traffic Plan: When warranted by a traffic study the commission may
require the applicant to provide a Traffic and Roadway Impact Mitigation Plan
identifying primary routes for all project-connected traffic, a baseline
roadway conditions report, and a roadway maintenance agreement for maintenance
of all County maintained roads providing primary access to the small
agricultural production/food processing facility.
   E.   Information Required For Small Agricultural Production/Food Processing
Facility Conditional Use Permit Application: Prior to consideration by the
commission, the applicant for a conditional use permit for a small agricultural
production/food processing facility shall provide the following information to
the Director:
      1.   Owners, managers, management company(ies) or similar entities names,
addresses and telephone numbers.
      2.   Legal description of site.
      3.   The type of food to be processed and a description of all processing
operations.
      4.   A detailed site plan showing location and dimensions of all
structures, improvements, and confinement areas.
      5.   A Drainage Study/Plan in conformance with current Lyon County Design
Criteria and Improvement Standards.
      6.   Fly, vector and odor control plan.
      7.   A transportation study and access management plan in conformance
with current Lyon County Design Criteria and Improvement Standards. (Ord. 603,
11-1-2018)
15.336.14: SMALL POULTRY/SMALL MEAT PROCESSING FACILITY:
   A.   Purpose: It is the intent of this section to provide for a viable small
poultry/small meat processing industry within appropriately zoned areas of Lyon
County, and ensure that small poultry/small animal processing facilities are
properly sited, maintained and managed. Small poultry/small animal processing
facilities butcher, process, package, label, and/or store products for human
consumption.
   B.   Applicability:
      1.   Registered Farm-to-Fork operations, cottage food operations and
slaughtering and private use by the owner or by a custom meat processor holding
a custom meat processing permit or other similar small-scale processing (e.g.,
Future Farmers of America and 4-H animal husbandry and quality assurance
programs) are considered to be home based businesses and are exempt from the
provisions of this section.
   C.   Conditional Use Permit: Any person who owns, operates, or proposes to
own or operate a small poultry/small meat processing facility as defined herein
shall obtain a conditional use permit in compliance with chapter 230 of this
title whenever the following occurs:
      1.   A new small poultry/small meat processing facility exceeding the
definition of a home based business is proposed where one does not exist; or
      2.   An existing home based business operating as a small poultry/small
meat processing facility expands beyond the definition of a home based
business.
   D.   Standards For Small Poultry/Small Meat Processing Facilities: Small
poultry/small meat processing facilities shall be designed, located,
established and operated in full consideration to their proximity to all
adjacent uses, their effect upon adjacent and surrounding properties, to the
reduction of noise, odor, dust, and other similar nuisance factors, and in
accordance with the following standards:
      1.   Required Minimum Setbacks For New And Expanded Small Poultry/Small
Meat Processing Facilities: Setbacks are the distance between the listed
structure or use and the nearest point on the perimeter of the small poultry/
small meat processing facilities.
      TABLE 15.336.14-1
      SETBACK REQUIREMENTS
 
                              AG, NIA And RL Zoning LI-R, LI-S, HI-R And HI-
                              Districts             S Zoning Districts
Churches, businesses and      100 feet              50 feet
Commercially zoned area
Established residences not    100 feet              50 feet
including owners/operators
Federal, State or County road 50 feet               25 feet
ROW
Flood Hazard Zones            Prohibited            Prohibited
Source Water Protection Zones Prohibited            Prohibited
 
      2.   Modification Of Setback: The setbacks listed in table 15.336.14-1 of
this section are minimums, and may be increased under the terms of a
conditional use permit based on considerations and characteristics of the
neighborhood, including but not limited to adjoining or nearby uses within the
same or different districts and prevailing wind direction.
      3.   Fly, Vector And Odor Control: Small poultry/small meat processing
facilities shall dispose of all food waste and wastewater in such a manner as
to control odors, flies and other vectors. Solid food waste shall be kept in
covered air tight containers and be removed and disposed within forty eight
(48) hours.
      4.   Unloading Areas: Unloading areas shall be located at the rear of the
facility.
      5.   Rendering Prohibited: No rendering may take place on the site. All
operations other than shipping and receiving shall be conducted in an enclosed
building.
      6.   Hours: The hours and days of operation as specified by the
commission.
      7.   Federal And State Licenses: The operator shall maintain all required
Federal and State licenses, permits and registrations.
      8.   Development Standards: All activities shall conform to the standards
established for industrial uses in chapter 337 of this title and the Lyon
County Design Criteria and Improvement Standards.
      9.   Additional Conditions: The commission may impose, in addition to the
standards and requirements set forth in these regulations, additional
conditions which are reasonable and related to the use being controlled.
   E.   Information Required For Small Poultry/Small Meat Processing Facility
Conditional Use Permit Application: Prior to consideration by the commission,
the applicant for a conditional use permit for a small poultry/small meat
processing facility shall provide the following information to the Director:
      1.   Owners, managers, management company(ies) or similar entities names,
addresses and telephone numbers.
      2.   Legal description of site.
      3.   The type of animals to be processed and a description of all
processing operations.
      4.   A detailed site plan showing location and dimensions of all
structures, improvements, and confinement areas.
      5.   A Drainage Study/Plan in conformance with current Lyon County Design
Criteria and Improvement Standards.
      6.   Fly, vector and odor control plan.
      7.   A transportation study and access management plan in conformance
with current Lyon County Design Criteria and Improvement Standards. (Ord. 603,
11-1-2018)
15.336.15: MEAT PROCESSING FACILITY:
   A.   Purpose: It is the intent of this section to provide for a viable meat
processing industry within appropriately zoned areas of Lyon County, protect
ground and surface waters, and ensure that meat processing operations are
properly sited, maintained and managed.
   B.   Applicability: This subsection applies to all meat processing
facilities where the number of live animals confined for the purpose of
slaughter and processing that are commercial in nature and that slaughter,
butcher, process, package, label, and/or store more than two hundred (200)
animal unit equivalents per week of animal derived meat products.
   C.   Conditional Use Permit: Any person who owns, operates, or proposes to
own or operate a meat processing facility as defined herein shall obtain a
conditional use permit in compliance with chapter 320 of this title whenever
the following occurs:
      1.   A new meat processing operation is proposed where one does not
currently exist or an existing meat processing operation seeks to expand in
which the animals are contained or at any time during the previous twelve (12)
months contained for a total of thirty (30) days or more, the following types
of animals at or in excess of the number listed for each animal listed below:
Cattle, veal calves or a pair consisting of a cow and calf             1,000
Swine weighing over 55 pounds                                          2,500
Swine weighing 55 pounds or less                                       10,000
Sheep or lambs                                                         10,000
Turkeys                                                                55,000
Chickens (if animal confinement facility has a liquid manure handling  30,000
system)
Chickens (if animal confinement facility does not have a liquid manure 125,000
handling system)
Ducks (if animal confinement facility has a liquid manure handling     5,000
system)
Ducks (if animal confinement facility does not have a liquid manure    30,000
handling system)
 
   D.   Standards For Meat Processing Facilities: Meat processing facilities
shall be designed, located, established and operated in full consideration to
their proximity to all adjacent uses, their effect upon adjacent and
surrounding properties, to the reduction of noise, odor, dust, and other
similar nuisance factors, and in accordance with the following standards:
      1.   Setbacks: The minimum required setbacks are listed in section
15.336.14, table 15.336.14-1 of this chapter. These minimum setbacks may be
increased under the terms of a conditional use permit based on considerations
and characteristics of the neighborhood, including but not limited to adjoining
or nearby uses within the same or different districts and prevailing wind
direction.
      2.   Manure Application Or Disposal: The land application of animal
manures and agricultural process wastewater must follow standards for water
quality protection acceptable to the NDEP Bureau of Water Pollution Control
(NDEP-BWPC) and the setback requirements of section
15.336.14, table 15.336.14-1 of this chapter.
      3.   Fly, Vector And Odor Control: Meat processing facilities shall
dispose of dead animals, manure, and wastewater in such a manner as to control
odors, flies and other vectors.
      4.   Rendering Prohibited: No rendering may take place on the site.
      5.   Holding Live Animals: Live animals may be held on the site for no
more than twenty four (24) hours.
      6.   Enclosed Building Required For Operations: All operations other than
shipping, receiving and holding shall be conducted in an enclosed building.
      7.   Hours: The hours and days of operation as specified by the
commission.
      8.   Federal And State Licenses: The operator shall maintain all required
Federal and State licenses, permits and registrations.
      9.   Development Standards: All activities shall conform to the standards
established for industrial uses in chapter 337 of this title and the Lyon
County Design Criteria and Improvement Standards.
      10.   Additional Conditions: The commission may impose, in addition to
the standards and requirements set forth in these regulations, additional
conditions which are reasonable and related to the use being controlled.
   E.   Application Review: The commission will review the need for control
measures on a site specific basis, taking into consideration prevailing wind
direction, topography, and existing nearby land uses. The conditional use
permit review shall consider the following:
      1.   Methods to be utilized to dispose of dead animals approved by the
Nevada Department of Agriculture.
      2.   Screening of lagoons or containment structures to help control odors
and improve aesthetics.
      3.   Grading and/or other methods designed to keep pens and solid waste
containment areas dry.
      4.   Plans and procedures for the removal of manure from open pens to
minimize odor production.
      5.   The design of vertical storage systems, deep pit concrete lined
holding ponds, or holding ponds with approved impermeable liners for manure
storage.
      6.   The commission may request information relating to the operation not
contained in these regulations.
   F.   Traffic Plan: When warranted by a traffic study the commission may
require the applicant to provide a Traffic and Roadway Impact Mitigation Plan
identifying primary routes for all project- connected traffic, a baseline
roadway conditions report, and a roadway maintenance agreement for maintenance
of all County maintained roads providing primary access to the meat processing.
   G.   Violations: When considering an application, the commission will take
into consideration current and past violations relating to concentrated animal
feeding operations and/or meat processing operations that the applicant has had
an interest in.
   H.   Information Required For Meat Processing Facility Permit Application:
Prior to consideration by the commission, the applicant for a conditional use
permit for a meat processing facility shall provide the following information
to the Director:
      1.   Owners, managers, management company(ies) or similar entities names,
addresses and telephone numbers.
      2.   Legal description of site.
      3.   Number and type of animals.
      4.   A detailed site plan showing location and dimensions of all
structures, improvements, and confinement areas.
      5.   A Drainage Study/Plan in conformance with current Lyon County Design
Criteria and Improvement Standards.
      6.   Fly, Vector and Odor Control Plan.
      7.   Information on ability to meet designated setback requirements,
including maps showing measured distances.
      8.   General water pollution control permit from the NDEP as required.
      9.   Nutrient Management Plan.
      10.   Information on soils, shallow aquifers, designated wellhead
protection areas, and flood hazard designations within and adjacent to the
site.
      11.   A transportation study and access management plan in conformance
with current Lyon County Design Criteria and Improvement Standards.
      12.   Site plan of the land utilized for manure application and written
agreements for application on land not owned by the applicant. (Ord. 603, 11-1-
2018)
15.336.16: FACILITIES FOR USE, MANUFACTURE, PROCESSING, TRANSFER OR STORAGE OF
EXPLOSIVES OR CERTAIN OTHER SUBSTANCES:
   A.   Conditional Use Permit: A conditional use permit (CUP) is required for
all facilities for the use, manufacture, transfer, processing, transfer or
storage of explosives or certain other substances.
   B.   Permit Required Before Commencement: As required by Nevada Revised
Statutes 278.147, a conditional use permit is required to be approved prior to
the commencement of an operation of a facility in which:
      1.   An explosive as defined in Nevada Revised Statutes 459.3816 will be
used, manufactured, processed, transferred or stored, or
      2.   A highly hazardous substance is present in a quantity equal to or
greater than the amount listed in Nevada Revised Statutes 459.3816 will be
used, manufactured, processed, transferred or stored, or
      3.   A hazardous substance listed in Nevada Revised Statutes 459.3833
will be used, manufactured, processed, transferred or stored.
The provisions of this section do not apply to the mining industry per Nevada
Revised Statutes 278.147(8).
   C.   Public Hearing: The commission shall within ninety (90) days of the
filing of a complete application hold a public hearing to consider the
application.
   D.   Public Notice:
      1.   At least thirty (30) days prior to the date of the public hearing, a
notice of the time, place and purpose of the public hearing shall be published
in a newspaper of general distribution within the County.
      2.   At least thirty (30) days prior to the date of the public hearing, a
notice shall be sent by mail or, if requested by a party to whom notice must be
provided by electronic means if receipt of such an electronic notice can be
verified, to:
         a.   The applicant;
         b.   Each property owner or tenant of real property located within one
thousand feet (1,000') of the property in question;
         c.   The owner, as listed in the County Assessor's record, of each of
the separately owned parcels nearest the property in question, to the extent
this notice does not duplicate the notice pursuant to subsection D2b of this
section;
         d.   If a mobile home park or multi-family residential development is
located within one thousand feet (1,000') of the property in question, each
tenant of that mobile home park or multi-family residential development;
         e.   If a military installation is located within three thousand feet
(3,000') of the property in question, the commander of that military
installation;
         f.   Any advisory board that has been established for the affected
area;
         g.   The Administrator of the Division of Environmental Protection of
the State Department of Conservation and Natural Resources;
         h.   The State Fire Marshal; and
         i.   The Administrator of the Division of Industrial Relations of the
Department of Business and Industry.
      3.   The public hearing notice shall:
         a.   Be written in language that is easily understood; and
         b.   Include a physical description or map of the property in question
and a description of all explosives and all substances described in subsection
A of this section that will be located at the property in question.
      4.   The commission shall consult with:
         a.   Local emergency management planning agencies;
         b.   The Administrator of the Division of Environmental Protection of
the State Department of Conservation and Natural Resources;
         c.   The State Fire Marshal;
         d.   The Administrator of the Division of Industrial Relations of the
State Department of Business and Industry;
         e.   The commander of any military installation that may be affected
by the operation of the facility; and
         f.   The Governing Body of any city that may be affected by the
operation of the facility.
      5.   The commission shall submit to the Board its recommendations for any
actions to be taken on the application. In making its recommendation the
commission shall include in its approval in addition to the findings listed in
section
15.230.06 of this title, such terms and conditions for the operation of the
facility as it deems necessary for the protection of:
         a.   The health and safety of the residents of the city, County and/or
region; and
         b.   The safety and security of any military installation in the city,
County and/or region.
      6.   The Board shall, within thirty (30) days after receiving the
commission's recommendation, hold a public hearing to consider the conditional
use permit application for approval or denial. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
CHAPTER 337
PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS FOR INDUSTRIAL USES
SECTION:
15.337.01: Purpose
15.337.02: Applicability
15.337.03: Standards
15.337.01: PURPOSE:
Performance standards are intended to ensure that all industrial uses will
provide necessary operational procedures and control methods to protect the
County and its residents from hazards and nuisances; to set objective and
quantifiable standards for the maximum tolerated levels of frequently hazardous
or annoying emissions; and to protect any industry from arbitrary exclusion or
persecution based solely on the characteristics of that type of industry's past
uncontrolled operation. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.337.02: APPLICABILITY:
Development of any land or structure that will contain an industrial use, or a
mix of industrial and other uses shall comply with appendix B, Lyon County
Design Criteria and Improvement Standards on file in the County, other
applicable health and safety regulations, title 6, chapter 2 of this Code and
the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.337.03: STANDARDS:
All uses that are identified to adhere to the standards of this chapter require
a conditional use permit. The following standards are provided as base general
standards for consideration of necessary conditions of approval for each
applicable use. The approving authority may consider additional appropriate
standards and establish additional specific conditions of approval where
warranted by the specific use and its locality.
   A.   Off-Street Parking And Loading: Off-street parking and loading
provisions shall be administered pursuant to chapter 401 of this title. In
addition, for new development loading areas must be located in such a manner
that no loading, unloading and/or maneuvering of trucks associated therewith
takes place on public rights-of-way.
   B.   Maintenance: The owner, lessee or user shall be responsible for
maintaining an orderly appearance of all properties, and shall be responsible
for assuring the care and maintenance of any natural growth where appropriate.
All required yards, parking areas, storage areas, operation yards and other
open uses on the site which are adjacent to a public right-of-way shall be
maintained in a neat and orderly manner appropriate for the district at all
times.
   C.   Enclosure: All manufacturing or fabrication processes which produce
physical off-site impacts of a detrimental nature shall be sufficiently
enclosed to mitigate the impact.
   D.   Pollution Control And Nuisance Abatement: Each industry is required to
continuously employ the best pollution control and nuisance abatement
technology when reasonable and practicably available for each particular
industry; provided, that where Federal or State laws or regulations provide for
the level of technology to be employed, the appropriate State or Federal
standards shall apply. Hazardous waste shall be managed in accordance with the
requirements of title 6, chapter 2 of this Code.
   E.   Heat, Light And Glare: All operations and facilities producing heat,
light or glare, including exterior lighting, shall be so constructed, screened
or used as to not unreasonably infringe upon the use and enjoyment of property
beyond the boundaries of the district.
   F.   Ground Vibrations: No ground vibration other than that caused by
highway vehicles, trains or construction activity shall be permitted which is
discernible, without instruments, at or beyond the property line for the use
concerned.
   G.   Odor, Dust, Dirt, And Smoke: Odor, dust, dirt, or smoke shall not be
emitted that is detectable at or beyond the property line, for the use
concerned, in such a concentration or of such duration as to cause a public
nuisance, or threaten health or safety, or to unreasonably infringe upon the
use and enjoyment of property beyond the boundaries of the district.
   H.   Noise: No use in this district shall exceed the maximum environmental
noise level at the property line:
      1.   When adjacent to a commercial or industrial use or zone: Daytime
seventy five (75) dBA and nighttime seventy (70) dBA.
      2.   When adjacent to a Residential Zone: Daytime sixty five (65) dBA and
nighttime sixty (60) dBA.
   I.   Toxic Gases And Fumes: There shall be no emission of toxic gases or
fumes.
   J.   Liquid Pollutants: There shall be no release to soil or surface
drainage ways of water borne or liquid pollutants. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
CHAPTER 340
RESIDENTIAL DESIGN STANDARDS
SECTION:
15.340.01: Residential Design Standards; Benefits
15.340.02: Residential Development Design Standards
15.340.03: Housing Types
15.340.04: Conventional Subdivision
15.340.05: Cluster Subdivision
15.340.06: Mixed Residential Subdivision
15.340.07: Planned Unit Development
15.340.08: Special Standards For Cluster, Mixed Residential Subdivisions, And
Planned Unit Developments
15.340.01: RESIDENTIAL DESIGN STANDARDS; BENEFITS:
The design standards of this chapter establish certain restrictions for
residential development. These standards allow for variety in housing types
while maintaining the overall character of neighborhoods throughout County.
Design standards are based on the County's suburban and rural character areas.
Separate standards are established to regulate development in each zone. This
approach to Character Districts and zone specific design standards has several
public benefits:
   A.   It allows for development that is more sensitive to the environment and
allows for the preservation of open and natural areas.
   B.   It promotes quality site layout and energy-efficient development.
   C.   It promotes affordable and life-cycle housing.
   D.   It promotes development intensities that match existing and proposed
infrastructure investments. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.340.02: RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT DESIGN STANDARDS:
   A.   Conventional Subdivision: Conventional subdivision is a pattern of
residential development that provides a majority of property owners with
substantial yards on their own property. Lots are typically at the minimum size
for a specific zoning district, and uniform in dimension and net area.
Structures are sited uniformly to front and side setback limits.
   B.   Cluster Subdivision: Cluster subdivisions trade smaller lot sizes (with
smaller yards) for additional common open space. A cluster subdivision shall be
a minimum size to ensure sufficient common open space can be incorporated into
the subdivision design.
   C.   Mixed Residential Subdivision: Mixed residential subdivisions allow for
a diversity of single family housing types and styles within a single
subdivision development while maintaining the underlying density and character
of the zoning district in which it is located. The following housing types may
be incorporated into a mixed residential subdivision subject to the limitations
of the specific zoning district: single family detached, zero lot line, alley
loaded, semi-attached, cottage housing, and townhouse.
   D.   Planned Unit Development: Planned unit development (PUD) allows maximum
flexibility and creativity in the design and execution of large scale
development projects through the use of project specific design standards, a
mix of land uses, and an extended development schedule. Planned unit
development is intended to create a mix of residential and non-residential
development on parcels in excess of five (5) acres. While typically used in
suburban character areas with access to public water and sewer and the arterial
transportation network, planned unit development is also available for use in
rural character areas to cluster the residential use while maintaining the
remaining area as open space that can remain in agricultural use, preserve
significant topographic features or historical structures/features. (Ord. 603,
11-1-2018)
15.340.03: HOUSING TYPES:
The following housing types are established to provide a common terminology for
housing in the County. All drawings are for illustrative purposes only.
   A.   Single Family Detached: A dwelling unit located on a single lot with
private yards on all four (4) sides.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b3e37bf04674f7b3738d62883ef5a27ed6aa631/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2341.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b3e37bf04674f7b3738d62883ef5a27ed6aa631/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2343.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b3e37bf04674f7b3738d62883ef5a27ed6aa631/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2345.jpg]
   B.   Zero Lot Line House: A dwelling unit located on a single lot with
private yards on three (3) sides with the fourth side abutting the adjoining
property line. The house has only a single side yard comprising the equivalent
of the two (2) side yards of a single-family detached house. An access easement
for maintenance of the structure's exterior is provided on the adjoining lot.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b3e37bf04674f7b3738d62883ef5a27ed6aa631/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2347.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b3e37bf04674f7b3738d62883ef5a27ed6aa631/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2349.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b3e37bf04674f7b3738d62883ef5a27ed6aa631/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2345.jpg]
 
   C.   Alley-Loaded House: A dwelling unit located on a single lot with
private yards on all four (4) sides. The house is set much closer to the street
than a single-family detached house, and alley access to a garage (either
attached or detached) is required.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b3e37bf04674f7b3738d62883ef5a27ed6aa631/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2353.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b3e37bf04674f7b3738d62883ef5a27ed6aa631/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2355.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b3e37bf04674f7b3738d62883ef5a27ed6aa631/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2357.jpg]
 
   D.   Semi-Attached House: Two (2) attached single-family units located on
two (2) adjoining lots that share a common wall along the lot line, providing
for fee-simple ownership.
This duplex building type consists of structures that contain two (2) side-by-
side dwelling units, both facing the street, and sharing one common party wall.
This building type has the appearance of a medium to large single-family home.
This type is typically integrated sparingly into single-family neighborhoods or
more consistently into neighborhoods with other medium density types such as
courtyard cottages, fourplexes, or courtyard apartments. This building type
enables the incorporation of high- quality, well-designed density within a
walkable neighborhood.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b3e37bf04674f7b3738d62883ef5a27ed6aa631/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2359.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b3e37bf04674f7b3738d62883ef5a27ed6aa631/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2393.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b3e37bf04674f7b3738d62883ef5a27ed6aa631/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2395.jpg]
 
   E.   Courtyard Cottage: The courtyard cottage building type consists of a
series of small detached or attached houses on a single lot, arranged to define
a shared court that is perpendicular to the street. All units are oriented to
and are accessed from this shared court. This type is typically integrated
sparingly into single-family neighborhoods or more consistently into
neighborhoods with other medium density types such as duplexes, four-plexes, or
courtyard apartments. This building type provides an option for living in a
smaller, high- quality house in a more community-driven environment due to the
shared outdoor space.
   F.   Townhouse: Three (3) or more attached units where the units are lined
up in a row and share side walls. Access to garages is generally from the rear.
A small side or rear yard is provided for each unit as private open space. This
building type provides a higher density, fee-simple unit in a more urban form.
This townhouse building type shall comply with the regulations in Nevada
Revised Statutes 116 (Common Interest Communities) as this type of residential
development requires the owners of units within the development shall pay for a
share of the Real Estate Taxes, insurance premiums, maintenance or improvement
of, or services or other expenses related to common elements, other units or
other real estate associated with the townhouse development.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b3e37bf04674f7b3738d62883ef5a27ed6aa631/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2397.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b3e37bf04674f7b3738d62883ef5a27ed6aa631/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2399.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b3e37bf04674f7b3738d62883ef5a27ed6aa631/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2401.jpg]
 
(Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.340.04: CONVENTIONAL SUBDIVISION:
   A.   Compliance: Applicants shall comply with all provisions of this title
and all other applicable laws.
   B.   Dimensional Standards: Applicants using the conventional subdivision
option shall meet the dimensional standards of the standards of the zoning
district. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.340.05: CLUSTER SUBDIVISION:
   A.   Compliance: Applicants proposing a cluster subdivision shall comply
with the provisions of section
15.340.08 of this chapter and chapter 343 of this title, all provisions of this
title and all other applicable laws.
   B.   Dimensional Standards: Applicants using the cluster subdivision option
shall meet the dimensional standards of the zoning district.
   C.   Ownership Of Development Site: The development site to be subdivided
may be held in single and separate ownership or in multiple ownership. If held
in multiple ownership, the site shall be developed according to a single plan
with common authority and common responsibility. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.340.06: MIXED RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISION:
   A.   Zoning Districts: Mixed residential subdivisions are to be used in the
CMU, HMU, RMU and EMU Zoning District for the residential component of the
various Mixed Use Zoning Districts. Applicants shall comply with the provisions
of section
15.340.08 of this chapter and chapters 344, 345, 346, 347, and 348 of this
title, as applicable, all provisions of this title and all other applicable
laws.
   B.   Dimensional Standards: Applicants using the Mixed Residential
Subdivision option shall meet the dimensional standards of the respective Mixed
Use Zoning District.
   C.   Density: Aggregate density shall be no greater than the density
permitted in the underlying zoning district.
   D.   Open Space: Total project open space shall not be less than the
aggregate requirement for each housing type.
   E.   Ownership Of Development Site: The development site to be subdivided
may be held in single and separate ownership or in multiple ownership. If held
in multiple ownership, then the site shall be developed according to a single
plan with common authority and common responsibility. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.340.07: PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT:
   A.   Where Permitted: Planned unit development (PUD) is permitted in all
zoning districts where the proposed development is consistent with the Lyon
County Comprehensive Master Plan and applicable Community Plans, will not
conflict with existing uses both within the project site and sites adjacent to
the PUD site.
   B.   Dimensional Standards: Dimensional standards for planned unit
development proposals shall be in general conformance with the standards
established and modifications as permitted by chapters 341 through 349 of this
title.
   C.   Permitted Uses: A planned unit development may include any uses
permitted in any zone classification consistent with the underlying master plan
designation(s) provided that any combination of uses are planned in a manner
compatible to each and to the surrounding environment.
   D.   Ownership Of Development Site: The entire property proposed for
development as a PUD shall be under common ownership or unified control. If a
proposed PUD is under unified control, then the application shall include an
agreed-upon dissolution methodology in a format to the satisfaction of the
Director and the District Attorney, so as to ensure unified development.
   E.   Special Standards For Planned Unit Development:
      1.   Design Regulations: Each planned unit development shall be governed
by a Design Manual prepared and adopted as a component of the planned unit
development approval. The Design Manual shall conform to the requirements of
chapter 349 of this title and Nevada Revised Statutes chapter 278A.
      2.   Density: The allowable density for a planned unit development shall
be compatible with the Lyon County Comprehensive Master Plan and applicable
Community Plans. The following factors will be considered in approving the
allowable density of a planned unit development project:
         a.   The geotechnical characteristics of the site, including soils,
proximity to identified faults.
         b.   Groundwater recharge capacity, etc.
         c.   The topography of the project site.
         d.   Drainage within and through the project site.
         e.   The impact of the project on views into and from the site.
         f.   Project layout and subdivision scheme.
         g.   Relation to existing and planned transportation facilities.
         h.   Water and sewer capacity.
      3.   Common Open Space: Each planned unit development shall contain a
minimum of twenty percent (20%) common open space meeting the requirements of
section
15.340.08 of this chapter and chapter 349 of this title as well as Nevada
Revised Statutes 278A.130 and 278A.170.
      4.   Buffer Zones: Each planned unit development shall include buffers
between dissimilar uses within the project, and the project shall be designed
in consideration of height, density, architecture, and landscaping of existing
uses adjacent to the planned unit development project.
      5.   Landscaping: At a minimum all components of planned unit development
projects shall be landscaped in accordance with the requirements of chapter 402
of this title. The project-specific landscaping requirements shall be
incorporated into the planned unit development's Design Manual. (Ord. 603, 11-
1-2018)
15.340.08: SPECIAL STANDARDS FOR CLUSTER, MIXED RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISIONS, AND
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS:
   A.   Open Space Requirements:
      1.   Configuration Of Open Space:
         a.   The open space may adjoin any neighboring areas of open space,
other protected areas, and non-protected natural areas that would be candidates
for inclusion as part of a future area of protected open space.
         b.   At least twenty five percent (25%) of the open space shall be
made accessible with trails, active recreation areas or other similar
improvements. Trails shall be developed in accordance with the Lyon County
Design Criteria and Improvement Standards (providing for neighborhood,
connector and regional corridors). Active recreation areas shall be developed
in accordance with the requirements in Lyon County Design Criteria and
Improvement Standards. Where open space consists of agricultural land in active
use, this accessibility requirement shall not apply.
         c.   The open space shall be directly accessible to the largest
practicable number of lots within the subdivision. Non-adjoining lots shall be
provided with safe, convenient access to the open space (i.e., mid-block
connections in logical locations).
      2.   Permitted Uses Of Open Space: Uses of open space may include, but
are not limited to the following:
         a.   Conservation areas for natural, archeological or historical
resources;
         b.   Meadows, woodlands, wetlands, wildlife corridors, game preserves,
or similar conservation-oriented areas;
         c.   Pedestrian or multipurpose trails;
         d.   Passive recreation areas, including pocket parks;
         e.   Active recreation areas, such as ball fields and playgrounds,
provided that impervious area is limited to no more than ten percent (10%) of
the total open space (active recreation areas in excess of this impervious area
limit shall be located outside of the protected open space);
         f.   Golf courses (excluding clubhouse areas and maintenance
facilities), provided the area does not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the
required open space;
         g.   Above-ground utility rights-of-way, provided the area does not
exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the required open space;
         h.   Water bodies, such as lakes and ponds, and floodways provided the
total surface area does not exceed seventy five percent (75%) of the required
open space as long as the water body provides a function of recreation as an
amenity to the public;
         i.   Agriculture, horticulture, silviculture or pasture uses as
provided for in a conservation plan approved by the Conservation District;
         j.   Landscaped stormwater management facilities;
         k.   Easements for drainage, access, and underground utility lines;
and
         l.   Other conservation-oriented uses compatible with the purposes of
these regulations.
      3.   Prohibited Uses Of Open Space: Open space shall not include the
following:
         a.   Community or individual wastewater disposal systems;
         b.   Streets and parking areas;
         c.   Agricultural and forestry activities not conducted according to a
conservation plan approved by the Conservation District or a forest management
plan approved by the Nevada Division of Forestry; and
         d.   Other activities as determined by the Director to be similar to
the activities listed in subsections A3a through A3c, inclusive, of this
section and recorded on the legal instrument providing for permanent
protection.
      4.   Ownership And Management Of Open Space:
         a.   Ownership Of Open Space: No residential lots shall be allowed to
extend into the required open space. Open space shall be accepted and owned by
one of the following entities:
            (1)   Conservation District: The responsibility for maintaining the
open space and any facilities shall be borne by the Conservation District.
            (2)   Land Conservancy Or Land Trust: The responsibility for
maintaining the open space and any facilities shall be borne by a land
conservancy or land trust.
            (3)   Homeowners Or Similar Association: A homeowners' association
or similar such association that represents the property owners of the
subdivision shall own the open space. Membership in the association shall be
mandatory and automatic for all homeowners of the subdivision and their
successors. The association shall have lien authority to ensure the collection
of dues from all members. The responsibility for maintaining the open space and
any facilities shall be borne by the association.
            (4)   Private Landowner: A private landowner may retain ownership
of open space, provided that a conservation easement meeting the standards for
conservation easements established by the IRS and approved by the County is
recorded on the property in question. The responsibility for maintaining the
open space and any facilities shall be borne by the private landowner.
            (5)   Lyon County: The responsibility for maintaining the open
space and any facilities as offered to and accepted by the County shall be
borne by the County.
         b.   Management Plan: Applicants shall submit a plan for the
management of open space and other common facilities that:
            (1)   Allocates responsibility and guidelines for the maintenance
and operation of the open space and any facilities located thereon, including
provisions for ongoing maintenance and for long-term capital improvements;
            (2)   Estimates the costs and staffing requirements needed for
maintenance and operation of, and insurance for, the open space and outlines
the means by which such funding will be obtained or provided;
            (3)   Provides that any changes to the plan be approved by the
County; and
            (4)   Provides for enforcement of the plan.
         c.   Maintenance Of Open Space:
            (1)   Passive open space maintenance is limited to removal of
litter, dead tree and plant materials (as well as obstructions to pedestrian
movement), brush; weeding and mowing, and removal of any illegal dumping, fire
hazards and fuels modifications. Natural water courses are to be maintained as
free-flowing and devoid of debris. Stream channels shall be maintained so as
not to alter or increase floodplain levels.
            (2)   No specific maintenance is required for agricultural uses.
            (3)   Active open space areas shall be accessible to all residents
of the development.
         d.   Failure To Maintain Open Space: In the event the party
responsible for maintenance of the open space fails to maintain all or any
portion in reasonable order and condition, the County may deem material(s) and/
or item(s) within the open space to be a public nuisance and begin the
abatement process outlined in title 6 of this Code. Such action could include
that the County assume responsibility for its maintenance and may enter the
premises and take corrective action, including the provision of extended
maintenance. The County may file an enforcement action for failure to maintain
open space. The costs of such maintenance may be charged to the homeowners'
association, or to the individual property owners that make up the homeowners'
association, or other entity responsible for maintenance of the open space, and
may include administrative costs and penalties. Such costs shall become a lien
on all subdivision properties.
         e.   Legal Instrument For Protection:
            (1)   The open space shall be protected in perpetuity by a binding
legal instrument that is recorded with the deed and enforceable by Lyon County.
The instrument shall be one of the following:
   (A)A permanent conservation easement in favor of either:
(i)The Conservation District; or
(ii)A land trust or similar conservation-oriented non-profit organization with
legal authority to accept such easements. The organization shall be bona fide
and in perpetual existence and the conveyance instruments shall contain an
appropriate provision for re-transfer in the event the organization becomes
unable to carry out its functions; or
(iii)A governmental entity with an interest in pursuing goals compatible with
the purposes of this title. If the entity accepting the easement is not the
County, then a third party right of enforcement favoring the County shall be
included in the easement.
   (B)A permanent restrictive covenant for conservation purposes in favor of a
governmental entity.
   (C)An equivalent legal tool that provides permanent protection, if approved
by the County.
            (2)   The instrument for permanent protection shall include clear
restrictions on the use of the open space. These restrictions shall include all
restrictions contained in this chapter, as well as any further restrictions the
applicant chooses to place on the use of the open space. Where appropriate, the
instrument shall allow for the inclusion of such items as utility maintenance
access, storm drainage infrastructure maintenance access, stream or habitat
restoration and other similarly necessary features within the easement area.
   B.   Utilities: To the maximum extent determined feasible, utilities shall
be placed underground.
   C.   Street Image:
      1.   Applicability: This subsection's street image standards shall apply
to all new cluster, mixed residential subdivisions, and planned unit
developments residential projects under one-half (1/2) acre in size.
      2.   Standard Street Image Features: New single-family residential
structures on lots seventy feet (70') or wider shall utilize a minimum of three
(3) of the following techniques, and new single- family residential structures
on lots narrower than seventy feet (70') shall utilize a minimum of two (2) of
the following techniques to reduce the prominence of garages, promote
pedestrian activity, and create visual diversity in single-family
neighborhoods:
         a.   House Forward: Living areas shall extend a minimum of three feet
(3') in front of the garage face.
         b.   Front Porches: A sixty (60) square foot or larger covered front
porch shall be provided and shall extend a minimum of three feet (3') in front
of the living area and garage face.
         c.   Courtyards: A sixty (60) square foot or larger front yard
courtyard with a hard finished floor surface (concrete, wood, brick, pavers,
etc.) and walls not exceeding four feet (4') in height shall be provided and
shall extend a minimum of three feet (3') in front of the garage face.
         d.   Varied Front Setbacks: Front setbacks of adjacent homes on the
same side of the street shall vary by a minimum of three feet (3').
         e.   Garage Orientation: Garage doors shall not face the street (i.e.,
provide side loaded garages) and front elevations of garages shall be
architecturally consistent with the living area front elevation.
         f.   Reduced Garage Width: Garages shall not exceed forty percent
(40%) of the front elevation.
         g.   Hillside Adaptive Architecture: Within hillside developments and
on properties with an average slope exceeding ten percent (10%), homes shall be
built on existing grade. This option may be used if the development requires
minor grading for driveways, rear yards and other features but may not be used
in projects that mass grade sites to provide flat foundations and yards.
         h.   Enhanced Landscaping: On lots narrower than seventy feet (70'), a
minimum of one additional code size tree shall be provided in the front yard.
On lots seventy feet (70') or wider, a minimum of two (2) additional code size
tree shall be provided in the front yard.
         i.   Parkway Strips: Parkway strips between the street and sidewalk
may be provided with a minimum width of five feet (5'). Any provided parkway
strips shall be the maintenance responsibility of a homeowners' association or
similar maintenance organization to ensure consistent planting and maintenance
of the parkway strip through the life of the neighborhood.
         j.   Front Door Path: A three foot (3') or wider path that is
physically separated from the driveway shall be provided from the sidewalk to
the front door.
         k.   Structure Articulation: A minimum of four (4) separate roof
planes shall be incorporated within the front elevation and the front elevation
shall contain a minimum of two (2) wall planes that are offset by a minimum of
three feet (3'). (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
CHAPTER 341
SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT IN SUBURBAN CHARACTER DISTRICTS
SECTION:
15.341.01: Applicability
15.341.02: Siting
15.341.03: Architecture
15.341.04: Colors And Materials
15.341.05: Fencing
15.341.06: Roofing
15.341.07: Performance Standards
15.341.01: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter applies to single-family residential structures in new residential
development projects in the following Suburban Residential Districts: SR-12000,
SR-9000, NR, RMU, CMU, EMU and HMU-S. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.341.02: SITING:
Houses should be designed and sited to conform to the natural terrain as much
as possible and to take advantage of views. In tracts, houses should be located
on their lots so as to create interest and varying vistas as a person moves
along the street. In order to prevent a tract from exhibiting a row-house
effect, no more than two (2) adjacent residences should have the same setback;
and the minimum setback variation should be three feet (3'). Care should be
exercised that no house is located in such a manner to create an objectionable
overview which invades the privacy of an adjoining unit. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.341.03: ARCHITECTURE:
The County encourages variations of architectural theme. However, it shall be
the responsibility of the designer to coordinate the design with adjacent
developments so that the design does not conflict with the character of the
neighborhood as a whole. Within a tract, architectural styles should remain
uniform.
Material changes within a building shall be offset in plane or an entirely
different design element. Detailing of construction elements is another
important consideration. For example, exterior metal portions of the structure
(i.e., vent pipes and flashings) should be painted to blend with the adjacent
roof or wall material. In addition, the vent pipes should be consolidated where
possible by design. Also, thought should be given to locating mechanical units
in some area other than the roof. Where units are located on the roof, then the
units shall be screened in manner that is architecturally integrated with the
design of the house. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.341.04: COLORS AND MATERIALS:
Houses should vary in color and character within the development. However, no
one structure should be at such variance with its neighbors that it detracts
from the character of the street as a whole. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.341.05: FENCING:
   A.   In new subdivisions or developments and infill developments a solid
block wall or wooden fence a minimum of six feet (6') in height shall be
provided along side and rear lot lines of parcels twelve thousand (12,000)
square feet or less to provide privacy and screening.
   B.   When there is an existing well-maintained fence, new fencing
requirements may be waived.
   C.   Adjacent to a collector and arterial streets rights-of-way required
fences shall be constructed of decorative block, brick, or stucco, or similar
decorative masonry material.
   D.   Wrought iron fencing or combination block and wrought iron fencing may
be utilized in place of the fences required above to preserve views or provide
greater openness.
   E.   The Planning Commission may waive fencing requirements in hillside
areas where side and/or rear lot line slope is extremely severe and it can be
shown that fencing will serve no purpose. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.341.06: ROOFING:
All new dwelling units shall utilize non-combustible roofing materials. (Ord.
603, 11-1-2018)
15.341.07: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
The following special requirements and performance standards shall apply to
properties located in Residential Zoning Districts, except as otherwise
authorized through approval of a planned development:
   A.   Required Landscaping: Required front and street side yards shall be
landscaped in conformance with chapter 402 of this title.
   B.   Building Height Exceptions: Chimneys, vents and church steeples may
exceed the maximum height requirement of the zoning district.
   C.   Sight Distance Requirements: At all street, alley and driveway
intersections there shall be triangular yard area within which no tree, sight-
obscuring fence, shrub, wall or other visual obstruction shall be permitted
higher than thirty inches (30") above the adjacent street, alley or driveway
grade. This triangular area shall measure as follows:
      1.   At any intersection of two (2) street rights-of-way, two (2) sides
of the triangular area shall extend twenty feet (20') along both right-of-way
lines, measured from their point of intersection. For the purpose of this
subsection, an alley shall be considered as a street.
      2.   At any intersection of a driveway with a street or alley, the sides
of the triangle shall extend ten feet (10') along the street or alley right-of-
way and fifteen feet (15') along the edge of the driveway, measured from their
point of intersection.
      3.   The provisions of this subsection shall be in addition to any other
site distance protection requirements of the County, and in the event of
conflict between requirements, the more restrictive shall apply.
   D.   Mechanical Equipment: Air conditioners, heating, cooling, ventilating
equipment, swimming pool pumps and heaters, and other similar mechanical
equipment shall be screened from surrounding properties and streets.
   E.   Driveway Setback: A driveway located in front of a garage accessed
through the front yard shall not be less than twenty feet (20') in length as
measured from the garage to the right-of- way line.
   F.   Wireless Communication Facilities: Wireless communication facilities
located in the Residential Zones when allowed by this chapter shall be subject
to the provisions of chapter 236 of this title and all other applicable
requirements.
   G.   Shipping Containers: No shipping container may be placed on any
Residentially zoned property in a suburban character area. (Ord. 603, 11-1-
2018)
CHAPTER 342
DUPLEX RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
SECTION:
15.342.01: Purpose
15.342.02: Applicability
15.342.03: Development Criteria
15.342.04: Architectural Treatment
15.342.05: Setbacks And Yards
15.342.06: Parking And Access
15.342.07: Accessory Dwelling Units And Buildings
15.342.08: Utilities And Services
15.342.09: Supplementary Regulations
15.342.01: PURPOSE:
This chapter is intended to allow duplexes in order to increase available
housing in the County while maintaining the coherence of single-family
residential neighborhoods. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.342.02: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter applies to proposals to construct a new duplex or to convert, or
add on to, an existing structure to create a duplex. They also apply to
additions and modifications to existing duplexes. In Residential Zones SR-
12000, SR-9000, NR, NR-H, MFR, CMU-R, CMU-S, CMU-H, HMU-R, HMU-S, EMU and RMU a
duplex is allowed outright, subject to the lot size requirements for the zone.
(Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.342.03: DEVELOPMENT CRITERIA:
   A.   Density: Overall density in a particular duplex project shall not
exceed the maximum density allowed within the zoning district for which it is
located, except when designed and developed as a planned unit development under
provisions set forth in chapter 349 of this title or as provided in chapter
115, "Density Bonus Agreements", of this title.
   B.   Lot Area: No duplex lot shall contain an area of less than eight
thousand (8,000) square feet or as otherwise provided by this title.
   C.   Project Site: As used in this chapter, a duplex project site is the
entire parcel of land for which duplex units are proposed prior to the creation
of any duplex lots.
   D.   Height Of Structure: Maximum height for any duplex structure shall not
be greater than thirty five feet (35').
   E.   Dwelling Unit Access: Each duplex unit shall have two (2) separate
entries from the ground on which the structure is erected.
   F.   Building Coverage: In no event shall a duplex, including any accessory
buildings cover more than forty five percent (45%) of the individual lot area.
   G.   Street Frontage: Each duplex project site shall border on a public
street. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.342.04: ARCHITECTURAL TREATMENT:
   A.   In all duplex development, architectural treatment shall be as follows:
      1.   The facades of duplexes in a group shall be varied by changed front
yard setbacks and variation in materials or design so that not more than two
(2) abutting duplexes will have the same front yard setback and the same or
essentially the same architectural treatment of facades and roof lines. (Ord.
603, 11-1-2018)
15.342.05: SETBACKS AND YARDS:
   A.   Right-Of-Way Setback: No duplex unit shall be located closer than
twenty feet (20') from any public right-of-way or within fifteen feet (15') of
a private drive, access road, or common open parking area, to the front or rear
of such dwelling.
   B.   Setback Variation: No more than two (2) abutting duplexes within the
duplex project site shall have a common front building setback. Variations in
the setback of front building faces shall be at least two feet (2'). Height
variations shall also be incorporated, if feasible, in duplex design.
   C.   Distances Between Duplex Structures: Separations between duplex
structures shall comply with the requirements of the zoning district in which
it is located. For the Mixed Use Zoning Districts, the separations between
duplex structures shall conform to the corresponding zoning district that is
closest to the proposed lot sizes. For MFR Zoning Districts, the separation
between duplex structures shall comply with the NR building setbacks. (Ord.
603, 11-1-2018)
15.342.06: PARKING AND ACCESS:
   A.   Spaces Required: A minimum of two (2) off-street parking spaces shall
be provided for the residents of each duplex unit.
   B.   Location: A driveway located in front of a garage accessed through the
front yard shall not be less than twenty feet (20') in length as measured from
the garage to the right-of-way line. Additional parking shall be located a
minimum of five feet (5') behind the front line of the duplex structure.
   C.   Construction: All permanent off-street parking spaces, access drives,
and facilities shall be designed and constructed according to the Lyon County
Development Standards and Specifications contained in appendix B on file in the
County. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.342.07: ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS AND BUILDINGS:
Accessory dwelling units are not permitted on parcels containing a duplex
living structure. Refer to subsection
15.335.03A of this title for accessory dwelling unit development standards. No
accessory building shall be erected in any front yard or side yard. Accessory
buildings other than commonly owned garage, recreation, or maintenance facility
may not exceed two hundred (200) square feet, nor shall any separate accessory
building be erected within ten feet (10') of any principal building. An
accessory building shall not be located within ten feet (10') of the rear
property line of any duplex unit or occupy more than twenty five percent (25%)
of the rear yard area. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.342.08: UTILITIES AND SERVICES:
Each individual unit shall be connected to and serviced by public water and
sewer lines. The water and sewer lines shall be independent of any other unit
or structure. Water and sewer service facilities shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with the Lyon County Design Criteria and Improvement
Standards and specifications contained in appendix B on file in the County.
Necessary easements shall be indicated and recorded on the final subdivision or
parcel map. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.342.09: SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS:
All development under this chapter shall conform to the Lyon County Design
Criteria and Improvement Standards and specifications, appendix B on file in
the County. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
CHAPTER 343
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT
SECTION:
15.343.01: Purpose
15.343.02: Applicability; General Provisions
15.343.03: Contents Of Site Plan
15.343.04: Calculation Of Permitted Number Of Dwelling Units; Density Bonuses
15.343.05: Procedures For Review
15.343.06: Review Criteria
15.343.07: Reduction Of Certain Physical Design Requirements
15.343.08: Conveyance Of Open Space
15.343.01: PURPOSE:
   A.   Residential cluster development is intended to:
      1.   Encourage creative and flexible site design that is sensitive to the
land's natural features and adapts to the natural topography;
      2.   Protect environmentally sensitive areas of a development site and
preserve on a permanent basis open space, natural features, and prime
agricultural lands;
      3.   Decrease or minimize nonpoint source pollution impacts by reducing
the amount of impervious surfaces in site development;
      4.   Promote cost savings in infrastructure installation and maintenance
by such techniques as reducing the distance over which utilities, such as water
and sewer lines, need to be extended or by reducing the width or length of
streets; and
      5.   Provide opportunities for preservation of open space that can be
used for passive recreation, or retain agricultural/ranching in open space
areas while congregating residential development and reducing both sprawl and
the loss of open space and active agricultural/ranching uses. (Ord. 603, 11-1-
2018)
15.343.02: APPLICABILITY; GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Residential cluster development shall be permitted by right in the
following zoning districts:
      1.   Rural Character Districts: AG, NIA, RR-20, RR-10, RR-5, RR-2, RR-1.
      2.   Suburban Character Districts: SR-2.
   B.   All principal and accessory uses authorized in the applicable
Residential Zoning District(s) shall be allowed in the cluster development.
(Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.343.03: CONTENTS OF SITE PLAN:
   A.   The preliminary and final site plan for a residential cluster
development shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following
information:
      1.   The maximum number and type of dwelling units proposed.
      2.   The location of all structures to be located on the project site,
including an accurate footprint and envelope of each structure.
      3.   The calculations for the permitted number of dwelling units, derived
pursuant to section
15.343.04 of this chapter.
      4.   The areas of the site on which other proposed principal and
accessory uses may be located and their size/intensity/footprint.
      5.   The areas of the site designated for common open space/conservation
easement/agricultural-ranching use restrictive covenant and their size.
      6.   The areas of the site designated for parking and loading and the
size of individual spaces.
      7.   The location of walkways, trails, and bike paths.
      8.   The number of acres that are proposed to be conveyed as common open
space/placed in a conservation easement/remain in agricultural use.
      9.   Emergency access to open space/conservation area/agricultural areas.
(Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.343.04: CALCULATION OF PERMITTED NUMBER OF DWELLING UNITS; DENSITY BONUSES:
   A.   Except as provided in subsection C of this section, the maximum numbers
of dwelling units proposed for a residential cluster development shall not
exceed the number of dwelling units otherwise permitted for the Residential
Zoning District in which the parcel is located.
   B.   Except as provided in subsection C of this section, the number of
permitted dwelling units on a site shall be calculated in the following manner.
      1.   Measure the gross area of the proposed cluster development site in
acres and tenths of an acre;
      2.   Subtract from the gross area determined in subsection B1 of this
section the area of public and private streets and other publicly dedicated
improvements, measured in acres and tenths of an acre, excluding common open
space. The remainder shall be the net buildable area;
      3.   Convert the net buildable area from acres to square feet (SF), using
the equivalency of 43,560 SF = 1 acre; and
      4.   Divide the net buildable area by the smallest minimum lot size (in
square feet) per unit for a dwelling unit permitted in the zoning district.
This figure shall be rounded to the nearest lower number to establish the
maximum number of dwelling units to be permitted in the cluster development.
   C.   An increase of up to a minimum of one unit or ten percent (10%),
whichever is greater, of the maximum number of dwelling units in the cluster
development, as calculated in subsection B of this section, may be approved if
the percent of density bonus is no greater than the percent of the gross area
of the cluster development that is set aside and conveyed as common open space
pursuant to section
15.340.08 of this title.
   D.   Additional density may be approved when the requirements of chapter
115, "Density Bonus Agreements", of this title, are met. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.343.05: PROCEDURES FOR REVIEW:
A residential cluster development and any amendments thereto as a land
development project shall be reviewed in accordance with the provisions of this
title and any regulations adopted pursuant to this title. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.343.06: REVIEW CRITERIA:
   A.   In reviewing a residential cluster development, the Planning Commission
shall determine whether:
      1.   The site plan satisfies the requirements of section
15.343.03 of this chapter and the limitations of the zoning district in which
the cluster development is located;
      2.   Buildings and structures are adequately grouped so at least twenty
five percent (25%) of the total area of the site is set aside as common open
space. Open space shall be configured to comply with the requirements of
section
15.340.08 of this title;
      3.   Pedestrians can easily access common open space;
      4.   The site plan establishes, where applicable, an upland buffer of
vegetation of at least fifty feet (50') in depth adjacent to wetlands and
surface waters, including intermittent streams, springs, lakes, and ponds;
      5.   Individual lots, buildings, structures, streets, and parking areas
are situated to minimize the alteration of natural features, natural
vegetation, and topography;
      6.   Existing scenic views or vistas are permitted to remain
unobstructed, especially from public streets;
      7.   The site plan accommodates and preserves any features of historic,
cultural, or archaeological value;
      8.   Floodplains, wetlands, and areas with slopes in excess of twenty
five percent (25%) are protected from development; and
      9.   The cluster development advances the purposes of this title as
stated in section
15.343.01 of this chapter.
   B.   The Planning Commission may, in its opinion, apply such special
conditions or stipulations to its approval of a residential cluster development
as may be required to maintain harmony with neighboring uses and to promote the
objectives and purposes of the comprehensive plan and this title.
   C.   If the Planning Commission finds that the requirements of subsection A
of this section are satisfied, it shall recommend approval of the residential
cluster development, subject to any special conditions or stipulations pursuant
to subsection B of this section, any density incentive pursuant to section
15.343.04 of this chapter, and any reductions and/or waivers pursuant to
section
15.343.07 of this chapter. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.343.07: REDUCTION OF CERTAIN PHYSICAL DESIGN REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   In approving a residential cluster development, the Board may reduce
the pavement width of any public or private streets that would otherwise be
required by this title or the Lyon County Design Criteria and Improvement
Standards to twenty two feet (22') subject to the approval of the Fire Chief of
the local Fire Protection District.
   B.   An applicant who wants the reduction of pavement width of public or
private streets as provided for in subsection A of this section, shall submit a
statement of justification for the reduction along with the final site plan.
(Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.343.08: CONVEYANCE OF OPEN SPACE:
   A.   Open space provided by a residential cluster development shall be
identified, conveyed, and managed in accordance with the requirements of
section
15.340.08 of this title. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
CHAPTER 344
COTTAGE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT
SECTION:
15.344.01: Purpose And Intent
15.344.02: Applicability
15.344.03: Density, Number Of Cottage Housing Units And Minimum Lot Area
15.344.04: Existing Nonconforming Structures And Accessory Dwelling Units
15.344.05: Building Height
15.344.06: Exterior Trim And Roof Eaves
15.344.07: Covered Main Entry Porches
15.344.08: Street Facing Facades
15.344.09: Lot Coverage Area
15.344.10: Cottage Floor Area
15.344.11: Yards - Building Setbacks From Exterior Lot Lines
15.344.12: Cottage Housing Development Building Separation
15.344.13: Common Open Space
15.344.14: Private Open Space
15.344.15: Tree Conservation
15.344.16: Stormwater Low Impact Development Techniques
15.344.17: Off-Street Parking
15.344.18: Exterior Lighting And Heating/Cooling Equipment Noise
15.344.19: Required Separation Of Cottage Housing Developments In The SR-1/2,
SR-12000, SR-9000, And NR Zoning Districts
15.344.20: Ownership And Residential Use Of Cottages
15.344.21: Alternative Site Design
15.344.01: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The general purposes of the cottage housing development design standards are as
follows:
   A.   A cottage housing development is an alternative type of detached
housing providing small residences for households of typically one to two (2)
individuals. Cottage housing is provided as part of the County's overall
housing strategy which intends to encourage affordability, innovation and
variety in housing design and site development while ensuring compatibility
with existing neighborhoods, and to promote a variety of housing choices to
meet the needs of a population diverse in age, income, household composition
and individual needs.
   B.   The cottage housing development design standards contained in this
section are intended to create a small community of cottages oriented around
open space that is pedestrian-oriented and minimizes the visibility of off-
street parking. These design standards are intended to ensure that cottage
housing developments include pedestrian amenities and take advantage of
existing natural features on the site including topography and vegetation. The
cottage housing development design standards are intended to maintain
traditional cottage amenities and proportions and ensure that cottage housing
developments contribute to the overall community character.
   C.   Cottage housing may allow higher residential density than is normally
allowed in the underlying zone district. This increased density is possible
through the use of smaller than average home sizes, clustered parking, and site
design standards.
   D.   All cottage housing developments are subject to stormwater standards
and shall incorporate low impact development stormwater techniques whenever
possible. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.344.02: APPLICABILITY:
Cottage housing development is permitted in the SR-1/2, SR-12000, SR-9000, NR,
RMU and CMU Zoning Districts subject to the limitations of the zoning district.
(Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.344.03: DENSITY, NUMBER OF COTTAGE HOUSING UNITS AND MINIMUM LOT AREA:
   A.   In cottage housing developments the permitted densities shall be as
follows:
 
                     Zoning District
                     SR-1/2 Low Density SR-12000 And SR-9000 NR, RMU, CMU-H And
                     Residential        Suburban Density     CMU-S Suburban
                                        Single-Family        Density Mixed
Maximum cottage      1 cottage dwelling 1 cottage dwelling   1 cottage dwelling
density              unit per 5,000     unit per 3,333       unit per 2,857
                     square feet        square feet          square feet
Minimum number of
cottages per cottage 4                  4                    4
housing development
Maximum number of
cottages per cottage 8                  12                   14
housing development
Minimum lot size
(accommodates 4      20,000 square feet 13,332 square feet   11,428 square feet
cottages)
 
Note: Densities are subject to availability of water and sewer services. (Ord.
603, 11-1-2018)
15.344.04: EXISTING NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES AND ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS:
   A.   On a lot to be used for a cottage housing development, an existing
detached single-family residential structure, which may be nonconforming with
respect to the standards of this chapter, shall be permitted to remain, but the
extent of the nonconformity may not be increased. Such nonconforming dwelling
units shall be included in the maximum permitted cottage density.
      1.   Nonconforming dwelling units may be modified to be more consistent
with this chapter. For example, roof pitches may be increased, but the building
ground floor or total floor area may not be increased beyond allowed density of
the zoning district.
   B.   New accessory dwelling units are not permitted in cottage housing
developments. All residential units in a cottage housing development count
towards the maximum permitted density. An existing attached or detached
accessory dwelling unit that is accessory to an existing nonconforming single-
family structure may be counted as a cottage unit if the property is developed
subject to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.344.05: BUILDING HEIGHT:
   A.   Objective: Structures in cottage housing developments shall be designed
to be single story or single story plus a loft. Because the base density is
higher and building separation less than on typical residential lots, it is
important to maintain a feeling of adequate light and open space by providing
more restrictive maximum roof heights and roof proportion standards.
      1.   The maximum building height permitted for structures in cottage
housing developments shall be eighteen feet (18').
      2.   The highest point of a pitched roof may extend up to twenty three
feet (23'). (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.344.06: EXTERIOR TRIM AND ROOF EAVES:
   A.   Objective: Cottage housing development structures shall be provided
with substantial exterior trim elements consistent with traditional mining and
ranching community cottage design and small home craftsmanship. Roofs in
cottage housing developments shall have eaves to recognize traditional cottage
design traits to efficiently shade walls, shed rain, and provide rain
protection for exterior walls. Departures from these standards (exterior trim
and eave requirements) shall be reviewed through the alternative design review
process. Alternative exterior trim and eave designs shall demonstrate a
coherent cottage housing design based upon traditional design principles
including weather protection.
      1.   Window and door trim with a minimum width of three and one- half
inches (31/2") shall be provided on all cottage housing developments
structures.
      2.   Eaves of at least twelve inches (12") shall be provided on all
cottage structures on at least two (2) sides of each building. Where buildings
are not square (1 set of exterior parallel walls are longer than the other),
the eaves shall be provided on the parallel walls that are the longest. (Ord.
603, 11-1-2018)
15.344.07: COVERED MAIN ENTRY PORCHES:
   A.   Objective: All residences in cottage housing developments shall be
provided with a covered main entry porch to create a private outdoor space
protected from the weather and provide a transition from the interior private
residential space to the semi-private outdoor space. Covered porches shall be
usable both in design and dimension.
      1.   Cottage homes shall have a covered main entry porch with a floor
area measuring at least sixty (60) square feet in size.
      2.   The floor of the covered main entry porch shall have minimum
dimensions of not less than five feet (5') in any direction (length or width).
(Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.344.08: STREET FACING FACADES:
   A.   Objective: The street facing facades of cottages in a cottage housing
development will contribute to the neighborhood by including attractive design
details such as windows, changes in materials, and views of front doors or
porches. The main entries of some cottages will be visible from the adjacent
streets to provide a visual pedestrian connection with the surrounding
neighborhood.
      1.   All cottages shall have street facing facades that avoid blank walls
or appear to "turn their backs" to the street. All cottages shall include one
or more of the following on-street facing facades:
         a.   Changes in exterior siding material and paint color;
         b.   Windows which may include bay windows; and/or
         c.   Building modulation with a depth measuring at least one foot
(1').
      2.   At least one cottage shall have its front main entry door and/or
front porches visible from each street frontage. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.344.09: LOT COVERAGE AREA:
Cottage housing developments shall not exceed underlying lot coverage standards
for the respective zoning district to maintain residential neighborhood
character and the balance of built structures to open spaces. (Ord. 603, 11-1-
2018)
15.344.10: COTTAGE FLOOR AREA:
   A.   Objective: Structures in cottage housing developments shall be designed
to be single story or single story plus a loft. Residences in cottage housing
developments are primarily intended for one- and two-person households and
their occasional guests. Maintaining the maximum square footage of residences
in cottage housing developments is necessary to prevent overbuilding of the
site and to not exceed available off-street parking.
      1.   The maximum ground floor area for an individual principal structure
in a cottage housing development shall be as follows:
         a.   For at least fifty percent (50%) of the units, the ground floor
area may not exceed six hundred fifty (650) square feet.
         b.   For no more than fifty percent (50%) of the units, the ground
floor area may be up to eight hundred (800) square feet.
         c.   The net total floor area of each cottage shall not exceed one and
one-half (11/2) times the area of the main level. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.344.11: YARDS - BUILDING SETBACKS FROM EXTERIOR LOT LINES:
   A.   Objective: Exterior lot line building setbacks in cottage housing
developments are based upon setbacks of the zoning district. These yard
setbacks are appropriate based upon the allowed density of cottage housing as
well as the small size of the structures. Flexible setbacks are allowed at the
discretion of the Planning and Public Works Directors to obtain improved site
design and to avoid impacting existing physical features on the site such as
trees. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.344.12: COTTAGE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT BUILDING SEPARATION:
   A.   Objective: Structures within cottage housing developments shall observe
minimum setbacks from other cottage housing development structures to avoid
overcrowding the site and to maintain a sense of privacy within the cottages
themselves.
      1.   All buildings within a cottage housing development shall maintain a
minimum separation of ten feet (10') from cottages within a cottage housing
development measured from the nearest point of the exterior walls. Accessory
buildings shall comply with Building Code requirements for separation. (Ord.
603, 11-1-2018)
15.344.13: COMMON OPEN SPACE:
   A.   Objective: Open space that is commonly owned by all members of a
cottage housing development is an important feature of any site design. It is
intended that the open space be adequately sized and centrally located with
individual cottage entrances oriented towards the open space.
      1.   Common Open Space: A minimum of four hundred (400) square feet per
cottage unit of common open space is required. Parking areas, yard setbacks,
spaces between buildings of ten feet (10') or less in width, private open
space, and driveways do not qualify as common open space.
      2.   Proximity To Common Open Space:
         a.   At least fifty percent (50%) of the cottage units shall abut a
common open space, all of the cottage units shall be within sixty feet (60')
walking distance measured from the nearest entrance of the cottage along the
shortest safe walking route to the nearest point of the common open space. The
common open space shall have cottages abutting at least two (2) sides.
         b.   For the purposes of cottage housing, "common open space" shall be
the central space that may be used by all occupants of the cottage complex.
(Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.344.14: PRIVATE OPEN SPACE:
   A.   Objective: Each residential unit in a cottage housing development shall
be provided an area of private open space. The private open space shall
separate the main entrance to the cottage from the common open space to create
a sense of privacy and shall be oriented to take advantage of solar orientation
and other natural features to create a small but pleasant private yard area.
The private open space may be separated from the common open space with a small
hedge, picket fence, or other similar visual separation to create a sense of
separate ownership.
      1.   Each cottage unit shall be provided with a minimum of two hundred
(200) square feet of usable private open space separated from the common open
space by a hedge or fence not to exceed thirty six inches (36") in height.
      2.   No dimension of the private open space shall be less than eight feet
(8'). (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.344.15: TREE CONSERVATION:
   A.   Objective: Cottage housing developments should be designed to
incorporate existing trees to the extent possible. New trees should be located
to create amenities in the common open space, private open space, provide shade
where appropriate, to create separation between buildings when desired, and to
screen and soften the perimeter of parking areas and street facing sides of
cottage housing developments.
      1.   Preservation of existing trees, and/or new trees, shall be provided
consistent with chapter 402, "Landscape Standards", of this title. Native trees
and other vegetation should be preserved to the extent possible and the overall
site design should take advantage of the location of existing trees and
topographic features. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.344.16: STORMWATER LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT TECHNIQUES:
   A.   Objective: Cottage housing developments shall be designed to take
advantage of open space and landscaped features to utilize low impact
development techniques including natural filtration and on-site infiltration of
stormwater.
      1.   Low impact development techniques for stormwater management shall be
used wherever possible. Such techniques may include the use of pervious pavers
in parking areas and for walkways, directing roof drains and parking lot runoff
to landscape beds, living roofs, and the use of rain barrels. (Ord. 603, 11-1-
2018)
15.344.17: OFF-STREET PARKING:
   A.   Objective: Off-street parking space requirements for cottage housing
developments shall be less than normally required for detached single-family
residences. These reduced standards are based upon the cottages being smaller
than average detached single-family homes and on average containing fewer
occupants. Off-street parking shall be located and designed to be less visible
from frontage streets than the cottages themselves. Off- street parking shall
be designed to maintain a pedestrian character for the overall cottage housing
development. Clustering parking to the side or rear of a cottage project will
most often best accomplish these goals. However, on a site-specific basis,
design solutions other than clustering may be found to meet this objective
through the alternative design process. Parking areas shall be attractively
landscaped to screen parking from adjacent properties and street rights-of-way
and shall meet parking lot landscape standards.
      1.   Parking Ratios:
 
Total Net Floor Area Of Cottage Or   Ratio Of Off-Street Parking Spaces
Nonconforming Dwelling Unit          Required Per Cottage Or Nonconforming
                                     Dwelling Unit
Up to 1,000 square feet                 1.25 parking spaces
1,001 to 1,200 square feet              1.5 parking spaces
Existing nonconforming single-family 2 parking spaces
residence
 
      2.   Off-Street Parking Location: Parking shall be located on the cottage
housing development property. Off-street parking lots shall be located to the
side or rear of the cottage housing development (see illustrations below).
Parking lots shall not be located between the cottage housing development and
the primary street frontage.
         a.   Off-Street Parking Screening: Off-street parking may be located
in or under a non-cottage parking structure (such as a single or multi-auto
carport or garage), but such structures shall not be attached to individual
cottages. Uncovered parking is also permitted; provided, that off-street
parking shall be screened from direct street view from one or more street
facades by garage doors, or by a fence and landscaping.
         b.   Preferred Parking Locations: Preferred locations for parking, in
descending order of preference, are as follows:
            (1)   To the rear of cottage housing units accessed by an alley.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b3e37bf04674f7b3738d62883ef5a27ed6aa631/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2403.jpg]
 
            (2)   To the side of the cottage housing units access by a private
driveway.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b3e37bf04674f7b3738d62883ef5a27ed6aa631/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2405.jpg]
 
            (3)   Parking on the side (non-primary street) screened from the
side street by either garage doors, landscaping, and/or fencing.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b3e37bf04674f7b3738d62883ef5a27ed6aa631/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2407.jpg]
 
         c.   Parking Lot Landscaping: Parking lot landscaping shall comply
with the requirements of chapter 402, "Landscape Standards", of this title.
(Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.344.18: EXTERIOR LIGHTING AND HEATING/COOLING EQUIPMENT NOISE:
   A.   Objective: Cottage housing developments should be designed to minimize
light and noise impacts both within the development and to adjacent properties.
      1.   Where provided, exterior lighting shall be mounted as low as
possible, pointed downward, and the light source shall be shielded from direct
observation from above, adjacent properties, and public rights-of-way. Lighting
"spillover" to adjacent properties shall be avoided.
      2.   Heating (and cooling, if applicable) equipment for cottage housing
developments shall be designed to cause little or no noise impacts within the
development and to adjacent properties. To help prevent noise problems,
exterior heating and cooling units shall not be used for cottage housing
developments. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.344.19: REQUIRED SEPARATION OF COTTAGE HOUSING DEVELOPMENTS IN THE SR-1/2,
SR-12000, SR-9000, AND NR ZONING DISTRICTS:
   A.   Objective: Cottage housing developments in Single-Family Zoning
Districts shall be separated from each other by a minimum distance to promote
housing-type diversity, to reduce potential cumulative impacts of cottage
housing development, and to help protect neighborhood character.
      1.   Each cottage housing development in the SR-1/2, SR-12000, SR-9000,
and NR Zoning Districts shall be separated from any other cottage housing
development in these districts by a distance of at least one thousand feet
(1,000') or one block, whichever is greater. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.344.20: OWNERSHIP AND RESIDENTIAL USE OF COTTAGES:
   A.   All cottage housing developments shall be developed utilizing common
ownership provisions of Nevada Revised Statutes chapter 116 including with
regard to ownership in which portions of the real estate are designated for
separate individual ownership and the remainder of the real estate is
designated for common ownership solely by the owners of those portions (similar
to condominiums or townhomes). An exception that an association, cooperative or
other similar ownership technique may be substituted for the requirement of
residential condominiums. Appropriate documentation of formal legal ownership
of the development shall be recorded with the County Recorder.
   B.   Cottages are for residential use only and may not be operated as
transient accommodations. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.344.21: ALTERNATIVE SITE DESIGN:
It is possible that an alternative design may fulfill the intent of this
chapter while not complying with the provisions herein. Requests for
alternative designs shall be processed pursuant to section
15.330.04, "Alternative Equivalent Compliance", of this title. (Ord. 603, 11-1-
2018)
CHAPTER 345
TOWNHOUSE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
SECTION:
15.345.01: Purpose And Intent
15.345.02: Applicability
15.345.03: Development Criteria
15.345.04: Architectural Treatment
15.345.05: Setbacks And Yards
15.345.06: Parking And Access
15.345.07: Open Space
15.345.08: Accessory Dwelling Units And Buildings
15.345.09: Utilities And Services
15.345.10: Supplementary Regulations
15.345.01: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
Townhouse development is intended to:
   A.   To accommodate various types of unique and innovative housing forms
which are usually based upon a concept of reducing the area of individually
owned lots, and grouping such lots together to more efficiently utilize the
total space within the subdivision by creating common open spaces, scenic and
recreational areas, and other spaces which would compensate for the reduction
of land area contained within the individually owned lot.
   B.   To allow the grouping of separately owned one-family dwelling units
into a group of townhouses in such a manner as to make efficient, economical
and aesthetically pleasing use of land so restricted that the same will be
continually well maintained in order to preserve the health, welfare, safety
and convenience of the surrounding neighborhood and insure a reasonable amount
of open space and architectural variety. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.345.02: APPLICABILITY:
Townhouse developments may be allowed in the NR, NR-H, CMU-S, CMU-H, MFR, RMU,
HMU-S and EMU Zoning Districts. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.345.03: DEVELOPMENT CRITERIA:
   A.   Density: Overall density in a particular townhouse project shall not
exceed the maximum density allowed within the zoning district for which it is
located, except when designed and developed as a planned unit development under
provisions set forth in chapters 342 and 349 of this title.
   B.   Lot Area: No townhouse lot shall contain an area of less than one
thousand six hundred (1,600) square feet and a minimum lot and building width
of twenty feet (20'). The remaining lot area that would normally be required in
the zoning district, per dwelling unit, shall be incorporated into usable and
accessible open space and/or private or common vehicular access or parking area
for the townhouse project site.
   C.   Project Site: As used in this chapter, a townhouse project site is the
entire parcel of land for which townhouse units are proposed prior to the
creation of any townhouse lots.
   D.   Height Of Structure: Maximum height for any townhouse structure shall
not be greater than thirty five feet (35').
   E.   Dwelling Unit Access: Each townhouse unit shall have two (2) separate
entries from the ground on which the structure is erected.
   F.   Size Of The Project Site: Minimum size of the site to be developed for
a group of townhouse units shall be twenty five thousand (25,000) square feet.
   G.   Building Coverage: In no event shall a townhouse, including any
accessory buildings cover more than forty five percent (45%) of the individual
lot area.
   H.   Street Frontage: Each townhouse project site shall border on a public
street, except provided that they face private or common open areas as set
forth herein. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.345.04: ARCHITECTURAL TREATMENT:
   A.   In all townhouse development, architectural treatment shall be as
follows:
      1.   The facades of townhouses in a group shall be varied by changed
front yard setbacks and variation in materials or design so that not more than
two (2) abutting townhouses will have the same front yard setback and the same
or essentially the same architectural treatment of facades and roof lines.
(Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.345.05: SETBACKS AND YARDS:
   A.   Right-Of-Way Setback: No townhouse unit shall be located closer than
fifteen feet (15') from any public right-of-way or within fifteen feet (15') of
a private drive, access road, or common open parking area, to the front or rear
of such dwelling.
   B.   Yard Requirements: Each individual townhouse lot shall have a minimum
front yard of fifteen feet (15') and a rear yard of twenty feet (20'). The
minimum side yard requirements of the zoning district shall be maintained from
side property lines of the townhouse project site.
   C.   Setback Variation: No more than two (2) abutting townhouses or
townhouse groupings within the townhouse project site shall have a common front
building setback. Variations in the setback of front building faces shall be at
least two feet (2'). Height variations shall also be incorporated, if feasible,
in townhouse design.
   D.   Distances Between Townhouse Groups: Townhouse groups, as defined in
this chapter, shall be separated by at least sixteen feet (16'). (Ord. 603, 11-
1-2018)
15.345.06: PARKING AND ACCESS:
   A.   Spaces Required: A minimum of two (2) off-street parking spaces shall
be provided for the residents of each townhouse unit.
   B.   Location: Parking shall be located to the rear of each townhouse
grouping, provided that one on-street parking space located directly in front
of the townhouse unit may be used to fulfill the required per unit space
requirement, where additional guest parking of 0.5 space per unit are provided
within one hundred fifty feet (150') of each townhouse grouping. Parking spaces
shall be located in the rear of the townhouse or in a commonly owned and
maintained off-street parking bay or facility located to the side or rear of
any townhouse grouping. Such parking facility(ies) shall be easily accessible
and a reasonable distance from the townhouse unit it serves (maximum of 150
feet).
      1.   Access drives to parking areas shall be allowed in front and side
yards, but shall not exceed twenty feet (20') in width.
   C.   Construction: All permanent off-street parking spaces, access drives,
and facilities shall be designed and constructed according to the Lyon County
Design Criteria and Improvement Standards and specifications contained in
appendix B on file in the County. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.345.07: OPEN SPACE:
   A.   Open Space Required: A minimum of forty five percent (45%) of the
project site shall be maintained as open space.
   B.   Maintenance Of Common Areas: All common areas and facilities including,
but not limited to, recreational facilities, off- street parking and common
open space shall be maintained in a satisfactory manner without expense to the
County. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.345.08: ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS AND BUILDINGS:
Accessory dwelling units are not permitted within the boundary of any townhouse
development site. No accessory building shall be erected in any front yard or
side yard. Accessory buildings other than commonly owned garage, recreation, or
maintenance facility may not exceed two hundred (200) square feet, nor shall
any separate accessory building be erected within ten feet (10') of any
principal building. An accessory building shall not be located within ten feet
(10') of the rear property line of any townhouse unit or occupy more than
twenty five percent (25%) of the rear yard area. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.345.09: UTILITIES AND SERVICES:
Each individual townhouse unit shall be connected to and serviced by public
water and sewer lines, and serviced by separate gas and electric utility
connections. The water and sewer lines shall be independent of any other
townhouse unit or structure. Water and sewer service facilities shall be
designed and constructed in accordance with the Lyon County Design Criteria and
Improvement Standards and specifications contained in appendix B on file in the
County. Necessary easements shall be indicated and recorded on the final
subdivision or parcel map. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.345.10: SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS:
   A.   Building Permit: A final subdivision map shall be recorded with the
County Recorder and all Property Taxes, fees, liens and penalties satisfied
prior to the issuance of any building permit within a townhouse development.
   B.   Development Standards: All development under this chapter shall conform
to the Lyon County Design Criteria and Improvement Standards and
specifications, appendix B on file in the County. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
CHAPTER 346
ZERO LOT LINE DEVELOPMENTS
SECTION:
15.346.01: Purpose
15.346.02: Applicability
15.346.03: Requirements
15.346.01: PURPOSE:
Zero lot line provisions are intended to provide flexibility for the placement
of structures in new residential land divisions in order to increase usable
yard area. Zero lot line developments are different from townhouse developments
in that structures are not attached at property lines. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.346.02: APPLICABILITY:
These provisions can be used as an alternative to standard side or rear setback
requirements in the SR-12000, SR-9000, NR, and the Mixed Use Zoning Districts
CMU-S, HMU-S, EMU and RMU Zoning Districts when the requirements of this
section are applied in conjunction with a land division application. (Ord. 603,
11-1-2018)
15.346.03: REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Tentative maps using zero lot line provisions must identify building
envelopes for all dwelling units placed in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter. The tentative and final maps shall be consistent with the
standards of this section and all other applicable requirements.
   B.   Conditions may be imposed to ensure that development on the resultant
lots is consistent with the approved tentative map and site plan.
   C.   Building permits for structures may only be approved when consistent
with the approved site plan and final map.
   D.   A single side yard shall be provided per parcel. This reduction shall
not be allowed for the front yard on a corner lot or for the side yard adjacent
to lots developed with other housing types.
   E.   Zero setbacks may be applied to a side or rear property line; provided,
that the setback on the lot abutting a zero setback lot line shall be at least
ten feet (10').
   F.   Structures less than three feet (3') to a property line must meet fire
resistive provisions of the Residential Building Code.
   G.   If the sidewall of the house is on the property line, or within three
feet (3') of the property line, windows or other openings that allow for
visibility into the side yard of the adjacent lot shall not be allowed. Windows
that do not allow visibility into the side yard of the adjacent lot, such as
clerestory windows, translucent windows, or glass block, are permitted.
   H.   A note shall be placed on the final plat, and covenants running with
the land shall be approved by the District Attorney and recorded with the
County Recorder to guarantee that the required setbacks are kept perpetually
free of structures.
   I.   Easements for such purposes as maintenance, or for building projection
encroachments beyond a zero setback line, shall be shown on the final map.
   FIGURE 40.260.260-1
   ZERO LOT LINE DEVELOPMENT
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b3e37bf04674f7b3738d62883ef5a27ed6aa631/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2409.jpg]
 
(Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
CHAPTER 347
ALLEY LOADED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS
SECTION:
15.347.01: Purpose
15.347.02: Applicability
15.347.03: Requirements
15.347.01: PURPOSE:
Alley loaded residential development provisions are intended to provide
flexibility for the placement of structures in new residential land divisions
in order to increase usable yard area, enhance neighborhood walkability, and
allow reduced street widths. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.347.02: APPLICABILITY:
These provisions can be used as an alternative to standard front, side or rear
setback requirements in the SR-12000, SR-9000, NR, and the Mixed Use Zoning
Districts CMU-S, HMU-S, EMU and RMU Zoning Districts when the requirements of
this section are applied in conjunction with a subdivision application. (Ord.
603, 11-1-2018)
15.347.03: REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Development projects using alley loaded residential development
provisions must comply with the following provisions in addition to all other
applicable provisions of this title:
      1.   An alley shall be provided to the rear of all alley-loaded houses.
All vehicular access shall take place from the alley. No off-street parking
shall be permitted in the required front yard.
      2.   Front porches may encroach a maximum of eight feet (8') into the
front yard and shall be at the same first floor elevation as the home.
      3.   Attached and detached garages shall be set back a minimum of twenty
feet (20') from the rear property line. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
CHAPTER 348
MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DESIGN STANDARDS
SECTION:
15.348.01: Purpose
15.348.02: Applicability
15.348.03: Review
15.348.04: Design Standards
15.348.05: Transition And Compatibility Between Multi-Family And Single Family
Housing Development
15.348.06: Storage
15.348.07: Open Space
15.348.08: Landscaping, Fences And Walls
15.348.09: Pedestrian Circulation
15.348.10: Parking
15.348.11: Vehicular Circulation
15.348.01: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to:
   A.   Promote the livability, neighborhood compatibility and public safety of
multi-family housing in the community; and
   B.   Promote higher residential densities in the suburban areas of the
County that will utilize existing infrastructure and improve the efficiency of
public services and facilities. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.348.02: APPLICABILITY:
In all Residential Districts where permitted, including MFR, RMU, CMU-S, CMU-H,
HMU-S, and EMU, multi-family residential development shall comply with the
design standards of this chapter. In cases where the standards of this chapter
conflict with other standards in this title, the standards of this chapter
shall prevail. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.348.03: REVIEW:
All multi-family residential developments shall be subject to the design review
procedures as specified in chapter 235 of this title. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.348.04: DESIGN STANDARDS:
All of the following design standards shall be met by all multi- family
residential developments:
   A.   Building Orientation: Multi-family residential developments, when
abutting a private street, local, collector, or arterial street that has
existing or planned on-street parking, shall have the building oriented to the
street along a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the site's frontage (see
figure 15.348-2 of this subsection).
FIGURE 15.348-2
BUILDING ORIENTATION AND STORAGE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b3e37bf04674f7b3738d62883ef5a27ed6aa631/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2411.jpg]
 
The "orientation" standard is met when all of the following criteria are met:
      1.   Primary building entrances shall face the street;
      2.   The front of the buildings shall be within twenty five feet (25') of
the front lot/parcel line,
Exception: Open, courtyard space in excess of twenty five feet (25') may be
placed in front of building entrances. Open courtyard space is defined as
usable, hard-surfaced space with pedestrian amenities including benches,
seating walls or similar furnishings.
      3.   Off-street parking or vehicular circulation shall not be placed
between buildings and streets used to comply with this standard;
   B.   Building Form: New multi-family construction shall comply with the
following building form standards (see figure 15.348-3 of this subsection).
FIGURE 15.348-3
BUILDING FORM
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b3e37bf04674f7b3738d62883ef5a27ed6aa631/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2413.jpg]
 
      1.   Structures shall not have continuous horizontal distance exceeding
one hundred feet (100') (measured from end wall to end wall).
      2.   A minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the front facade (area
measurement) shall contain windows or doors. All windows and doors shall be
trimmed or be recessed (i.e., into the front facade) to provide shadowing.
      3.   Garages attached to living units and accessed from the street (front
setback) shall be recessed at least four feet (4') behind the front facade of a
dwelling structure; and
      4.   Exterior building elevations shall incorporate design features
including offsets, balconies, projections, window reveals, or similar elements
to preclude large expansions of uninterrupted building surfaces. Along the
vertical face of a structure, the features shall occur at a minimum of every
thirty feet (30'), and on each floor shall contain a minimum of two (2) of the
following features:
         a.   Recesses (e.g., deck, patio, courtyard, entrance, window reveals)
that have a minimum depth of three feet (3');
         b.   Extensions (e.g., floor area, deck, patio, entrance) that have a
minimum depth of two feet (2') and minimum length of four feet (4'); and/or
         c.   Offsets or breaks in roof elevation of two feet (2') or greater
in height.
   C.   Roof Form: New multi-family residential structure(s) shall comply with
the following building form standards
      1.   Roof Architecture:
         a.   General Design Principles:
            (A)   No specific architectural style is required; however, within
a development, buildings shall incorporate complementary forms, materials,
colors, and rooflines that result in a cohesive and integrated design.
            (B)   Roof massing shall avoid box-like or monotonous appearances.
Articulation shall be achieved through variations in roof planes, changes in
materials, and the integration of architectural elements.
            (C)   Architectural detailing and materials shall be consistently
applied on all building elevations to retain a cohesive design.
      2.   Roof Form And Massing:
         a.   Roof Design And Variation:
            (A)   Roof forms shall be used to break up long horizontal massing,
reflect internal building organization, and emphasize entries, corners, or unit
modules.
            (B)   Roofs shall have variations in plane accomplished by changes
in plane or by the use of traditional roof forms such as dormers (pitched,
shed-roof or eyebrow), gables, hipped roofs and variations in pitch.
            (C)   Flat roofs may be permitted if fully concealed behind
architectural facade roof elements that simulate sloped rooflines through
construction of false or partial roof forms integrated into the building's
exterior. These elements shall be constructed along all exterior elevations of
the building and shall maintain a minimum height consistent with a 3:12 roof
pitch measured from the top of the primary roof surface to the peak of the
facade roof. The facade roof shall be continuous around the entire perimeter of
the building to ensure a consistent and integrated architectural appearance,
which shall be compatible with and complimentary to the architectural character
of the surrounding development.
         b.   Roof Function And Expression:
            (A)   Roof forms shall be aligned with and reinforce the layout of
the building, highlighting entrances, corners, and unit configurations.
            (B)   Applied or purely decorative roof features that are not
structurally or visually integrated into the building are discouraged.
      3.   Rooftop Mechanical Equipment Screening:
         a.   All rooftop mechanical equipment shall be fully screened from
view from public streets, adjacent residential uses, and publicly accessible
locations (e.g. sidewalks, parks, or other ground level areas open to the
public). Required screening shall be designed to ensure that rooftop mechanical
equipment is not visible when viewed from any adjacent public street, adjacent
residential use, or publicly accessible location located at or below the
elevation of the top of the highest occupied floor of the building. 
         b.   Screening shall be accomplished through one or more of the
following:
            (A)   Locating equipment within recessed roof wells below the
height of facade roof elements;
            (B)   Enclosing equipment within a rooftop structure designed and
finished in a manner architecturally consistent with the primary building; or
            (C)   Using facade roof forms that are of sufficient height and
design to fully conceal equipment from all public views.
         c.   Mechanical equipment shall not extend above the visible roofline
or roof screen.
      4.   Alternative Compliance: The Community Development Director may
approve deviations from the standards set forth in this section through the
minor variance process if the applicant demonstrates that the proposed design:
         a.   Meets or exceeds the overall intent of these design standards;
         b.   Provides an equal or greater level of architectural quality and
visual interest; and
         c.   Maintains compatibility with surrounding development patterns.
(Ord. 603, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 639, 6-18-2025)
15.348.05: TRANSITION AND COMPATIBILITY BETWEEN MULTI-FAMILY AND SINGLE FAMILY
HOUSING DEVELOPMENT:
Multi-family residential developments adjacent to properties zoned Residential
shall comply with the transition area and compatibility standards listed below,
unless it can be demonstrated that adjacent residential property is committed
to a non-residential use (e.g., church) (see figures 15.348-4 and 15.348-5 of
this section).
FIGURE 15.348-4
COMPATIBILITY AND TRANSITION
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b3e37bf04674f7b3738d62883ef5a27ed6aa631/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2415.jpg]
 
FIGURE 15.348-5
BUILDING SETBACKS, BUILDING HEIGHT AND TRANSITION TO SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b3e37bf04674f7b3738d62883ef5a27ed6aa631/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2417.jpg]
 
   A.   When a single-family residence is within twenty five feet (25') of a
proposed multi-family residential development site and the residence is on the
same side of the street and same block, a setback similar to that of the
nearest single-family residence shall be used for the front yard. "Similar"
means the multifamily development setback is within five feet (5') of the
setback provided by the nearest single-family residence. For example, if the
single-family residence setback is twenty feet (20'), then the multi-family
building shall be set back by fifteen feet (15') to twenty five feet (25'). The
minimum front yard setback shall be twenty feet (20'), as specified in chapter
312 of this title.
   B.   Site obscuring buffers shall be required. The County may require
retention of existing vegetation; installation of a six foot (6') minimum
height, site- obscuring fence with shade trees planted a maximum of thirty feet
(30') on center (2-inch caliper diameter at breast height ("dbh")) at planting;
other landscaping to provide visual buffering; and/or other sight obscuring
barriers to provide visual buffering. In addition, the County may require
acoustical barriers when parking is proposed to be located adjacent to the
shared property line.
   C.   Buildings, or portions of buildings adjacent to single family
residential property shall not exceed a building height greater than one foot
(1') for each foot distance from the property line. For example, a building or
portion of a building thirty feet (30') in height shall be thirty feet (30')
from the single-family residential property line. This standard applies up to a
distance of fifty feet (50') from the property line.
   D.   Light standards shall be twelve feet (12') or less in height and
shielded so that light does not allow direct illumination onto adjacent single
family residential property or into dwelling units.
   E.   Mechanical equipment shall be screened from view (i.e., as viewed from
adjacent properties and street), and shall be buffered so that noise does not
exceed sixty five (65) dBA as measured at the property line. The County may
require a noise study certified by a licensed acoustical engineer.
   F.   All rooftop equipment other than solar installations shall be hidden
behind parapets or other structures designed into the building. (Ord. 603, 11-
1-2018; amd. Ord. 607, 9-19-2019)
15.348.06: STORAGE:
Multi-family residential development shall provide space for and install trash
receptacles, storage and equipment as specified in the following standards (see
subsection
15.348.04A, figure 15.348-2 of this chapter):
   A.   Adequate, accessible and secure storage space shall be provided for
each dwelling. A minimum of one hundred twelve (112) cubic feet of enclosed
storage is required separate from the living unit. Garages and storage units
adjoining a dwelling (e.g., attached to decks and patios) shall qualify as
storage space;
   B.   Trash receptacles shall be screened from view by placement of a solid
wood fence, masonry wall, or similar sight-obscuring, gated enclosure, from
five feet (5') to six feet (6') in height. Obscuring landscaping shall be
planted a minimum twenty four inches (24") in height around all exposed sides
of the wall or fence, unless breaks are provided for gates.
   C.   No trash receptacles shall be located in any front yard setback, or
within twenty five feet (25') of property lines abutting Residentially zoned
property; and
   D.   Ground-mounted equipment, including exterior transformers, utility
pads, cable television and telephone boxes and similar utility services, shall
be placed underground, where practicable. When placed above ground, equipment
shall be placed to minimize visual impact; or screened with a wall or
landscaping. When walls are used they shall be tall enough to completely screen
the equipment at the time of the equipment installation. Landscaping shall be
planted tall enough to attain fifty percent (50%) coverage after two (2) years
and one hundred percent (100%) coverage within four (4) years. (Ord. 603, 11-1-
2018)
15.348.07: OPEN SPACE:
Multi-family residential developments shall provide both common open space and
private open space as specified in the following standards (see figures 15.348-
1 and 15.348-6 of this section):
FIGURE 15.348-1
MULTI-UNIT DESIGN STANDARDS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b3e37bf04674f7b3738d62883ef5a27ed6aa631/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2419.jpg]
 
FIGURE 15.348-6
OPEN SPACE AND LANDSCAPING
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b3e37bf04674f7b3738d62883ef5a27ed6aa631/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2421.jpg]
 
   A.   General: Inclusive of required yards, a minimum of fifteen percent
(15%) of the gross site area shall be designated and permanently reserved as
open space. The total required open space is the sum of setbacks, common open
space, and private open space.
      1.   Multi-family developments in mixed-use buildings are exempt from
these standards.
      2.   Multi-family developments at densities exceeding twelve (12) units
per gross acre shall include a minimum of twenty percent (20%) of the gross
site as open space, which may be any combination of yards, common open space
and private open space.
   B.   Common Open Space: Common open space shall be provided in all newly
constructed multi-family residential development as specified in the following
standards:
      1.   Multi-family residential developments shall designate within common
open space a minimum of five hundred (500) square feet of active recreation
area (including, but not limited to: children's play areas, play fields,
swimming pools, sports courts) for every ten (10) units or increment thereof.
For example, a sixty (60) unit development shall provide a minimum area of
three thousand (3,000) square feet for active recreation. No horizontal
dimension shall be less than fifteen feet (15').
Exception: As determined by the Director, qualified senior housing developments
may be excluded from this requirement; however, all other common open space
requirements apply.
      2.   Placement of children's play areas shall not be allowed in any
required yard setback or transition area.
      3.   Landscaping and/or natural vegetation shall occupy a minimum of
fifty percent (50%) of required common open space. On-site natural resources
and historic features which are accessible to residents (including, but not
limited to: by trails, boardwalks) may be used to partially or fully satisfy
this requirement.
      4.   Indoor or covered recreational space (including, but not limited to:
swimming pools, sports courts, weight rooms) shall not exceed thirty percent
(30%) of the required common open space area (even if more than the required
common open space is provided).
      5.   Reduction of up to a maximum of twenty five percent (25%) to the
common open space standard may be granted for multi-family residential
developments of up to sixty (60) units (or for the first 60 units of a larger
project) when the developments are within one-fourth (1/4) mile (measured
walking distance) to a public park; and there is a direct, improved, permanent,
public, Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA)-accessible, lighted, maintained
pedestrian trail or sidewalk between the site and the park. An exemption shall
be granted only when the nearby park provides active recreation area.
      6.   Phasing shall not be used to circumvent common open space standards.
   C.   Private Open Space: Private open space shall be provided in all newly
constructed multi-family residential developments, to comply with the following
standards:
      1.   All private open space shall be directly accessible from the
dwelling unit through a doorway. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 607, 9-19-
2019)
15.348.08: LANDSCAPING, FENCES AND WALLS:
Multi-family residential developments shall provide landscaping as specified in
chapter 402 of this title and the following standards (see section
15.348.07, figure 15.348-6 of this chapter):
   A.   A minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the site shall be landscaped.
Xeriscape techniques are encouraged. All landscaping should include a mix of
vegetative ground cover, shrubbery and trees. Trees, a minimum two inches (2")
caliper size in diameter at breast height ("dbh"), and shrubbery, a minimum of
twenty four inches (24") in height, shall be planted. Mulch, decomposed
granite, rocks and similar inert material may be used to complement the cover
requirement, but shall not be considered a sole substitute for the vegetative
ground cover requirement.
   B.   Planter strips shall be required for all multi-family residential
developments. Planter strips shall be a minimum of 4.5 feet wide, placed
between the back of curb and the sidewalk, along public or private streets.
   C.   Street trees, a minimum two inches (2") caliper size dbh, shall be
placed within the planter strips between the curb and the sidewalk. Street
trees shall be planted one per every thirty (30) linear feet (minimum) of
street frontage.
   D.   Fences in front yards and along any frontage used to comply with the
building orientation standard shall be limited to three feet (3') in height.
Fences in other yards shall comply with the fence standards contained in the
Lyon County Design Criteria and Improvement Standards and Specifications,
appendix B on file in the County.
   E.   The use of native and/or low water-consumptive drought- tolerant
landscaping is encouraged. All landscaping shall be irrigated with a permanent
irrigation system unless a licensed landscape architect submits written
verification that the proposed plant materials do not require permanent
irrigation. If the proposed plant materials do not require permanent
irrigation, then temporary irrigation shall be installed to allow the living
plant materials to become established. Once the living plant materials are
deemed to be established by the Director, then the temporary irrigation shall
be removed. The property owner shall maintain all landscaping. (Ord. 603, 11-1-
2018)
15.348.09: PEDESTRIAN CIRCULATION:
Multi-family residential developments with more than ten (10) units shall
provide pedestrian circulation as specified in the following standards (see
figure 15.348-7 of this section):
   FIGURE 15.348-7
   CIRCULATION AND PARKING
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b3e37bf04674f7b3738d62883ef5a27ed6aa631/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2423.jpg]
 
   A.   Continuous internal sidewalks shall be provided throughout the site.
Discontinuous internal sidewalks shall be permitted only where stubbed to a
future internal sidewalk on abutting properties, future phases on the subject
property, or abutting recreation areas and pedestrian trails;
   B.   Internal sidewalks shall be separated a minimum of five feet (5') from
dwellings, measured from the sidewalk edge closest to any dwelling unit;
   C.   The internal sidewalk system shall connect all abutting streets to
primary building entrances;
   D.   The internal sidewalk system shall connect all buildings on the site
and shall connect the dwelling units to the parking areas, bicycle parking,
storage areas, all recreational facilities and common areas, and abutting
public sidewalks and pedestrian trails;
   E.   Surface treatment of internal sidewalks shall be concrete or masonry
pavers, at least five feet (5') wide. Multi-use accessways (e.g., for bicycles,
pedestrians and emergency vehicles) shall be of the same materials, at least
ten feet (10') wide. Where emergency vehicle access is required, there shall be
an additional five feet (5') on either side of the accessway (15 feet total).
The additional five foot (5') area may be turf- block, grass-crete or similar
permeable material on a base of gravel capable of supporting fire equipment
weighing eighty thousand (80,000) pounds;
   F.   Where internal sidewalks cross a vehicular circulation area or parking
aisle, they shall be clearly marked with contrasting paving materials,
elevation changes, speed humps, or striping. Speed humps shall be subject to
review and approval by the Lyon County Sheriff's Department, and the applicable
Fire Protection District. Internal sidewalk design shall comply with Americans
With Disabilities Act (ADA) requirements;
   G.   Where the internal sidewalks are parallel and abutting to a vehicular
circulation area, the sidewalk shall be raised or be separated from the
vehicular circulation area by a raised curb, bollards, landscaping or other
physical barrier. If a raised sidewalk is used, the ends of the raised portions
shall be equipped with curb ramps; and
   H.   All on-site internal sidewalks shall be lighted to a minimum of two (2)
foot-candles. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.348.10: PARKING:
Multi-family residential developments shall provide parking designed in
conformance with the provisions of chapter 401 of this title, and as specified
in the following standards:
   A.   Parking lots and facilities shall be placed to the side or rear of
buildings as specified in the building orientation standards. Parking shall not
be placed along that portion of the street where building frontages are used to
comply with the building orientation standard;
   B.   Lighting shall be provided for safety purposes, and focused/shielded to
avoid glare on adjacent properties or dwellings as specified in chapter 405 of
this title and the Lyon County Design Criteria and Improvement Standards and
specifications, appendix B on file in the County;
   C.   There shall be one planter island for every eight (8) parking spaces.
Planter islands shall be a minimum of six feet (6') wide, exclusive of the
curb, the full length of a parking space containing one shade tree (a minimum 2
inches diameter at breast height [dbh] in caliper at planting) and vegetative
ground cover. Trees shall be specimens capable of attaining thirty five feet
(35') or more in height at maturity and shall not produce excessive fruit,
nuts, or sap, and resistant to pest damage. Bark and rock mulch is an
acceptable substitute for vegetative ground cover in the planter island. Low
impact development stormwater features shall be incorporated into planter
islands whenever possible. Landscape areas shall be evenly distributed
throughout the perimeter of interior parking areas, where practicable;
   D.   A minimum six foot (6') wide planter area shall separate and visually
screen parking from living area windows. The planter area shall include a mix
of inert or vegetative ground cover, shrubbery, and trees with appropriate
growth habit (i.e., for narrow planters and any height limitations including
balconies, overhangs, and eaves). Shrubbery in this planter area shall be at
least twenty four inches (24") in height at the time of planting, and trees a
minimum of two inches (2") (dbh) in caliper at the time of planting;
   E.   Parking lots shall be connected to all building entrances by means of
internal sidewalks;
   F.   All parking stalls fronting a sidewalk, or landscaped area shall be
provided with a secure wheel bumper not less than six inches (6") in height and
set back from the front a minimum of two feet (2') to allow for vehicle
encroachment. Wheel bumpers, if used, shall be a minimum of six feet (6') in
length. As an option, the sidewalk or planter may be widened two feet (2')
beyond the minimum dimension required to allow for vehicle encroachment. The
sidewalks and planters shall be protected by a curb not less than six inches
(6") in height;
   G.   On corner lots/parcels, parking areas shall not be located within five
feet (5') of an intersection, as measured from the center of the curb return to
the edge of the parking area (curb or wheel stop);
   H.   All parking, maneuvering and loading areas abutting a property line or
right-of-way shall provide perimeter lot/parcel landscaping. A minimum five
foot (5') wide planting strip shall be planted with a mixture of shade trees, a
minimum two inches (2") dbh, and evergreen trees, a minimum of six feet (6') in
height, shrubbery and a mix of inert or vegetative ground cover, and a low
level (e.g., 30 inches to 40 inches) evergreen hedge. Low impact development
stormwater features shall be incorporated wherever possible;
   I.   Decorative walls may be used in place of the hedge in subsection H of
this section. The decorative wall shall be a minimum of thirty inches (30") in
height and no more than forty inches (40") in height, and shall comply with the
vision clearance standards specified in the Lyon County Design Criteria and
Improvement Standards and specifications, appendix B on file in the County.
Decorative walls shall be constructed of textured concrete masonry (CMU) or
similar quality material, and include a cap. The wall may be partially see-
through (up to 40 percent) as appropriate for security purposes. The area
between the wall and property line shall be landscaped with shade trees;
   J.   Parking area landscaping shall be designed to reduce stormwater runoff
(e.g., through infiltration swales and other measures), as practicable; and
   K.   Bicycle parking shall be provided and may be incorporated into the
landscaping design. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.348.11: VEHICULAR CIRCULATION:
Multi-family residential developments shall provide vehicular circulation as
specified in the following standards (see subsection
15.401.04B of this title):
   A.   The on-site driveway (or private street) system shall connect with
public streets abutting the site;
   B.   Shared driveways shall be provided whenever practicable to minimize
cross turning movements on adjacent streets. On-site driveways and private
streets shall be stubbed to abutting high density residential and commercial
properties, at locations determined during site plan review process to
facilitate development of shared driveways;
   C.   Parking areas shall also be accessible from alleys when properties abut
an alley, or an alley can be reasonably extended to serve the development.
(Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
CHAPTER 349
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD)
SECTION:
15.349.01: Purpose
15.349.02: Applicability
15.349.03: Standards And Criteria
15.349.04: Planned Unit Development Approval Process
15.349.05: Processing
15.349.06: Preapplication Conference
15.349.07: Application For Tentative Approval
15.349.08: Review Of Application For Tentative Approval
15.349.09: Hearing On Application
15.349.10: Approval Or Denial Of Application
15.349.11: Effect Of Tentative Approval
15.349.12: Time Limits For Filing Application For Final Approval
15.349.13: Final Approval
15.349.14: Certification Of The Final Development Plan
15.349.15: Abandonment Of Final Plan
15.349.16: Judicial Review
15.349.01: PURPOSE:
   A.   Planned unit development (PUD) is a land use designation designed to
provide an overall planning and design approach for a single use development or
a development incorporating a mix of uses. PUD allows for deviation from a
strict application of dimensional and use limitations of the zoning district or
districts in order to provide flexibility for landowners to creatively plan for
the overall development of their land to achieve a more desirable environment
than would be possible through strict application of the standard requirements
of the zoning district.
While not to be considered as the explicit standards to be applied when
evaluating a PUD, the general purpose or purposes for establishing a PUD may
include one or more of the following:
      1.   Permit the integration rather than separation of uses so that
necessary commercial, recreation, and educational facilities are conveniently
located to housing;
      2.   Establish land use patterns that promote and expand opportunities
for public transportation and for efficient, compact, networks of streets and
utilities that lower development and maintenance costs and conserve energy;
      3.   Help preserve valued environmental resource lands and avoid
development of natural hazard areas;
      4.   Help maintain and enhance surface and ground water quality and
quantity, and to maintain air quality;
      5.   Help improve and enhance the County's trail and park system and
maintain access to public lands;
      6.   Help protect and maintain critical wildlife habitat and migration
corridors;
      7.   Establish incentives for applicants to assure that long term
affordable housing will be developed;
      8.   Help provide for well-located, clean, safe, and pleasant industrial
sites involving a minimum of strain on transportation facilities;
      9.   Encourage innovations in residential, commercial and industrial
development and renewal so that the growing demands of the population may be
met by greater variety in type, design, and layout of buildings, and by the
conservation and more efficient use of open space ancillary to the built
environment;
      10.   Minimize the burden of traffic on roads and highways;
      11.   Help ensure that the purposes, goals, objectives and policies of
applicable Lyon County Comprehensive Master Plans and maps are achieved. (Ord.
603, 11-1-2018)
15.349.02: APPLICABILITY:
PUDs shall be permitted in Suburban and Rural Character Areas of Lyon County as
identified in the Lyon County Comprehensive Master Plan and maps. PUDs may be
permitted in all Suburban Character Area Zoning Districts provided the project,
and its component elements and uses, is planned in a manner compatible with
each and to the surrounding environment. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.349.03: STANDARDS AND CRITERIA:
The following standards and criteria shall govern PUD proposals within Lyon
County:
   A.   Proposed Uses: The use (or uses) proposed is (are) consistent with the
goals and policies of the Lyon County Comprehensive Master Plan.
   B.   Site Area: The minimum site area required for a proposed PUD is five
(5) acres. The tract or tracts of land included in a proposed PUD must be in a
single ownership or under the development control of a joint application of
owners or authorized agents of the property involved.
   C.   Design: The PUD will comply with the Lyon County Design Criteria and
Improvement Standards and specifications contained in appendix B on file in the
County.
   D.   Density: The allowable residential density shall be established for the
subject property, using the net density acreage as defined in chapter 1200 of
this title, appendix A. An increase in residential density above the maximum
residential density allowed in the existing underlying zoning district may be
proposed and can be permitted. The applicant must mitigate increased density,
and the level of mitigation shall increase as the proposed density increases.
At a minimum, the applicant must explain how the increase can be offset through
provision of usable open space and amenities, innovative site design,
architectural variety, and quality of construction or promulgates a master plan
goal/policy/strategy and demonstrate that any adverse impacts can be mitigated.
If the PUD is to be developed in phases, the County may allow for a greater
concentration of density or intensity of land use within a section of the
development as long as the increase is offset by a reciprocal decrease in
density or intensity of land use in any completed prior section of development
or by an appropriate reservation of common open space on the remaining land by
a grant of permanent protective easement as proscribed in subsection
15.340.08A4 of this title or by covenant in favor of the County.
   E.   Bulk Requirements: Building and parking area setbacks, minimum lot
area, lot coverage and building height must conform to the requirements of the
equivalent zoning district or the existing underlying zoning for a majority of
the PUD unless deviations from those underlying zoning development standards
are proposed, considered and approved as a part of the review process. Any such
deviation(s) must be justified by the applicant by addressing the allowable
modifications contained in chapters 340 through 349 of this title where
appropriate, and the exceptions criteria of subsection M of this section.
   F.   Commercial Design: Commercial building placement and architectural
design shall conform to the intent of chapter 360 of this title, commercial
design standards.
   G.   Residential Design: Multi-family housing placement and design shall
conform to the intent of chapter 348, "Multi-Family Residential Design
Standards", of this title.
   H.   Parking: Parking shall be provided as required by chapter 401 of this
title, parking and loading. Further reductions in the amount of parking to be
provided may be proposed by the applicant but shall be approved only if they
meet the exceptions criteria of subsection M3 of this section.
   I.   Open Space: The minimum amount of area to be designated and preserved
as common open space in any planned unit development shall be twenty percent
(20%). Each planned unit development proposal shall identify all areas proposed
as common open space meeting the requirements contained in section
15.340.08 of this title. Where a decrease in the required common open space is
proposed the applicant shall provide a detailed justification addressing the
criteria for exception to the common open space requirement outlined in
subsection M of this section. For nonresidential development the common open
space requirement can be met by providing a minimum of twenty percent (20%) of
the development as landscaped area, which exceeds the minimum standards
imposed.
      1.   Usable common open space in residential PUDs shall be sited and
improved to provide active recreational amenities intended to provide
appropriate opportunities for physical activity and interaction among residents
within the development. Except where inventoried significant natural resources
or Flood Hazard Zone are present on site, one hundred percent (100%) of the
required usable common open space area shall be improved for active or passive
recreational use. Usable common open space in Rural Character Areas of Lyon
County may retain agricultural/ranching uses, operations and related support
structures to continue the agricultural/ranching uses subject to a restrictive
covenant recorded on the common open space areas outlining the remaining
agricultural/ranching uses and activities to continue on the open space areas
while extinguishing any residual development rights from the designated open
space areas.
      2.   Development within Historic Character Areas shall provide usable
common open space improvements which enhance the pedestrian environment and are
appropriate to these higher density areas. Such improvements may include, but
are not limited to, the following: hardscaped courtyards; weather canopies;
water features and drinking fountains; benches or low walls with seating areas;
free-standing planters; play structures; public art or other pedestrian space
or design features integrated into the overall design of the development.
      3.   Open space deemed unusable shall be placed under permanent
protective easement as proscribed in section
15.340.08 of this title, with evidence provided at the time of application that
the proposed easement holder has or will accept the easement and perpetual
management and maintenance as required by section
15.340.08 of this title.
   J.   Connectivity: Planned unit developments shall provide vehicular,
bicycle, pedestrian or equestrian connections to adjacent and nearby
residential areas, transit stops, neighborhood activity centers and other
neighborhood facilities in the following manner:
      1.   In PUDs that are five (5) acres or more in size, full street
connections with spacing of no more than six hundred feet (600') between these
connections shall be provided except where barriers such as topography,
railroads, or pre-existing development prevent their construction.
      2.   Within PUDs in which full street connections are not possible,
bicycle and pedestrian connection on public easements or rights- of-way shall
be provided with spacing of no more than four hundred feet (400') between
connections except where barriers such as topography, railroads, or pre-
existing development prevent their construction.
      3.   In PUDs, opportunities to incrementally extend and connect proposed
new streets with existing streets in adjacent or nearby areas shall be
considered in addition to addressing street connectivity recommendations shown
on the County-Wide Integrated Roadway Network Maps contained within appendix B
of the Lyon County Comprehensive Master Plan on file in the County.
      4.   The use of cul-de-sac designs and closed street systems shall be
limited to circumstances in which barriers such as topography, railroads,
arterial highways, or pre-existing development prevent full street extensions.
When permitted, cul-de-sacs shall have a maximum length of two hundred feet
(200') and shall serve no more than twenty five (25) dwelling units.
      5.   Narrow street designs for local streets may be permitted with
approval of the County Engineer, Road Superintendent and Fire Chief of the
local Fire Protection District, provided that other minimum dimensional
requirements are met for travel lanes, bike lanes, parking lanes and sidewalk
widths or other suitable alternative facilities (such as grade-separated bike
lanes and sidewalks, designated parking areas, etc.) are provided.
      6.   Where site conditions are favorable to stormwater infiltration
"green streets" designs may be utilized. Permissible design elements and
facilities include, but are not limited to, minimizing paving and/or using
pervious paving materials, maximizing street tree coverage, using multi-
functional open drainage systems in lieu of more conventional curb-and-gutter
systems, reducing cul-de-sac radii and using vegetated islands in the center,
and minimizing the negative effects of stream crossings.
   K.   Employment Or Commercial Designations: Planned unit development in
areas designated employment or commercial on the Lyon County Comprehensive
Master Plan Map may allow mixed industrial, commercial, and residential uses
subject to the following:
      1.   The site proposed for the PUD is not less than twenty (20) gross
acres in size.
      2.   The PUD preliminary development plan shall indicate the approximate
size, general location, and character of use of all areas of the site which the
applicant designates for uses other than those allowed by the Lyon County
Comprehensive Master Plan Map and this title.
   L.   Buffers: Planned unit developments shall establish adequate buffer
zones between dissimilar uses within the development and between dissimilar
uses and/or densities exterior to the planned unit development. Special design
considerations such as height controls, density controls, architectural
modifications, and landscaping buffers shall be incorporated in any portion of
the development which adjoins a previously approved land use or division of
land.
   M.   Exceptions:
      1.   Building Setback Or Yard Requirements: The commission may grant an
exception to the dimensional building setback or yard requirements of the
applicable standards based on findings that the approval will result in the
following:
         a.   No adverse effect to adjoining properties in terms of light, air
circulation, noise levels, privacy, and fire hazard.
         b.   At least one of the following:
            (1)   A more efficient use of the site;
            (2)   The preservation of natural features which have been
incorporated into the overall design of the project;
            (3)   Safe vehicular and pedestrian access to the site and safe on-
site vehicular and pedestrian circulation.
In the instance where adjoining properties to the planned unit development are
zoned Residential, all structures within the PUD shall be set back from
adjoining properties to the minimum setback or yard required in the underlying
zone.
      2.   Building Height: The commission may grant an exception to the
applicable height requirements for a specified and defined area within the PUD,
based on findings that:
         a.   The applicant provides a compelling land use reason that would
necessitate additional building height; and
         b.   Solar access is maintained to existing solar energy devices on
adjacent property.
      3.   Parking: The commission may grant an exception to the off- street
parking dimensional and minimum number of space requirements of the applicable
standard based on findings that the approval will result in one of the
following:
         a.   An exception which is not greater than ten percent (10%) of the
required parking.
         b.   At least one of the following:
            (1)   A proposed use which is designed for a specific purpose, is
intended to be permanent in nature (for example, a nursing home), and has a low
demand for off-street parking;
            (2)   An opportunity for sharing of parking including written
evidence that the property owners will enter into a binding legal agreement
(e.g., a joint non-concurrent parking agreement);
            (3)   Public transportation is available to the site.
      4.   Open Space: The commission may grant a reduction to the minimum open
space requirements of this section upon a finding that:
         a.   The development is within one-fourth (1/4) mile (measured in
actual walking distance) of a publicly accessible active open space area such
as a regional open space area or a regional public park; or
         b.   Additional amenities are provided in perpetuity to the residents
that are determined to sufficiently compensate for the loss of open space are
included in the PUD and available to all lots and users of the PUD.
      5.   Density: The commission may grant an exception to allow an increase
from the maximum density of the underlying zone, up to a maximum of one hundred
twenty percent (120%) of the underlying density, upon finding that:
         a.   Existing and proposed streets and pedestrian/bicycle systems
within and connecting to the development are adequate to support the proposed
density;
         b.   Existing and proposed water, sanitary sewer and storm drainage
facilities within and connecting to the development are adequate to support the
proposed density;
         c.   The increase does not necessitate unnecessary topographic
alterations or impact significant natural resource areas;
         d.   The development will provide usable common open space and other
amenities of exceptional quality or quantity, especially active recreational
areas; and
         e.   The additional density will be located internal to the project in
a manner which decreases the visual impact on adjacent properties.
In addition to findings in subsections M5a through M5e of this section, the
commission also finds that:
         f.   The development demonstrates innovative site design, outstanding
architectural variety, and quality of construction;
         g.   The development demonstrates a high level of compliance with
habitat friendly, low impact development practices;
         h.   The development demonstrates a high level of compliance with
recognized practices for sustainable development, such as (but not limited to)
the following: lot and structure orientation for passive and/or active solar
energy use; covenants ensuring maintenance of future solar access; use of wind
turbines or wind collectors for power generation or passive ventilation;
provision of community greenhouses, gardens, or orchards; use of water
conserving landscaping; use of stormwater harvesting or diversion for
irrigation; enhanced tree plantings; and use of green roofs; or
         i.   The development would provide for the implementation of a master
plan goal in a significant manner (e.g., provides that a quarter of the
proposed residential units are to be reserved to address the County's need for
affordable workforce housing).
   N.   Existing Projects: Existing projects may be considered for planned unit
development if, in the opinion of the Director, they do not pose any health,
safety or welfare problems and can comply with the minimum acreage, open space
and amenities requirements of a new planned unit development proposal.
   O.   Land Dedication: Any land or interest therein within a planned unit
development may be dedicated to the County or school district for public use
and maintenance, although the County or school district is under no obligation
to accept such dedication. In no event does land dedicated to and accepted by
the County or school district constitute common open space for the purposes of
this chapter. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.349.04: PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL PROCESS:
A tentative and/or final subdivision map implementing a planned unit
development may not be approved until a land use plan has been approved for the
planned unit development as a part of the tentative and final PUD approval
process. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.349.05: PROCESSING:
The processing of a planned unit development (PUD) is completed in at least two
(2) stages. Stage one is the application for tentative approval of a PUD to the
commission and approval by the Board. Stage two is final approval of the PUD by
the County.
A tentative subdivision map may be processed concurrently with the PUD
tentative approval application. No final subdivision map may be processed until
final approval of the PUD is obtained. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.349.06: PREAPPLICATION CONFERENCE:
   A.   Preapplication Conference: Prior to submitting a tentative approval
application for a PUD, the developer shall submit for a preapplication
conference as provided in chapter 201 of this title and providing the
information outlined below. The preapplication conference is for informational
or advisory purposes only, and does not constitute an application for official
tentative approval review of a PUD.
      1.   The preapplication conference materials shall contain the following:
         a.   Sketch plan showing the project location, proposed layout and
distribution of uses within the planned unit development, and all existing
structures within the proposed project area.
         b.   A narrative identifying proposed uses, densities, site
conditions, and a preliminary schedule for development of the planned unit
development.
      2.   Upon receipt of a Letter of Intent for a planned unit development,
the Director shall distribute copies to all County department heads, affected
fire, irrigation, improvement districts, and State or local government agencies
with a potential interest in the project, and schedule an informational meeting
between the developer and affected governmental entities. The informational
meeting is intended to allow all parties to identify applicable development
criteria and standards, potential conflicts, design opportunities, and the
processes and procedures necessary to move the project from concept to
implementation. Within ten (10) working days of the information meeting, the
Director shall compile comments from participants, and provide a written
summary to the project proponent. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.349.07: APPLICATION FOR TENTATIVE APPROVAL:
   A.   Application: Each planned unit development proposal shall submit a
tentative development plan which provides a development suitability analysis
and land use concept plan for the project which establishes the constraints and
opportunities for development of a site, and sets forth in the form of written
text, diagrams, and/or maps one or more development alternatives and the
planning objectives to guide and control the future development of the site. A
Tentative Development Plan shall consist of the following elements:
      1.   A narrative addressing the standards and criteria established in
sections 15.349.01, 15.349.02 and subsections 15.349.03A thru K of this
chapter, including documentation and justification for any exceptions
requested.
      2.   A statement of proposed density. The allowable density for a planned
unit development shall be compatible with the Lyon County Comprehensive Master
Plan and any applicable community plan. Where an increase in the allowable
density is proposed the applicant shall provide a detailed justification
addressing the criteria for exception to density outlined in section
15.349.03 of this chapter. Factors to be considered in assigning density are as
follows:
         a.   Site analysis.
         b.   Topography.
         c.   Drainageways/floodplain areas.
         d.   Views.
         e.   Soils.
         f.   Layout of lots and open space areas.
         g.   Site sectional studies.
         h.   Access.
      3.   A site analysis drawn at 1:20 scale which, on one or more sheets,
shows the following:
         a.   A vicinity map showing the location of the property in relation
to adjacent properties, roads, pedestrian and bikeways, transit stops, utility
lines and any easements on and across the property;
         b.   The parcel boundaries, dimensions and gross area;
         c.   Contour lines at two foot (2') intervals;
         d.   The drainage patterns and drainage courses and water courses
(including ditches) on the site and on adjacent parcels;
         e.   Portions of the site within any Flood Hazard Zone, including a
figure giving the area and percentage of the site therein;
         f.   Critical wildlife habitat or natural heritage sites;
         g.   Significant site features, including areas with unique views,
streams, and stream corridors, significant rock outcrops, and similar
significant physical site features;
         h.   The location, size, and variety of trees having a six inch (6")
or greater caliper at five feet (5') above ground or, where the site is heavily
vegetated, an aerial photograph at the same scale as the site analysis and a
drawing showing the location, size, and variety of only the vegetation that
will be affected by the proposed development;
         i.   Identification information including the name, address, and phone
number of the owner, developer, and project designer;
         j.   A north arrow and the scale.
      4.   A geotechnical investigation report which shows the following: slope
stability studies, on-site site grading, cutting and filling; structural
foundation requirements; surface and subsurface drainage recommendations;
erosion vulnerability; building or grading limitations, including top of slope
offsets and areas restricted for site grading; recommendations for construction
of streets, utilities, and structures of the site; and identification of any
portions of the site requiring further evaluation by a geotechnical or
structural engineer. Unless the Director determines that a geotechnical
investigation is warranted due to site-specific characteristics, projects
meeting all of the following criteria are exempt from this requirement:
         a.   Construction value of the project is one hundred fifty thousand
dollars ($150,000.00) or less;
         b.   The project will not involve the import, export, and/or on- site
movement of more than one hundred (100) cubic yards of earth;
         c.   There is no evidence of any previous fill on the site to a depth
exceeding one foot (1');
         d.   The project does not include proposed cuts or fills on the site
to a depth exceeding one foot (1'); and
         e.   No portion of the site has a slope in excess of ten percent
(10%).
      5.   A site plan, drawn at the same scale as the site analysis, which, on
one or more sheets, shows the following:
         a.   The applicant's entire property and the surrounding property to a
distance sufficient to determine the relationship between the applicant's
property and proposed development and adjacent property and development;
         b.   Boundary lines and dimensions for the perimeter of the property
and approximate dimensions for all proposed lot lines;
         c.   Section lines, corners, and monuments;
         d.   Identification information, including the name, address, and
phone number of the owner, developer, and project designer;
         e.   The scale and north arrow;
         f.   The location, dimensions and names of all:
            (1)   Existing and platted streets and other public ways and
easements on adjacent property and on the site,
            (2)   Proposed streets or other public ways, easements on the site
and on adjoining property;
         g.   The location, dimensions, and setback distances of all:
            (1)   Existing structures, improvements, utility, and drainage
facilities on adjoining properties,
            (2)   Existing structures, improvements, utility and drainage
facilities to remain on the site,
            (3)   Proposed structures and improvements and conceptual plans for
utilities, fire suppression and drainage facilities on the site;
         h.   The location and dimensions of:
            (1)   The entrances and exits to the site,
            (2)   The parking and circulation areas,
            (3)   Pedestrian and bicycle circulation patterns,
            (4)   On-site outdoor recreation spaces and common areas,
            (5)   Above-ground utilities;
         i.   The location of areas to be landscaped;
         j.   The location and type of street lighting;
         k.   The orientation of structures, except single-family detached
structures and duplexes;
         l.   The location of group mail boxes.
      6.   Preliminary architectural drawings including proposed building
elevations, sections, and floor plans, except for detached single-family and
duplex dwelling units;
      7.   A preliminary grading and drainage plan including written statements
and descriptions as necessary, at the same scale as the site analysis,
addressing the following:
         a.   The location and extent to which grading will take place
indicating general contour lines, slope ratios, and slope stabilization
proposals;
         b.   A statement from a registered engineer supported by factual data
that all drainage, both upstream and on the site, can be accommodated, and the
amount and rate of run-off leaving the site is minimized;
         c.   A plan, where on-site detention is not feasible, which identifies
and mitigates any off-site adverse effects resulting from increased runoff; the
plan shall be prepared by a registered engineer;
         d.   Identification information, including the name and address of the
owner, developer, project designer, and the project engineer.
      8.   A conceptual landscape plan, drawn at the same scale as the site
plan, which on one or more sheets shows:
         a.   The conceptual location of the underground irrigation system or
hose bibs (a general description of maintenance of landscaped areas may be
submitted where no irrigation system is proposed);
         b.   The location and height of fences and other buffering or
screening materials;
         c.   The location, size, and species of the existing and proposed
plant materials;
         d.   The location, size, and variety of the trees to be removed.
      9.   A map showing how proposed street, sidewalks, bike routes and bike
ways and pedestrian connections within the proposed planned unit development
may be extended onto adjoining undeveloped properties so as not to preclude
their efficient development.
      10.   A connectivity analysis prepared by a qualified professional
describing the existing and future vehicular, bicycle and pedestrian
connections between the proposed planned unit development and existing and
planned land uses on adjacent properties.
      11.   The applicant shall submit either:
         a.   A determination by USA that site assessment is not necessary, or
         b.   A USA Service Provider Letter.
      12.   An applicant for a project or phase of a multi-phase project that
is forecast to generate one hundred (100) or more average daily auto trips,
shall submit as a part of the PUD application a traffic impact report. The
report shall analyze the impact of the project or phase of a project on the
County and State road and street systems within one mile of the borders of the
project or phase of a project, or to such greater distance as necessary until
the traffic analysis shows that the impact of the project or phase of a project
has dissipated to where it no longer results in an impact of ten percent (10%)
or more over current conditions. Such report shall be prepared and certified by
a registered traffic engineer licensed in the State of Nevada. The required
report shall comply with the standards listed in the Lyon County Design
Criteria and Improvement Standards for Traffic Analysis contained in appendix B
on file in the County.
      13.   The proposed covenants, conditions and restrictions to be recorded
if the PUD is approved. The covenants, conditions and restrictions shall
incorporate appropriate provisions for the establishment and maintenance of
long-term PUD site development standards, including enforcement mechanisms
designed to assure coherent, coordinated development, maintenance and use
activity with the PUD site.
      14.   Letters of Intent to Serve from each utility providing service to
the planned unit development.
      15.   Tentative map or maps for all land included in the PUD. Tentative
subdivision maps, if processed concurrently with the tentative PUD approval
application, shall be prepared in accordance with the standards for tentative
maps contained in the Lyon County Design Criteria and Improvement Standards,
appendix B on file in the County.
   B.   All reports, plans, and documents submitted as elements of the
preliminary plan shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements of this
section and appendix B on file in the County. Where a conflict exists, the
stricter requirement shall be followed. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.349.08: REVIEW OF APPLICATION FOR TENTATIVE APPROVAL:
   A.   An application for tentative approval of a PUD shall be filed by or on
behalf of the landowner. The application shall be filed with the department on
forms approved by the department and accompanied by the payment of all
applicable fees. Neither the Board, commission, nor any County department shall
undertake a review of the proposed development until all fees have been paid in
full and a complete application submittal has been received to the satisfaction
of the Director.
      1.   The complete application submittal must contain the fee payment, the
application form, the appropriate number of prints, and all information
required by section
15.349.07 of this chapter as well as additional information deemed necessary to
fully determine the potential impacts of the PUD by the Director. The term
"print" shall mean plans drawn in conformance with the requirements of the Lyon
County Design Criteria and Improvement Standards contained in appendix B on
file in the County.
   B.   The department, after submittal of the complete application, shall
circulate for review and comment the proposed design standards and development
plans. These design standards and plans will be reviewed by County, State, and
Federal agencies for compliance with applicable regulations and laws. The
agencies shall then respond, in written form, as to the changes and/or
conditions to be imposed upon the proposed development. These changes and/or
conditions will be incorporated into the staff report and relayed to the
landowner prior to the public hearing before the commission.
   C.   Tentative maps submitted together with the application for a PUD shall
be reviewed in accordance with the requirements of chapters 600 and 607 of this
title concurrent with the review and approval of the PUD. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.349.09: HEARING ON APPLICATION:
   A.   The commission shall hold a public hearing in conformance with the
development review and decision making requirements of chapters 6 and 10 of
this title.
   B.   The commission may continue a hearing to a specific time and may refer
the matter to the department staff for further study. In any event, however,
the public hearings shall be concluded within sixty (60) days after the date of
the first public hearing unless the landowner consents in writing to an
extension of time within which such hearings shall be concluded.
   C.   The commission shall consider all such evidence as presented by staff,
the applicant, and the public and shall make findings of fact relative to the
tentative map. Findings of fact shall not be inconsistent with the laws of the
State or the provisions of this title. The commission shall recommend
disapproval or conditional approval on every tentative map if the map does not
demonstrate full compliance with this title or Nevada Revised Statutes.
   D.   Recommendation of approval by the commission of the proposed planned
unit development plan and implementing tentative map(s) shall impose no
obligation on the part of the Board to approve either the plan or tentative map
(s) or to accept any public dedication shown thereon.
   E.   The Board shall consider the commission's report and any new evidence
as presented by the staff, the applicant, or the public. The Board may continue
a hearing to a specific time and may refer the matter back to staff or the
commission for further study. In any event, however, the public hearings shall
be concluded within sixty (60) days after receipt of the commission report
unless the applicant agrees in writing to extend the 60-day period.
   F.   The Board shall, after the conclusion of public hearings by minute
action, grant tentative approval, tentative approval subject to specific
conditions, or denial of a tentative plan, and all maps necessary to implement
the approved plan. When tentative approval is granted, the Board shall specify
the maps, drawings, specifications, and form of performance bond that shall
accompany the application for final approval. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.349.10: APPROVAL OR DENIAL OF APPLICATION:
The approval or denial of a tentative planned unit development plan shall be by
minute action and shall set forth the reasons for the approval or for the
denial, and in the case of approval, shall set a specific date for the filing
of an application for final approval of the planned unit development, or in the
case of phased development over a period of years, shall set the specific
periods within which applications for final approvals of each part thereof must
be filed. The minutes shall also set forth with particularity in what respects
the plan would or would not be in the public interest, including but not
limited to, the following findings:
   A.   In what respects the plan is or is not consistent with the statement of
objectives of this chapter;
   B.   The extent to which the plan departs from zoning and planned unit
development regulations otherwise applicable to the property, including but not
limited to density, size and use, and the reasons such departures are or are
not deemed to be in the public interest;
   C.   The purpose, location and amount of the open space in the planned unit
development, the reliability of the proposals for maintenance and conservation
of the open space and the adequacy or inadequacy of the amount and purpose of
the open space as related to the proposed density and type of residential
development;
   D.   A physical design of the plan and in the manner in which such design
does or does not make adequate provision for public services, provide adequate
control over vehicular traffic, parking requirements, and further the amenities
of light and air, recreation and visual enjoyment;
   E.   The relationship, beneficial or adverse, of the proposed planned unit
development to the neighborhood in which it is proposed;
   F.   In the case of a plan which proposes a development over a period of
years, the sufficiency of the terms and conditions intended to protect the
interest of the public and the residents of the planned unit development in the
integrity of the plan. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.349.11: EFFECT OF TENTATIVE APPROVAL:
Tentative approval of a plan does not qualify a map or plat of the planned unit
development for recording or authorize development or the issuance of any
building permits. A plan which has been given tentative approval as submitted,
or which has been given tentative approval with conditions which have been
accepted by the applicant, may not be modified, revoked, or otherwise impaired
by action of the County pending an application for final approval, without the
consent of the applicant. Impairment by the County is not stayed if an
application for final approval has not been filed, or in the case of
development over a period of years applications for approval of the several
parts have not been filed, within the time specified in the minutes granting
tentative approval.
The tentative approval must be revoked and the portion of the area included in
the plan for which final approval has not been given shall revert to the master
plan designations and zoning classifications in effect on the date of initial
application for a planned unit development and shall be subject to this title
if:
   A.   The applicant/landowner elects to abandon the plan or any part thereof,
and so notifies the County in writing, or
   B.   The applicant/landowner fails to file application for final approval
within the required time. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.349.12: TIME LIMITS FOR FILING APPLICATION FOR FINAL APPROVAL:
Unless the time is specified in an agreement entered into pursuant to Nevada
Revised Statutes 278.0201, when the applicant has been granted tentative
approval of a PUD, the applicant shall file an application for final approval
of the plan, and a map or maps for the first phase or unit of the PUD, within
one year from the date of tentative approval as granted by the Board. Specific
Final Map filing dates for all phases may be extended, upon application to the
Board, but in no event shall the dates exceed two (2) years from the previously
established final filing date. Tentative approval of a plan does not qualify a
plat of the PUD for recording or authorize development or the issuance of any
building permits. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.349.13: FINAL APPROVAL:
   A.   Application: An application for final approval of a planned unit
development shall be made for all the land included in a plan or to the extent
set forth in the tentative approval for a section thereof. Such application
shall be made to the department within the time specified by the minutes
granting tentative approval. The County Engineer and the department shall
review, within thirty (30) days, the final approval plan for compliance with
the approved tentative approval plan.
      1.   If the plan, as submitted for final approval, is not in substantial
compliance with the plan as given tentative approval, the Director shall,
within thirty (30) days of the date of the filing of the application for final
approval, notify the applicant in writing, setting forth the particular ways in
which the final approval plan is not in substantial compliance. Thereupon, the
applicant may:
         a.   Treat such notification as a denial of final approval;
         b.   Refile his plan in a form which is in substantial compliance with
the plan as tentatively approved; or
         c.   File a written request with the department that the Board hold a
public hearing on the application for final approval.
      2.   If the applicant elects the alternatives set out in subsection A1b
or A1c of this section, he must refile his plan or file a request for a public
hearing on or before the last day of the time within which he was authorized to
file for final approval, or thirty (30) days from the date he receives notice
that his plan is not in substantial compliance, whichever is later. Failure to
refile a request for public hearing within such time period shall constitute an
abandonment of the plan by the applicant.
         a.   The burden shall be upon the applicant to show the Board good
cause for any variation between the plan as tentatively approved and the plan
as submitted for final approval.
         b.   Any such public hearing shall be held by the Board within thirty
(30) days after the request for the hearing is made by the applicant. The Board
shall, by minute action, either grant final approval to the plan or deny final
approval to the plan. The grant or denial of final approval of the plan shall,
in cases arising under this section, contain the matters required with respect
to an application for tentative approval by section
15.349.08 of this chapter. The Board may continue the hearing, but in no case
shall action on the map exceed sixty (60) days from the first hearing date.
      3.   If any errors or omissions are found on the prints of the final plan
submitted to the County for checking, the final plan shall be returned to the
subdivider or his engineer for correction. When the corrected plans has been
received and approved, the County Engineer and Director shall then notify, by
certified mail, the land owner if the final plan is in compliance. The thirty
(30) day review period shall be extended by the number of days it takes to get
the final approval plan corrected. The applicant shall then have ninety (90)
days, upon receipt of the County's letter, to record the final plan, if the
final approval plan is in substantial compliance with the plan that had been
granted tentative approval.
   B.   Contents Of Application: The application shall include such maps,
drawings, design and development standards, architectural building elevations,
use specification, covenants, easements, conditions and form of performance
bond as were set forth in the public record and Board minutes at the time of
tentative approval of the planned unit development.
   C.   Hearing: A public hearing on an application for final approval for a
planned unit development and zoning map amendment approval of the final planned
unit development plan or any part thereof, shall not be required if the plan,
or any part thereof, submitted for final approval is in substantial compliance
with the plan that had been granted tentative approval. The plan submitted for
final approval shall be in substantial compliance with plans previously
approved if modifications by the applicant do not:
      1.   Vary the proposed gross residential density or the number of units
proposed;
      2.   Involve a reduction of the area set aside for common or private open
space or modify the maintenance agreements;
      3.   Increase the total ground coverage of buildings or involve a
substantial change in the height of buildings;
      4.   Vary circulation, drainage, or utility patterns;
      5.   Vary the substance of the covenants, conditions, and restrictions.
   D.   Expiration: Only when final approval has been granted and the final
approval plan recorded shall the notation of this fact be placed on the zoning
map. If construction of the approved planned unit development has not begun
within one year of the recording of the final approval plan, the final approval
plan shall expire and the zoning of the site shall revert to the zoning
classification in place at the time of initial application for a planned unit
development and the zoning map amended to reflect the reversion unless an
alternative time is specified in the tentative PUD approval or in a development
agreement entered into pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 278.0201. (Ord. 603,
11-1-2018)
15.349.14: CERTIFICATION OF THE FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN:
Approval of a plan, or any part thereof, which has been given final approval,
shall be certified without delay by the proper authorities and shall be filed
within ninety (90) days of final approval in the Office of the County Recorder
before the approval of a final subdivision map for the development and the
issuance of any building permits for the development. The Recorder shall
collect a fee pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.349.15: ABANDONMENT OF FINAL PLAN:
   A.   No further development shall take place on the property included in the
final approval plan until the property is resubdivided and is reclassified by
an enactment of an amendment to the zoning if:
      1.   The landowner abandons the final approval plan or any sections of
the final approval plan and gives written notification thereof to the Director;
or
      2.   The applicant fails to begin the planned unit development within the
prescribed period of time after the final approval has been granted.
   B.   Upon abandonment of a final plan, all property not previously developed
as part of the planned unit development shall revert to the zoning
classification in place at the time of initial application for a planned unit
development. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.349.16: JUDICIAL REVIEW:
Any decision of the Board under this chapter granting or denying tentative or
final approval of the plan or authorizing or refusing to authorize a
modification in a plan is a final administrative decision and is subject to
judicial review in a properly presented case. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
CHAPTER 351
MANUFACTURED HOMES AND MANUFACTURED HOUSING
SECTION:
15.351.01: Purpose
15.351.02: Applicability
15.351.03: Where Permitted
15.351.04: Standards
15.351.05: Hardship Exception For Manufactured Home Used As An Accessory
Dwelling
15.351.06: Permit Requirements
15.351.07: Converting Manufactured Home To Real Property
15.351.01: PURPOSE:
This chapter is intended to establish standards and conditions for the
placement of a manufactured home, as the primary residence, on a single-family
residential parcel within Lyon County while protecting the public health,
safety and general welfare. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.351.02: APPLICABILITY:
All manufactured homes to be placed or relocated within the County shall comply
with the provisions of this chapter.
All manufactured homes to be placed or relocated within the County shall comply
with the requirements and standards established by the Nevada Division of
Manufactured Housing for the manufacture, transport, installation and
alteration of manufactured and mobile homes contained in chapter 489 of the
Nevada Revised Statutes.
Any manufactured home placed or relocated within Lyon County, or any
manufactured home that has had electric and/or fuel gas services discontinued
for greater than twelve (12) months must obtain appropriate permits,
inspections and approvals from the County Building Department prior to
occupancy or connection of electric or fuel gas services. The building
inspector will require the correction of any apparent fire and safety hazards
prior to authorizing restoration of the utility services. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.351.03: WHERE PERMITTED:
Manufactured homes allowed under the provisions of this chapter shall be
permitted as follows:
   A.   Use As Single-Family Dwelling: Manufactured homes may be used as
single-family dwellings in all Single Residential Zoning Districts, except
within designated Historic Districts (e.g., Comstock Historic District) or if
not permitted per the recorded Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions (CC&Rs)
for the subdivision where the manufactured home is to be located, if the home
is certified under the National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety
Standards Act of 1974 and is less than six (6) years old at the time of its
placement.
   B.   Zoning Districts For Primary Residential Use: Manufactured homes
certified under the National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety
Standards Act of 1974 and that are more than six (6) years old at the time of
placement may be placed for primary single family residential use in Suburban
Residential Districts SR-2 and SR-1, and any Rural Residential (RR),
Agricultural (AG), or Non-Irrigated Agricultural (NIA) Zoning District provided
the mobile or manufactured home has been inspected and certified as meeting all
life safety requirements of the Manufactured Housing Division of the Nevada
Department of Business and Industry, and all dimensional standards and
requirements of the zoning district are met.
   C.   Watchman's Quarters: Manufactured homes certified under the National
Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 and less than
six (6) years old at the time of placement may be placed as watchman's quarters
in the Employment and Industrial zoning districts (Service Industrial (SI),
Light Industrial Districts (LI-R and LI-S) and Heavy Industrial Districts (HI-
R and HI-S) subject to all dimensional standards and requirements of the zoning
district, and all applicable design and development standards of this title.
   D.   Hardship Exception For Manufactured Home As An Accessory Dwelling:
Manufactured homes certified under the National Manufactured Home Construction
and Safety Standards Act of 1974 may be placed as an accessory dwelling in any
Single-Family Residential District with a hardship exception approved by the
Director in accordance with the procedures set forth in section
15.351.05 of this chapter, provided the mobile or manufactured home has been
inspected and certified as meeting all life safety requirements of the
Manufactured Housing Division of the Nevada Department of Business and
Industry, and subject to all dimensional standards and requirements of the
zoning district, all applicable design and development standards of this title,
all permits required by the County building official, and the following
conditions:
      1.   The lot upon which the manufactured home (MH) is placed as an
accessory dwelling is at least one acre (gross) in size,
      2.   The MH is for the sole and express purpose of facilitating the care
of an immediate relative,
      3.   The hardship exception is intended to mitigate a special hardship
resulting from handicap, age or infirmity evidenced by a physician's
certification (financial hardship alone is not sufficient),
      4.   Sufficient sewer, electrical, and water facilities and rights are
available to serve the accessory dwelling, and
      5.   The MH cannot be converted to real property and shall be removed by
the property owner within thirty (30) days from when the immediate relative
requiring care no longer resides within the MH.
   E.   Agricultural Labor Housing: Manufactured homes certified under the
National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 and
that are more than six (6) years old at the time of placement may be placed
upon issuance of a conditional use permit (CUP) for agricultural labor housing
in Agricultural (AG), or Non-Irrigated Agricultural (NIA) Zoning Districts
provided the mobile or manufactured home has been inspected and certified as
meeting all life safety requirements of the Manufactured Housing Division of
the Nevada Department of Business and Industry, the manufactured home complies
with Federal standards for agricultural housing, and all dimensional standards
and requirements of the zoning district and this chapter are met. (Ord. 603,
11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 607, 9-19-2019)
15.351.04: STANDARDS:
   A.   Manufactured homes placed as single-family dwellings pursuant to
subsections
15.351.03A and B of this chapter shall:
      1.   Be permanently affixed to the residential lot, with running gear,
tongues, axles, and wheels removed at the time of installation;
      2.   Have exterior siding and roofing which is similar in color, material
and appearance to the exterior siding and roofing primarily used on other
single family residential dwellings within three hundred feet (300') of the MH;
      3.   Have a minimum roof pitch of three in twelve (3:12);
      4.   Consist of more than one section;
      5.   Contain at least one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet of
living area;
      6.   Have a full, poured in place, perimeter foundation similar to that
used for any other single-family home, with a crawl space below or an
equivalent foundation approved by the building official.; and
      7.   Any manufactured home intended to be installed in Lyon County must
be constructed or manufactured not more than six (6) years prior to the date of
the application for the installation permit.
Standards 4 and 5 above may be waived by submitting and receiving approval of a
minor variance by the director if the size or configuration of the subject
parcel limits the size of a manufactured home that can be placed on the parcel
or the existing square footage of single family residential dwellings in the
immediate area are less than one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet in
living area.
Manufactured homes placed as single family dwellings pursuant to subsection
15.351.03A and B shall be reviewed as single family residential building
permits through the Lyon County Building Department.
   B.   Manufactured homes placed as agricultural labor housing in conformance
with subsection
15.351.03E of this chapter shall:
      1.   Comply with Federal standards for agricultural housing,
      2.   Be placed not less than ten feet (10') apart, and
      3.   Maintain a density no greater than one unit per forty (40) acres
under a single ownership.
   C.   Manufactured homes placed as an accessory dwelling by hardship
exception when approved by the Director in conformance with subsection
15.351.03D of this chapter shall:
      1.   Not be permanently affixed to the residential lot, and be maintained
in a condition to permit removal of the unit upon termination of the hardship
exception, and
      2.   Conform to such additional requirements as may be imposed by the
Director.
   D.   Manufactured homes placed in a mobile home park developed in
conformance with this title shall meet all standards, requirements and
conditions of the mobile home park approval. Manufactured homes placed in a
mobile home park developed in conformance with this title shall be reviewed as
a manufactured home set-up permit through the Lyon County Building Department.
(Ord. 603, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 607, 9-19-2019; Ord. 623, 1-62022)
15.351.05: HARDSHIP EXCEPTION FOR MANUFACTURED HOME USED AS AN ACCESSORY
DWELLING:
The Director may by special exception allow the installation of an MH in
addition to the primary residence on a residential lot. The lot must be not
less than one acre (gross) in size.
   A.   In approving a special exception, the Director must find:
      1.   That the additional MH conforms to the requirements for an accessory
dwelling contained in section
15.335.03 of this title.
      2.   That the authorization of the additional MH is for the sole and
express purpose of facilitating the care of an immediate relative.
      3.   That the authorization of the additional MH is intended to mitigate
a special hardship resulting from handicap, age or infirmity as evidenced by a
physician's certification. (Financial hardship alone shall not be sufficient
grounds.)
      4.   That the authorization of the additional MH will not substantially
impact the surrounding property owners.
      5.   That sufficient sewer, electrical power and water facilities and
water rights are available to serve the additional MH.
   B.   An MH approved under this section shall not be permanently affixed to
the residential lot, and shall be maintained in a condition to permit removal
of the unit upon termination of the hardship exception.
   C.   The authorization of an additional MH may be upon such additional terms
and conditions as the Director deems appropriate for the approval of the
special exception.
   D.   Any MH authorized under this section may remain on the property only as
long as the person for whom it was issued shall continue to reside in said MH
and the special hardship shall continue to exist.
   E.   A notice of continuing use must be filed with the Director by the
special exception grantee annually certifying that the special exception
continues to be necessary under the same terms and conditions as the original
approval.
   F.   At the time the applicant submits request for a special exception, the
Director shall notify all property owners located within three hundred feet
(300') of the parcel upon which the MH will be placed that the application has
been received. The notification letter shall advise the property owners that
this chapter contains language directing the Director to permit these hardship
exceptions administratively, provided they comply with this chapter's
provisions. The notification letter shall call to the property owners'
attention that the Director will be reviewing the land use request and
providing a determination on a date certain. The notification letter shall
encourage property owners to contact the Director with their concerns and
issues prior to that date. The notification letter shall advise these property
owners that they may appeal the Director's determination in writing to the Lyon
County Manager's Office within ten (10) days of the Director's determination.
The notification letter shall further advise that the Board is the Appeal
Authority and clarify that their review is limited to a determination that the
Director failed to take in account some provision of this chapter that would
serve as a basis for its denial or modification. The Board shall convene a
public hearing for purpose of reviewing the Director's decision within thirty
(30) days of receiving the written appeal. The County Manager's Office shall
provide for the public notification according to the County's land use
notification process. Absent some finding that the Director erred in the
assessment, the Board shall uphold the Director's decision and direct approval
of the hardship exception. If the Board determines that the Director erred in
the assessment, they may conduct their own public hearing, relying upon this
chapter for review and guidance, or they may remand the matter back to the
Director with guidance.
   G.   The sale of the lot upon which an additional manufactured home has been
authorized or the discontinuance of the specific hardship shall result in the
automatic cancellation of the special exception approval for the additional
manufactured home. Upon cancellation, the additional MH must be removed within
thirty (30) calendar days. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.351.06: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permits are required for manufactured homes in the following instances:
      1.   Prior to moving a manufactured home on any lot or parcel for the
purpose of establishing a single-family residence, an installation permit must
first be obtained from the County Building Department. It is unlawful for any
person to do any construction, erection, alteration, installation, addition,
reconstruction or moving of any manufactured home unless the appropriate permit
has first been obtained from the Building Department.
      2.   If the electric or fuel gas has been disconnected from a
manufactured home for greater than six (6) months, the owner must obtain a
permit from the County Building Department prior to occupancy or connection of
the electric or fuel gas service.
      3.   The fee for issuance of said permits shall be set by resolution of
the Board.
   B.   Permit applications shall contain all documents and information as
required by the Building Department. Such applications may be reviewed by other
departments of State or local government for compliance with the laws and
ordinances under their jurisdiction. If the Building Department is satisfied
that the work described in an application for permit and plans filed therewith
conform to the requirements of this title and other pertinent laws and
ordinances, it may issue the appropriate permit(s). All work done under the
permit(s) shall be done in accordance with the approved plans. Plans and
specifications shall not be changed, modified or altered without authorization
from the building official.
   C.   The following limitations and requirements shall apply to manufactured
home permits:
      1.   Prior to moving an MH onto the lot or parcel, an installation permit
and appropriate utility service permit must be obtained from the Building
Department.
      2.   An application to place an MH on a residential lot pursuant to this
chapter constitutes an attestation by the owner of the lot that the placement
complies with all covenants, conditions and restrictions placed on the lot and
that the lot is not within a Historic District.
      3.   An MH installation permit will expire one hundred eighty (180) days
after the date of issuance unless a time extension is granted by the Building
Department. The building official may grant a onetime thirty (30) day extension
upon request and payment of an administrative fee as set by resolution of the
Board.
      4.   The applicant must obtain all inspections required by the State,
utility purveyor and County departments in order to receive a final approval
for occupancy from the building official. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.351.07: CONVERTING MANUFACTURED HOME TO REAL PROPERTY:
   A.   All manufactured homes and factory built housing installed on or after
July 1, 1998, that are eligible for conversion under Nevada law, shall be
converted to real property pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes section 361.244.
   B.   All persons or entities seeking a manufactured home installation permit
shall complete an agreement to convert to real property prior to Lyon County
issuing the installation permit. The agreement will require that the applicant
complete the real property conversion and that the MH or factory built housing
be taxed as real property.
   C.   The requirement to convert to real property pursuant to subsection B of
this section does not apply to manufactured homes or factory built housing
under the following conditions:
      1.   Manufactured home located within an approved manufactured/mobile
home park.
      2.   Manufactured home permitted by hardship exception approved by the
Director.
      3.   Manufactured home upon land which is not owned by the owner of the
MH or factory built housing.
      4.   Manufactured home moved within the County that is twenty (20) or
more years old at the time it is moved.
   D.   In order to have a manufactured home assessed as real property, the MH
must be permanently affixed to concrete footings that comply with the current
Building Code, meet Lyon County permit and State law requirements, and, in all
cases, the "running gear" attached to the home must be completely removed from
under the MH.
   E.   Real property conversion shall comply with all Federal, State and local
requirements. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
CHAPTER 352
MANUFACTURED/MOBILE HOME PARK STANDARDS
SECTION:
15.352.01: Purpose
15.352.02: Applicability
15.352.03: Design Requirements
15.352.01: PURPOSE:
The standards provided in this chapter are intended to encourage development
providing sufficient open space and complementary uses under conditions which
assure protection of the character of the district in which the park is
located. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.352.02: APPLICABILITY:
All manufactured/mobile home parks to be developed within the County shall
comply with the provisions of this chapter.
All manufactured/mobile homes to be placed or relocated within a manufactured/
mobile home park in Lyon County shall comply with the requirements and
standards established by the Nevada Division of Manufactured Housing for the
manufacture, transport, installation and alteration of manufactured and mobile
homes contained in chapter 489 of the Nevada Revised Statutes.
Any manufactured/mobile home placed or relocated within a manufactured/mobile
home park in Lyon County, or any manufactured/mobile home within a
manufactured/mobile home park that has had electric and/or fuel gas services
discontinued for greater than twelve (12) months must obtain appropriate
permits, inspections and approvals from the County Building Department prior to
occupancy or connection of electric or fuel gas services. The building
inspector will require the correction of any apparent fire and safety hazards
prior to authorizing restoration of the utility services.
Any manufactured/mobile home lawfully placed on or before the effective date of
this title shall be a legal non-conforming use as provided in chapter 202 of
this title. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.352.03: DESIGN REQUIREMENTS:
Manufactured/mobile home parks shall be designed and constructed in the
following manner:
   A.   Individual manufactured home space minimum setbacks shall be measured
from the edge of internal streets and space lines as follows:
      1.   Front: Ten feet (10');
      2.   Side: Five feet (5') on each side or zero lot line on one side with
ten feet (10') on the opposite side;
      3.   Rear: Ten feet (10');
      4.   Structural separation: Ten foot (10') minimum between dwelling
units.
   B.   Maximum manufactured/mobile home space coverage (manufactured home and
any accessory structures) shall be seventy five percent (75%) of the individual
manufactured home site.
   C.   Each manufactured/mobile home shall be equipped with skirting, or
provided with a support pad which is recessed to give the appearance of the
manufactured home being located on-grade.
   D.   All manufactured/mobile homes and park facilities shall be connected to
Municipal water and sewer systems. All on-site utilities shall be installed
underground.
   E.   The manufactured/mobile home park shall provide parking as required by
chapter 401 of this title, parking and loading.
   F.   A common recreation area shall be provided in the park for use by all
tenants and their invited guests. The area shall be provided in one common
location with a minimum aggregate area of two hundred (200) square feet of
recreational space for each manufactured/mobile home space. The recreation area
may contain a recreation building.
   G.   All exterior boundaries of the manufactured/mobile home park shall
appear similar to conventional residential developments and shall be screened
by a decorative wall, fence or other comparable device six feet (6') in height,
with a minimum six foot (6') wide landscaped area provided along the outside of
the perimeter screen.
   H.   Common open space shall be landscaped in accordance with a landscape
plan approved by the Director and in a manner consistent with chapter 402 of
this title.
   I.   All manufactured/mobile home parks shall provide recreational amenities
within the site's common recreational area which may include but are not
limited to swimming pools, spas, a clubhouse, a "tot lot" with play equipment,
picnic shelter or barbecue area, court game facilities such as tennis,
basketball, or racquetball, improved softball or baseball fields, or day care
facilities. The type and number of amenities shall be approved by the Board and
provided according to the following schedule:
 
Units        Number Of Amenities
   0 - 9  0
   10 - 501
   51 - 102
   101 - 230
   201 - 340
 
(Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
CHAPTER 353
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK STANDARDS
SECTION:
15.353.01: Purpose
15.353.02: Applicability
15.353.03: Design Requirements
15.353.04: Application Requirements And Procedures
15.353.01: PURPOSE:
This use is intended to provide commercial rental parking spaces and sites for
recreational vehicles (RVs), including motor homes, travel trailers, pick-up
campers and tent trailers; to provide goods and services customarily needed by
occupants of the park; and to assure reasonable standards for the development
of facilities for the occupancy of recreational vehicles on a temporary basis,
ranging from short overnight stops to longer destination-type stays of several
days to weeks. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.353.02: APPLICABILITY:
All recreational vehicle parks to be developed within the County shall comply
with the provisions of this chapter.
Recreational vehicle parks shall be located only as permitted in chapter 320 of
this title, table of land uses. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.353.03: DESIGN REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Minimum Park Area: The minimum size of an RV park shall be three (3)
acres.
   B.   Rental Space Size: Minimum rental space size for those spaces having
utility hookups shall be one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet. Minimum
rental space size for those spaces not having hookups shall be nine hundred
(900) square feet. Minimum rental space size shall not include any area
required for access roads, off-street parking, service buildings, recreation
areas, office and similar RV park needs.
   C.   Rental Pads: A minimum of eighty percent (80%) of all spaces shall be
equipped with a surfaced area of not less than ten feet (10') by forty feet
(40'), containing hookups for water, sewer and electricity. Surfacing shall
consist of gravel, asphalt or concrete. Where gravel surfacing is used, the
design of the gravel pad shall be approved by the County Engineer to maintain
proper drainage and minimize dust. Where provided, each RV unit shall be parked
entirely on the surfaced area so that no part thereof obstructs any roadway or
walkway within the RV park. Those spaces not equipped with such a surfaced
area, intended for occupancy by recreational vehicles not having self-contained
toilet, lavatory or bathing facilities, shall be equipped with a gravel pad,
the design of which shall be approved by the County Engineer, of not less than
ten feet (10') by twenty five feet (25') for RV unit parking and a hookup for
water. Spaces equipped with such a gravel pad shall not exceed twenty percent
(20%) of the total number of spaces in the RV park.
   D.   Setback Requirements: Each rental space shall meet the following
setback requirements:
      1.   Fifty feet (50') when abutting a State or Federal highway or
designated major arterial;
      2.   Twenty five feet (25') when abutting a public right-of-way other
than subsection D1 of this section;
      3.   Fifteen feet (15') when abutting any property line other than
subsection D1 or D2 of this section;
      4.   There shall be a minimum distance of ten feet (10') provided between
RV units parked side by side;
      5.   There shall be a minimum distance of ten feet (10') between RV units
parked end to end;
      6.   There shall be a minimum distance of twenty feet (20') between any
RV space and any building.
   E.   Streets: Streets or roadways and parking areas within the RV park shall
be designed to provide safe and convenient access to all spaces and to
facilities for common use by park occupants. Streets or roadways and parking
areas shall be constructed and maintained to allow free movement of emergency
and service vehicles at all times, and shall be graded to drain and surfaced
with gravel, asphalt or concrete, the design of which shall be approved by the
County Engineer, to maintain proper drainage and minimize dust. All interior
roadways shall be at least thirty two feet (32') in width for two-way traffic,
and at least eighteen feet (18') in width for one-way traffic. A forty five
foot (45') turning radius shall be required on all curves, to allow access by
emergency vehicles. Any bridges within the development shall have a capacity of
at least sixteen (16) tons, to allow access by emergency vehicles. Road grades
shall not exceed six percent (6%). Access into the park from a public street
shall meet the same design standards as those of the public street, for a
distance of forty feet (40') from the property line into the development. All
roadways and walkways within the park shall be adequately lighted at night to
the satisfaction of the Director in order to provide safe access.
   F.   Frontage: All spaces shall have a minimum frontage of twenty feet (20')
along an interior roadway.
   G.   Sanitary Facilities: Every RV park shall be provided with one or more
service buildings equipped with flush toilets, lavatories, showers and laundry
facilities meeting minimum State Health Department standards. Such facilities
shall be conveniently located at a distance of not more than three hundred feet
(300') from any RV which requires to be served. Such facilities shall be kept
in a clean and sanitary condition, and plumbing fixtures shall be maintained in
good working order. All such facilities shall be adequately lighted at all
times of the day and night and shall be well ventilated. Portable fire
extinguishers of a type approved by the local Fire Protection District shall be
kept in the service buildings and at all locations as designated by the Fire
District and shall be maintained in operating condition.
   H.   Sanitary Disposal Stations: Every RV park shall contain at least one
sanitary disposal station for the sole purpose of removing and disposing of
wastes from holding tanks in a clean, efficient and convenient manner.
      1.   Each sanitary station shall consist of a drainage basin constructed
of impervious material, containing a disposal hatch and self-closing cover, and
related washing facilities.
      2.   The disposal hatch of sanitary station units shall be connected to
the sewage disposal system. Related facilities required to wash holding tanks
and the general area of the sanitary station shall be connected to the RV park
water supply system.
      3.   Each sanitary station shall have a sign posted stating "Danger - Not
to be used for drinking or domestic purposes".
      4.   Sanitary disposal station designs shall be approved by the State
Department of Health.
   I.   Utilities: All utilities shall be placed underground.
      1.   Water Supply: An accessible, adequate, safe and potable supply of
water under pressure shall be provided in every RV park. The water supply
system shall be designed, constructed and maintained in compliance with the
State Health Department standards and applicable County standards. All plans
and specifications shall be submitted with the conditional use permit
application. Each rental space equipped with sewer and electrical hookups shall
also be equipped with two (2) water outlets, to provide connection for the RV
and a garden hose. All other rental spaces shall be equipped with one water
outlet.
      2.   Sanitary Sewer: An adequate and safe sewage system shall be
provided. Where a public sewage system is available connection must be made
subject to the requirements of the sewer utility. Sanitary sewage systems shall
be designed, constructed and maintained in compliance with all applicable State
Health Department and County codes, requirements and standards. All plumbing in
the RV park shall comply with State and County plumbing laws, codes and
regulations.
      3.   Electricity: An adequate and safe electrical system shall be
provided and installed in accordance with applicable State and County
electrical laws, codes and regulations.
   J.   Refuse Disposal: The storage, collection and disposal of refuse shall
be performed so as to minimize accidents, fire hazards, air pollution, odors,
insects, rodents or other nuisance conditions. All refuse shall be stored in
durable, washable and nonabsorbent metal or plastic containers with tight-
fitting lids. Such containers shall be provided at the rate of at least one (1)
30-gallon container, secured in a rack or holder, for each rental space, or an
equivalent storage capacity in centralized storage facilities. Adequate refuse
collection and removal shall be the responsibility of the park owner.
   K.   Landscaping: A landscape plan, to be approved by the Director, shall be
required for all RV parks. Landscaping in conformance with the requirements of
chapter 402 of this title shall be designed to perform the following functions:
      1.   Screen the RV park visually and audibly from adjacent properties as
completely as possible;
      2.   Provide an attractive entrance and street frontage;
      3.   Provide dust and erosion control;
      4.   Provide a neat, attractive and aesthetically pleasing appearance.
Landscaping shall be required in all RV parks, together with adequate water
outlets to maintain all landscaping. The RV park shall be screened from
adjacent properties by means of fences or walls, six feet (6') in height, or by
means of hedges or other landscaping.
   L.   Open Space: Open space for common areas, playgrounds and other
recreational uses shall be provided at the rate of at least ten percent (10%)
of the gross area of the RV park, and shall be of sufficient size and
distribution as to be a functional part of the entire development plan. Open
space shall not include any area designated as a roadway, RV rental space,
storage area, swimming pool, yard area surrounding the caretaker's or manager's
residence, or any area required for setbacks as set forth in these regulations.
   M.   Fire Protection: Fire hydrants shall be installed throughout all RV
parks in accordance with the specifications of the local Fire Protection
District. At a minimum, there shall be one hydrant at the entrance to the
development, and additional hydrants at a distance not to exceed three hundred
feet (300') between hydrants unless this requirement is altered by
recommendation of the local Fire Protection District. All buildings within the
RV park shall be equipped with fire extinguishing equipment in good working
order of such type, size and number as prescribed by the local Fire Protection
District.
   N.   Structural Additions: Temporary structures such as canvas awnings,
screened enclosures, or platforms, which are normal camping equipment, may be
erected but must be removed when the rental space is vacated. No permanent
structural additions shall be built onto or become a part of any RV within an
RV park.
   O.   Storage Sheds: No storage sheds shall be allowed within an RV rental
space.
   P.   Fires: Fires shall be made only in stoves and other equipment intended
for such purposes and placed in safe and convenient locations, where they will
not constitute fire hazards to vegetation, undergrowth, trees and RVs. No open
fires/bonfires/open fire pits are allowed.
   Q.   Tents: Tents shall be permitted, and their number shall be limited to
one tent per rental space. Areas for group tent camping may be established,
with the following provisions:
      1.   The area set aside for such group use is not a part of any
designated open space;
      2.   An adequate number of parking spaces is provided;
      3.   The area is served by one or more water outlets; and
      4.   The area is located no further than three hundred feet (300') from a
service building and/or restroom facilities.
   R.   Registration Of Occupants: It shall be the responsibility of the owner
or manager of the RV park to keep a current record of the names and addresses
of the owners and/or occupants of each RV space, the make, model, year and
license number of each RV and motor vehicle by which it is towed, the state,
territory or country issuing such licenses, and the arrival and departure dates
of each occupant. This record must be made available for inspection to all
appropriate Federal, State and local agencies whose duties necessitate
acquisition.
   S.   Duration: It is the responsibility of the owner and manager of the RV
park to ensure that the rental of RV spaces remains temporary in nature.
      1.   It is unlawful for any person or corporation operating a
recreational vehicle park to allow or permit a recreational vehicle to occupy
any recreational vehicle space within the recreational vehicle park for a
period of more than twenty five (25) consecutive days.
      2.   It is unlawful for any person or corporation operating a
recreational vehicle park to allow or permit a recreational vehicle to occupy
any recreational vehicle space at the same recreational vehicle park for more
than fifty (50) days during any three (3) consecutive calendar months.
The manager of the RV park shall maintain on-site documentation of compliance
with these two (2) requirements to be available upon request by the Director or
their designee.
   T.   Swimming Pools: Swimming pools and natural swimming areas shall be
operated, maintained and used in compliance with recommendations and
requirements of the State Board of Health's Regulations and Standards Governing
Swimming Pools and Swimming Areas. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.353.04: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES:
The proponent of a recreational vehicle park, or an expansion thereof, shall
make written application for review for a recreational vehicle (RV) park,
pursuant to the provisions of chapter 230, "Conditional Use Permits", of this
title, and the following shall also be submitted with such application:
   A.   A complete and comprehensive development plan, including the following:
      1.   Detailed land use plan, drawn to a scale of 1"=100', unless larger
scale is necessary, including the dimensions and location of each RV rental
space, service buildings, common and recreation areas, surrounding land uses
and zoning districts;
      2.   Typical street cross sections;
      3.   Location and widths of roadways, sidewalks and pedestrian ways;
      4.   Topography of site, at two foot (2') contours;
      5.   Grading and drainage plans;
      6.   Utility plans;
      7.   Legal description of property, including acreage;
      8.   Copy of title commitment;
      9.   Landscaping, screening and fencing plans;
      10.   Fire protection plan;
      11.   Location and description of all permanent structures and common
facilities;
      12.   Acreage and percentage of land to be set aside as open space;
      13.   Density of RV rental spaces per acre;
      14.   Vicinity map drawn to a scale of 1"=1,000' or 1"=5,000';
      15.   Location of all areas subject to inundation or stormwater overflow
and the location, area and direction of flow of all water courses, including
the 100-year floodplain boundaries;
      16.   Location and principal dimensions of all existing or proposed
easements, water course boundaries, public utilities, monuments, pins,
benchmarks and other significant features;
      17.   Proposed surface treatment and design of all interior roadways and
rental pads.
   B.   A time schedule for development;
   C.   Information regarding abutting properties and land uses;
   D.   A completed application form (including the signature of the property
owner witnessed by a notary public) and an application fee for conditional use
permit, as set by the Board. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
CHAPTER 360
COMMERCIAL AND MIXED-USE DESIGN STANDARDS
SECTION:
15.360.01: Purpose
15.360.02: Applicability
15.360.03: Exempt Commercial Uses
15.360.04: General Standards
15.360.05: Additional Standards; Properties With Highway 50 Or Highway 95A
Frontage
15.360.06: Additional Standards; Commercial Mixed-Use Zoning Districts
15.360.07: Additional Standards; Buildings Twenty Five Thousand Square Feet In
Size And Greater
15.360.01: PURPOSE:
This chapter is intended to promote high-quality commercial and mixed-use
building design, encourage visual variety in non- residential and historic
areas of the County, foster a more human scale and attractive street fronts,
project a positive image to encourage economic development in the County, and
protect property values of both the subject property and surrounding areas. In
addition, this chapter intends to create a distinct image for important or
highly visible areas of Lyon County. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.360.02: APPLICABILITY:
Development of any site or structure that will contain a commercial use, or a
mix of commercial and other uses shall comply with the general standards of
section
15.360.04 of this chapter. In addition, the following supplemental standards
are applicable to properties within the listed areas or of the listed types:
   A.   Properties adjacent to the rights-of-way of U.S. Highway 50 or U.S.
Highway 95A: section
15.360.05 of this chapter.
   B.   Properties within a Commercial Mixed Use (CMU) District (including
Historic Character Districts and Rural Community Mixed-Use Districts): section
15.360.06 of this chapter.
   C.   Buildings of twenty five thousand (25,000) square feet or greater:
section
15.360.07 of this chapter.
In case of conflict, the more restrictive standard as determined by the
Director shall apply. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.360.03: EXEMPT COMMERCIAL USES:
Commercial uses conducted as a home occupation or home based business shall not
be subject to the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.360.04: GENERAL STANDARDS:
   A.   Site Layout:
      1.   Siting: The siting of the building should:
         a.   Reflect, rather than obscure natural topography.
         b.   Encourage preservation of significant or important trees.
         c.   Be compatible with the original structure, when the structure is
an addition to an existing structure.
      2.   Building Orientation: Local climatic conditions shall be considered
when orienting buildings. For example, north-facing facades are especially
susceptible to winter snow and ice accumulation, and entries may require
special treatment. Snow shed from roofs and snow piling zones along streets
shall be considered in arranging building elements on the site. Adequate solar
access shall be considered when planning outdoor spaces, with shade and relief
from glare provided by landscaping and overhead structures.
      3.   Development Responsive To Site Conditions: Development shall respond
to specific site conditions and opportunities such as odd-shaped lots, location
on prominent intersections, unusual topography, protection of view corridors,
significant vegetation, and/or other natural features to the maximum extent
feasible.
      4.   Street Corners: Buildings located on street corners should recognize
the importance of their location by:
         a.   Concentrating tallest portions of the building at the
intersection where they may "frame" the corner;
         b.   Employing architectural features, such as angled facades,
prominent entrances, a stepped parapet wall, or other unique building features
at the corner; or
         c.   Employing a similar technique as approved by the Director.
      5.   Pedestrian Environment:
         a.   Site design shall locate pedestrian routes connecting
residential, recreational, and commercial uses to minimize contact with normal
vehicular traffic. This can be achieved by designing crossings at traffic stop
points, and/or by announcing crossings with signage, pavement changes, and
landscape features.
Open spaces of adjoining properties are located to join together and link
properties, while walkways link properties and add connection to other
pedestrian facilities.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b3e37bf04674f7b3738d62883ef5a27ed6aa631/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2361.jpg]
 
         b.   Pedestrian use can be increased by the addition of amenities such
as benches, drinking fountains, planters, trash receptacles, path lighting, and
bicycle racks in quantities and locations appropriate for the development.
         c.   When existing sidewalks, curbs, gutters, or other public
improvements have deteriorated, the development shall be required to replace
and/or repair the public amenities.
         d.   New development required to install sidewalks may be assessed an
in lieu fee for pedestrian improvements, as determined appropriate by the
Director and County Engineer, to mitigate the construction of certain
pedestrian improvements.
         e.   When sidewalks exist or are proposed, new development should be
sited and designed to encourage human activity on the street.
         f.   Construction of and/or land dedication for pedestrian
improvements may be required pursuant to the land division regulations and/or
development improvement agreement.
         g.   Pedestrian facilities shall be designed and constructed to meet
or exceed the development standards contained in appendix B on file in the
County.
   B.   Building Design:
      1.   Building Massing And Form: Unless otherwise provided in this title,
building form may vary widely, as long as certain features of building form are
considered:
         a.   Within the development, variability in size and shape of
buildings shall occur.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b3e37bf04674f7b3738d62883ef5a27ed6aa631/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2363.jpg]
 
         b.   Incorporating human-scaled features at the ground level, referred
to as "differentiation of ground level", will help to encourage pedestrian use.
Examples are: articulated entries and windows, canopies, arcades, recessed
entries, changes in color, material, or texture.
         c.   Facade modulation shall be utilized to reduce the apparent bulk
of a large building, where applicable.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b3e37bf04674f7b3738d62883ef5a27ed6aa631/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2365.jpg]
 
         d.   Large, unbroken expanses and long, continuous rooflines shall be
avoided.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b3e37bf04674f7b3738d62883ef5a27ed6aa631/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2367.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b3e37bf04674f7b3738d62883ef5a27ed6aa631/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2369.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b3e37bf04674f7b3738d62883ef5a27ed6aa631/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2371.jpg]
 
      2.   Building Materials:
         a.   Unless otherwise provided in this title, a wide range of exterior
building materials is acceptable, including but not limited to wood, brick,
stone, and stucco. Materials appearing to derive from local natural settings,
such as timber and native stone, are encouraged.
         b.   Use of metal siding may be used when appropriate to the
architectural or cultural context of the application.
         c.   Plastic may be considered for sign letters only.
      3.   Architectural Style: The architectural character of new buildings or
additions shall complement the architectural character of adjacent existing
buildings.
      4.   Four-Sided Design: All building facades shall be designed with a
similar level of design detail. Blank walls void of architectural detailing
shall not be permitted. Exceptions may be granted for those areas of the
building envelope that the applicant can demonstrate are not visible from
adjacent development, public rights-of-way, or trails.
      5.   Entrance Visibility: Entrances shall be clearly delineated and
visible from the street.
         a.   Buildings should be designed with delineated and unobstructed
entries accessible from adjacent streets, as opposed to entries accessible only
from parking lots.
         b.   When entries cannot be located adjacent to the street, delineated
and unobstructed pathways using building and landscape elements should enhance
building entries.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b3e37bf04674f7b3738d62883ef5a27ed6aa631/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2373.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b3e37bf04674f7b3738d62883ef5a27ed6aa631/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2375.jpg]
 
(Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.360.05: ADDITIONAL STANDARDS; PROPERTIES WITH HIGHWAY 50 OR HIGHWAY 95A
FRONTAGE:
   A.   Applicability: Development of any site or structure that will contain a
commercial use, or a mix of commercial and other uses adjacent to the rights-
of-way of Highway 50 or Highway 95A, with the exception of those properties
located within a Historic Character District, shall comply with the general
site layout and building design standards of section
15.360.04 of this chapter, plus the standards of this section.
   B.   Setbacks:
      1.   Highway Landscape Buffer: All development shall be buffered from
Highway 50 or Highway 95A by a landscaped area. Commercial development within
Regional Commercial Districts the minimum buffer shall be ten feet (10') deep
with drought tolerant trees, shrubbery and rock mulch. Commercial development
within Community Commercial, Highway Mixed-Use, Commercial Mixed-Use and
Neighborhood Commercial Districts the buffer shall be ten feet (10') measured
from the property line. Buildings and parking areas shall not be located in
this buffer area. On sites with severe topographic/physical constraints, this
landscaped buffer may be reduced at the discretion of the Director.
   C.   Building Orientation:
      1.   Uses with highway frontage shall have a strong internal focus,
rather than a highway orientation. Entryways shall face towards the internal
road system. A highway orientation will be permitted where lot depths make it
difficult to achieve an internal focus.
      2.   Developers shall carefully consider building orientation to achieve
effective overall site planning. Although legibility of signs identifying
businesses from the highway is important, buildings shall be oriented towards
focal points within the development itself. These focal points may include
unique natural features, a building of central importance, internal streets, or
planned open space.
      3.   Adjacent residential land uses shall be considered when orienting
buildings on properties with highway frontage. Service and utility entrances,
mechanical support facilities, and unimproved building "back sides" shall not
be located within view of neighboring residences or visible from highway right-
of-way. Service and utility courts or alleys may contain these necessary
support functions.
Landscaped areas buffer the edges of this development.
Pedestrian ways connect to adjoining properties.
Pedestrian ways link parking areas with buildings and open space in a
coordinated system for this development.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b3e37bf04674f7b3738d62883ef5a27ed6aa631/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2377.jpg]
 
   D.   Access: Coordinated access points along Highway 50 and Highway 95A will
be required in accordance with NDOT requirements. Location and design of these
highway accesses will be based on projected traffic flows and NDOT standards,
policies and guidelines. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.360.06: ADDITIONAL STANDARDS; COMMERCIAL MIXED-USE ZONING DISTRICTS:
   A.   Purpose: These standards are intended to preserve and enhance the
unique character and identity of current and planned commercial mixed-use
areas, Historic Districts and rural community centers, and ensure that future
infill and redevelopment is consistent with the County's Comprehensive Master
Plan. A high-quality appearance will be achieved through requirements for
context-sensitive site layouts, architectural detailing, facade articulation,
and other features designed to provide a more distinct character and pedestrian
scale. Unique characteristics and distinctions in scale and use between the
Suburban and Rural Character Districts will be achieved through tailored
standards as necessary. The alternative equivalent compliance process in
section
15.330.04 of this title is available to help tailor standards for specific
sites as necessary.
   B.   Applicability: Development of any site or structure that will contain a
commercial use, or a mix of commercial and other uses, or that is located
within a Commercial Mixed-Use Zoning District, shall comply with the general
site layout and building design standards of section
15.360.04 of this chapter, plus the standards of this section.
   C.   Site Planning:
      1.   Primary Entrances: Primary entrances shall be oriented towards and
visible from the primary street frontage.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b3e37bf04674f7b3738d62883ef5a27ed6aa631/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2379.jpg]
 
      2.   Outdoor Gathering Spaces: Developments consisting of at least twenty
five thousand (25,000) square feet in size shall incorporate outdoor gathering
spaces. Outdoor gathering spaces may include, but are not limited to, plazas,
mini-parks, or courtyards that are open to and accessible to the public.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b3e37bf04674f7b3738d62883ef5a27ed6aa631/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2425.jpg]
 
         a.   Minimum Size: All outdoor gathering spaces shall have a minimum
depth and width of twenty feet (20') and a minimum total area of one thousand
(1,000) square feet.
         b.   Pedestrian Amenities: Outdoor gathering spaces shall include
amenities that encourage pedestrian activity, such as benches, water features,
drinking fountains, planters, public art, trash receptacles and bicycle racks.
      3.   Parking Location: Surface parking shall be located behind buildings.
Surface parking will not be permitted between the building and the primary
street frontage or to the side of the building where it may be viewed from the
primary street frontage.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b3e37bf04674f7b3738d62883ef5a27ed6aa631/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2427.jpg]
 
      4.   Ground-Floor Uses: The incorporation of retail shops and/or
restaurants is encouraged at the street level to promote a more active
environment for pedestrians and to support residential and office uses located
within the same building (on upper floors) or nearby. This configuration of
uses is particularly encouraged along Main Street, Pike Street, Ziller Way, and
Highway 50 in the Dayton Historic District, Highway 342 in Silver City and
other downtown street frontages, as well as new developments in Commercial
Mixed-Use Zones, and adjacent to major public spaces, where a high level of
activity and visibility is desirable. If a limited portion of a structure's
ground level will be devoted to retail or restaurant space, such space should
be located along those facades adjacent to or most visible from primary street
frontages or major pedestrian walkways.
      5.   Build-To Line: First floors of all commercial buildings within CMU-
S and CMU-H Districts shall "build to" the back of the sidewalk or edge of
property. Exceptions to the build-to line may be permitted if:
         a.   The space set back from the build-to line is used for an outdoor
gathering space, as defined in subsection C2 of this section;
         b.   The space set back from the build-to line is designed as a
protected walkway for pedestrians, with the second floor placed at the build-to
line; or
         c.   The space set back from the build-to line is used to provide a
mid-block pedestrian connection to an outdoor gathering space or additional
commercial uses at the rear of the building or to an adjacent trail corridor.
Mid-block pedestrian connections shall be a minimum of fifteen feet (15') in
width.
      6.   Build-To Zone:
         a.   A variable setback is typical of rural community centers;
therefore, placement of the front building facade is guided by a flexible
build-to zone as set forth below.
            (1)   First floors of all buildings within a Commercial Mixed-Use
Zone in a Rural Character District shall build to the "build-to- zone", which
shall be the area located from fifteen feet (15') to twenty feet (20') from the
back of sidewalk or property line.
         b.   The front building facade may only be located outside of the
build-to-zone to:
            (1)   Reflect existing, adjacent development (in which case
buildings shall be built to the average setback of the adjacent existing
structures);
            (2)   Accommodate an outdoor gathering space, as defined in
subsection C2 of this section;
            (3)   Reflect the regular rhythm of residential homes interrupted
by side yards traditionally found in Historic Districts and rural community
centers;
            (4)   Reflect distinctions in use within the building; or
            (5)   Accomplish a similar objective, as approved by the Director.
         c.   Portions of the front facade of the building built that are not
located within the build-to zone shall:
            (1)   Not extend further than five feet (5') from the build-to
zone; and
            (2)   Be limited to twenty feet (20') in length or twenty percent
(20%) of the length of the front facade, whichever is less.
   D.   Building Considerations:
      1.   Building Articulation: The perceived mass and scale of development
shall be reduced to achieve a human scale. This shall be accomplished by
incorporating a series of smaller design elements that are consistent with the
development's architectural character. Appropriate design elements for every
development shall incorporate, but are not limited to, at least four (4) of the
following:
         a.   Variations in roof form and parapet heights;
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b3e37bf04674f7b3738d62883ef5a27ed6aa631/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2429.jpg]
 
         b.   Pronounced recesses and projections;
         c.   Wall plane off-sets;
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b3e37bf04674f7b3738d62883ef5a27ed6aa631/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2431.jpg]
 
         d.   Off-sets to accommodate outdoor gathering spaces;
         e.   Distinct changes in texture and color of wall surfaces;
         f.   Ground-level arcades and second or third-floor galleries/
balconies;
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b3e37bf04674f7b3738d62883ef5a27ed6aa631/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2433.jpg]
 
         g.   Protected and recessed entries; and
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b3e37bf04674f7b3738d62883ef5a27ed6aa631/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2435.jpg]
 
         h.   Vertical accents or focal points.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b3e37bf04674f7b3738d62883ef5a27ed6aa631/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2437.jpg]
 
      2.   Building Height/Mass: A single, large, dominant building mass shall
be prohibited.
      3.   Lot Consolidation: The consolidation of existing lots is permitted
to enhance infill and redevelopment opportunities. However, the following
standards shall apply for developments occupying two (2) or more combined lots.
         a.   Historic Districts: Facade modulation shall be provided to
reflect traditional storefront widths within the downtown core, which range
from twenty five feet (25') to fifty feet (50') in width.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b3e37bf04674f7b3738d62883ef5a27ed6aa631/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2439.jpg]
 
         b.   CMU-R Districts: Facade modulation shall be provided to reflect
the traditional character and design of structures.
      4.   Building Design And Character:
         a.   Roof Form:
            (1)   Flat roof forms with parapet walls are traditionally found in
Historic Districts. Large, unbroken expanses and long, continuous rooflines
shall be prohibited.
            (2)   Box-like structures and flat roofs are incompatible with the
traditionally residential character of rural community centers. A variety of
roof forms and surfaces (pitched, shed, and dormers) shall be incorporated into
structures to break up large roof planes, provide visual interest, and manage
snow loads.
            (3)   Flat roof sections shall be limited to a maximum of one-third
(1/3) of the total roof area and shall be located where they are not visible
from the primary street frontage or public right-of- way.
         b.   Materials: Primary building materials shall be durable and
project an image of permanence typical of traditional masonry storefronts and
many of historic residences.
         c.   Color: The use of historic color schemes in Historic Districts is
encouraged. Historic color palettes are provided in Design Guidelines for the
Comstock Historic District. Bright colors shall be limited to use for accents
and decorative details such as window details, storefronts and entrances.
         d.   Awnings: Awnings, when used, shall be designed as integral
elements of the building facade. Material, configuration, dimension, and
location of awnings shall be appropriate for the building.
      5.   Street Level Transparency: A minimum percentage of the total area of
each ground-floor building facade that faces a street, plaza, park, or other
public space, shall be comprised of transparent window openings to allow views
of interior spaces and merchandise, to enhance the safety of public spaces by
providing direct visibility to the street, and to create a more inviting
environment for pedestrians. Such openings shall be taller than they are wide.
Minimum percentages vary by location and use as follows:
         a.   Historic Districts: Non-residential uses: Fifty percent (50%)
minimum.
         b.   CMU-R: Non-residential uses: Forty percent (40%) minimum. (Ord.
603, 11-1-2018)
15.360.07: ADDITIONAL STANDARDS; BUILDINGS TWENTY FIVE THOUSAND SQUARE FEET IN
SIZE AND GREATER:
   A.   Applicability: Development of any structure that will be twenty five
thousand (25,000) square feet in size or greater shall comply with the general
site layout and building design standards of section
15.360.04 of this chapter, plus the standards of this section.
   B.   Setbacks: The required setbacks shall comply with the setbacks in
chapter 313 of this title. Reduced setbacks may be approved by the commission
if the overall design of the building reflects an "urban" style building form
and site design (e.g., connected sidewalks, on-street parking, benches, display
windows, awnings, etc.).
   C.   Building Height, Bulk, Scale: Buildings should be visually harmonious
with their surroundings, by considering the scale, proportions and character of
adjacent structures and landforms. The design of a new building or addition
should incorporate architectural features, elements and details to achieve
human scale, if appropriate. Building elements that should be enlisted to
achieve a better human scale include:
      1.   Pedestrian-oriented open space, such as courtyards or other unified
landscaped areas, upper story setbacks, a porch or cover entry, awnings,
limited signage, and street furniture.
      2.   Buildings greater than one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet
should be multi-story.
      3.   If a large retail building is part of a development, variability in
size and shape of buildings is encouraged.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b3e37bf04674f7b3738d62883ef5a27ed6aa631/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2441.jpg]
 
   D.   Architectural Elements, Materials And Color:
      1.   Architectural Elements:
         a.   Buildings should be unique and appropriate to the community and
should not be recognizable by its architecture as a standard trademark design.
Generic franchise architecture shall not be acceptable unless modified to meet
these standards.
         b.   Box-like structures and flat roofs are discouraged.
         c.   Roof forms will be highly visible at a distance, and projects
shall avoid large, unbroken expanses and long, continuous rooflines by
variation in rooflines and height. The addition of dormers, balconies, deep
eaves and overhangs may create visual interest.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b3e37bf04674f7b3738d62883ef5a27ed6aa631/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2443.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b3e37bf04674f7b3738d62883ef5a27ed6aa631/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2445.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b3e37bf04674f7b3738d62883ef5a27ed6aa631/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2447.jpg]
 
      2.   Materials: The use of neon is prohibited for any architectural
application, such as building trim. See chapter 403 of this title for the
standards relating to the use of neon in signs.
      3.   Color: Attention must be paid to the use of color on buildings as it
affects the visual aesthetics of the community.
         a.   Bright colors should be used minimally and may be considered only
for accents and decorative details such as window details and entrances.
         b.   Colors should be used to coordinate the entire building facade as
a composition. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
CHAPTER 401
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
SECTION:
15.401.01: Intent
15.401.02: Applicability
15.401.03: Off-Street Parking Requirements
15.401.04: Parking Area Layout And Design
15.401.05: Parking Alternatives
15.401.01: INTENT:
These requirements are intended to establish orderly, safe, and efficient
vehicular parking, circulation and access on adjoining thoroughfares within
developments. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.401.02: APPLICABILITY:
   A.   Generally:
      1.   The off-street parking and loading standards of this section shall
apply to all parking lots and parking structures accessory to any building
constructed and to any use established in every district.
      2.   The requirements of this section shall apply to all temporary
parking lots and parking lots that are the principal use on a site.
      3.   The Director may approve the use of alternative parking space
requirements based on Urban Land Institute, American Planning Association,
Institute of Transportation Engineers or other similar professional analytical
studies approved by the Director, that take into account monthly, hourly and
weekly variation; peaking characteristics, ride-share programs, proximity to
transit stops and shared uses. The applicant shall provide justification of the
use of and appropriateness of alternative parking number calculations instead
of the current Lyon County Code parking requirements.
   B.   Expansions And Enlargements And Changes In Use: The off-street parking
and loading standards of this chapter shall apply when an existing structure or
use is expanded or enlarged, or when there is a change in use. Additional off-
street parking and loading spaces shall be required to serve the enlarged or
expanded area or the new use, provided that in all cases the number of off-
street parking and loading spaces provided for the entire use (pre-existing
plus expansion) equal one hundred percent (100%) of the minimum ratio
established in this chapter. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.401.03: OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Schedule A: Unless otherwise expressly stated in this title, off-street
parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with table 15.401-1, "Off-Street
Parking Schedule A", of this section.
      TABLE 15.401-1
      OFF-STREET PARKING SCHEDULE A
(du = dwelling unit; sf = square feet; gfa = gross floor area)
Use Category Use Type Number Of Spaces Required
Use Category               Use Type                  Number Of Spaces Required
Residential uses:                                    
                           Group living facility     1 per 2 beds plus 1 per
                                                     100 sf assembly area
                           Intermediate care
  Group living             facility                  1 per 4 beds, based on
                           Nursing care facility     maximum occupancy plus 1
                           Nursing care home         per 150 sf assembly area

                           Cottage                   See section
                                                     15.344.17 of this title
                                                     1.5 per du for 1-bedroom
                                                     units
  Household living         Multi-family              2 per du for 2-bedroom and
                                                     up
                                                     0.25 per du guest parking
                           Single family detached,   2 per du
                           duplex, townhouse
Public, institutional, and                           
civic uses:
                           Child care center         1 per 400 sf, and 1
                                                     additional space per 800
  Child care facilities                              sf gfa reserved for pick-
                           Day care home             up and delivery of
                                                     children

                                                     1 per 150 sf for assembly
                           Community center          area and 1 per 250 sf of
                                                     office area
  Community and cultural   Government administration 1 per 800 sf
  facilities               and civic buildings
                           Public assembly           1 per 150 sf
                           Public safety facility    1 per 800 sf
                           Social, fraternal lodges  1 per 150 sf
                           College or university     1 per 300 sf of enclosed
                                                     floor area
                                                     1 per classroom plus 1 per
                           Elementary school         100 students based on
                                                     design capacity
                                                     1 per 1.5 students/
  Educational facilities   High school               faculty/staff based on
                                                     design capacity
                           Intermediate/middle       2 per classroom plus 1 per
                           school                    100 students based on
                                                     design capacity
                           Trade or vocational       1 per 300 sf of enclosed
                           school                    floor space
                                                     1.5 per bed, based on
                                                     maximum capacity, plus 1
                           Hospital                  per 300 sf of office and
                                                     administrative area, plus
  Health care facilities                             required parking for
                                                     accessory uses
                           Medical or dental office  1 per 300 sf
                           or clinic
                           Urgent care facility      1 per 800 sf
                                                     See schedule C. Playfields
 Parks and open space     All use types             (soccer, baseball, etc.)
                                                     shall have a minimum of 20
                                                     spaces per field
                                                     1 per 30 sf of worship
 Religious facilities     Churches                  area plus required parking
                                                     for accessory uses
Commercial uses:                                     
 Agriculture              All use types             See schedule C
 Animal related services  All use types             1 per 300 sf
                                                     1 per 300 sf (plus
 Financial services       All use types             stacking spaces if drive-
                                                     thru is provided)
                           All use types not listed  1 per 200 sf
                           below
                           Bar                       1 per 75 sf
                                                     1 per 300 sf of retail or
                                                     personal service uses;
  Food and beverage        Craft food/alcoholic      parking for processing and
  services                 beverages                 warehousing to comply with
                                                     standards listed in
                                                     Industrial uses section of
                                                     this table
                           Restaurant with drive-    1 per 100 sf plus stacking
                           thru                      spaces
                           B&B                       1 per guestroom plus 2 for
                                                     primary resident/caretaker
                           Campground                1 per cabin, sleeping
                                                     unit, or tent site
                           Guest ranch               1.5 per room or cabin
                                                     1 per guestroom, plus 1
                                                     per 800 sf of restaurant,
  Lodging facilities       Hotel, motel, or lodge    meeting or lounge area,
                                                     plus parking required for
                                                     accessory uses
                           Inn                       1 per guestroom plus 1 per
                                                     800 sf of restaurant
                                                     1 per RV space plus 1 per
                           RV park                   250 sf of enclosed floor
                                                     space
 Offices, business and    All use types             1 per 300 sf
  professional
 Personal services        All use types             1 per 300 sf
                           Adult entertainment       1 per 300 sf
                           Art gallery               1 per 300 sf
                                                     1 per 100 sf of gaming
                                                     floor area plus 1 per 300
                           Gaming establishment      sf for accessory uses
                           (unlimited)               (restaurants, bars, hotel
                                                     rooms, showrooms, meeting
  Recreation and                                     rooms, etc.)
  entertainment, indoor    Gymnasium/fitness/ health 1 per 150 sf
                           club
                                                     1 per 4 seats of
                                                     auditorium seating. If no
                           Movie theater/            fixed seating, then based
                           playhouse/auditorium      on maximum capacity under
                                                     provisions of the Building
                                                     Code
                                                     1 per 5,000 sf of land
                                                     area, or 1 per 3 persons
                                                     capacity (maximum),
                           General outdoor           whichever is greater;
  Recreation and           recreation, commercial    playfields (soccer,
  entertainment, outdoor                             baseball, etc.) shall have
                                                     minimum 20 spaces per
                                                     field
                           Golf course or driving    Golf course: 4 spaces per
                           range                     green
                                                     Driving range: 1 per tee
                                                     1 per 1,000 sf of the
                                                     development site plus 1
                           Greenhouse or nursery,    per 250 sf of interior
                           commercial                floor area (excluding
  Retail sales                                       shade structures and
                                                     greenhouses)
                           Grocery store             See table 15.401-2 of this
                                                     section, schedule B
                           All other uses            1 per 300 sq. ft.
                           Gasoline sales (including See table 15.401-2 of this
                           convenience stores)       section, schedule B plus
                                                     stacking spaces
                           Parking lot/structure     n/a
                                                     1 per 300 sf plus required
                           Truck stop                parking for accessory uses
                                                     (retail sales, office,
  Vehicles and equipment                             restaurant, lodging, etc.)
                           Vehicle/equipment sales
                           and rental (vehicles/     See table 15.401-2 of this
                           equipment cannot occupy   section, schedule B
                           required parking spaces)
                           Vehicle/equipment service
                           and repair (vehicles/     See table 15.401-2 of this
                           equipment cannot occupy   section, schedule B
                           required parking spaces)
Industrial uses:                                     
 Industrial service       All use types             See schedule C
                           All use types             See schedule C
                           Concentrated animal       See schedule C
  Manufacturing and        feeding operation
  production               Meat/poultry processing   See schedule C
                           facility
                           Mining                    See schedule C
 Telecommunications       Tower/antenna of any      None
                           height
                                                     1 per 50 units, plus 1 per
                                                     300 sf of office area,
                                                     plus vehicle stacking
                                                     spaces for security gate.
                                                     Aisles suitable for
                                                     temporary loading and
  Warehouse and            Mini-storage              unloading may be counted
  distribution/freight                               as required parking stalls
  movement                                           in accordance with section
                                                     15.401.04, table 15.401-
                                                     4 of this chapter as
                                                     determined by a traffic
                                                     engineer
                           All other uses            See table 15.401-2 of this
                                                     section, schedule B
 Waste and salvage        Salvage, junk yard        See schedule C
Accessory uses:                                      
                                                     1 per accessory dwelling
 Accessory dwelling units                          unit in addition to spaces
                                                     required for primary
                                                     dwelling unit
 
   B.   Schedule B: Uses subject to table 15.401-2, "Off-Street Parking
Schedule B", of this subsection, as indicated in subsection A, table 15.401-
1 of this section shall provide the minimum number of off-street parking spaces
listed in table 15.401-2 of this subsection. Unless otherwise approved, lots
containing more than one activity shall provide parking and loading in an
amount equal to the total of the requirements for all activities.
      TABLE 15.401-2
      OFF-STREET PARKING SCHEDULE B
Activity Number Of Spaces Required
Activity                                            Number Of Spaces Required
Indoor sales area                                   1 per 250 square feet
Indoor storage/warehousing/vehicle service/          
manufacturing area:
 1 - 3,000 square feet                             1 per 300 square feet
 3,001 to 5,000 square feet                        1 per 650 square feet
 5,001 to 10,000 square feet                       1 per 750 square feet
 10,001 to 50,000 square feet                      1 per 1,250 square feet
 50,001 square feet or greater                     1 per 1,500 square feet
Offices                                             1 per 300 square feet
Outdoor sales or display area (3,000 square feet or 1 per 750 square feet
less)
Outdoor sales or display area (over 3,000 square    1 per 2,000 square feet
feet)
 
   C.   Schedule C: Uses that reference "schedule C" in subsection A, table
15.401-1 of this section have widely varying parking and loading demand
characteristics, making it impossible to specify a single off-street parking or
loading standard. Upon receiving a development application for a use subject to
schedule C standards, the building official and the Director shall apply the
off-street parking and loading standard specified for the listed use that is
deemed most similar to the proposed use or establish minimum off-street parking
requirements on the basis of a parking and loading study prepared by the
applicant. Such a study shall include estimates of parking demand based on
recommendations of the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE), Urban Land
Institute, American Planning Association or other acceptable professional
analytical estimates as approved by the Director, and should include other
reliable data collected from uses or combinations of uses that are the same as
or comparable with the proposed use. Comparability will be determined by
density, scale, bulk, area, type of activity, and location. The study shall
document the source of data used to develop the recommendations.
   D.   Maximum Number Of Spaces Permitted:
      1.   General Maximum Requirement: For any use categorized as a
"commercial" or "industrial" use in chapter 320, "Land Use Tables", of this
title, off-street vehicle parking spaces shall not be provided in an amount
that is more than one hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the minimum
requirements established in subsection A, table 15.401-1, "Off-Street Parking
Schedule A", of this section.
      2.   Exceptions:
         a.   If application of the maximum parking standard would result in
less than six (6) parking spaces, the development shall be allowed six (6)
parking spaces.
         b.   For the purpose of calculating parking requirements, the
following types of parking spaces shall not count against the maximum parking
requirement, but shall count toward the minimum requirement:
            (1)   Accessible parking;
            (2)   Vanpool and carpool parking;
            (3)   Structured parking, underground parking, and parking within,
above, or beneath the building(s) it serves.
For the purpose of calculating parking requirements, fleet vehicle parking
spaces shall not count against either the minimum or maximum requirements.
         c.   Exceptions to the maximum parking requirement may be allowed in
situations that meet all of the following criteria as determined by the
Director:
            (1)   The proposed development has unique or unusual
characteristics such as high sales volume per floor area or low parking
turnover, which create a parking demand that exceeds the maximum ratio and
which typically does not apply to comparable uses; and,
            (2)   The parking demand cannot be accommodated by on-street
parking, shared parking with nearby uses, or by increasing the supply of spaces
that are exempt from the maximum ratio; and,
            (3)   The request is the minimum necessary variation from the
standards; and,
            (4)   If located in a Mixed-Use District, the uses in the proposed
development and the site design are highly supportive of the mixed-use concept
and support high levels of existing or planned transit and pedestrian activity.
   E.   Computation Of Parking And Loading Requirements:
      1.   Fractions: When measurements of the number of required spaces result
in a fractional number, any fraction shall be rounded up to the next higher
whole number.
      2.   Multiple Uses: Lots containing more than one use shall provide
parking and loading in an amount equal to the total of the requirements for all
uses.
      3.   Area Measurements: Unless otherwise specified, all square footage-
based parking and loading standards shall be computed on the basis of floor
area of the use in question. Bathrooms, utility rooms, hallways/corridors and
other similar areas that are accessory and do not generate a demand for parking
are not included in the computations of the floor area to determine parking
requirements. Structured parking within a building shall not be counted in such
measurement.
      4.   Computation Of Off-Street Parking: Required off-street loading space
shall not be included as off-street parking space in computation of required
off-street parking space.
      5.   Parking For Unlisted Uses: Parking requirements for uses not
specifically listed in subsection A, table 15.401-1 of this section shall be
determined by the Director based on the requirements for the closest comparable
use, as well as on the particular parking demand and trip generation
characteristics of the proposed use. The Director may alternately require the
submittal of a parking demand study that justifies estimates of parking demand
based on the recommendations of the Institute of Transportation Engineers,
Urban Land Institute, American Planning Association, or other acceptable
similar professional analytical body, and includes relevant data collected from
uses or combinations of uses that are the same or comparable to the proposed
use in terms of density, scale, bulk, area, type of activity, and location.
(Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.401.04: PARKING AREA LAYOUT AND DESIGN:
   A.   Stall Dimensions:
      1.   Parking stall and aisle dimensions shall be measured from the middle
of the stall stripe of a parking stall to the middle of the adjacent stall
stripe. Aisles for two-way flows shall be a minimum of twenty four feet (24'),
except when no spaces are backing onto the aisle, in which case width shall be
twenty feet (20').
      2.   One universally accessible, ADA-compatible, space shall be provided
in each parking lot in compliance with the adopted Building Code, and as set
forth in the following table:
      TABLE 15.401-3
      ACCESSIBLE PARKING REQUIREMENTS
Total Parking   Minimum Number Of
Spaces Provided Accessible Spaces
Total Parking    Minimum Number Of
Spaces Provided  Accessible Spaces
   1 to 25    1
   26 to 50   2
   51 to 75   3
   76 to 100  4
   101 to 150 5
   151 to 200 6
   201 to 300 7
   301 to 400 8
   401 to 500 9
   More than 52 percent of total
 
      3.   In parking lots of twenty (20) spaces or more, special
considerations will be made for compact car spatial dimensions.
      4.   The following standards may be used as guidelines for the design of
indoor and outdoor parking stalls:
      TABLE 15.401-4
      DESIGN OF PARKING STALLS
 
Type Of Stall Parking Angle Stall Width Stall To Curb Aisle Width Curb Length
Passenger     0°           8'          8'            12'         24'
vehicle
Passenger     45°          9'          19'           13'         12'8"
vehicle
Passenger     60°          9'          20'           13'         12'8"
vehicle
Passenger     90°          9'          18'           24'         9'
vehicle
Handicapped                 8' with 5'
space         90°          adjacent    18'           24'         9'
                            access area
Handicapped                 8' with 8'
van space     90°          adjacent    18'           24'         9'
                            access area
 
   B.   Parking Area Layout:
      1.   Surface: All parking and driveway areas and primary access to
parking facilities shall be surfaced with asphalt, concrete or other similar
materials, unless otherwise approved by the County Engineer. Accent paving is
recommended to indicate pedestrian linkages.
      2.   Integrate Parking Lots With Surroundings: Parking lots shall not
dominate the frontage of pedestrian-oriented streets, interfere with designated
pedestrian routes, or negatively impact surrounding neighborhoods. The
pedestrian character of streets and building shall be maximized through
continuity of building and landscape frontage.
      3.   Design Standards: All parking lot placement and design shall comply
with the applicable standards in chapters 360, "Commercial And Mixed-Use Design
Standards", and 348, "Multi-Family Residential Design Standards", of this
title.
      4.   Lot Size: Required parking shall be broken into component parking
lots, avoiding large, unrelieved expanses of paving.
   C.   Landscaping: A landscaped buffer zone of five feet (5') to ten feet
(10') may be required between the actual parking area, major arterial, or major
pedestrian route. Additionally, in areas that provide parking for more than ten
(10) vehicles, at least ten percent (10%) of the total area of the parking lot
shall be used for landscaping and/or aesthetic treatment. The following
landscaping standards shall be met:
      1.   A minimum of one tree planted in landscaped tree islands for every
eight (8) parking spaces shall be located within the parking area/lot.
      2.   Tree islands shall be installed intermittently and have a length
equal to the adjacent parking stalls, contain sufficient area to protect
plantings from vehicles and foot traffic and accommodate a tree root system
with a clear area of earth not less than three feet (3') in width.
      3.   Tree islands and other landscaping features on a site should be
utilized where practical as low impact development (LID) features to assist in
managing storm drainage.
      4.   All unimproved earth areas shall be planted, restored, or otherwise
protected from erosion.
      5.   Ongoing maintenance, including the replacement of dead or unhealthy
plants, shall be provided by the parking area owner/leaseholder.
   D.   Parking For Single-Family Residential Dwelling Units: For single family
residential units on streets designated local streets, an on-street parking
lane at each lot's street frontage may fulfill the requirement for one parking
space, with driveway and garage meeting the additional requirement. Driveways
and garage entrances from interior block alleys are preferred.
   E.   Shared Access: Wherever feasible, parking lots shall share access
lanes.
   F.   Circulation Area Design: Circulation for parking areas intended to
accommodate twenty (20) vehicles or more shall be designed to facilitate the
safe movement of vehicles without posing a danger to pedestrians or impeding
the function of the parking area. Parking lots that accommodate twenty (20) or
more vehicles must maintain continuous circulation patterns, with no dead-ends,
and safe access to public streets.
   G.   Lighting And Maintenance: All parking area lighting shall comply with
the lighting requirements of this title and the Lyon County Design Criteria and
Improvement Standards, and provide adequate lighting for safety if night use is
intended. Parking lots should provide adequate security and should limit visual
clutter, parking lot signs, and equipment.
   H.   Drainage: All parking areas shall have adequate drainage as determined
by a drainage report, and utilize low impact development techniques where
practical.
   I.   Loading/Unloading Areas: All new and substantially remodeled commercial
and industrial developments shall provide adequate loading and unloading zones.
The loading/unloading zones must be illustrated on the parking plan submitted
for approval. Loading and unloading areas shall not impede major roads,
highways, intersections, or other paths of travel. Also, these zones must be
located away from areas where there is heavy pedestrian travel unless such
areas cannot be avoided, as in the Commercial Mixed- Use (CMU) District.
Loading/unloading areas will include block walls, opaque fences, earthen mounds
and/or vegetative screening to reduce noise and visual impacts. (Ord. 603, 11-
1-2018)
15.401.05: PARKING ALTERNATIVES:
The Director may approve alternatives to providing the number of off-street
parking spaces required by subsection
15.401.03A, table 15.401-1 of this chapter in accordance with the following
standards.
   A.   Shared Parking: The Director may approve shared parking facilities for
developments or uses with different operating hours or different peak business
periods (i.e., non-concurrent joint use parking) if the shared parking complies
with all of the following standards:
      1.   Location: Every shared parking space shall be located no farther
than six hundred feet (600') from the entrance to each building for which the
shared parking is provided (measured along the shortest legal pedestrian
route).
      2.   Shared Parking Study: Those proposing to use shared parking as a
means of satisfying off-street parking requirements shall submit a shared
parking analysis to the County that clearly demonstrates the feasibility of
shared parking. The study shall be provided in a form established by the
Director. It shall address, at a minimum, the size and type of the proposed
development, location of required parking, the composition of tenants, the
anticipated rate of parking turnover, and the anticipated peak parking and
traffic loads for all uses that will be sharing off-street parking spaces. The
applicant shall also demonstrate that any parking reduction requested as part
of the shared parking study will not result in the spillover of parking onto
other properties. The study shall utilize the Urban Land Institute, American
Planning Association, or other acceptable similar professional analytical body
shared parking methodology to calculate temporal and locational parking
reductions.
      3.   Agreement For Shared Parking: The parties involved in the joint use
of off-street parking facilities shall submit a written agreement in a form to
be recorded for such joint use, approved by the Director as to form and
content. The agreement shall provide for the maintenance of jointly used
facilities. The Director may impose such conditions of approval as may be
necessary to ensure the adequacy of parking in areas affected by such an
agreement. Recordation of the agreement shall take place before issuance of a
building permit for any use to be served by the shared parking area. A shared
parking agreement may be revoked only if all required off-street parking spaces
will be provided in accordance with the requirements of this title.
   B.   Off-Site Parking: The Director may approve the location of required
off-site parking spaces on a separate lot from the lot on which the principal
use is located if the off-site parking complies with all of the following
standards:
      1.   Location: No off-site parking space may be located more than six
hundred feet (600') from an entrance to the use being served (measured along
the shortest legal pedestrian route). Off-site parking spaces shall be
connected to the use by acceptable pedestrian facilities. Off-site parking
spaces may not be separated from the use served by a street right-of-way with a
width of more than eighty feet (80'), unless a grade-separated pedestrian
walkway, a traffic signal, a shuttle bus, or other traffic control device or
remote parking shuttle bus service is provided.
      2.   Control Of Site: Required parking spaces for residential uses must
be located on the site of the use or within a tract owned in common by all the
owners of the properties that will use the tract.
      3.   Ineligible Activities: Required parking spaces for persons with
disabilities may not be located offsite.
      4.   Agreement For Off-Site Parking: In the event that an off-site
parking area is not under the same ownership as the principal use served, a
written agreement between the record owners shall be required, approved by the
Director as to form and content. The agreement shall guarantee the use of the
off-site parking area for a minimum period of at least twenty (20) years. The
Director may impose such conditions of approval as may be necessary to ensure
the adequacy of parking in areas affected by such an agreement, including a
requirement that the Director be notified if the off-site parking agreement is
being revoked. An attested copy of the agreement between the owners of record
shall be submitted to the County prior to recordation in a form acceptable by
the District Attorney. Recordation of the agreement shall take place before
issuance of a building permit for any use to be served by the off-site parking
area. An off-site parking agreement may be revoked only if all required off-
street parking spaces will be provided in accordance with the requirements of
this title.
   C.   On-Street Parking: On-street parking spaces in the right-of- way along
the property line, between the two (2) side lot lines of the site, may be
counted to satisfy the minimum off-street parking requirements, if approved by
the Director.
   D.   District Parking: Minimum required off-street parking spaces may be
waived or reduced for properties within the boundaries of a public parking,
Local Improvement District or Historic District that provides district-wide
parking facilities, based on the projected parking demand to be addressed by
the district-wide facility. All off-street parking waivers by the Director
shall be documented in writing and included in the business license and/or
building permit applications for the uses located within the district.
   E.   Stacked, Tandem, And Valet Parking: Stacked, tandem, or valet parking
for nonresidential uses is allowed if an attendant is present to move vehicles.
In addition, a guarantee acceptable to the County shall be filed with the
County ensuring that a valet parking attendant shall always be on duty when the
parking lot is in operation. For residential uses, tandem or stacked vehicle
parking is not allowed to comply with the minimum residential parking
requirement, but may be allowed for additional parking exceeding the minimum
residential parking requirement.
   F.   Structured Parking:
      1.   Maximum Parking Waiver: Where seventy five percent (75%) or more of
the parking accessory to a use is in structured parking, there shall be no
maximum cap on the number of parking spaces.
      2.   Credit For Nearby Public Structured Parking: Spaces available in
public parking structures located within one thousand feet (1,000') of the
subject use may be counted toward the total amount of required off-street
parking.
      3.   Density Bonus For Underground Parking In The Commercial And Mixed-
Use Districts: A density bonus shall be granted for underground parking
structures in the Commercial and Mixed-Use Districts. The bonus shall be
granted at a ratio of 0.01 du/gross acre of additional bonus density for each
one hundred (100) square feet of structured parking that is underground.
   G.   Sites In Mixed-Use Districts: In the Mixed-Use Districts, the total
requirement for off-street parking facilities shall be the sum of the
requirements for the various uses computed separately, subject to the
modifications set forth below.
      1.   All uses within MU Districts shall be eligible for a twenty percent
(20%) parking reduction to reflect the reduced automobile use associated with
mixed-use developments.
      2.   A ten percent (10%) parking reduction for multifamily residential
dwellings may be allowed if the proposed use is located within three hundred
feet (300') of a transit stop with midday service headways of thirty (30)
minutes or less in each direction.
      3.   For non-residential uses, the minimum parking requirement may be
reduced ten percent (10%) if the use incorporates a transit stop that meets
minimum design standards established by the County to ensure ready access to
users and is compatible with the design and materials of the non-residential
use of which it is associated.
      4.   A ten percent (10%) parking reduction for developments that include
bicycle parking at a minimum ratio of five (5) bicycle rack spaces to one
parking space. (Up to a maximum of 2 parking spaces.)
      5.   The total number of parking spaces required of a use or uses in an
MU District may be further reduced by the Director if the applicant prepares a
parking evaluation that demonstrates a reduction is appropriate based on the
expected parking needs of the development, availability of mass transit, and
similar factors and the County Engineer accepts such study as an accurate
reflection of parking demand. The parking evaluation shall be prepared in a
form and manner prescribed by the Director.
   H.   Other Eligible Alternatives: Modification of requirements of this
chapter may be approved in conformance with the provisions of section
15.330.04 of this title when substantiated by a report based on the Institute
of Transportation Engineers (ITE) Manual, American Planning Association (APA),
Urban Land Institute (ULI) or other nationally accepted authority, and where it
is demonstrated that the modification will protect surrounding neighborhoods,
maintain traffic circulation patterns, and promote quality urban design to at
least the same extent as would strict compliance with the standards set forth
in this chapter. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
CHAPTER 402
LANDSCAPE STANDARDS
SECTION:
15.402.01: Purpose
15.402.02: Applicability
15.402.03: Design Standards
15.402.04: Buffering And Screening
15.402.01: PURPOSE:
This chapter is intended to ensure that new landscaping and the retention of
existing vegetation is an integral part of all development and that it
contributes added high quality to development, retains and increases property
values, conserves water, and improves the environmental and aesthetic character
of the community. It is also the intent of this chapter to provide flexible
requirements that encourage and allow for creativity in landscape design. (Ord.
603, 11-1-2018)
15.402.02: APPLICABILITY:
All landscaping, buffering, and screening provided pursuant to this title shall
comply with the standards in this chapter. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.402.03: DESIGN STANDARDS:
   A.   General: Developments shall incorporate a variety of landscape elements
to enhance the building or site, add privacy or shade, screen obtrusive or
objectionable features, and take advantage of special site conditions.
Landscape elements may include, but not be limited to:
      1.   Living plant material;
      2.   Decorative pavement;
      3.   Screening walls;
      4.   Planters; or
      5.   Site furniture or similar details to enhance the project.
All unimproved earth areas shall be planted, restored, or otherwise protected
from erosion. The use of low impact development techniques such as use of
native plants, on-site stormwater retention, drip-irrigation, and use of
pervious paving material is strongly encouraged to meet the requirements of
this title.
   B.   Protection Of Existing Vegetation: The appeal and character of the site
shall be preserved and enhanced by retaining and protecting existing vegetation
and trees whenever possible.
      1.   Designation, Protection, And Replacement: The owner must indicate on
the landscaping plan trees and vegetation intended to be preserved. Designated
trees and vegetation must be protected during construction through use of
fencing and other protective measures.
   C.   Maintenance: Landscaping shall be watered and maintained by the
property owner/leaseholder as necessary to preserve the intent of any approved
landscape plan. Ongoing maintenance shall include the replacement of dead or
unhealthy plants. Violations of this section shall be subject to penalties
pursuant to chapter 15 of this title.
   D.   Plant Materials: Plant materials shall be adaptable to local
conditions. Naturalized planting schemes using native or low water-consumptive
drought-tolerant plant materials with a high desert character theme are
strongly encouraged. Lawn areas shall be kept to a minimum.
   E.   Street Trees: Street trees shall be organized in a formal architectural
fashion to reinforce, define, and connect the spaces and corridors created by
buildings and other features along a street.
      1.   Location: Street trees shall be planted in the area between the curb
and sidewalk or a location most appropriate for street tree planting.
      2.   Spacing: Spacing of street trees shall not exceed two (2) times the
tree's mature crown diameter.
      3.   Type: Street trees shall consist of a mixture of canopy shade trees.
      4.   Additional Landscaping: Additional landscaping within the area
between the curb and sidewalk may consist of shrubs, annuals, perennials,
ground cover and turf, and shall be planted and maintained by the adjacent
property owners at the approval of the appropriate jurisdiction (homeowners'
association, landscape maintenance association, improvement district, GID,
etc.).
   F.   Visibility And Security:
      1.   Intersections shall be landscaped with plant materials of a shape
and size that will not impede visibility of motorists, cyclists, or
pedestrians.
      2.   At no time may the security of a building, specifically the entryway
and parking area, be compromised by creating visual barriers or hiding places.
   G.   Landscape Plan Required: A landscape plan including plant materials,
plant sizes, numbers of plants and plant and landscape material locations as
well as an irrigation plan with details shall be submitted for developments as
required by the Director. Plant materials and the irrigation system shall be
installed prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. (Ord. 603, 11-1-
2018; amd. Ord. 607, 9-19-2019)
15.402.04: BUFFERING AND SCREENING:
   A.   Intent: To integrate adjacent land uses and provide appropriate
transitions from one use to another through the use of building orientation and
access, landscaping, and appropriate architectural elements.
   B.   General Provisions:
      1.   It is the responsibility of any new proposed use (whether more or
less intense) to demonstrate compatibility with any surrounding, existing,
adjacent uses. This can be accomplished through appropriate building
orientation and setbacks, landscaping, architectural treatment and effective
use of fencing and screening walls. Special consideration shall be given to the
impact of aesthetics, noise, lighting, and traffic.
      2.   Buffering may be required between any development and adjacent
natural or environmentally sensitive areas. This will be determined on a case-
by-case basis.
   C.   Loading And Service Areas:
      1.   Location: Loading docks, recycling facilities and other service and
utility areas shall be placed to the rear or side of buildings.
      2.   Screening And Landscaping: Screening and landscaping shall prevent
direct views of the loading areas and shall be concealed from all adjacent
properties and public rights-of-way through installation of walls, opaque
fences, earthen mounds and/or vegetative screening. Screening and landscaping
shall also be provided to help mitigate spill-over glare, noise, or exhaust
fumes.
   D.   Mechanical Equipment: Mechanical equipment, rooftop appurtenances, and
outdoor storage areas should be screened. Rooftop appurtenances, such as
mechanical equipment shall be screened from view from adjacent properties and
public rights-of- way whenever practical.
   E.   Dumpsters And Trash Storage Areas: Every development that is required
to provide one or more dumpsters for solid waste collection shall provide sites
for such dumpsters that are:
      1.   Sited to the rear of the building,
      2.   Compliant with the setbacks required of the building's underlying
zone, and,
      3.   Designed such that they are concealed from all adjacent properties
and public rights-of-way through installation of walls, fencing and/or
vegetative screening.
   F.   Outdoor Storage Areas: In the event that a use which will incorporate
the outdoor storage of equipment, trucks, trailers, materials, etc., will abut
Residentially used or zoned property, such storage areas must either be
screened by a solid fence or wall with a minimum height of six feet (6') or be
set back from the adjacent residential property line the distance of the
minimum setback distance. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
CHAPTER 600
GENERAL LAND DIVISION PROVISIONS
SECTION:
15.600.01: Purpose
15.600.02: Scope Of Provisions
15.600.03: Planned Unit Developments
15.600.04: Public Notice And Review
15.600.05: Mandatory Water Rights Dedication Or Relinquishment Requirements
15.600.01: PURPOSE:
The purposes of this chapter are:
   A.   To safeguard the public health, safety, and general welfare by
establishing certain standards of design, improvement, survey and construction
of land developments hereafter platted in all areas of the County;
   B.   To provide and ensure the orderly and proper growth thereof;
   C.   To aid in the prevention of pollution of land or water resources;
   D.   To encourage new concepts and innovations in the arrangement of
building sites;
   E.   To protect, enhance and preserve the County's vast and valuable
agricultural land; and
   F.   To provide for the continued protection and beneficial use of all
waters appurtenant to lands within Lyon County. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.600.02: SCOPE OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   It is unlawful for any individual, firm, association, syndicate, co-
partnership, trust or any other legal entity, as a principal, agent or
otherwise, to reserve, offer to reserve, to sell, to offer to sell, to contract
to sell or lease or transfer any division of land or any part thereof in the
County unless and until all the requirements hereinafter provided have been
performed or guaranteed by bond or other surety satisfactory to the County.
   B.   All "condominiums", "cooperatives" or "townhouses", "commercial" and
"industrial" type developments shall be subject to the full requirements of
this title as pertinent. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.600.03: PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS:
All planned unit land developments hereinafter platted and improved within the
County shall be characterized by a complete planning approach in the tentative
map stage. Planned unit developments may include tentative subdivision map and
final subdivision map applications concurrent with the planned unit development
tentative approval and final approval procedures respectively as outlined in
the requirements of chapter 349 of this title. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.600.04: PUBLIC NOTICE AND REVIEW:
All land divisions, adjustments, amendments, and modifications subject to
review under this title shall be open to inspection and comment by the public
and subject to the public notice and review requirements outlined in this
title. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.600.05: MANDATORY WATER RIGHTS DEDICATION OR RELINQUISHMENT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   All maps of land division, including parcel maps, subdivision maps and
maps of division of land into large parcels, must dedicate or relinquish water
rights as follows:
      1.   If the land encompassed by any map of land division is not within
the existing boundaries of a public water system as defined in Nevada Revised
Statutes 445A and the newly created parcels are to be served by domestic well:
         a.   The land divider shall relinquish to the State Engineer water
rights necessary to ensure an adequate water supply for domestic use of the
newly created parcels from within the water basin in which the parcel is
located; and
         b.   The land divider shall bear all costs associated with such
relinquishment; and
         c.   For purposes of this section, valid underground water rights in
the amount of 2.0 acre-feet per year shall be relinquished for each new parcel
created by the land division; and
         d.   No map of land division shall be recorded until the requirements
of this section have been satisfied.
      2.   If the land encompassed by any map of land division is within the
boundaries of, or will be served by a public water system as defined in Nevada
Revised Statutes 445A:
         a.   The dedication or relinquishment of water rights necessary to
ensure an adequate supply for the domestic use of the newly created parcels
shall follow the rules and requirements of that system, or a written statement
from the water system that no dedication or relinquishment requirement exists,
or that dedication or relinquishment requirements have been satisfied, must be
submitted before a map may be recorded; and
         b.   The land divider shall bear all costs associated with such
relinquishment; and
         c.   For the purpose of this section, necessary water rights required
shall be determined by the rules and requirements of the water system.
      3.   If a land division map is created on land subject to a conservation
or agricultural easement meeting the requirements of section 170(h) of the
Internal Revenue Code, the requirements for dedication or relinquishment of
water rights enumerated in subsections A1 and A2 of this section may be waived
by the Board for those portions of the land division map subject to the
easement when the following findings can be made:
         a.   The conservation or agricultural easement creates a perpetual
restriction on development of the parcel(s) for residential use; and
         b.   The conservation or agricultural easement is held by a qualified
land protection organization; and
         c.   The conservation or agricultural easement document conforms to
the requirements of subsection
15.340.08A4e of this title. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
CHAPTER 601
MAP AND EASEMENT MODIFICATIONS
SECTION:
15.601.01: Amended Maps
15.601.02: Modifications To Approved Tentative Maps
15.601.03: Reversion Of Maps And Lot Consolidations Or Reversion Of Division Of
Land To Acreage
15.601.04: Merger And Resubdivision Of Land Without Reversion To Acreage
15.601.05: Vacation Or Abandonment Of Street Or Easement
15.601.06: Administrative Vacation Or Abandonment Of Public Utility Easements
15.601.01: AMENDED MAPS:
   A.   Certificate Of Amendment: If an error or omission is found in any
subdivision map, record of survey, parcel map, map of division into large
parcels, or reversionary map, and the correction does not change or purport to
change the physical location of any survey monument, property line or boundary
line, the error or omission may be corrected by the filing and recordation of a
certificate of amendment authorized by the Board. The certificate of amendment
shall contain the items required by Nevada Revised Statutes 278.473(4).
   B.   Amending Map: If an error or omission is found in any recorded
subdivision map, record of survey, parcel map, map of division into large
parcels, or reversionary map, and the correction changes or purports to change
the physical location of any survey monument, property line or boundary line,
the correction may be effected by the filing of an amended map pursuant to the
procedures of this section. This procedure may be utilized only to correct
errors or omissions which do not result in a change of the number of lots,
result in significant changes to the area of any lot or the amount of land
reserved or dedicated for public use and improvements, or result in the removal
of any covenants or restrictions attached to the final approved or recorded
map.
   C.   Procedures For Amending Map: The same procedures and requirements shall
be applied to the application for an amended map as to the original land
division, except, in the case of subdivisions, only those procedures for the
approval and filing of a final subdivision map shall apply. The amending map
shall be in the format and shall contain the certificates required by Nevada
Revised Statutes 278.477(2) and this title.
   D.   Public Notice And Review: Map amendments shall be subject to the same
personal notice and hearing requirements as required for an original map
review. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.601.02: MODIFICATIONS TO APPROVED TENTATIVE MAPS:
   A.   Applicability: Whenever the owners of land or their representatives
desire to modify an approved tentative map or conditions of approval, an
application shall be filed with the department. Those requests resulting in no
net change or reduction in the number of parcels, the re-design of the map
involving less than ten percent (10%) of the total number of parcels or land
area, minor clarification of a condition resulting in no impact to public
health or safety, or changes to map design resulting from the mapping of
environmental constraints or historic sites, an application for a minor
modification may be filed. All other requests shall constitute a major
amendment.
   B.   Procedures For Processing A Minor Modification Or A Technical
Correction: An application for a minor modification or technical correction
shall be filed with the department, on the form provided, with the applicable
fees. The Director is the designated authority for minor modifications and
technical corrections. Minor modifications as defined in subsection A of this
section shall be subject to the personal notice requirements of section
15.09.03 of this title. The applicant shall be notified in writing of the
decision regarding the request within thirty (30) working days of the official
filing date. The decision of the Director may be appealed.
   C.   Procedures For Processing A Major Amendment: Major amendments shall be
processed in the same manner as the original application for land division.
With the consent of the department, the applicant may incorporate the previous
applications and procedures by reference, to the extent that the amendment
makes no material changes on the matters addressed therein. Public notice and
hearing requirements shall be those precedent to the approval of the original
tentative map. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.601.03: REVERSION OF MAPS AND LOT CONSOLIDATIONS OR REVERSION OF DIVISION OF
LAND TO ACREAGE:
   A.   Application: All applications for a reversion of map and lot
consolidation or reversion of division of land to acreage must be filed with
the department on the appropriate forms and meet all applicable submittal
requirements. The Director, or his designee, shall be the final decision maker
regarding reversion of maps and lot consolidations or reversion of division of
land to acreage.
   B.   Fee: The applicant shall pay a fee as set by the Board.
   C.   Compliance With Statute: All applications for reversion of maps and lot
consolidations or reversion of land to acreage must comply with Nevada Revised
Statutes 278.490.
   D.   Easements: Reversion of maps and lot consolidations or reversion of
division of land to acreage does not automatically eliminate any public
utility, irrigation, or other private easement that may exist along a lot line.
It is the responsibility of the property owner(s) to resolve any and all
interest of record in conformance with section
15.601.06 of this chapter.
   E.   Map; Deed: All applications of reversion of maps and lot consolidation
or reversion of division of land to acreage must include a reversion to acreage
map which contains the same survey dimensions as the previous recorded map.
When the lot line to be deleted was created by deed, the lot line deletion may
be accomplished by deed and record of survey.
   F.   Notice: Reversion of maps and consolidations or reversions of division
of land to acreage shall be subject to the personal notice requirements of
section
15.09.03 of this title.
   G.   Appeal: A decision of the Director made under this section may be
appealed in the manner provided in chapter 4 of this title.
   H.   Final Reversion Map: Prior to recordation, the final reversion map
shall be provided to the county engineer in form and format compatible with the
county geographic information system (GIS). The scale of the map, improvements,
monuments, and other information shall be placed in the model space correctly
oriented to the coordinate system as approved by the public works director.
(Ord. 603, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 607, 9-19-2019)
15.601.04: MERGER AND RESUBDIVISION OF LAND WITHOUT REVERSION TO ACREAGE:
   A.   An owner or Governing Body that owns two (2) or more contiguous parcels
may merge and resubdivide the land into new parcels or lots without reverting
the preexisting parcels to acreage pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 278.490.
   B.   Streets and easements will remain in effect after the merger and
resubdivision of land, unless abandoned in accordance with the provisions of
sections
15.601.05 and
15.601.06 of this chapter and Nevada Revised Statutes.
   C.   All applications of a merger and resubdivision of land must be filed
with the department on the appropriate forms meeting all applicable submittal
requirements.
   D.   The applicant shall pay a fee as set by the Board.
   E.   All applicants for merger and resubdivision of land must comply with
Nevada Revised Statutes 278.4925, 278.4955, 278.496 and 278.4965.
   F.   All applications for merger and resubdivision of land, whether created
by a map or deed, must follow the same County approval process as would be
required for a division of land based on the number of lots to be created.
(Ord. 603, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 607, 9-19-2019)
15.601.05: VACATION OR ABANDONMENT OF STREET OR EASEMENT:
Any abutting property owner desiring the vacation or abandonment of any street
or easement or portion thereof shall file a petition in writing with the
department. The petition for vacation or abandonment of the street or easement
shall be processed in accordance with the procedures set forth in Nevada
Revised Statutes 278.480. A vacation or abandonment of a street easement may be
approved in conjunction with the approval of a tentative map pursuant to Nevada
Revised Statutes 278.349. The Board may initiate the vacation or abandonment of
a street or easement by resolution. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.601.06: ADMINISTRATIVE VACATION OR ABANDONMENT OF PUBLIC UTILITY EASEMENTS:
   A.   Purpose: For the purposes of this section, a public utility easement is
an easement owned or controlled by public or private utility, and which runs in
favor of such utility. Pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 278.480(11) and
through the use of the procedure contained in this section, the Director, or
his designee, is authorized to take final action on the vacation or abandonment
of a public utility easement subject to the procedures set forth below.
   B.   General Procedure: The owner of property who seeks abandonment of a
public utility easement involving his property shall file an application with
the department on the forms provided by the department. The applicant shall pay
a fee as set by the Board. The applicant shall provide written verification
that all public utility or video service providers have approved the
application. The application shall also include a legal description and exhibit
prepared and signed by a Nevada licensed land surveyor, unless the County
Engineer waives the requirements of retaining a State licensed surveyor for the
preparation of the documents. The Director shall provide all conditions of
approval to the applicant in writing within forty five (45) days of receiving
an application.
   C.   Decision: The Director, or his designee, may issue a written order
abandoning a public utility easement after:
      1.   Receiving a complete application;
      2.   Providing notice to each owner of property abutting the easement to
be abandoned in conformance with the procedures set forth in chapter 9 of this
title. Property owners shall be given ten (10) days to respond;
      3.   Obtaining written approval from all public utility or video service
providers indicating that they no longer request the reservation of the
easement(s). Written approval shall consist of a legal description sufficient
to identify the easement being abandoned and the notarized signatures of all
parties holding an interest in the easement. If there is an associated map or
record of survey, the acknowledgement of relinquishment shall be provided on
the map or record of survey;
      4.   Verification that the applicant has fulfilled all prescribed
conditions, and;
      5.   A determination that the subject public utility easement is no
longer necessary or useful to Lyon County and that the public will not be
materially injured by the proposed vacation.
   D.   Appeal: A decision of the Director made under this section may be
appealed in the manner provided for in chapter 4 of this title. (Ord. 603, 11-
1-2018)
CHAPTER 602
BOUNDARY LINE ADJUSTMENT
SECTION:
15.602.01: Applicability
15.602.02: Exclusions
15.602.03: Procedures For Boundary Line Adjustment
15.602.04: Standards For Approval
15.602.05: Public Notice And Review
15.602.01: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter applies to an adjustment of the boundary line between two (2)
abutting parcels or the transfer of land between two (2) owners of abutting
parcels. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.602.02: EXCLUSIONS:
   A.   An adjustment of the boundary line between abutting parcels or the
transfer of land between two (2) owners of abutting parcels may not be approved
if it reduces the size of a non-conforming parcel, increases a non-conformity,
or results in the creation of a non-conforming condition or parcel.
   B.   An adjustment of the boundary line between abutting parcels or the
transfer of land between two (2) owners of abutting parcels may be disapproved
if it does not contain adequate access, utility, water conveyance and drainage
easements to serve the resulting parcels. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.602.03: PROCEDURES FOR BOUNDARY LINE ADJUSTMENT:
   A.   Application: All applications for a boundary line adjustment must be
filed with the department on the appropriate forms and meet all applicable
submittal requirements. The applicant shall pay a fee(s) as set by the Board.
The Director, or his designee, shall be the final decision maker regarding
boundary line adjustments.
   B.   No Delinquencies: The applicant shall prove that there are no
delinquent taxes or assessments on the parcels involved in the boundary line
adjustment.
   C.   Contents Of Boundary Line Adjustments: Every map for boundary line
adjustments shall show, at a minimum, the information required by Nevada
Revised Statutes 278.469 and Nevada Revised Statutes 278.5693.
   D.   Submissions: Applicants for boundary line adjustments shall submit a
deed document which includes a metes and bounds legal description, the
appropriate number of printed and electronic record of survey maps of said
parcels showing lot line dimensions, adjacent streets, north arrow, and the
locations of all structures, wells, septic tanks, and leach fields. A record of
survey and additional materials must be signed and stamped by a Nevada
registered land surveyor complying with Nevada Revised Statutes 278.469 and
278.5692. The record of survey map of said parcels shall also contain a
certificate stating that each holder of record of a security interest consents
to the preparation and recordation of the boundary line adjustment record of
survey map.
   E.   Easements: Boundary line adjustments do not automatically eliminate any
public utility, irrigation, or other private easement that may exist along a
lot line. It is the responsibility of the property owner(s) to resolve any and
all interest of record in conformance with section
15.601.06 of this chapter.
   F.   Processing By Department: The department will review the application
and boundary line adjustment map for compliance with Nevada Revised Statutes
278.469, Nevada Revised Statutes 278.5693, this title, and the comments by
other reviewing agencies.
   G.   Decision: The Director, or his designee, may make a decision regarding
a boundary line adjustment after:
      1.   Receiving a complete application;
      2.   Verifying that there are no delinquent taxes or assessments on the
parcels involved in the boundary line adjustment; and
      3.   Verifying that the county engineer, county surveyor, and county
agencies have reviewed the application materials and determined that the
boundary line adjustment application complies with their regulations and
standards and Nevada Revised Statutes 278.5693. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord.
607, 9-19-2019; Ord. 613, 12-3-2020)
15.602.04: STANDARDS FOR APPROVAL:
   A.   The adjustment of the boundary line between abutting parcels or the
transfer of land between two (2) owners of abutting parcels shall be approved
without conditions or further administrative proceedings when:
      1.   It does not result in the creation or reduction in size of non-
conforming lots;
      2.   The map meets the formal requirements of Nevada Revised Statutes
278.469 and Nevada Revised Statutes 278.5693;
      3.   The map is not in conflict with the provisions of this title and
Nevada Revised Statutes 278.010 to 278.630, inclusive.
   B.   If the proposed configuration is to accommodate new residential,
commercial or industrial development, the Director, or his designee, may
require, prior to approval and recordation of the map, that public facilities
and improvements be constructed, in the manner and at the same level as if
parcel map approval had been sought.
   C.   A decision of the Director made under this section may be appealed in
the manner provided in chapter 4 of this title.
   D.   Prior to recordation, the boundary line adjustment map shall be
provided to the county engineer in form and format compatible with the county
geographic information system (GIS). The scale of the map, improvements,
monuments, and other information shall be placed in the model space correctly
oriented to the coordinate system as approved by the public works director.
(Ord. 603, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 607, 9-19-2019)
15.602.05: PUBLIC NOTICE AND REVIEW:
An application for a boundary line adjustment under this chapter shall be
subject to the personal notice requirements of section
15.09.03 of this title. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
CHAPTER 605
DIVISION OF LAND INTO LARGE PARCELS
SECTION:
15.605.01: General Procedures
15.605.02: Applicability
15.605.03: Procedures For Tentative Maps For Division Of Land Into Large
Parcels
15.605.04: Findings For Tentative Map For Division Of Land Into Large Parcels
15.605.05: Duration, Extension And Amendment Of Tentative Map Of Division Into
Large Parcels
15.605.06: Final Land Division Map Procedure
15.605.07: Final Land Division Map Content
15.605.08: Effect Of Approval
15.605.09: Recording
15.605.01: GENERAL PROCEDURES:
   A.   Except as otherwise provided for in this section, all applications for
division of land into large parcels shall be processed in two (2) stages:
      1.   Application for tentative map for division of land into large
parcels, and
      2.   Application for final map for division of land into large parcels.
(Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.605.02: APPLICABILITY:
All owners of land or their authorized representatives who propose to divide
any land or portion thereof, vacant or improved, for transfer or development
into lots or parcels, each of which is at least: a) one-sixteenth (1/16) of a
section as described by government land office survey; or b) forty (40) acres
in area, including roads and easements, shall file an application for approval
of a tentative map of division into large parcels; provided that, the
provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the proposed division of land
where each lot is at least one section or six hundred forty (640) acres, or
where the division of land conforms to the provisions of Nevada Revised
Statutes 278.320, paragraph 4, division of land for agricultural purposes.
(Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.605.03: PROCEDURES FOR TENTATIVE MAPS FOR DIVISION OF LAND INTO LARGE
PARCELS:
   A.   Application: The landowner or his authorized representative shall
submit a complete tentative map application with the department in accordance
with the established and published application and submittal schedule.
   B.   Contents Of Tentative Map For Division Of Land Into Large Parcels:
Every tentative map for division of land into large parcels shall show, at
minimum, the information required by Nevada Revised Statutes 278.471 through
278.4713, inclusive.
   C.   Processing By Department: The department shall distribute copies of the
tentative map and accompanying materials to all agencies charged by statute.
The department shall schedule the application for public hearing and file
reports with the commission and subsequently with the Board.
   D.   Hearing Notice And Procedure: Notice of the hearings before the
commission and the Board shall be provided in accordance with chapter 9 of this
title.
   E.   Planning Commission Action: Within sixty (60) days after the official
filing date, unless the time is extended by mutual consent of the applicant and
the commission, the commission shall, following a public hearing, recommend
approval, conditional approval or denial of the tentative map of division into
large parcels by a majority vote of the members present. The commission shall
set forth findings and reasons for its decisions in accordance with the
criteria identified in section
15.605.04 of this chapter.
   F.   Decision By Board: Within thirty (30) days after receipt of the
commission's recommendation, unless the time is extended by mutual consent of
the applicant and the Board, the Board shall conduct a public hearing, and
approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the tentative map of division into
large parcels. The review and decision of the Board shall conform to the
provisions of chapter 7 of this title and include findings and reasons for its
decision in accordance with the criteria identified in section
15.605.04 of this chapter. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.605.04: FINDINGS FOR TENTATIVE MAP FOR DIVISION OF LAND INTO LARGE PARCELS:
The commission and the Board, in rendering a decision on the tentative map,
shall base the recommendation for approval or approval (respectively) on
finding in the affirmative of the following:
   A.   The tentative map meets the formal requirements of this chapter and
Nevada Revised Statutes.
   B.   The tentative map secures adequate access for subsequent purchasers.
   C.   Where applicable, the tentative map secures the ability to irrigate and
drain each parcel, consistent with the water rights appurtenant, and that the
rights of downstream users are secured and not impaired.
   D.   The location and width of easements for roads and public utilities are
adequate for the area to be divided.
   E.   The location and width of easements for drainage and irrigation
purposes are adequate for the area to be divided.
   F.   There are no delinquent taxes or assessments on the land to be divided.
(Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.605.05: DURATION, EXTENSION AND AMENDMENT OF TENTATIVE MAP OF DIVISION INTO
LARGE PARCELS:
   A.   Time For Submission Of Final Map: Unless the time is extended by the
Board in the manner set forth in subsection B of this section, the final map
shall be filed within one year from the date of approval of the tentative map
by the Board or the date that the requirement of its filing was extended
pursuant to subsection B of this section. If a final map of division into large
parcels is not recorded within the time frames listed above, all proceedings
concerning the map of division into large parcels are terminated.
   B.   Extension Of Tentative Map: The Board may extend the period for
presentation of a final map of division into large parcels for not more than
one additional year if the application for extension is submitted prior to the
expiration of the initial one-year period for presenting the final map as
provided in chapter 13 of this title. If a party is aggrieved by the decision
of the Board concerning an application for extension, the party may appeal such
determination in accordance with the provisions of chapter 12 of this title.
   C.   Amendment Of Tentative Map: At any time after tentative map approval,
and before the time required for presentation of a final map, the applicant may
request amendment to the approval or conditional approval of the tentative map.
The Director may approve minor tentative map amendments, subject to appeal to
the commission in accordance with chapter 4 of this title. Major amendments
shall be determined in accordance with the procedure for original approval of
the tentative map under this chapter. Additional conditions which are
reasonably related to the proposed amendment may be attached to approval of the
tentative map amendment. An applicant who is unwilling to accept conditions
attached to the proposed amendment may withdraw the amendment. Action on the
application for amendment of the tentative map shall not extend the period for
presenting a final map, unless a request for extension pursuant to subsection B
of this section is approved. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.605.06: FINAL LAND DIVISION MAP PROCEDURE:
   A.   Application Requirements: Final land division map shall be filed with
the department on a form provided by the department. The Board shall be the
final decision maker for approval of the final map.
   B.   Action By Board:
      1.   Unless the time period is extended by a mutual consent of the
developer and the Board, the Board shall approve, conditionally approve or
disapprove the final map within sixty (60) days of the official filing date.
      2.   If the Board does not approve, approve with conditions or disapprove
the final map within sixty (60) days, the final map shall be deemed approved
unconditionally.
      3.   The Board shall approve the map only upon findings as follows:
         a.   The final map conforms in every respect with the approved
tentative map.
         b.   All conditions established upon approval of the tentative map
have been satisfied.
         c.   The final map conforms to all County ordinances applicable at the
time of the hearing on the final map.
         d.   All necessary certificates required by State law or by this title
have been presented with the application for approval of the final map.
      4.   If the map is disapproved, the Board shall also provide the
applicant with a written statement of what changes would be necessary to render
the map acceptable.
      5.   The Board shall, at the time of approval of the final map, accept or
reject any or all offers of dedication.
   C.   Appeal: The Board's action to deny the final land division map may be
appealed in accordance with the procedures of chapter 12 of this title. (Ord.
603, 11-1-2018)
15.605.07: FINAL LAND DIVISION MAP CONTENT:
   A.   Contents Of Final Map: Every final map shall include all data required
for the tentative map and all changes required as conditions of tentative map
approval, and shall contain contents required by Nevada Revised Statutes
278.472, and the following information:
      1.   All lots by number and actual acreage of each lot.
      2.   All roads or easements of access which exist and which the owner
intends to offer for dedication, all roads or easements or access which are
shown on the applicable master plan, and all roads or easements of access which
are specifically required by the tentative approval.
      3.   Any easements for public utilities which exist or are proposed.
      4.   Any existing or proposed easements for irrigation or drainage, and
any normally continuously flowing watercourses of any conveyance ditches or
other irrigation water structure within the proposed land division map.
      5.   An offer or offers to dedicate the utility and right-of-way
easements.
   B.   Final Map Certificates: The following certificates shall appear on the
final map and shall be combined when appropriate:
      1.   A certificate signed and acknowledged by the owner of land
consenting to the dedication of the roads and granting of the easements.
      2.   A certificate of the Director and the County Engineer certifying the
following:
         a.   That the map conforms to the approved tentative land division
map, and all conditions imposed upon such approval have been satisfied.
         b.   That all the improvements have been installed in accordance with
the requirements of these regulations, or adequate assurances have been
provided that improvements will be completed and maintained in accordance with
this title.
         c.   That the County has accepted or deferred any land offered for
dedication for public use in conformity with the terms of the offer of
dedication.
      3.   If the property includes, impacts, or is adjacent to an irrigation
or drainage ditch, a certificate of the appropriate Irrigation and/or
Conservation District stating that all irrigation water conveyance facilities
and associated access and maintenance easements or rights-of-way are depicted
on the map and that all required improvements have been completed.
      4.   A certificate stating that each holder of record as a security
interest consents to the preparation and recordation of the boundary line
adjustment record of survey map. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 607, 9-19-
2019)
15.605.08: EFFECT OF APPROVAL:
No vested rights shall accrue to the owner or developer of any division of land
into large parcels by reason of the approval of a tentative or final map for
division into large parcels approval until the actual signing of the final map
by all parties required to sign the map and it has been recorded by the County
Recorder. All requirements, conditions or regulations adopted by the County
applicable to the division of land shall be deemed a condition for any division
prior to the time of signing of the final map. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.605.09: RECORDING:
   A.   Recording Of The Map: The developer shall file the official final map
with the County Recorder once all of the final map certificates have been
signed by the appropriate agency/utility/district representatives. Prior to
recordation, the final map shall be provided to the county engineer in form and
format compatible with the county geographic information system (GIS). The
scale of the map, improvements, monuments, and other information shall be
placed in the model space correctly oriented to the coordinate system as
approved by the public works director.
   B.   Effect Of Recording: Recording of the final map operates as a
continuing:
      1.   Offer to dedicate for public roads the areas shown as proposed roads
or easements of access, which the County may accept in whole or in part at any
time or from time to time.
      2.   Offer to grant the easements shown for public utilities, which any
public utility may similarly accept without excluding any other public utility
whose presence is physically compatible.
   C.   Conveyances: After a map has been filed with the County Recorder and
recorded, any lot shown thereon may be conveyed by reference to the map,
without further description. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 607, 9-19-2019)
CHAPTER 606
PARCEL MAPS
SECTION:
15.606.01: Purpose
15.606.02: Parcel Map Required
15.606.03: Survey Required
15.606.04: Submittal Of Tentative Parcel Map
15.606.05: Data To Accompany Tentative Parcel Map
15.606.06: Form Of Tentative Parcel Map
15.606.07: Tentative Parcel Map Review Procedures
15.606.08: Submittal Of Final Parcel Map
15.606.09: Form Of Final Parcel Map
15.606.10: Contents Of Final Parcel Map
15.606.11: Review Procedures For Final Parcel Map
15.606.12: Appeals
15.606.13: Certificates And Statements
15.606.14: Recordation
15.606.15: Expiration Date
15.606.16: Waiver Of Parcel Map
15.606.17: Document Required If Parcel Map Waived
15.606.01: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to prescribe the requirements for, and waiver
of, parcel maps. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.606.02: PARCEL MAP REQUIRED:
A parcel map shall be required as set forth in this section.
   A.   Parcel Map Required: A parcel map shall be required for all
subdivisions, merger and re-subdivision of existing lots, and common-interest
communities consisting of four (4) or fewer units, except as provided in this
section.
   B.   Exempt Divisions: A parcel map is not required when the division is for
the express purpose of:
      1.   The creation or realignment of a public right-of-way by a public
agency;
      2.   The creation or realignment of an easement;
      3.   An adjustment of the boundary line between two (2) abutting parcels
or the transfer of land between two (2) owners of abutting parcels which does
not result in the creation of any additional parcels;
      4.   The purchase, transfer or development of space within an apartment
building or an industrial or commercial building; or
      5.   Carrying out an order of any court of dividing land as a result of
an operation of law;
      6.   Creation of cemetery plots;
      7.   A division of land for agricultural purposes in conformance with
Nevada Revised Statutes 278.320, paragraph 5.
   C.   Exempt Transactions: A parcel map is not required for any of the
following transactions involving land:
      1.   The creation of a lien, mortgage, deed of trust, or any other
security instrument;
      2.   The creation of a security or unit of interest in any investment
trust regulated under the laws of this State or any other interest in an
investment entity;
      3.   Conveying an interest in oil, gas, minerals or building materials
which are severed from the surface ownership of real property;
      4.   Conveying an interest in land acquired by the Department of
Transportation pursuant to chapter 408 of Nevada Revised Statutes; or
      5.   Filing a certificate of amendment.
   D.   Waiver: A parcel map may be waived pursuant to section
15.606.16, "Waiver Of Parcel Map", of this chapter.
The following land divisions are eligible for consideration of a waiver:
      1.   Creation of sites for utility services, such as well sites, pump
stations, transformer boxes, as long as the utility is a regulated utility or
operated by a government entity. A waiver will require conformance with section
15.606.17, "Document Required If Parcel Map Waived", of this chapter.
   E.   Separate Lots: When two (2) or more separate lots, parcels, sites,
units or plots of land are purchased, they remain separate for the purposes of
this chapter.
   F.   Conveyance: When lots, parcels, sites, units or plots are resold or
conveyed, they are exempt from the provisions of this section until further
division of the lots, parcels, sites, units or plots is proposed. (Ord. 603,
11-1-2018)
15.606.03: SURVEY REQUIRED:
A parcel map shall be based on a survey made for that purpose, unless this
requirement is waived by the County Surveyor within forty five (45) days of the
submittal of an application for the waiver, unless this time is extended by
mutual consent. The requirement of a survey may be waived if, in the judgment
of the County Surveyor, a survey is not required to accomplish the purposes of
this chapter. Failure of the County Surveyor to act on the waiver request
within the time prescribed in this section shall result in approval of the
waiver. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.606.04: SUBMITTAL OF TENTATIVE PARCEL MAP:
A tentative parcel map must be submitted to the department for the purpose of
review prior to or concurrent with submittal of the final parcel map. Every
tentative parcel map shall be prepared by a professional land surveyor licensed
in the State of Nevada and shall contain the following data:
   A.   Existing Parcels: Boundary lines and dimensions of the parcel being
divided, regulatory zone designation, and date of creation of the parcel being
proposed to be subdivided.
   B.   Merger And Resubdivision Of Pre-Existing Parcels: Pre- existing,
contiguous parcels held under the same ownership may be merged into a single
parcel with a simultaneous resubdivision of that parcel as proposed in the
tentative parcel map.
   C.   Proposed Parcels: Proposed division lines using solid lines with
dimensions of each parcel being created and required setbacks of each parcel
being created that meet the requirements of this chapter using lines that are
not solid.
   D.   Area: The area of the original parcel and of each proposed new parcel.
   E.   Rights-Of-Way: Names, locations and widths of all streets, alleys or
rights-of-way adjoining the property showing relationships to the streets in
the proposed parcel map.
   F.   Easements: The dimensions and approximate location of all existing or
proposed road easements, slope and curve easements, conservation easements,
open space easements, recreation or trail easements, drainage easements, sewer
easements, water conveyance/irrigation ditch easements, or public utility
easements, whether for public or private purposes.
   G.   North Point And Scale: North arrow and scale of drawing.
   H.   Street Names: All street names, denoting if they are existing or
proposed.
   I.   Parcel Data: Parcel designation and a graphic border around the
proposed division. The area of each parcel and lot, and the total area of land
to be divided. If the area is two (2) acres or more, the area shall be
calculated to the nearest one- hundredth (1/100) of an acre. If the area is
less than two (2) acres, then the area shall be calculated in square feet.
   J.   Monuments: All monuments found, set, re-set, replaced or removed,
describing their size and location and other data.
   K.   Bearings: Bearing or witness monuments, basis of bearings, bearing and
length of lines, and scale of map.
   L.   Legal Designation: The name and legal designation of the tract or grant
in which the survey is located and any ties to adjoining tracts.
   M.   Date Of Survey: The date of the survey.
   N.   Owners: The owner or owners of the land to be divided.
   O.   Vicinity Map: A vicinity map of the location of the map.
   P.   Other Data: Any other data necessary for the intelligent interpretation
of the various items and locations of the points, lines, area shown and
required yards. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 607, 9-19-2019)
15.606.05: DATA TO ACCOMPANY TENTATIVE PARCEL MAP:
The following data shall accompany a tentative parcel map:
   A.   Owner: Name, legal address and telephone number of the owner of the
land. In addition, an affidavit from the legal owner of the land acknowledging
that a tentative parcel map is being prepared with his permission. If the
subdivider of the land is different from the owner of the land, the name, legal
address and telephone number of that person shall also be included.
   B.   Preparer: Name, address and telephone number of the person who prepared
the map.
   C.   Legal Description: Legal description of original parcel. It is
sufficient to give the County Recorder's book and page of deed or document and
the County Assessor's parcel number.
   D.   Zoning: Zoning designation for each parcel.
   E.   Proposed Use: Proposed use of each parcel.
   F.   Water Supply And Sewage: Source of water supply and proposed method of
sewage disposal for each parcel.
   G.   Survey Computations: A copy of all survey computations.
   H.   Existing Structures: If applicable, a map showing all structures
located on the property and their distances from the existing and proposed
property lines and each other, and all septic (including septic tank and leach
lines) and well locations.
   I.   Slope: A general indication of the slope of the land using contour
intervals of no greater than two feet (2') where slopes are less than ten
percent (10%), and no greater than five feet (5') where slopes exceed ten
percent (10%). (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 607, 9-19-2019)
15.606.06: FORM OF TENTATIVE PARCEL MAP:
The tentative parcel map shall be legibly drawn in permanent black ink on
material of a permanent nature generally used for such purposes in the
engineering profession. The size of each sheet must be 24 inches by 32 inches.
A marginal line must be drawn completely around each sheet, leaving an entirely
blank margin of one inch (1") at the top, bottom and right edges, and of two
inches (2") at the left edge along the twenty four inch (24") dimension. (Ord.
603, 11-1-2018)
15.606.07: TENTATIVE PARCEL MAP REVIEW PROCEDURES:
The review procedures for tentative parcel maps shall be as set forth in this
section.
   A.   Filing: The subdivider shall file with the department a complete
application and the required supporting materials as outlined in sections
15.606.04 and 15.606.05 of this chapter and the application packet. The
subdivider shall pay the required fees upon acceptance of a complete
application.
   B.   Application Review: The department will review the submitted packet and
accept or reject the application as complete within three (3) working days
after the published application submittal date. If the application is deemed
complete by the department, then the department shall distribute the parcel map
application to the appropriate reviewing agencies for comments regarding
compliance with their regulations, standards and policies. The department will
compile those comments into a staff report for the Planning Commission.
   C.   Action Required By The Planning Commission: The commission shall
approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the tentative parcel map within
sixty (60) days of the date that the application is determined to be complete,
unless the time limit is extended in writing by the mutual consent of the
subdivider and the commission. Failure of the commission to take action within
the time prescribed in this section shall result in approval of the parcel map.
   D.   Review Criteria: Prior to approving a tentative parcel map, the
commission shall determine that the following are or will be adequately
provided for:
      1.   General improvement considerations for all parcel maps including,
but not limited to:
         a.   Environmental and health laws and regulations concerning water
and air pollution, the disposal of solid waste, facilities to supply water,
community or public sewage disposal and, where applicable, individual systems
for sewage disposal;
         b.   The availability of water which meets applicable health standards
and is sufficient for the reasonably foreseeable needs of the subdivision;
         c.   Conformity with the zoning ordinances and master plan;
         d.   General conformity with the Governing Body's master plan of
streets and highways;
         e.   Physical characteristics of the land such as floodplain, slope
and soil;
         f.   The recommendations and comments of those entities reviewing the
tentative parcel map;
         g.   The availability and accessibility of fire protection including,
but not limited to, the availability and accessibility of water and services
for the prevention and containment of fires including fires in wild lands;
      2.   Where an applicant proposes to create parcels of less than one acre,
the commission may require additional improvements which are reasonably
necessary and consistent with the use of the land if it is developed as
proposed.
      3.   For a second or subsequent parcel map with respect to a single
parcel or a contiguous tract of land under the same ownership, the commission
may require any reasonable improvement up to those required for subdivisions.
   E.   Conditions: An approval of any tentative parcel map may be subject to
conditions relating to the items specified in subsection D, "Review Criteria",
of this section, as are reasonably necessary.
   F.   Notice Of Action: The applicant shall be notified in writing of the
decision of the commission. If the tentative parcel map is conditionally
approved, the notice of decision shall contain a statement of all conditions
imposed. If the tentative parcel map is disapproved, a statement of the reasons
for such disapproval shall be included.
   G.   No Guarantee Of Final Map Approval: Approval or conditional approval of
a tentative parcel map imposes no obligation on the part of the Director, or
the Board to approve the final parcel map or to accept any public dedication
shown on the tentative or final parcel map.
   H.   Cessation Of Further Action: Failure to submit a complete final parcel
map and pay the required fees within one year from the date of approval shall
render the tentative parcel map approval as expired. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.606.08: SUBMITTAL OF FINAL PARCEL MAP:
After approval or conditional approval of the tentative parcel map, the
applicant may submit a final parcel map for review. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.606.09: FORM OF FINAL PARCEL MAP:
The final parcel map shall be legibly drawn in permanent black ink on tracing
cloth or produced by the use of other materials of a permanent nature generally
used for such purpose in the engineering profession. The size of each sheet
must be 24 inches by 32 inches. A marginal line must be drawn completely around
each sheet, leaving an entirely blank margin of one inch (1") at the top,
bottom and right edges, and of two inches (2") at the left edge along the
twenty four inch (24") dimension. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.606.10: CONTENTS OF FINAL PARCEL MAP:
In addition to the information required by section
15.606.04 of this chapter, the following information must be shown on the final
parcel map:
   A.   Monuments: All monuments found, set, reset, replaced or removed,
describing their kind, location and giving other data relating thereto;
   B.   Oaths: A memorandum of oaths;
   C.   Surveyor: The signature of the Nevada licensed surveyor;
   D.   Owners: The signature of the owner or owners of the land to be divided;
   E.   Easements And Dedications: Any easements granted or dedications made
including, but not limited to, public utility access easements, water
conveyance/irrigation ditch maintenance access easements, public or private
access easements, and community water and wastewater system easements; and
   F.   Survey: Name of the person or persons for whom the survey on which the
map is based was made. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 607, 9-19-2019)
15.606.11: REVIEW PROCEDURES FOR FINAL PARCEL MAP:
The review procedures for final parcel maps shall be as set forth in this
section.
   A.   Filing: The subdivider shall file with the department and County
Engineer a final parcel map application and the required supporting materials
showing that all conditions imposed by the commission have been met within one
year of the date of approval of the tentative parcel map. The subdivider shall
pay the required fees upon the filing of the final parcel map.
   B.   Application Review: The department and County Engineer will review the
submitted final parcel map and supporting materials and recommend to the
Director acceptance or rejection of the map as complete within fourteen (14)
working days after submittal, unless the time limit is extended in writing by
the mutual consent of the subdivider and the Director.
   C.   Action Required By Director: Within twenty five (25) working days of
submittal of the final parcel map application, the Director shall determine
whether the conditions placed on the tentative parcel map approval have been
met. The final parcel map application shall be considered incomplete if the
Director cannot make a determination that all of the tentative map conditions
have been met. If the final parcel map is determined to be complete, the
Director shall approve or disapprove the map within thirty (30) working days of
the submittal date, unless the time limit is extended in writing by the mutual
consent of the subdivider and the Director.
   D.   Review Criteria: Prior to approving a final parcel map, the Director
shall determine that the following have been met:
      1.   Completion of all conditions imposed on the subdivision prior to
approval of the final parcel map or, in the alternative, acceptance by the
Director and County Engineer of a satisfactory guarantee of completion and
faithful performance of all conditions. The amount of the guarantee shall be in
a sum which, in the opinion of the County Engineer, equals one hundred fifty
percent (150%) of the cost of performance of the conditions. If a subdivider
fails to perform any condition within the time specified, the Board, upon
recommendation of the Director and County Engineer, may cause the guarantee to
be forfeited in an amount necessary to finish the uncompleted portion of the
work. If a security was previously posted to guarantee completion of
improvements for two (2) or more contiguous parcels and those improvements will
not be completed because of a merger and subsequent re-subdivision pursuant to
this chapter, a credit on a pro-rata basis of the security posted by the owner
shall be credited toward the financial assurance required for the parcel map
re-subdivision.
      2.   Completion of all certificates and statements required by section
15.606.13 of this chapter.
   E.   Notice Of Action: The applicant shall be notified in writing of the
decision of the Director. If the final parcel map is disapproved, a statement
of the reasons for such disapproval shall be included. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.606.12: APPEALS:
All appeals regarding tentative and final parcel maps shall be made as provided
in this section.
   A.   Process For Tentative Parcel Map: For thirty (30) days following the
notification of the decision, a decision of the commission may be appealed to
the Board.
      1.   The statement of appeal shall be filed with the department, set
forth the particular actions or conditions appealed, the reasons for the
appeal, and shall be accompanied by all supporting documentation.
      2.   The department shall set an appeal hearing before the Board within
thirty (30) days of receipt of a complete statement of appeal.
      3.   If the Board fails to render a decision after sixty (60) days of the
scheduled appeal hearing, the appeal shall be deemed to have been decided in
favor of the appellant.
   B.   Process For Final Parcel Map: For fifteen (15) days following the
notification of the decision, a decision of the Director to deny a final parcel
map may be appealed to the Board.
      1.   The statement of appeal shall be filed with the department, set
forth the particular actions or conditions appealed, the reasons for the
appeal, and shall be accompanied by all supporting documentation.
      2.   The department shall set an appeal hearing before the Board within
thirty (30) days of receipt of a complete statement of appeal.
      3.   If the Board fails to render a decision after sixty (60) days of the
scheduled appeal hearing, the appeal shall be deemed to have been decided in
favor of the appellant.
   C.   Final Action On Appeal: The Board shall take action on the appeal
within the time prescribed above.
      1.   The Board may impose additional conditions on the parcel map,
provided the conditions are related to the review criteria in section
15.606.07 of this chapter.
      2.   Any disapproval or conditional approval must include a statement of
the reason for that action and must be acted upon by an affirmative vote of a
majority of the full membership of the Board. In the case of a tie vote due to
the absence of a member, the appeal shall be continued to a future meeting
unless requested otherwise by the appellant.
   D.   Notice Of Final Action: Within ten (10) days of the final action, the
Director shall report to the applicant concerning the decision of the Board.
Such report shall contain, at a minimum, any additional conditions placed upon
the parcel map, the statement of the reason for the final action, and a
statement that the Board's decision is final for the purpose of judicial
review. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.606.13: CERTIFICATES AND STATEMENTS:
Language satisfying the intent of the following certificates and statements
shall appear on a parcel map before it can be filed for record. Final parcel
maps that have been approved for recordation prior to the date of adoption of
this title, but which have not been recorded, shall not be required to comply
with this section.
   A.   Certificate Of Director: A certificate for execution by the Director
stating that the map has been approved for subdivision purposes and accepted or
rejected on behalf of the public any parcel of land, or portion of a parcel,
offered for dedication for public use in conformity with the terms of the offer
of dedication. If the final parcel map includes a merger of pre- existing lots
and the re-subdivision of those lots, the certificate shall acknowledge that
any public streets, easements or utility easements that will not remain were
abandoned pursuant to chapter 601 of this title.
   B.   Certificate Of Surveyor: A certificate by the Nevada licensed surveyor
responsible for the parcel map giving the date of survey on which the map is
based, and stating that the survey was made by him or under his direction and
setting forth the name of the owner who authorized him to make the survey, and
that the parcel map is true and complete as shown. This certificate shall also
state:
      1.   That the monuments are of the character and occupy the position
indicated or that they will be set in such positions and at such time as is
agreed upon under the provisions of chapter 278 of Nevada Revised Statutes;
      2.   That the monuments are or will be sufficient to enable the survey to
be retraced; and
      3.   The completion date.
   C.   Certificate Of Record Title Owner: A certificate signed and
acknowledged by all persons having any record title in the land subdivided,
evidencing their grant or permanent easements for utility installations and
access, as designated on the map.
   D.   Certificate Of Public Utilities Concerning Easements: A statement
acknowledging such easements, signed by each public utility company or agency
in whose favor the easements are created or whose utility services are to be
required for the platted parcels. It is the responsibility of the applicant to
obtain acknowledgement of serving utility companies as to location of any
utility easements which are to be shown on the parcel map.
   E.   Statement From County Treasurer: A written statement by the County
Treasurer indicating that all Property Taxes on the land have been paid for the
period identified in Nevada Revised Statutes 278.
   F.   Guarantee Of Title: A subdivision guarantee of title, in a form
acceptable to the County Engineer and District Attorney, issued by a competent
title company to and for the benefit and protection of the County. Said
guarantee of title shall be continued complete up to the instant of filing the
final map with the County Recorder, guaranteeing that the names of all persons
whose consent is necessary to pass a clear title to the land being subdivided,
and all public easements being offered for dedication, and all acknowledgements
thereto, appear on the proper statements and are correctly shown on the map,
both as to contents as to the making thereof and affidavits of dedication where
necessary.
   G.   Certificate Of The County Utility Department Or Other Utility
Concerning Water Right Dedications: A certificate for execution by the County
Utilities Director or other applicable authorized utility representative
stating that the provisions of chapter 110 of this title related to the
dedication of water resources have been satisfied.
   H.   If the property includes, impacts, or is adjacent to an irrigation or
drainage ditch, a certificate of the appropriate irrigation ditch company and/
or conservation district stating that all irrigation water conveyance
facilities and associated access and maintenance easements or rights-of-way are
depicted on the map and that all required improvements have been completed.
   I.   A certificate stating that each holder of record of a security interest
consents to the preparation and recordation of the boundary line adjustment
record of survey map. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 607, 9-19-2019)
15.606.14: RECORDATION:
The approved parcel map with the certificates and statements set forth in
section
15.606.13 of this chapter and the required filing fee advanced by the owner
shall be transmitted to the County Recorder by the subdivider for recording and
filing. The land division is complete when the approved parcel map with its
required certificates and statements have been filed in the Office of the
County Recorder within one year from the date of approval of the tentative
parcel map. There shall be no extension of this time period. The recordation
time shall be extended as a part of the one year time period set forth in this
section should an appeal be filed with the Director until the date of the Board
action on the appeal plus an additional ten (10) days.
Prior to recordation, the final parcel map shall be provided to the County
Engineer in form and format compatible with the county geographic information
system (GIS). The scale of the map, improvements, monuments, and other
information shall be placed in the model space correctly oriented to the
coordinate system as approved by the Public Works Director. The cover/signature
sheet and standard details sheet need not be included. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018;
amd. Ord. 607, 9-19-2019)
15.606.15: EXPIRATION DATE:
Failure of the subdivider to record an approved parcel map within one year from
the date of approval of the tentative parcel map requires that all proceedings
on the parcel map terminate, and a new application shall be required. There
shall be no extension of this time frame. The expiration date shall be extended
as part of the one year time period set forth in this section should an appeal
be filed. The expiration date for an approved tentative parcel map shall become
the date of the Board action on the appeal plus an additional ten (10) days. If
an approved parcel map is not recorded within the time frames listed above, all
proceedings concerning the parcel map are terminated. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.606.16: WAIVER OF PARCEL MAP:
The requirement for filing a parcel map for divisions of land into four (4) or
less parcels may be waived by the commission, if it finds all the following:
   A.   Conformity With Laws: That the proposed division of land complies with
chapter 278 of Nevada Revised Statutes and this title;
   B.   Conformity With Regulations: That the proposed division of land
conforms to State and County requirements as to area, improvement and design,
and flood water drainage control;
   C.   Environmental Effects: That the proposed division of land will not have
an adverse effect on the environment;
   D.   Conformity With Master Plan: That the proposed division of land
conforms to the Lyon County Comprehensive Master Plan, including community
plans and any specific plans adopted by the County;
   E.   Change In Nonconformity: That no existing nonconformity with the other
divisions in this title will be increased;
   F.   Conformity With Other Ordinances: That the proposed division of land
complies with all other County ordinances;
   G.   Lack Of Need: That unusual circumstances exist so that a parcel map is
not necessary to insure proper legal description of property and proper
monuments are in place to identify the location of property lines; and
   H.   Facilities: That appropriate improved public roads, adequate sanitary
disposal facilities, and adequate water supplies are available. (Ord. 603, 11-
1-2018)
15.606.17: DOCUMENT REQUIRED IF PARCEL MAP WAIVED:
If the requirement for a parcel map is waived by the commission, said
requirement having been waived within sixty (60) days of the date of the
request to waive the tentative map requirement, the applicant shall comply with
the provisions of this section.
   A.   Document Recordation: The County Surveyor may require the applicant to
prepare and record a document which contains:
      1.   A legal description of all parts based on a system of rectangular
surveys;
      2.   A provision for the dedication or reservation of any road right-of-
way or easement; and
      3.   The approval of the authority which granted the waiver.
   B.   Description Of Metes And Bounds: The County Surveyor shall require a
description of metes and bounds if necessary to describe the parcel division.
The description shall be prepared by a Nevada licensed professional land
surveyor with a signature and stamp.
   C.   Waiver: The person preparing the document shall include the following
statement:
This document was prepared from existing information (identifying the existing
information and stating where the information is filed and recorded) and the
undersigned assumes no responsibility for the existence of monuments or
correctness of other information shown on or copied from any prior documents.
   D.   Statement Indicating That No Property Taxes Delinquent: A document
recorded pursuant to this section shall be accompanied by a written statement
by the County Treasurer indicating that all Property Taxes on the land have
been paid pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 278. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
CHAPTER 607
SUBDIVISION APPLICATION PROCEDURE AND APPROVAL PROCESS
SECTION:
15.607.01: General Requirements
15.607.02: Tentative Subdivision Map Procedures
15.607.03: Tentative Subdivision Map Findings
15.607.04: Conditions And Phasing Of Maps
15.607.05: Duration, Extension, And Amendment Of Tentative Subdivision Map
15.607.06: Procedures For Final Subdivision Map
15.607.07: Effect Of Approval
15.607.08: Signing And Recording Of Final Subdivision Map
15.607.09: Reversion Of Final Subdivision Map
15.607.10: Procedures For Planned Development Applications
15.607.01: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   General Procedures: All subdivision applications shall be processed in
two (2) stages:
      1.    Application for tentative map approval; and
      2.    Application for final map approval.
The Director shall be the designated official. The Board shall be the final
decision maker for purposes of tentative subdivision maps and the Director
shall be the final decision maker for the purposes of final subdivision maps,
except as otherwise provided.
   B.   Pre-Application Conference: Before preparing the tentative subdivision
map, the subdivider shall meet with County staff and the appropriate outside
reviewing agencies and conduct a preliminary review of the tentative
subdivision map application to discuss the procedure for approval of a
tentative subdivision map and the requirements as to the general layout of
streets and for reservations of land, street improvements, drainage, sewerage,
fire protection, and similar matters, as well as the availability of existing
services, including schools.
   C.   Applicability: All owners of land or their authorized representatives
who propose to divide any land or portion thereof, vacant or unimproved, for
transfer or development into five (5) or more lots, parcels, sites, units or
plots, or to create a commercial or industrial subdivision, pursuant to Nevada
Revised Statutes 278.325, shall file an application for approval of a tentative
subdivision map.
The term "subdivision" does not apply to:
      1.   A division of land into large parcels which creates lots, parcels,
sites, units or plots of land, each of which comprises forty (40) nominal acres
or more of land including roads and roadway easements, and is subject to
chapter 605 of this title;
      2.   Any division of land which is ordered by any court in this State or
created by operation of law;
      3.   A lien, mortgage, deed of trust or any other security instrument,
provided, however, that creation or foreclosure of such an instrument on a
portion of a larger parcel shall not result in the division of the larger
parcel;
      4.   A security or unit of interest in any investment trust regulated
under the laws of the State or any other interest in an investment entity;
      5.   Cemetery lots; or
      6.   An interest in oil, gas, minerals or building materials which are
now or hereafter severed from the surface ownership of the real property. (Ord.
603, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 627, 6-7-2022)
15.607.02: TENTATIVE SUBDIVISION MAP PROCEDURES:
   A.   Application: The landowner or his authorized representative shall
submit a complete tentative map application with the department in accordance
with the established and published submittal schedule. The application shall
contain the following items:
      1.   A Subdivision Feasibility Analysis containing the following
components:
         a.   Water Availability: Information as to how domestic water service
will be provided including status and source of required water rights, and
availability of water that meets applicable health standards and is sufficient
in quantity for the reasonably foreseeable needs required for the land
development and proposed land use, and a written statement of the ability and
willingness of a water utility to provide water service to the proposed
development.
         b.   Electricity Availability: Name of the utility company that will
serve the area and a written statement of the ability and willingness of such
company to provide electrical power to the proposed development.
         c.   Telephone Availability: Name of the telephone company that will
serve the area and a written statement of the ability and willingness of such
company to provide telephone service to the proposed development.
         d.   Natural Gas Availability: Name of utility company that will serve
the area and a written statement of the ability and willingness of such company
to provide natural gas service to the proposed development.
         e.   Sewage Disposal: Information as to how sewage disposal will be
provided and a written statement of the ability and willingness of any
applicable utility to provide sewage disposal service to the proposed
development, or evidence that on-site sewage disposal is possible based on an
analysis of the soils, groundwater levels, and sub-surface geologic conditions.
         f.   Fire Protection: Provide information regarding the Fire District
within which the proposed development is located and distance from the nearest
firefighting equipment. Identify the availability and accessibility of fire
protection, including, but not limited to, the availability and accessibility
of water and services for the prevention and containment of fires, including
wildland fires.
         g.   Schools: Proximity to existing schools and school bus service, if
such service is operating within the vicinity of the proposed development.
         h.   Parks And Recreational Areas: Parks and recreational facilities
in the general area of the proposed development; distance and access to such
facilities.
         i.   Commercial And Shopping Areas: Distance and access to the closest
commercial and shopping facilities from the proposed development.
         j.   Road Construction And Maintenance: Proposed maintenance plan for
both access roads and roads within the subdivision; general timetable for
construction of such roads; plan for maintenance until public maintenance is
secured; type of anticipated public maintenance - State, County, city or
general improvement district.
         k.   Restrictive Covenants: Proposed restrictive covenants applicable
to the subdivision or development.
         l.   Adjacent Ownership And Use: Present legal owner of properties
adjacent to the proposed subdivision; and present use and zoning of all
adjacent properties.
         m.   Traffic Impacts: Identify all roads, streets and highways that
will be affected by the development. Identify the effect of the proposed
subdivision on existing public roads and streets and the need for new roads,
streets or highways to serve the subdivision. Provide a traffic study prepared
by a traffic engineer licensed to practice in the State of Nevada if the
subdivision will meet or exceed eighty (80) peak hour vehicle trips or five
hundred (500) average daily vehicle trips.
         n.   Drainage Study And Stormwater Impact Analysis: Identify existing
natural and constructed stormwater structures, proposed stormwater management
concepts and general impacts from and on surrounding property. Provide a
drainage study and stormwater impact analysis prepared by a civil engineer
licensed to practice in the State of Nevada in conformance with the Lyon County
Drainage Guidelines.
         o.   Solid Waste Disposal: Identify the method and availability of
solid waste disposal.
         p.   Soils Report, Geotechnical Analysis, And Land Capability
Analysis: Identify the physical characteristics of the land such as floodplain,
slope, vegetation and soil. Provide a soils report, geotechnical analysis and
land capability analysis prepared by a geological engineer licensed to practice
in the State of Nevada.
         q.   Location And Placement: If applicable, a map showing the
location, by distance from existing and proposed property lines of all above
ground structures, the placement on the property of all existing structures and
other manmade features including buildings, irrigation ditches, utility poles,
fences, driveways and accesses, signs, existing wells, sewers, septic systems
(including leach lines), culverts, bridges, drain pipes, fire hydrants and
sand, gravel or other excavations within the subdivision. Indicate which
existing structures and uses will remain and which will be removed.
         r.   Zoning And Master Plan Designations And Land Uses: Zoning and
master plan designations and land uses of adjoining properties, including
across any rights-of-way. Indicate distance from property line to any off-site
structures that are within twenty five feet (25') of property line;
      2.   A description of all contiguous holdings of the owner, including
land in the same ownership with indication of the portion of the property which
is to be subdivided;
      3.   The number of copies of the tentative subdivision map, with contents
as prescribed in the application form;
      4.   A certificate from the County Treasurer stating that no taxes or
assessments are delinquent;
      5.   A statement as to whether the subdivision is to be developed in
phases and a conceptual phasing plan;
      6.   Documentation indicating that all applicable fees and application
materials have been submitted to the Nevada Division of Environmental
Protection, Water Quality Division;
      7.   Copies of all applicable "will serve" or "intent to serve" letters
from the utility providers;
      8.   Copies of all applicable special studies and reports;
      9.   Other information necessary for review of the tentative subdivision
map required by the Director.
   B.   Contents Of Tentative Subdivision Map: Every tentative subdivision map
shall show, at minimum, the following data and information:
      1.   List of the names, addresses and telephone numbers of the owners of
record, subdivider and the engineer or surveyor preparing the map;
      2.   List of the names, addresses and telephone numbers of public utility
companies which will serve the subject property, including water supply and
method of sewage disposal;
      3.   A north point, scale, date, boundary line and dimensions of the
project. The direction of the north arrow should be shown pointing towards the
top or right hand side of the map;
      4.   Show the entire assessor's parcel, identify any remainder portion,
and any contiguous properties under common ownership (whole or partial
ownership);
      5.   Legal description of the land included within the tentative
subdivision map sufficient to define the boundaries of the map. Note: A portion
of a section is not sufficient. If the boundary is by metes and bounds, that
description shall be on the tentative map;
      6.   The parcel layout, the approximate dimensions of each lot, where
pads are proposed for building sites, the approximate pad elevation, the
elevations of all adjacent parcels, the top and toe of cut and fill slopes to
scale, preliminary design and approximate finish of all grading, and a number
for each parcel utilizing consecutive numbers. Any portion of property in
common contiguous ownership not included in the map shall be labeled as a
remainder parcel;
      7.   In tabular form, indicate the approximate acreage, the number of
lots, proposed density, existing and proposed zoning and master plan
designations, proposed use of lots, number of linear feet of new streets, and
acreage of any remainder parcels/open space parcels;
      8.   The street, approximate gradient or centerline profile for each
proposed highway, street easement and drainage improvement shown of the
tentative subdivision map;
      9.   Note the width and approximate locations of all existing and
proposed easements or rights-of-way, including any proposed to be abandoned as
part of the subdivision map whether for public or private roads, irrigation
ditches, drainage, sewers, utilities (overhead and underground) or flood
control purposes, shown by dashed lines. Overhead utility lines on peripheral
streets shall also be indicated. Existing easements shall show the name of the
easement holder, purpose of easement, and legal reference (official records)
for the easement. If an easement is blanket or intermittent in nature, a
legible note to this effect shall be placed on the tentative map;
      10.   Note of the approximate radius of all centerline curves on
highways, streets or ways;
      11.   The locations of all areas subject to inundation or flood hazard
and the locations, width, and directions of flow of all watercourses and flood
control areas within and adjacent to the property involved. Include community
panel number, date of the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) index map, and the
method for handling stormwater;
      12.   The tentative subdivision map must show contour of land at
intervals of not more than two feet (2') if the general slope of the land is
less than the ten percent (10%) and five feet (5') for all other areas. This
shall include an area of not less than one hundred feet (100') surrounding the
tentative subdivision map. Indicate contour interval and the source and date
the contours were compiled;
      13.   Vicinity map of the area showing the proposed subdivision map in
relation to any established roads or other landmarks so that the site can be
easily located. Indicate the proposed access route to the site from the nearest
public maintained road;
      14.   On a subdivision map consisting of a condominium project or a
planned development, the tentative subdivision map shall show, by dashed lines,
the approximate location from all existing and proposed property lines and
building envelopes and other structures to be erected and the designated open
space areas;
      15.   The identity and location of any existing or proposed drainage
conveyance ditches and/or other irrigation water conveyance structure within or
adjacent to the proposed subdivision. The subdivision map shall also provide
dimensioned typical channel cross sections with centerline, average slope
through the property, arrows indicating direction of flow, and design flow
capacity of conveyance structures. If the proposed subdivision includes water
impoundment there must be identification of the source of water and
documentation of the State Engineer's approval for the water rights.
   C.   Processing By Director: The Director or his designee will distribute
copies of the tentative subdivision map and accompanying materials to all
agencies charged by statute. The Director will determine within three (3)
working days after the published application submittal date whether the
application for a tentative subdivision map is complete, and notify the
applicant, in writing, of his finding. In addition to the notice to the
applicant, notice shall be given to any conveyance ditch users adjacent to or
downstream of the proposed map. The ditch users to be notified shall be
determined from the appropriate Irrigation District and/or Conservation
District where the subdivision is located. If complete, and applicable fees are
tendered and collected, the Director will file his report with the commission
and schedule the application for public hearing.
   D.   Hearing Notice And Procedure: Notice of the hearings before the
commission and the Board shall be provided in accordance with chapters 9 and 10
of this title. Hearings shall be held in accordance with the procedures
established in chapters 6 and 7 of this title.
   E.   Planning Commission Recommendation: Within sixty (60) days after the
official filing date, the commission shall hear the application and recommend
to the Board approval, conditional approval or disapproval of the tentative
subdivision map in accordance with the procedures established in chapter 6 of
this title, unless the time period is extended by mutual consent of the
applicant and the commission. The commission shall set forth findings and
reasons for its decision in accordance with the criteria identified in section
15.607.03 of this chapter.
   F.   Decision By Board: Within thirty (30) days after receipt of the
commission's recommendation, unless the time is extended by mutual consent of
the applicant and the Board, the Board shall conduct a public hearing, and
approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the tentative subdivision map. The
review and decision of the Board shall conform to the provisions of chapter 7
of this title and include findings and reasons for its decision in accordance
with the criteria identified in section
15.607.03 of this chapter. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.607.03: TENTATIVE SUBDIVISION MAP FINDINGS:
   A.   The commission in making its recommendation and the Board in rendering
a decision on the tentative subdivision map shall base its decision on the
requirements of Nevada Revised Statutes and make affirmative findings on the
following factors, taking into account the recommendations of reviewing
agencies:
      1.   The property to be subdivided is zoned for the intended uses and the
density and design of the subdivision conforms to the requirements of the
zoning regulations contained in this title;
      2.   If located within a planned unit development, the tentative
subdivision map conforms to the density requirements, lot dimension standards
and other design standards regulations approved for the planned unit
development;
      3.   The tentative subdivision map conforms to public facilities and
improvement standards contained in this title;
      4.   The tentative subdivision map conforms to the improvement and design
standards contained in this title and adopted design criteria and improvement
standards;
      5.   If applicable, that a phasing plan has been submitted and is deemed
acceptable;
      6.   There are no delinquent taxes or assessments on the land to be
subdivided, as certified by the County Treasurer;
      7.   The project complies with all environmental and health laws and
regulations concerning water and air pollution, the disposal of solid waste,
facilities to supply water, community or public sewage disposal and, where
applicable, individual systems for sewage disposal;
      8.   The availability of water which meets applicable health standards
and is sufficient in quantity for the reasonably foreseeable needs of the
subdivision;
      9.   There is adequate access and availability to public services such as
schools, police protection, transportation, recreation and parks;
      10.   The project is in general conformity with the Lyon County
Comprehensive Master Plan, the local community plan, if adopted, and the master
plan of streets and highways;
      11.   The project will have no adverse impacts, or provides adequate
mitigation of adverse impacts, to existing public streets;
      12.   The physical characteristics of the land such as floodplain, slope
and soil have been considered and provisions to adequately mitigate adverse
impacts of development on the environment have been incorporated;
      13.   The project demonstrates availability and accessibility of fire
protection services, including, but not limited to, the availability and
accessibility of water and services for the prevention and containment of
fires, including fires in wild lands. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.607.04: CONDITIONS AND PHASING OF MAPS:
In addition to all other conditions that may be recommended by the commission
and required by the Board pursuant to chapter 7 of this title in reviewing a
tentative subdivision map, the following actions may be taken:
   A.   Except as otherwise provided, as a condition of tentative subdivision
map approval, the commission may recommend and the Board may require that the
subdivider install and dedicate to the County all public improvements, whether
on-site or off-site, prior to the signing of the final subdivision map by the
Director. In lieu of such requirement, the Board shall require that the
subdivider provide adequate assurances for completion and maintenance of
improvements.
   B.   The commission may recommend and the Board may require as a condition
of tentative subdivision map approval that the subdivider divide the
subdivision into two (2) or more phases, provided as follows:
      1.   Each phase must be designed to meet the public facilities and
improvement standards independently and as part of the overall design.
      2.   Unless a longer time is provided in a development agreement or an
agreement pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 278.350, the final map must be
approved and recorded for the initial phase within four (4) years of tentative
subdivision map approval, and the final map for each subsequent phase must be
approved and recorded within two (2) years following recording of the final map
for the previous phase. The Board may grant a single extension of two (2) years
for final map approval for each phase.
      3.   Unless a longer time is provided in a development agreement or an
agreement pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 278.350, all phases must be
completed, and all final maps approved and recorded, within ten (10) years of
the date of initial subdivision map approval by the Director.
      4.   Amendment of the approval to permit development beyond the initial
ten (10) year period will require submission and approval of a new tentative
subdivision map application, and the approval may be conditioned on compliance
with statutes, codes, design standards, fees and capital improvements plans
current at the time of application for such amendment.
      5.   The Board and the applicant may enter and adopt a development
agreement, pursuant to chapter 110 of this title, to implement the provisions
of this chapter.
   C.   Where an industrial or commercial subdivision is proposed pursuant to
Nevada Revised Statutes 278.325, and the subdivider desires to record a single
final map without the completion or securing of improvements, the Board may
approve the map and allow recording of the final map subject to the following:
      1.   A conceptual development phasing plan is submitted concurrently with
the tentative map indicating the proposed development phasing, including a
general description of improvements, on-site and off-site to be constructed
with each development phase.
      2.   Improvement plans are to be submitted and approved for the entire
project site. The improvement plans shall be subject to modification, based on
changes to this title or the County design criteria and improvement standards
as they relate to public health and safety.
      3.   A security agreement shall be prepared and approved subsequent to
the filing of the final map, consistent with this title. In addition to the
standard provisions, the plan must provide a detailed description of on-site
and off-site improvements to be provided prior to the issuance of a building
permit within a given development phase.
      4.   No building permit will be issued on the site until any and all
required improvements are constructed or secured, and provided that those
improvements required for fire protection and emergency access are in place.
(Ord. 603, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 627, 6-7-2022)
15.607.05: DURATION, EXTENSION, AND AMENDMENT OF TENTATIVE SUBDIVISION MAP:
   A.   The subdivider shall present to the Director a final subdivision map,
prepared in accordance with the tentative subdivision map. The map shall cover
the entire area for which the tentative subdivision map was approved, or one of
a series of final subdivision maps, each covering one or more phases of the
approved tentative subdivision map. Unless a longer time is provided in a
development agreement or an agreement pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes
278.350, the final map covering the entire subdivision or the first of a series
of final maps covering a portion of the approved tentative map shall be
recorded within four (4) years after the date of approval of tentative
subdivision map by the Board. If the subdivider elects to present a successive
map in a series of final maps, the final map must be approved and recorded for
the initial phase within four (4) years of tentative subdivision map approval,
and the final map for each subsequent phase must be approved and recorded
within two (2) years following recording of the final map for the previous
phase. The Board may grant a single extension of two (2) years for final map
approval for each phase.
   B.   The Board may extend the period for presentation of final successive
subdivision map covering a portion of the approved tentative map for not more
than two (2) years after the expiration of the two-year period for presenting
the successive final subdivision map. If the subdivider is presenting in a
timely manner a series of final maps, each covering a portion of the approved
tentative map, no requirements other than those imposed on each of the final
maps in the series may be placed on the map when an extension of time is
granted unless the requirement is directly attributable to a change in
applicable laws which affect the public health, safety or welfare. Extension
applications must be accompanied by the applicable fee and written statement of
justification, and must be filed forty five (45) days prior to the expiration
of the final map.
   C.   At any time after tentative subdivision map approval, and before the
time required for presentation of a final subdivision map, the subdivider may
request amendment to the approval or conditional approval of the tentative
subdivision map. The Director may approve minor tentative subdivision map
amendments in accordance with section
15.601.02 of this title. Major amendments shall be determined in accordance
with the procedures for original approval of the tentative subdivision map
under this chapter. Additional conditions may be attached to approval of the
tentative subdivision map amendment which are reasonably related to the
proposed amendment. A subdivider who is unwilling to accept conditions attached
to the proposed amendment may withdraw the amendment. Action on the application
for amendment of the tentative subdivision map shall not stay the period for
presenting the final subdivision map, unless a request for extension pursuant
to subsection B of this section is approved.
   D.   If the subdivider fails to comply with the provisions of subsections A
and B of this section, all proceedings concerning the subdivision including
approvals are terminated. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 627, 6-7-2022)
15.607.06: PROCEDURES FOR FINAL SUBDIVISION MAP:
   A.   Application Requirements: Following approval of the tentative
subdivision map, a subdivider who wishes to proceed with the subdivision shall
file with the department an application for approval of a final subdivision
map. The application shall be prepared on a form provided by the department.
The Director shall be the final decision maker for approval of a final
subdivision map.
The application shall contain the following information:
      1.   At least five (5) printed copies of the final subdivision map and at
least one electronic copy of the final subdivision map in the form required by
subsection B of this section, containing all required certificates and
acknowledgments required by subsection C of this section, one copy of the
closure calculations, all documents required as conditions of tentative map
approval, and the fee(s) set by the Board;
      2.   A certificate from the County Treasurer stating that taxes and
assessments are paid in full;
      3.   A complete site improvement permit application as outlined in
chapter 15.234 for on-site and off-site improvements associated with the
subdivision, the site improvement permit application filing fee, the itemized
civil engineer's estimate and the surety to cover one hundred fifty percent
(150%) of the civil engineer's estimated value of work;
      4.   Written documentation of the status of all conditions of approval
for the tentative map;
      5.   Other items listed on the application form.
   B.   Form: The final map shall be clearly and legibly drawn in permanent
black ink on material of a permanent nature generally used for such purposes in
the engineering profession, including affidavits, certificates and
acknowledgments. Each sheet shall be twenty-four inches (24") by thirty-two
inches (32") in size. A margin line shall be drawn completely around each sheet
showing an entirely blank margin of one inch (1") at the bottom, top and right
and two inches (2") on the left edge on the twenty four inch (24") dimension.
The scale of the map shall be not less than one inch equals one hundred (100)
feet (1" = 100'). The particular number of the sheet and the total number of
sheets comprising the map shall be so stated on each of the sheets and the
number in relation to each adjoining sheet shall be clearly shown. The title
sheet shall contain the location of the property being divided with references
to maps that have been previously recorded or by reference to the plat of the
United States survey. The contents are as follows:
      1.   Affidavits, certificates, acknowledgments, endorsements, acceptances
of dedication, and the notarial seals required by law and this title. These may
be placed thereon with colored ink or by photographic reproduction. If more
than three (3) sheets are used, a key diagram shall be included.
      2.   The scale on each sheet containing a map. The basis of bearing shall
be that approved by the County Engineer and shall be required on one sheet
only.
      3.   All easements that are required to be offered for dedication of
acceptance and their particular use.
      4.   Every final map shall closely conform to the approved tentative map
and shall also show all data required for the tentative map except contour
lines, position of buildings, relationship to streets and highways beyond the
area shown on the map and the proposed use of building sites. Every final
subdivision map shall contain, in addition, the following data: sufficient
linear, angular and radial data to determine the bearings and lengths of
boundary lines of the land development and boundary lines of each and every
building site or parcel which is a part thereof as well as the necessary public
utility easements (p.u.e.) within the area shown on the final map and building
sites.
      5.   Easements not disclosed by the records in the Office of the County
Recorder and found by the surveyor or engineer to be existing in the
development prior to the date of filing for record of the final map, naming the
party or parties using said easement and describing the specific purpose for
which the easement is being used.
      6.   Easements evidenced by records in the Office of the County Recorder
prior to the date of filing for record of the final map, by the volume and page
of the conveyance which established said easement and the name of the grantee
in said conveyance who or which reserved said easement.
      7.   Easements, rights-of-way and other property interests necessary to
implement and maintain any water conveyance and delivery system required by any
rule or regulation of the Walker River Irrigation District or the U.S. water
master for the Carson River.
      8.   The exterior boundary of the land included within the land
development shall be highlighted by a border making all delineations covered by
it readily discernible on reproductions or prints of the original.
      9.   Each County boundary and government land survey line crossing or
adjoining the subdivision with adequate ties to monuments set or found within
the same.
      10.   If any portion of the land within the boundaries of the final map
is subject to inundation, storm flow conditions, geologic hazard or other
hazard, the land so affected shall be clearly marked by a prominent note on
each sheet. The map shall show the line of high water in case the development
is adjacent to a stream, lake or reservoir and/or areas subject to inundation
by water.
      11.   The monument line and boundary of each street, including the width
of the portion of any fractional street being dedicated, the width of existing
road rights-of-way when available from public records and the widths on each
side of the adjacent streets as determined from public records. Whenever the
engineer has established either the centerline or monument line of the street
and such information is made a public record, this location and data shall be
shown on the final map.
      12.   Building sites.
         a.   Numbers shall begin with the number 1 and continue consecutively
with no omissions or duplications; except, that multiple-unit development
numbering of building sites shall begin where the numbering of previous
building sites stopped.
         b.   Each building site must be shown in its entirety on one sheet of
the final map and may not be divided between sheets.
         c.   No ditto marks shall be used in the dimensions and data.
         d.   Building site area, if shown, shall be a net figure.
      13.   Block numbers shall begin with the letter A, continuing
consecutively without omission or duplication throughout the tract. Lots shall
be numbered consecutively for each block. The numbers or letters shall be solid
and of sufficient size and thickness to stand out, shall be so placed as not to
obliterate any figure and shall not be enclosed in any design. Each block, in
its entirety, shall be shown on one sheet. Where adjoining blocks appear on
separate sheets, the street adjoining both blocks shall be shown on both sheets
complete with monument line and property line data.
      14.   The final map shall particularly define, delineate and designate
all building sites intended for private purposes, all parcels offered for
dedication for any purpose, public or private, common area and private street,
with all dimensions, boundaries and courses clearly defined. Parcels offered
for dedication but not accepted shall be so designated and streets offered but
not accepted for dedication shall be designated "Not a Public Street".
      15.   Maps filed for the purpose of showing, as acreage, lands previously
divided into numbered or lettered parcels shall be conspicuously marked under
the title "the purpose of this map is to `Revert to Acreage'".
      16.   Wherever the land development is contained within the boundaries of
more than one district for which separate taxes are levied, the boundaries of
such districts shall be located and shown accurately on the final map.
      17.   Each sheet shall show the subdivision tract number assigned by the
County Recorder; each sheet may show the subdivision tract name and unit
number.
      18.   A reference to any private covenants, conditions and records to be
recorded with the map.
      19.   A signed statement indicating a petition of annexation into any
special taxing district, if the subject property is so located.
      20.   Other items listed on the application or required by conditions of
approval.
      21.   The final subdivision map must be reviewed and endorsed by the
following County department heads and Fire District representatives prior to
final review for acceptance by the County. Fire Districts that want to
participate in the review process must pass a resolution stating that the
district will be part of the review process and submit a copy of the resolution
to the department. A jurat for endorsements must be placed on the final map.
The jurat shall read as follows:
Lyon County and Fire District Review
The undersigned Lyon County department heads and local fire district hereby
certify that the final subdivision map has been reviewed by each department or
local fire district for all improvements thereof.
Director
Road Department Director
County Engineer
Local Fire District Representative
(If applicable)
Lyon County Assessor
Lyon County Utilities Director
(If applicable)
   C.   Final Subdivision Map Certificates: The following certificates and
acknowledgments shall appear on the final subdivision map and shall be combined
when appropriate:
      1.   A certificate signed and acknowledged by all parties having any
security interest and/or record title interest in the land subdivided,
consenting to the preparation and recordation of the map;
      2.   A certificate signed and acknowledged as above, offering for
dedication for certain specified public uses those certain parcels of land
which the parties desire so dedicated;
      3.   A certificate of title indicating:
         a.   That each person signing the final subdivision map owns a record
of interest in the land and that all the owners of record of the land have
signed the final subdivision map;
         b.   Listing of any lien or mortgage holders of record, if any. If
there are no lien or mortgage holders of record, the fact that there are none
shall be stated in the certificate;
         c.   The certificate of title shall be signed and dated by an officer
of the title company responsible for the statements contained within said title
certificate;
      4.   A certificate by the Nevada licensed surveyor responsible for the
survey and final subdivision map as prescribed by State law;
      5.   A certificate by the County Engineer stating that he has examined
the final subdivision map, that he is satisfied that the map is technically
correct, and that subdivider has complied with one of the following
alternatives:
         a.   All the improvements have been installed in accordance with the
requirements of these regulations; or
         b.   Adequate assurances have been provided that improvements will be
completed and maintained in accordance with chapter 110 of this title;
      6.   A certificate by the Health Division of the Department of Human
Resources indicating that the final subdivision map is approved concerning
sewage disposal, water pollution, water quality and water supply facilities;
      7.   A certificate by the Division of Water Resources of the State
Department of Conservation and Natural Resources showing that the final
subdivision map is approved concerning water quality and any other matters in
its jurisdiction;
      8.   A certificate of the Director that the map conforms to the approved
tentative subdivision map and all conditions imposed upon such approval have
been satisfied;
      9.   A certificate for execution by the County Clerk stating that the
County has approved the map and accepted (or deferred) on behalf of the public
the parcels of land offered for dedication for public use in conformity with
the terms of the offer of dedication;
      10.    A certificate by the appropriate public utilities accepting the
designated easements;
      11.    Proper certificates of a notary public as required;
      12.    A certificate for execution by the County Recorder concerning the
appropriate recording data required by Nevada Revised Statutes section 278.460;
      13.    A certificate granting rights-of-way and maintenance for water
conveyance facilities. The grant of the right-of-way shall run to the benefit
of all persons entitled to the use of the conveyance ditch under the Alpine
Decree or other court decree and their successors in interest or to any
irrigation district or ditch company or similar entity having an interest in or
responsibility for maintenance of the water conveyance ditch and associated
structures;
      14.   Other certificates as may be required.
   D.   Action By The Director:
      1.   Prior to its expiration, the subdivider shall submit the application
for a final map to the department.
      2.   Unless the time period is extended by a mutual consent of the
developer and the Director, the Director shall render a decision on the
application for final subdivision map approval within sixty (60) days following
the determination that the final map application is complete, except as
follows:
         a.   If any errors or omissions are found on the prints of the final
map submitted to the County, the map shall be returned to the subdivider or his
engineer for correction and shall not be submitted for Director's approval
until such errors and omissions are corrected.
         b.   The corrected final map shall be required to be resubmitted to
the department and the time period for Board action set forth in this
subsection D2 shall be reset.
      3.   The Director shall refuse any final map approval when a report of
error is made and shall continue to refuse to approve until all deficiencies
are resolved.
      4.   The Director shall approve the map only if it is found that:
         a.   The map conforms in every respect with the approved tentative
subdivision map, as amended;
         b.   All conditions established upon approval of the tentative
subdivision map, as amended, have been satisfied;
         c.   The final subdivision map conforms to all County ordinances
applicable at the time of the decision on the final subdivision map;
         d.   Sufficient assurances for completion and maintenance of
improvements have been made pursuant to this title;
         e.   All necessary certificates required by State law or by this title
have been presented with the application of approval of the final subdivision
map.
      5.   The Director shall, at the time of approval of the final subdivision
map, accept or reject any or all offers of dedication.
   E.   Appeal: The Director's action to deny the final subdivision map may be
appealed in accordance with the procedures of chapter 12 of this title.
   F.   Reporting: Once the Director has approved a final map and the final map
has been recorded, the director shall report that the final map has been
approves to the Board of County Commissioners at their next regularly scheduled
meeting. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 607, 9-19-2019; Ord. 627, 6-7-2022)
15.607.07: EFFECT OF APPROVAL:
No vested right shall accrue to the owner, subdivider or developer of any
subdivision by reason of tentative or final subdivision map approval until the
actual recording of the final subdivision map containing all of the signatures
of all parties required to sign the map. All requirements, conditions, or
regulations adopted by the County applicable to the subdivision or on all
subdivisions generally shall be deemed a condition for any subdivision prior to
the time of signing of the final subdivision map by the County Engineer. (Ord.
603, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 607, 9-19-2019)
15.607.08: SIGNING AND RECORDING OF FINAL SUBDIVISION MAP:
   A.   Signing Of Map:
      1.   When an improvement agreement and security are required, the County
Engineer shall endorse approval of the map only after security has been
provided and all conditions of the map have been satisfied.
      2.   When installation of improvements is required, the County Engineer
shall endorse approval on the map only after all conditions of the map have
been satisfied and upon issuance of a notice of completion.
      3.   The County Engineer shall sign the map only after determination in
cooperation with any utility providing water and/or sewer service to the
subdivision or accepting improvements for maintenance that the map is in
compliance with this Code relating to the dedication of facilities, water
rights and rights-of-way/easements.
   B.   Recording Of The Map: It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider
to file the original map with the County Clerk for signing and submission to
the County Recorder within two (2) years from the date of approval pursuant to
chapter 13 of this title. Simultaneously with the filing of the map the
subdivider shall cause to be recorded such other legal documents as may be
required to be recorded by the County.
   Prior to recordation, the final subdivision map shall be provided to the
County Engineer and the County Assessor in form and format compatible with the
county geographic information system (GIS). The scale of the map, improvements,
monuments, and other information shall be placed in the model space correctly
oriented to the coordinate system as approved by the Public Works Director. The
cover/signature sheet and standard details sheet need not be included. (Ord.
603, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 607, 9-19-2019; Ord. 613, 12-3-2020)
15.607.09: REVERSION OF FINAL SUBDIVISION MAP:
A final subdivision map which has been recorded may be revoked pursuant to
chapter 14 of this title, and the subdivision reverted to acreage, pursuant to
chapters 603 and 604 of this title, where applicable, in the event that the
subdivider or his successor in interest fails to complete improvements as
required by the subdivision improvement agreement, development agreement or as
otherwise provided by law. The proceeding may be initiated by either the owner
or the County. At the initiation of proceedings to revoke or revert to acreage,
the County shall record a document with the County Clerk and Recorder's Office
giving notice thereof. If final subdivision approval is revoked or the property
reverted to acreage, the Board order to that effect will be recorded with the
County Clerk and Recorder's Offices, the subdivision will no longer be valid
and further sale or development of lots or parcels within the revoked
subdivision shall be prohibited without approved division of land pursuant to
this title. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.607.10: PROCEDURES FOR PLANNED DEVELOPMENT APPLICATIONS:
Whenever an application for planned unit development proposes the division of
land into five (5) or more parts, the applicant may include with such
application a tentative subdivision map, to be processed in accordance with the
provisions of chapter 349 of this title and this chapter. If submitted
concurrently with the planned unit development application, consideration of
the tentative subdivision map shall be reviewed in conjunction with the
application for planned unit development tentative approval, and approval of
the tentative subdivision map shall be conditioned upon final approval of the
planned unit development. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
CHAPTER 800
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
SECTION:
15.800.01: Statutory Authorization
15.800.02: Findings Of Fact
15.800.03: Purpose
15.800.04: Methods Of Reducing Flood Losses
15.800.05: Definitions
15.800.06: Interpretation, Application And Compliance
15.800.07: Basis For Establishing Areas Of Special Flood Hazard; Information
Maintained
15.800.08: Floodplain Development Permit
15.800.09: Alteration Of Watercourses
15.800.10: Retaining Floodplain Development Documentation
15.800.11: Maintenance Of Flood Protection Measures
15.800.12: General Standards For Flood Hazard Reduction
15.800.13: Specific Standards For Flood Hazard Reduction
15.800.14: Variances And Appeals
15.800.15: Letters Of Map Revision/Amendment
15.800.16: Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability
15.800.01: STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION:
The Legislature of the State of Nevada has delegated the responsibility to
local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public
health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, pursuant to
Nevada Revised Statutes chapters 244, 278 and 543, including the sections
244A.057, 278.020 and 543.020, together with the applicable Code of Federal
Regulations, and as a participating County in the National Flood Insurance
Program (NFIP), the County Commissioners of Lyon County ordain and adopt the
floodplain management provisions as set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 603, 11-1-
2018; amd. Ord. 607, 9-19-2019)
15.800.02: FINDINGS OF FACT:
   A.   The flood hazard areas of Lyon County are subject to periodic
inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief and impairment of the tax base,
all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
   B.   These flood losses are caused by uses that are inappropriately
developed within the flood hazard areas or are inadequately elevated, flood-
proofed, or otherwise not protected from flood damage. The cumulative effect of
obstructions in areas of special flood hazards increase flood heights and
velocities and, when inadequately flood proofed, elevated or otherwise
protected from flood damage, contribute to the flood loss.
   C.   Protecting the natural resources and functions of floodplains, has
proven to be effective in reducing flood losses. FEMA encourages and provides
incentives to communities to adopt and implement programs that preserve the
integrity of floodplain resources and functions. Lyon County has adopted the
Carson River Watershed Floodplain Management Plan which includes strategies for
floodplain management to reduce flood damage impacts including:
      1.   Protection of natural floodplain function and values;
      2.   Higher regulatory standards;
      3.   Flood data information and maintenance;
      4.   Channel migration and bank erosion monitoring;
      5.   Floodplain and flood hazard outreach and education; and
      6.   Reduction of infrastructure impacts. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord.
607, 9-19-2019)
15.800.03: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:
   A.   To protect human life and health;
   B.   To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
   C.   To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   D.   To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood
blight areas;
   E.   To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, and streets and bridges located
in areas of special flood hazards;
   F.   To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard and X (Shaded) flood zones to
minimize property devaluation resulting from flood damage and events, and
future flood blight areas;
   G.   To ensure that property owners and potential buyers are notified when a
property is located in areas of special flood hazard and X (Shaded) flood
zones;
   H.   To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard and X
(Shaded) flood zones assume responsibility for their actions;
   I.   Implement the Carson River Regional Floodplain Management Plan;
   J.   Minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions within the
Carson River floodplain by requiring the use of the Carson River Hydraulic
Model and procedures designed to provide a consistent and complete:
      1.   Tool to assess cumulative impacts of land use changes within the 1-
percent chance (100-year) and 0.2-percent chance (500-year) floodplains;
      2.   Tool to assess project specific impacts of land use changes within
the 1-percent chance (100-year) and 0.2-percent chance (500-year) floodplains;
      3.   Tool for mitigating flood hazards to downstream communities, loss of
riparian habitat and floodplain function, and degradation of water quality due
to impacts of land use changes within the 1-percent chance (100-year) and 0.2-
percent chance (500-year) floodplains;
      4.   Set of protocols, procedures and guidance necessary to use the
Carson River Hydraulic Model to evaluate impacts to floodplain extents, peak
flow, peak flow timing, and flood volumes.
   K.   To maintain eligibility for State and Federal disaster relief;
   L.   Maintain qualifying standards for participation in the National Flood
Insurance Program (NFIP); and
   M.   Comply with applicable Code of Federal Regulations provisions. (Ord.
603, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 607, 9-19-2019)
15.800.04: METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES:
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
   A.   Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety
and property due to water or erosion hazards or which result in damaging
increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
   B.   Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   C.   Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels,
alluvial fans, and natural protective barriers which help accommodate or
channel floodwaters;
   D.   Controlling filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase flood damage; and
   E.   Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or may increase flood hazards in other areas.
(Ord. 603, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 607, 9-19-2019)
15.800.05: DEFINITIONS:
Definitions of many of the words used in this chapter are contained in chapter
1200 of this title, appendix A. Unless specifically defined in chapter 1200 of
this title, appendix A or in this chapter, or as used throughout this title,
the words and phrases used in this chapter should be interpreted to give them
the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most
reasonable application. The Director or their designee is the Floodplain
Administrator for the County. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 607, 9-19-2019)
15.800.06: INTERPRETATION, APPLICATION AND COMPLIANCE:
   A.   This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within
the jurisdiction of the County.
   B.   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions
shall be:
      1.   Considered as minimum requirements;
      2.   Construed in favor of the board to promote public health, safety and
welfare; and
      3.   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
State Statutes or local ordinance.
   C.   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
   D.   No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and
other applicable regulations. Violations of this requirement (including
violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with
conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this
chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction
be guilty of a misdemeanor of each violation, and in addition shall pay all
costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent
Lyon County or its board from taking such lawful action as is necessary to
prevent or remedy any violation.
   E.   After discovery of a violation or alleged violation of this chapter,
the Floodplain Administrator shall take action to verify the existence of a
violation(s) and remedy the violation(s) through administrative means including
stop work orders or other provisions of this title or applicable laws. If a
property owner fails to remedy any violation of this chapter, the Administrator
may submit a report to the board which shall include all information available
to the Floodplain Administrator which is pertinent to said violation, and
request that the board:
      1.   Take any necessary action to effect the abatement of such violation;
or
      2.   Issue a variance to this chapter in accordance with the provisions
of section
15.800.14 of this chapter; or
      3.   Submit to the Administrator of Federal Insurance Administration a
declaration for denial of insurance, stating that the property is in violation
of a cited statute or local law, regulation or ordinance, pursuant to section
1316 of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as amended.
   F.   It is unlawful for any person to divert, retard or obstruct the flow of
waters in any watercourse whenever it creates a hazard to life or property
without securing the appropriate local, state and/or Federal permit(s). Any
person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 607, 9-19-2019)
15.800.07: BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD; INFORMATION
MAINTAINED:
   A.   Flood Insurance Study And Maps: The areas of special flood hazard and X
(Shaded) flood zones identified by the Federal Insurance Administration in a
scientific and engineering report entitled "the Flood Insurance Study for Lyon
County" (FIS), dated January 19, 1982, with accompanying flood insurance rate
maps (FIRMS), and all subsequent revisions and amendments, are hereby adopted
by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. The FIS and
supplemental mappings, as amended and revised, is the minimum area of
applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other
areas that allow implementation of this chapter and that are recommended to the
board by the Floodplain Administrator. The flood insurance study and flood
insurance rate maps (FIRMS) are is on file at the department for public
reference and review.
   B.   Interpretations: Interpretations, where needed, as to location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions)
shall be made by the Floodplain Administrator. The Floodplain Administrator may
determine the best information available in making the map determinations. When
requested by the Floodplain Administrator, the applicants shall provide
documentation to assist the Floodplain Administrator in making the
determination. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be
given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in
section
15.800.14 of this chapter.
   C.   Use Of Other Base Flood Data: When base flood elevations are not
available, the Floodplain Administrator may obtain, review, and use the best
available flood data and information from any other authoritative source, such
as state, federal, or other such as historical data, high water marks, floods
of record, or private engineering reports, to establish base flood elevations
within the special flood hazard areas (SFHAs). Multiple parcels (five (5) or
more) will be required to have all proposals establish the one hundred-year
base flood elevation before consideration of the tentative plan for
development. The Floodplain Administrator may, at their discretion, require
standards exceeding those identified in this chapter. Any higher standards
above those in this chapter This information shall be submitted to the Board
for adoption. When base flood elevations are not available from any other
source, base flood elevations shall be obtained using one of two (2) methods
from the FEMA publication, FEMA 265, "Managing Floodplain Development in
Approximate Zone A Areas - A Guide for Obtaining and Developing Base (100-Year)
Flood Elevations", dated July 1995.
   D.   Information Obtained And Maintained:
      1.   Where base flood elevation data is provided through the flood
insurance study or acquired as in subsections B and C of this section, the
actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all new or substantially improved structures and whether or not
the structure contains a basement shall be obtained and recorded.
      2.   For all new or substantially improved flood proofed structures:
         a.   The actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) shall be
verified and recorded; and
         b.   The flood proofing certifications required in subsection
15.800.08B of this chapter shall be maintained.
      3.   All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be
maintained for public inspection.
   E.   Hydrology And Hydraulic Study Requirements: Detailed Base Flood
Elevations (BFEs) are determined by an engineering study consisting of
hydrology and hydraulics. All hydrology and hydraulic studies (also known as
Flood Impact Analysis) referenced in the chapter must be prepared by a
professional engineer licensed in the State of Nevada and meet FEMA standards
for hydrology and hydraulic studies submitted for the approval of CLOMRs and
LOMRs. Except for areas were FEMA allows the use of the approximate method, the
preferred modeling tool to determine changes on the base flood elevations and
the floodplain boundary shall be the current acceptable version of HEC-RAS.
   F.   Carson River Floodplain Hydraulic Modeling:
      1.   The Carson River Floodplain Hydraulic Model (Model) is hereby
adopted as the hydraulic modeling/mapping tool to assess impacts of land use
changes, development, construction, and man-made alterations within the Carson
River floodplain.
      2.   The Carson River Hydraulic Model - Model Management, Distribution,
And Update Guide (Guide), including revisions, amendments and updates, is
hereby adopted as the required procedures and guidance for the use of the
model, including management, distribution, modification, submission and review.
      3.   Lands to which the Carson River Floodplain Hydraulic Modeling
Applies. The Carson River Floodplain Hydraulic Modeling shall apply to all
areas of special flood hazards within the 1-percent chance (100-year) and 0.2-
percent chance (500-year) floodplains of the Carson River within the
jurisdiction of Lyon County.
      4.   The most current version of the model shall be used for the
following:
         a.   Interpretations as set forth in subsection
15.800.07 B.
         b.   Use of other base data as set forth in subsection
15.800.07 C.
         c.   For information for the application of a development permit as
required in subsections
15.800.08 B6, B7 and B8.
         d.   For the issuing of a permit for any alteration of watercourse as
set forth in subsection
15.800.09.
         e.   For compliance with the provisions of subsection
15.800.12 A.
         f.   For compliance with the provisions of subsection
15.800.13 D 1, "Specific Standards for Flood Hazard Reduction."
         g.   For compliance with the provisions of and providing information
for subsection
15.800.14 C, "Variances and Appeals."
         h.   For compliance with the provisions of and providing information
for subsection
15.800.15, "Letters of Map Revision/Amendment."
      5.   Use of the model shall be performed by the Carson Water
Subconservancy District contractor/consultant employed to maintain and operate
the model in conformance with the procedures and guidelines set forth in the
most current version of the Guide.
      6.   Applications for model use shall be made on forms furnished by the
department, contain the information stipulated in the forms, and be accompanied
by any applicable fees. The applicant is responsible for the cost of the Carson
Water Subconservancy District contractor/consultant to operate the model,
analyze the data and provide a report. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 607, 9-
19-2019)
15.800.08: FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
   A.   Permit Required: A floodplain development permit shall be obtained
before construction or development begins within any area of special flood
hazard established in subsection 15.800.07A of this chapter. The permit shall
be for all structures, including manufactured homes, accessory dwelling units
and accessory structures whether a building permit is required or not required
as defined herein or in chapter 1200 of this title, appendix A, and for all
development, including fill and other activities, including river bank and
stream bank erosion repair activities, as defined in chapter 1200 of this
title, appendix A.
   B.   Application For Permit: Applications for a permit shall be made on
forms furnished by the department, contain the information stipulated in the
forms, and be accompanied by any applicable fees. The applicant shall provide
at least the following information, where applicable. Additional information
may be required as determined by the Floodplain Administrator.
      1.   The proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest
floor (including basement) of all residential and nonresidential structures
whether new or substantially improved to be located in Zones A, A1-A30, AE, AH
and X (Shaded), if base flood elevations data are available.
      2.   In Zone AO the proposed elevation in relation to the elevation of
the highest adjacent grade of all residential and nonresidential structures
whether new or substantially improved.
      3.   The proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, to which any
new or substantially improved nonresidential structure will be flood proofed.
      4.   A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect in
the State of Nevada that any utility flood proofing meets the criteria in
subsection
15.800.12D, "Utilities", of this chapter.
      5.   A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect in
the State of Nevada that any nonresidential flood proofed structures meet the
criteria in sections
15.800.12 and
15.800.13 of this chapter.
      6.   When a watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the
proposed development, the applicant must submit a ‘No-Rise’ certificate and the
maps, computations, and other materials required by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) to process a conditional letter of map revision
(CLOMR) or a letter of map revision (LOMR) and pay any fees or other costs
assessed by FEMA for processing the revision.
      7.   A technical analysis, by a professional engineer licensed in the
State of Nevada, showing the proposed development located in the special flood
hazard area will not cause physical damage to any other property.
      8.   When there is no base flood elevation data available for Zone A from
any source, the base flood elevation data will be provided by the permit
applicant for all proposed development of subdivisions, manufactured home and
recreational vehicle parks in the special flood hazard areas, for all
developments of fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is less.
   C.   Permit Review And Approval: The Director or their designee is appointed
Floodplain Administrator to administer and implement this chapter by granting
or denying floodplain development permit applications in accordance with its
provisions.
      Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall
include, but not be limited to:
      1.   Review all floodplain development permit applications to determine
that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
      2.   Review all floodplain development permits to determine that all
necessary permits have been obtained from those Federal, State or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required prior to issuing
the floodplain development permit.
      3.   Review all floodplain development permits to determine that the site
and structure(s) is/are reasonably safe from flooding.
      4.   Review of all floodplain development permit applications to
determine if the proposed development in the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA)
may result in physical damage to any other property, to include river and
stream bank erosion and any increase in velocities or that it does not
adversely affect the flood-carrying capacity of the area where base flood
elevations have been determined, but a floodway has not been designated. For
purposes of this chapter, "adversely affected" means that the cumulative effect
of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the
base flood more than 0.5 foot at any point. To assist the local floodplain
administrator in making this determination, the applicant requesting the
floodplain development permit, may be required to submit additional technical
analyses.
      5.   Review of all proposals for the development of five (5) parcels or
more to assure that the flood discharge exiting the development after
construction is equal to or less than the flood discharge at the location prior
to development.
      6.   Review all development applications to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state, or local governmental
agencies from which prior approval is required.
      7.   May make map interpretations where needed, as to the location of the
boundaries of special flood hazard areas and where there appears to be a
conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions. The Floodplain
Administrator may determine the best information available in making the map
determinations. Floodplain development permit applicants must provide
documentation to assist the Floodplain Administrator or designee in making the
determination when requested by the Floodplain Administrator.
      8.   Submit new technical data to FEMA when the Floodplain Administrator
has received technical or scientific data that the base flood elevation has
either increased or decreased resulting from physical changes affecting
flooding conditions. The Floodplain Administrator will submit the technical or
scientific data to FEMA, as soon as practical, after the date of technical
information confirming the physical changes becomes available. The technical or
scientific data provided to the Floodplain Administrator shall meet the FEMA
notebook-style format as preferred.
      9.   The Planning Commission and board shall be responsible for reviewing
all proposals for new development and shall weigh all requests for future
floodplain development against the county's master plan and multi-
jurisdictional hazard mitigation plan. Consideration of the following elements
is required before approval:
         a.   Determination of whether a proposed development is in or affects
a known floodplain.
         b.   Inform the public of the proposed activity.
         c.   Determine if there is a practicable alternative or site for the
proposed activity.
         d.   Identify impact of the activity on the floodplain.
         e.   Provide a plan to mitigate the impact of the activity. (Ord. 603,
11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 607, 9-19-2019)
15.800.09: ALTERATION OF WATERCOURSES:
Prior to issuing a floodplain development permit for any alteration or
relocation of watercourse the Floodplain Administrator must:
   A.   Have processed and received a conditional letter of map revision
(CLOMR) and processed and received a letter of map revision (LOMR) through
FEMA.
   B.   Notify all adjacent communities, Nevada's National Flood Insurance
Program Coordinator, and submittal of evidence of such notification to the
Federal Insurance Administration, and the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   C.   Determine that the potential permit recipient has provided:
      1.   A description of the extent to which the watercourse will be altered
or relocated as a result of the proposed development;
      2.   Computations by a professional engineer licensed in the State of
Nevada that demonstrate that the altered or relocated segment will provide
equal or more capacity than the original watercourse;
      3.   A legally enforceable assurance instrument for maintenance within
the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood carrying
capacity is not diminished;
      4.   Have received a Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR)
determination from FEMA; and
      5.   Provided funds from the Developer to the County for processing the
Letter of Map Revision (LOMR).
   D.   Development Of Substantial Improvement And Substantial Damage
Procedures:
      1.   Using the most recent version of FEMA publication FEMA 213, "Answers
to Questions About Substantially Damaged Buildings," develop detailed
procedures for identifying and administering requirements for substantial
improvement and substantial damage, to include defining "Market Value." (Ord.
603, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 607, 9-19-2019)
15.800.10: RETAINING FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT DOCUMENTATION:
The Floodplain Administrator shall obtain and retain for public inspection and
have available for the National Flood Insurance Program Coordinator or the
Federal Emergency Management Agency representative conducting a community
assistance visit, the following:
   A.   Floodplain development permits and certificates of compliance.
   B.   Elevation required by section
15.800.13 of this chapter (lowest floor elevation).
   C.   Certification required by section
15.800.13 of this chapter (flood proofing nonresidential structures).
   D.   Elevation certificates with records of certification required for areas
below the lowest floor.
   E.   Elevation certificates and all certifications of elevation required by
section
15.800.12 of this chapter (subdivision standards).
   F.   Certification required by section
15.800.13 of this chapter (floodway encroachments - also referred to as a "no-
rise certification" by the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP)):
      1.   The no-rise certification shall be supported by technical data and
signed by a professional engineer licensed in the State of Nevada.
      2.   The supporting technical data shall be based on a FEMA approved
model used to develop the 100-year floodway shown on the FIRM and the results
tabulated in the Flood Insurance Study.
      3.   In a special flood hazard area, a no-rise certification must be
submitted for any construction or other development that is permitted to
proceed with a CLOMR on a form approved by the administrator and prepared by a
professional engineer licensed in the State of Nevada.
   G.   Variances issued pursuant to section
15.800.14, "Variances And Appeals", of this chapter.
   H.   Notices required under section
15.800.09, "Alteration Of Watercourses", of this chapter and any notices
required for the addition of fill material.
   I.   Copies of approved elevations, footing details, and site plans.
   J.   Copies of approved CLOMRs, LOMRs, LOMR-Fs, and LOMAs. (Ord. 603, 11-1-
2018; amd. Ord. 607, 9-19-2019)
15.800.11: MAINTENANCE OF FLOOD PROTECTION MEASURES:
The maintenance of any and all flood protection measures (levees, dikes, dams
or reservoirs) and alterations or relocations of watercourses will be required
of the jurisdiction where such measures provide protection. If these measures
are privately owned, an operation or maintenance plan and an operations or
maintenance agreement document, including enforcement provisions as recorded
with Lyon County will be required of the owner to be on file with the
department. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 607, 9-19-2019)
15.800.12: GENERAL STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION:
In all areas of special flood hazards, the following standards are required:
   A.   Development Requirements:
      1.   All preliminary subdivision proposals shall identify the special
flood hazard area and X (Shaded) flood zone and the elevation of the base
flood;
      2.   All final subdivision plans will provide the elevation of proposed
structure(s), pads, and adjacent grade. If the site is filled above the base
flood, the final pad elevation shall be certified by a registered professional
engineer or surveyor and provided to the floodplain administrator as set forth
in this chapter;
      3.   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage;
      4.   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to
minimize flood damage;
      5.   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage; certification of compliance shall be required
of the developer; and
      6.   Where base flood elevation data has not been provided or is not
available from another authoritative source, it shall be generated for
subdivisions and other proposed developments which contain at least fifty (50)
lots or five (5) acres (whichever is less).
      7.   All subdivision proposals and other proposed developments shall
assess the cumulative and project specific impacts of land use changes and
development through a detailed hydrologic and hydraulic analyses and/or
demonstration of the cumulative effect of the proposed land use changes or
development. All subdivision proposals must demonstrate that the proposed
development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development,
will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one-
half (0.5) foot at any point within the special flood hazard area;
      8.   Whenever any portion of a floodplain is authorized for use, the
space occupied by the authorized fill or structure below the base flood
elevation shall be compensated for and balanced by a hydraulically specified
volume of excavation taken from below the base flood elevation. All such
excavations shall be constructed to drain freely to the watercourse. All new
development placing fill and structures within special flood hazard areas must
provide compensatory storage at hydraulically equivalent sites at a minimum
ratio of 1.25:1 (i.e., where 1.25 cubic feet of material must be removed from a
hydraulically equivalent location for each 1 cubic foot of fill placed in the
special flood hazard zone); and
      9.   Land may not be divided for residential purposes that requires fill
to raise the elevation of the property to remove the property out of a special
flood hazard area and enable subsequent development.
      10.   Land may not be divided for residential purposes that will result
in the creation of a parcel that is less than twenty (20) net acres, unless the
applicant shows that:
         a.   The portion of the land in the special flood hazard area will be
contained on a single parcel; and
         b.   The land within the special flood hazard areas is retained in a
natural state including, without limitation, no solid fencing that impedes the
flow of floodwaters or other improvements; and
         c.   The land within the special flood hazard area is held in common
or single ownership with any overlying drainage easement; and
         d.   A property owner's association or similar entity is legally
responsible for maintenance of the land in the special flood hazard area in its
natural state.
   B.   Anchoring:
      1.   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored
to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting
from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
      2.   All manufactured homes must likewise be anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement and shall be installed using methods
and practices that minimize flood damage. Anchoring methods may include, but
are not limited to, use of over the top or frame ties to ground anchors (see
FEMA's "Manufactured Home Installation in Flood Hazard Areas" guidebook for
additional techniques).
      3.   Propane and other liquid or gaseous fuel storage tanks shall be
anchored to prevent flotation or lateral movement.
   C.   Construction Materials And Methods:
      1.   Materials: All new construction and substantial improvements shall
be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
      2.   Design And Construction Methods And Practices: All new construction
and substantial improvements shall be designed and constructed using methods
and practices that minimize flood damage and comply with FEMA requirements.
      3.   Location Of Service Facilities: Electrical, heating, ventilation,
plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be
designed and/or otherwise elevated or located so as to prevent water from
entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.
      4.   Drainage Paths: Within Zones AH or AO, all new construction and
substantial improvements shall be constructed so that there are adequate
drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away
from proposed structures.
      5.   Elevation And Flood Proofing:
         a.   New construction and substantial improvement of any structure
shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to create freeboard
above the base flood elevation or constructed with the freeboard requirement or
depth number as follows:
            (1)   In Zone AO: The lowest floor elevated above the highest
adjacent grade to a height equal to or exceeding the depth number specified in
feet on the FIRM by at least one and one half feet (1.5’), or elevated at least
three and one-half feet (3.5’) above the highest adjacent grade if no depth
number is specified. A professional surveyor or engineer licensed in the State
of Nevada must complete the elevation certificate.
            (2)   In Zone A: The lowest floor elevated to at least one and one
half feet (1.5’) or above the base flood elevation, as determined by a
professional engineer or surveyor licensed in the State of Nevada and approved
by the Floodplain Administrator.
            (3)   In all other special flood hazard areas where the base flood
elevation has been determined: The lowest floor elevated at least one and one
half feet (1.5’) above the base flood elevation.
            (4)   In all the X-shaded flood zone, one of the following minimum
criteria must be met:
               (A)   The lowest floor must be elevated at least one and one-
half feet (1.5’) above the pre-developed highest adjacent grade; or
               (B)   The applicant must provide a drainage plan designed by a
professional engineer licensed in the State of Nevada for diverting water
around the proposed structure using berms, swales, or other drainage features.
            (5)   In alluvial fan floodplain areas as designated within the
Area Drainage Master Plans, the lowest floor must be a minimum of two feet (2')
above the Base Flood Elevation to account for sedimentation.
         b.   Manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved
within a SFHA:
            (1)   Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision,
            (2)   In a new manufactured home park or subdivision,
            (3)   In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision,
      On which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the
result of a flood, shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the
lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated at least one and one-half
feet (1.5’) above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation collapse and lateral
movement in addition to meeting the above standards.
      Nonresidential structures may meet the standards in subsection C5c of
this section. Upon completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest
floor, including basement, shall be certified by a registered professional
engineer or surveyor to verify to the Floodplain Administrator that elevation
requirements have been met. Notification of compliance shall be recorded as set
forth in subsection C5a of this chapter.
         c.   Nonresidential construction shall either be elevated to
conformance with subsection C5a of this section or, together with attendant
utility and sanitary facilities:
            (1)   Be flood proofed so that below the base flood level the
structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water;
            (2)   Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
            (3)   Be certified by a professional engineer or architect licensed
in the State of Nevada that the standards of this subsection are satisfied.
Such certifications shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator.
         d.   All new construction and substantial improvements to existing
structures within a special flood hazard area with fully enclosed areas below
the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are usable solely for parking of
vehicles, building access or storage, and which are subject to flooding, must
be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic and hydrodynamic flood forces
on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of flood waters. Designs
for meeting this requirement shall follow the guidelines in FEMA Technical
Bulletins TB-1 (Openings in Foundation Walls and Walls of Enclosures, 2008) and
TB-7 (Wet Floodproofing Requirements, 1993) and must either be certified by a
professional engineer or architect licensed in the State of Nevada or meet or
exceed the following minimum criteria:
            (1)   Have a minimum of two openings on different sides having a
total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of
enclosed area subject to flooding. Net area may be reduced by manufacturer or
engineer certification if engineered flood openings are used. If a structure
has more than one enclosed area, each area must have openings on different
sides to allow floodwaters to directly enter and exit. Openings must be
equipped with FEMA approved louvers and other designated openings that permit
the automatic entry and exit of flood waters.
            (2)   The bottom of all such openings must be no higher than one
foot above the exterior lowest adjacent finished grade and be installed below
the base flood elevation.
            (3)   Have an adequate drainage system that removes floodwaters
from the interior.
            (4)   Areas below the BFE must be constructed with flood resistant
materials.
         e.   Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest
floor including basement shall be certified by a professional engineer or land
surveyor licensed in the State of Nevada and verified by the county building
inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification or verification shall be
provided to the floodplain administrator using the current FEMA Elevation
Certificate.
      6.   Requirements For All Crawl Space Construction:
         a.   The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
Hydrostatic loads and the effects of buoyancy can usually be addressed through
the required openings discussed in the next subsection. Because of hydrodynamic
loads, crawl space construction is not recommended in areas with flood
velocities greater than five feet (5') per second unless the design is reviewed
by a qualified design professional, such as an architect or professional
engineer licensed in the State of Nevada.
         b.   The crawl space is an enclosed area below the BFE or depth number
and, as such, must have openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by
allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. The bottom of each
flood vent opening can be no more than one foot (1') above the highest of
inside or outside adjacent grade.
         c.   Portions of the building below the BFE or depth number must be
constructed with materials resistant to flood damage. This includes not only
the foundation walls of the crawl space used to elevate the building, but also
any joists, insulation, or other materials that extend below the BFE or depth
number. The required construction practice is to elevate the bottom of joists
and all insulation two feet (2') above BFE or depth number. Insulation is not a
flood resistant material. When insulation becomes saturated with floodwater,
the additional weight often pulls it away from the joists and flooring.
Ductwork or other utility systems located below the insulation may also pull
away from their supports.
         d.   Any building utility systems within the crawl space must be
elevated above BFE or depth number, or designed so that floodwaters cannot
enter or accumulate within the system components during flood conditions.
Ductwork, in particular, must either be placed above the BFE or depth number,
or sealed from floodwaters.
         e.   Additional requirements for below grade crawl spaces:
            (1)   The interior grade of a crawl space below the BFE or depth
number must not be more than two feet (2') below the highest adjacent exterior
grade (HAG), shown as "D" in figure 3 of this section.
            (2)   The height of the below grade crawl space, measured from the
interior grade of the crawl space to the top of the crawl space foundation wall
must not exceed four feet (4') (shown as "L" in figure 3 of this section) at
any point. The height limitation is the maximum allowable unsupported wall
height according to the engineering analyses and Building Code requirements for
flood hazard areas. This limitation will also prevent these crawl spaces from
being converted into habitable spaces, in conjunction with the requirement of a
"non-convert to living space" agreement recorded with the County prior to the
final inspection.
            (3)   There must be an adequate drainage system that removes
floodwaters from the interior area of the crawl space. The enclosed area should
be drained within a reasonable time after a flood event. The type of drainage
system will vary because of the site gradient and other drainage
characteristics, such as soil types. Possible options include natural drainage
through porous, well drained soils and drainage systems such as perforated
pipes, drainage tiles, or gravel or crushed stone drainage by gravity or
mechanical means.
            (4)   The velocity of floodwaters at the site should not exceed
five feet (5') per second for any crawl space. For velocities in excess of five
feet (5') per second, other foundation types should be used.
FIGURE 1
PREFERRED CRAWL SPACE CONSTRUCTION
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b3e37bf04674f7b3738d62883ef5a27ed6aa631/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2381.jpg]
 
FIGURE 2
BELOW GRADE CRAWL SPACE CONSTRUCTION
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b3e37bf04674f7b3738d62883ef5a27ed6aa631/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2383.jpg]
 
FIGURE 3
REQUIREMENTS REGARDING BELOW GRADE
CRAWL SPACE CONSTRUCTION
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b3e37bf04674f7b3738d62883ef5a27ed6aa631/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2385.jpg]
 
   D.   Utilities:
      1.   All public utilities and facilities must be located and constructed
to minimize flood damage.
      2.   All new and replacement water supply systems must be designed to
prevent infiltration and intermingling of flood waters.
      3.   All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration and intermingling of floodwaters or
discharge from the systems into floodwaters. Sanitary sewer and storm drainage
systems for buildings that have openings below the base flood elevation shall
be provided with automatic backflow valves or other automatic backflow devices
that are installed in each discharge line passing through a building's exterior
wall.
      4.   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and
      5.   On site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment
to them or contamination from them during flooding.
      6.   All electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning
(HVAC) systems and other service facilities and mechanical equipment (including
ductwork) must be elevated, made of flood-resistant materials, or floodproofed
above the base flood elevation to the elevation (freeboard) required in the
applicable special flood hazard zone and X-shaded flood zone; and be located
and constructed to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding.
   E.   Standards For Critical Facilities: Critical facilities, as defined in
Appendix A of this title, are not permitted to be constructed within a special
flood hazard area, unless:
      1.   All alternative locations in the X-unshaded flood zone have been
considered and rejected; and
      2.   All alternative locations in X-shaded flood zone have been
considered and rejected.
      If the Floodplain Administrator determines the only practical alternative
location for the development of a new or substantially improved critical
facility is in a special flood hazard area, the Floodplain Administrator must
give public notice of the decision and reasons for the elimination of all
alternative locations. Additionally, a critical facility must be designed to
higher protection standards and have flood evacuation plans if the critical
facility must be located in a floodplain. The more common standards such as
freeboard, elevation above the 500-year floodplain, and elevated ramps will be
required. (NFIP).
   F.   Standards For Alluvial Fans: Areas subject to alluvial-fan flooding
have irregular flow paths that result in erosion of existing channels and the
undermining of fill material. Those areas are identified on the Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM) as AO Zones with velocities.
      1.   All structures must be securely anchored to minimize the impact of
the flood and sediment damage.
      2.   All new construction and substantial improvements must be elevated
on pilings, columns, or armored fill so that the lowest floor is elevated two
feet (2’) above the depth number.
      3.   Use of all fill materials must be armored to protect the material
from the velocity of the flood flow.
      4.   All proposals for subdivision development must provide a mitigation
plan that identifies the engineering methods used to:
         a.   Protect structures from erosion and scour caused by the velocity
of the flood flow;
         b.   Capture or transport flood and sediment flow through the
subdivision to a safe point of disposition.
      5.   All manufactured homes shall be prohibited within the identified
hazard area except within existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions.
      6.   Approval by the Floodplain Administrator and County Engineer is
required.
   G.   Review Of Building Permits: Applications for building permits shall be
reviewed to assure that proposed construction will be reasonably safe from
flooding. The test of reasonableness is a local judgment and includes use of
historical data, high water marks, photographs of past flooding, etc., where
available. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 607, 9-19-2019; Ord. 613, 12-3-2020)
15.800.13: SPECIFIC STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION:
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been
provided as set forth in subsection
15.800.07A or C of this chapter, the following provisions are required:
   A.   Residential Construction:
      1.   New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated one and one
half feet (1.5’) above base flood elevation.
      2.   Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor other than a crawl space
constructed in conformance with subsection
15.800.12C6 of this chapter subject to flooding are prohibited or shall be
designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls
by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect or must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
         a.   A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided on opposite walls.
         b.   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1')
above the highest inside or outside adjacent grade.
         c.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers or other coverings
or devices; provided, that they may permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
   B.   Manufactured Homes:
      1.   All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved within
Zones A, AH and AE shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the
bottom of the structural frame or the lowest point of any attached appliances,
whichever is lowest, of the manufactured home is at least one and one half feet
(1.5’) above the base flood elevation or at least three and one half feet
(3.5’) above the highest adjacent grade when no base flood elevation data is
available and shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist floatation, collapse, and lateral movement in accordance with
the provisions of subsection
15.800.12B2 of this chapter. This requirement is in addition to the applicable
state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
      2.   All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on
sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within zones A, AH,
and AE as shown on the community's FIRM are subject to the provisions of
subparagraph 1, above.
   C.   Nonresidential Construction: New construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure
shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to one and one
half feet (1.5’) above the base flood elevation or, together with attendant
utility and sanitary facilities, shall:
      1.   Be flood proofed so that below the base flood elevation the
structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water;
      2.   Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy;
      3.   Be certified by a Nevada licensed professional engineer or architect
that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted
standards of practice for meeting provisions of this subsection based on their
development and/or review of the structural design, specifications and plans.
Such certifications shall be provided to the official as set forth in
subsection
15.800.08B5 of this chapter.
      4.   Nonresidential structures that are elevated, not flood proofed, must
meet the same standards for space below the lowest floor as described in
subsection A2 of this section.
      5.   Applicants flood proofing nonresidential buildings shall be notified
that flood insurance premiums will be based on rates that are one foot (1')
below the flood proofed level (e.g., a building constructed to the base flood
level will be rated as 1 foot below that level).
   D.   Floodways: Located within areas of special flood hazard established in
subsection
15.800.07A of this chapter or based on the best information available, are
areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous
area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential
projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
      1.   Encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements and other development are prohibited unless it has been
demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses, performed in accordance
with standard engineering practice, supported by technical data and signed by a
professional engineer licensed in the State of Nevada, that the proposed
encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the
community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge, and the Federal
Emergency Management Agency has issued a conditional letter of map revision
(CLOMR).
      2.   If a floodway has not been designated within the special flood
hazard areas established in Basis for Establishing Areas of Special Flood
Hazard, no new construction, substantial improvement, or other development
(including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE, unless it has
been demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when
combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase
the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one half foot (0.5’) at
any point within the county.
      3.   If subsection D1 of this section is satisfied, all new construction
and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of this section and section
15.800.12 of this chapter.
      4.   A No-Rise Certificate prepared by a professional engineer licensed
in the State of Nevada must be submitted with the floodplain development
application to the County.
      5.   No manufactured homes shall be placed in a floodway except in
existing manufactured home parks or existing manufactured home subdivisions in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
      6.   The above exceptions in paragraphs D(1) and (2) do not apply, and
the Administrator may not issue a floodplain development review/permit for any
encroachment in the adopted regulatory floodway, including without limitation,
fill, new construction, substantial improvements, storage of equipment or
supplies, and any other development where the encroachment involves the
division of land or increases in the permitted density.
   E.   Recreational Vehicles: All recreational vehicles placed on sites within
the floodplain on the FIRM will be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a
recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking
system, is attached to a site only by quick disconnect type utilities and
security devices, and has no permanently attached additions).
   F.   Breakaway Walls: A breakaway wall must have a safe design loading
resistance of not less than ten (10) and no more than twenty (20) pounds per
square foot. Use of breakaway wall must be certified by a professional engineer
or architect licensed in the State of Nevada and must meet the following
conditions:
      1.   Breakaway wall collapse must result from a water load less than that
which would occur during the base flood; and
      2.   The elevated portion of the building must not incur any structural
damage due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously in the
event of the base flood.
   G.   All new buildings constructed on fill in the regulatory floodplain:
      1.   Must be constructed on properly designed and compacted fill (e.g.,
fill that meets the criteria of (1) Section 1803.5.8, Section 1804.4 and
Section 1804.5.1 of the International Building Code, (2) Section 2.4 of ASCE
24, or (3) their equivalent);
      2.   Must be on fill that has appropriate protection from erosion and
scour; and
      3.   Must meet a compensatory storage requirement (for the building and
fill) that meets the criteria of
15.800.12A6.
   H.   Prohibition Of Outdoor Storage Of Materials:
      1.   Hazardous materials are prohibited from being stored indoors or
outdoors within an area designated as special flood hazard area except as
follows:
         a.   Hazardous materials for agricultural use stored indoors or
outdoors within an area designated as agricultural in a special flood hazard
area.
         b.   Hazardous materials may be stored indoors within structures
legally existing and conforming to all building and zoning requirements as of
the effective date of ________ within an area designated as a special flood
hazard area if the hazardous materials are stored elevated above the base flood
elevation in accordance with the lowest floor elevation requirements.
   I.   Landscaping And Landscaping Berms: The planting of landscaping in
special flood hazard areas shall consider the least resistance to stormwater
flow. The construction of landscaping berms within the special flood hazard
area shall be designed in consideration of the direction of stormwater flow and
will not be allowed to divert the direction of flow. Grading plans for any new
construction where landscaping or landscape berms are proposed must show no
adverse impact to the floodplain and must be included in the building permit
submittal.
   J.   Multiple Flood Zones: Proposed construction, including without
limitation, substantial improvement, and other development, of a parcel within
multiple flood zones must be constructed to the standards of the most
restrictive flood zone.
   K.   Maintenance Of Flood Protection Measures: The maintenance of any and
all flood protection measures (levees, dikes, dams, or reservoirs) and
alterations or relocations of watercourses will be required of the jurisdiction
where such measures provide protection. If these measures are privately owned,
an operation or maintenance plan and a recorded operation or maintenance
agreement with the county, including enforcement provisions, will be required
of the owner. The operation or maintenance plan and recorded operation or
maintenance agreement must be on file with the community development
department.
   L.   Disclosure Requirements: Before the purchaser of a property which is
located partially or completely within a special flood hazard area, X (shaded)
flood zone, or dam inundation area signs a sales agreement, opens escrow or at
least ten (10) days prior to any conveyance of the property, whichever occurs
earlier, the seller shall, by separate written document, disclose to the
purchaser the applicable special flood hazard area and X (shaded) flood zone
designation(s).
      1.   The seller shall retain a copy of the disclosure document which has
been signed by the purchaser acknowledging the date of receipt by the purchaser
of the original document.
      2.   The information contained in the disclosure document must:
         a.   Be updated not less than once every six (6) months;
         b.   Advise the purchaser that the property may be subject to periodic
flooding;
         c.   Advise the purchaser that the property is in an area having been
identified as having special flood, mudslide, or flood-related erosion hazards
and/or a moderate flood hazard; and
         d.   Provide the purchaser with instructions on how to obtain more
information from the community development department regarding special flood
hazard areas and the X (shaded) flood zone, flood insurance, and other
available flood related resources. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 607, 9-19-
2019)
15.800.14: VARIANCES AND APPEALS:
   A.   Authority: The Board shall hear and decide appeals and requests for
variances from the requirements of this chapter.
   B.   Appeals:
      1.   The Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is
an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the Floodplain
Administrator of this chapter.
      2.   Those aggrieved by the decision of the Board may appeal such
decision to the appropriate court as provided in Nevada Revised Statutes.
   C.   Variances:
      1.   Application For Variance: In passing upon such applications, the
Board shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
         a.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
         b.   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
         c.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
         d.   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility
to the community;
         e.   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
         f.   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
         g.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
         h.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program for that area;
         i.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
         j.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
         k.   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water system and streets and
bridges.
      2.   Conditions May Be Imposed: Upon consideration of the factors of
subsection C1 of this section and the purposes of this chapter, the Board may
attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to
further the purposes of this chapter.
      3.   Standards For Granting Variances:
         a.   Generally, the only condition under which a variance from the
elevation standard may be issued is for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2) acre or less in size
contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below
the base flood level, providing items in subsections C1a through C1k of this
section have been fully considered. As the lot size increases, the technical
justification required for issuing the variance increases.
         b.   Variances may be issued for the rehabilitation or restoration of
historic structures.
         c.   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if
any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
         d.   Variances shall only be issued upon determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard to afford
relief.
         e.   Variances shall only be issued upon:
            (1)   A showing of good and sufficient cause such as renovation,
rehabilitation or reconstruction. Variances issued for economic considerations,
aesthetics or because variances have been used in the past are not good and
sufficient cause;
            (2)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
            (3)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization
of the public or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
         f.   Variances, as interpreted in the national flood insurance
program, are based on the general zoning law principle that they pertain to a
physical piece of property, they are not personal in nature and do not pertain
to the structure, its inhabitants, economic or financial circumstances. They
primarily address small lots in densely populated residential neighborhoods. As
such, variances from the flood elevations should be quite rare.
         g.   Variances may be issued for nonresidential buildings in very
limited circumstances to allow a lesser degree of flood-proofing than
watertight or dry flood-proofing, where it can be determined that such action
will have low damage potential, complies with all other variance criteria
except subsection C3a of this section and otherwise complies with subsections
15.800.12A and B of this chapter.
      4.   Notice When Variance Granted: Any applicant to whom a variance is
granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to
be built with a lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that
the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
   D.   Records And Reports: The County Clerk shall maintain the records of all
appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency upon request. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.800.15: LETTERS OF MAP REVISION/AMENDMENT:
National flood insurance program regulations provide procedures to remove
property from the 100-year floodplain or from a special flood hazard area.
Amendments and revisions to community flood insurance rate maps cannot
adversely impact the floodplain or floodway delineations of the level of the
100-year flood.
There are several procedures provided whereby the Federal Insurance
Administrator will review information from the community, an owner, or a lessee
of property where it is believed the property should not be included in a
special flood hazard area.
Submissions to FEMA for revisions to effective flood insurance studies (FISs)
by individual and community requesters will require the signing of application/
certification forms. These forms will provide FEMA with assurance that all
pertinent data relating to the revision is included in the submittal. They will
also assure that: a) the data and methodology are based on current conditions;
b) qualified professionals have assembled data and performed all necessary
computations; and c) all individuals and organizations impacted by proposed
changes are aware of the changes and will have an opportunity to comment on
them. FEMA procedures permit the following types of request:
A request for a revision to the effective FIS information (FIRM, FBFM, and/or
FIS report) is usually a request that FEMA replace the effective floodplain
boundaries, flood profiles, floodway boundaries, etc., with those determined by
the requester. Before FEMA will replace the effective FIS information with the
revised, the requester must: a) provide all of the data used in determining the
revised floodplain boundaries, flood profiles, floodway boundaries, etc.; b)
provide all data necessary to demonstrate that the physical modifications to
the floodplain have been adequately designed to withstand the impacts of the
one percent (1%) annual chance flood event and will be adequately maintained;
c) demonstrate that the revised information (e.g., hydrologic and hydraulic
analyses and the resulting floodplain and floodway boundaries) is consistent
with the effective FIS information.
Requests for amendments or revisions to FEMA maps must be reviewed and
submitted to FEMA by the Board with the applicant for a map amendment or
revision required to prepare all the supporting information and appropriate
FEMA forms.
The scientific or technical information to be submitted with these requests may
include, but is not limited to, the following:
   A.   An actual copy of the recorded plat map bearing the seal of the
appropriate recordation official County Clerk or Recorder of Deeds indicating
the official recordation and proper citation, deed or plat book volume and page
number, or an equivalent identification where annotation of the deed or plat
book is not the practice.
   B.   A topographical map showing:
      1.   Ground elevation contours in relation to the North American Vertical
Datum (NAVD) 1988 or the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) 1927 (MSL).
      2.   The total area of the property in question.
      3.   The location of the structure or structures located on the property
in question.
      4.   The elevation of the lowest adjacent grade to a structure or
structures.
      5.   An indication of the curvilinear line which represents the area
subject to inundation by a base flood. The curvilinear line should be based
upon information provided by an appropriate authoritative source, such as a
Federal agency, Department of Water Resources, a County Water Control District,
a County or city engineer, a Federal Emergency Management Agency flood
insurance study, or a determination by a registered professional engineer.
   C.   A copy of the FHBM or FIRM indicating the location of the property in
question.
   D.   A certification by a Nevada licensed professional engineer or Nevada
licensed land surveyor that the lowest grade adjacent to the structure is above
the base flood elevation.
   E.   The completion of the appropriate forms in the Federal Emergency
Management Agency's packets, amendments and revisions to national flood
insurance program maps (MT-1 FEMA form 81-87 series and MT-2 FEMA form 81-89
series).
   F.   The applicant shall provide the proposed map revision to the Floodplain
Administrator in form and format compatible with the County geographical
information system (GIS). The scale of the plan, improvements, monuments and
other items shall be in model space correctly oriented to coordinate system as
established by the GIS coordinator. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 607, 9-19-
2019)
15.800.16: WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purpose and is based on available information derived
from scientific and engineering methods of study. Larger floods can and will
occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural
causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special
flood hazards and X (Shaded) flood zones or uses permitted within such areas
will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create
liability on the part of Lyon County or any officer or employee thereof or the
Federal Insurance Administration or the Federal Emergency Management Agency for
any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any
administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018; amd.
Ord. 607, 9-19-2019)
CHAPTER 1200
APPENDIX A - GLOSSARY AND DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
15.1200.01: Purpose
15.1200.02: Interpretations
15.1200.03: How To Use This Appendix
15.1200.04: Part 1 - Land Use Categories And Types
15.1200.04.1: Residential Uses
15.1200.04.2: Public, Institutional, And Civic Uses
15.1200.04.3: Agricultural Uses
15.1200.04.4: Commercial Uses
15.1200.04.5: Industrial Uses
15.1200.05: Part 2 - General Terms And Definitions
15.1200.06: Part 3 - Acronyms
15.1200.01: PURPOSE:
This appendix contains definitions of technical and procedural terms used
throughout this title. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018)
15.1200.02: INTERPRETATIONS:
   A.   For the purpose of this title, all words shall have their normal and
customary meanings, unless specifically defined within this appendix or the
body of this title.
   B.   All definitions which reference the Nevada Revised Statutes (NRS),
Nevada Administrative Code (NAC), and International Building Code (ICODE) are
intended to mirror the definitions in these codes at the effective date of this
title or as amended. If the definition in this title conflicts with a
definition under State law or regulation, the State definition shall control
over this definition.
   C.   These definitions are not intended to establish regulations. (Ord. 603,
11-1-2018)
15.1200.03: HOW TO USE THIS APPENDIX:
Part 1 of this appendix defines the general land use categories and specific
land use types listed in section
15.320.03, tables 15.320-1, 15.320-2, 15.320-3, 15.320-4 and 15.320-5 of this
title.
Part 2 of this appendix defines words and terms used throughout this title.
Part 3 of this appendix identifies acronyms used throughout this title. (Ord.
603, 11-1-2018)
15.1200.04: PART 1 - LAND USE CATEGORIES AND TYPES:
15.1200.04.1: RESIDENTIAL USES:
   A.   Household Living: This use category is characterized by residential
occupancy of a dwelling unit by a household. Tenancy is arranged on a month-to-
month or longer basis (lodging where tenancy may be arranged for a period of
less than 30 days is classified under the "lodging facilities" category).
Common accessory uses include recreational activities, keeping of pets,
gardens, personal storage buildings, hobbies, and parking of the occupants'
vehicles. Specific use types include, but are not limited to:
      1.   Dwelling, Duplex: A detached house on a single lot designed for and
occupied exclusively as the residence of not more than two (2) families, each
living as an independent housekeeping unit.
      2.   Dwelling, Live/Work: A structure or portion of a structure: a) that
combines a commercial or manufacturing activity that is allowed in the zone
with a residential living space for the owner of the commercial or
manufacturing business, or the owner's employee, and that person's household;
b) where the resident owner or employee of the business is responsible for the
commercial or manufacturing activity performed; and c) where the commercial or
manufacturing activity conducted takes place subject to a valid business
license associated with the premises.
      3.   Dwelling, Single-Family Detached: A detached dwelling unit designed
to be occupied by not more than one family. This use type includes stick-built
homes, modular homes, manufactured homes (HUD) and mobile factory built homes.
      4.   Dwelling, Factory Built: Factory built homes shall include the
following:
         a.   Manufactured (HUD): These are homes built entirely in the factory
under a Federal Building Code administered by the U.S. Department of Housing
and Urban Development (HUD). The Federal Manufactured Home Construction and
Safety Standards (commonly known as the HUD Code) went into effect June 15,
1976. Manufactured homes may be single or multi section and are transported on
their own chassis (but not under their own power) to the site and installed on
permanent or temporary foundations. The chassis remains permanently attached to
the home. The Federal standards regulate manufactured housing design and
construction, strength, durability, transportability, fire resistance, energy
efficiency and quality. The HUD Code also sets performance standards for the
heating, plumbing, air conditioning, thermal and electrical systems. On-site
additions, such as garages, decks and porches must be built to local Building
Codes. A building permit must be obtained for all work performed on site to
install this type of home.
         b.   Mobile Homes: This term references manufactured homes produced
prior to June 15, 1976, when the HUD Code went into effect. Mobile homes may be
single or multi section and are transported on their own chassis (but not under
their own power) to the site and installed on permanent or temporary
foundations. The chassis remains permanently attached to the home. On-site
additions, such as garages, decks and porches must be built to local Building
Codes. A building permit must be obtained for all work performed on site to
install this type of home.
         c.   Modular Homes: These factory built homes are constructed to the
State of Nevada and locally adopted Building Codes. Modules are transported to
the site and installed on a permanent foundation. On-site additions, such as
garages, decks and porches must be built to local Building Codes. A building
permit must be obtained for all work performed on site to install this type of
dwelling.
      5.   Dwelling, Multi-Family: A dwelling or group of dwellings on one lot
containing separate living units for three (3) or more families, but which may
have joint services or facilities. Each dwelling unit is designed for occupancy
by one family within each unit and is attached by a common wall. The use
includes condominiums and apartments.
      6.   Dwelling, Townhouse: A building that has two (2) or more single-
family dwelling units erected on top of each other or in a row as a single
building, each unit being separated from the adjoining unit(s) by a fire wall
(to be constructed in accordance with code) along the dividing lot line, and
each such building being separated from any other building by space on all
sides. Each individual townhouse unit has individual front and rear access to
the outside. Townhouse units are typically surrounded by common areas owned and
maintained by a property owners' association. Each unit is identified by
specific title and ownership that includes the structure as well as the ground
immediately below the unit. The use includes patio homes and row homes.
      7.   Mobile Home Park: A residential development that consists of mobile
homes that are transported to the park site for use as permanent dwelling
units.
      8.   Courtyard Cottage: The courtyard cottage building type consists of a
series of small detached or attached houses on a single lot, arranged to define
a shared court that is perpendicular to the street. All units address and are
accessed from this shared court. This building type provides an option for
living in a smaller, high-quality house in a more community- driven environment
due to the shared outdoor space.
   B.   Group Living: This category is characterized by residential occupancy
of a structure by a group of people who do not meet the definition of
"household living". Tenancy is arranged on a monthly or longer basis, and the
size of the group may be larger than a family.
Generally, group living structures have a common eating area for residents. The
residents may receive care, training, or treatment, and caregivers may or may
not also reside at the site. Accessory uses commonly include recreational
facilities and vehicle parking for occupants and staff. Specific use types
include, but are not limited to:
      1.   Group Living Facility: Large: Any residence for eleven (11) or more
unrelated individuals, including but not limited to, any of the following
facilities that meet this definition:
         a.   A secure residential treatment center, as defined in Nevada
Revised Statutes 449.017, as amended; or
         b.   A shelter for homeless persons; or
         c.   A dormitory; or
         d.   A rooming or boarding house; or
         e.   An organizational house capable of accommodating more than ten
(10) unrelated individuals.
      2.   Group Living Facility: Small: A residence for up to ten (10) or less
unrelated individuals, none of whom are receiving on-site medical or
psychological treatment, but some or all of whom may be receiving on-site
physical assistance with day-to-day living activities. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018;
amd. Ord. 607, 9-19-2019)
15.1200.04.2: PUBLIC, INSTITUTIONAL, AND CIVIC USES:
   A.   Quasi-Residential:
      1.   Nursing Care Home: A residential facility maintained for the purpose
of providing skilled nursing care and medical supervision at a lower level than
that available in a hospital to no more than nine (9) residents.
      2.   Nursing Care Facility: A facility that is maintained primarily for
the care, treatment, and dispensing or administration of medication to more
than nine (9) inpatients including the aged, ill, injured, or infirm, on a 24-
hour basis, under the direction of a licensed physician or nurse.
      3.   Organizational House: A building containing sleeping rooms,
bathrooms, common rooms, and a central kitchen and dining room maintained
exclusively for members of a fraternity, sorority, religious organization, and
their guests or visitors and affiliated with an institution of higher learning
or religious organization.
   B.   Community Service: Uses including buildings, structures, or facilities
owned, operated, or occupied by a governmental entity or nonprofit organization
to provide a service to the public. Specific use types include, but are not
limited to:
      1.   Government Administration And Civic Buildings: An office of a
governmental agency that provides administrative and/or direct services to the
public, such as, but not limited to: Post Offices, employment offices,
libraries, public assistance offices, or motor vehicle licensing and
registration services.
      2.   Social, Fraternal Lodges: Buildings and facilities owned or operated
by a corporation, association, person, or persons for a social, educational, or
recreational purpose, to which membership is required for participation, and
not primarily operated for profit nor to render a service that is customarily
carried on as a business.
      3.   Public Assembly: A building or structure, or group of buildings or
structures, intended primarily for the conducting of organized assembly, with
membership not required for participation. Facilities intended for use by
religious organizations for worship and confraternity, as well as non-
sectarian community centers or facilities are considered public assemblies.
Accessory uses may include meeting rooms and childcare provided for persons
while they are attending assembly functions. Schools associated with assembly
uses are not an accessory use.
      4.   Public Safety Facility: The conduct of publicly owned safety and
emergency stations, such as, but not limited to, fire stations, police
stations, and emergency medical and ambulance services.
      5.   Museum: A place or building where objects of historical, artistic,
or scientific interest are exhibited, preserved, or studied.Museum: A place or
building where objects of historical, artistic, or scientific interest are
exhibited, preserved, or studied.
      6.   General Aviation Airport: Civilian airports that do not serve
scheduled passenger service are typically known as general aviation airports.
General aviation airports usually serve private aircraft and small aircraft
charter operations. General aviation airports meet the following criteria:
         a.   Designated by the Nevada Department of Transportation Airport and
Heliport System Plan as having a general role;
   C.   Day-Care Facilities: Facilities that provide care for children or
adults on a regular basis away from their primary residence. Accessory uses
include offices, recreation areas, and parking. This category does not include
public or private schools or facilities operated in connection with a shopping
center, or other use, where children are cared for while parents or guardians
are occupied on the premises, except on-site workplace child care as defined
below.
      1.   Child Care Center: A facility, by whatever name known, that is
maintained for the whole or part of a day, but less than twenty four (24) hours
for the care of seven (7) or more children who are eighteen (18) years of age
or younger and who are not related to the owner, operator, or manager thereof,
whether such facility is operated with or without compensation for such care
and with or without stated educational purposes.
      2.   Child Care In-Home: Any child care arrangement in a residential
setting that provides day care on a regular basis for less than twenty four
(24) hours per day for no more than six (6) children who are eighteen (18)
years of age or younger, and who are unrelated to the home's occupants.
      3.   On-Site Workplace Child Care: A facility co-located with a workplace
that is maintained for the care of children who are eighteen (18) years of age
or younger and who are related to individuals employed by the workplace.
      4.   Adult Day Care Center: An adult day care center, also commonly known
as adult day services, is a non-residential facility that supports the health,
nutritional, social support, and daily living needs of adults in professionally
staffed, group settings.
   D.   Health Care Facility: Health care uses are characterized by activities
focusing on medical services, particularly licensed public or private
institutions that provide primary health services and medical or surgical care
to persons suffering from illness, disease, injury, or other physical or mental
conditions. Accessory uses may include laboratories, outpatient, or training
facilities, and parking, or other amenities primarily for the use of employees
in the firm or building. Specific use types include, but are not limited to:
      1.   Hospital: A building or portion thereof for the accommodation of
sick, injured, or infirm persons. Services regularly include the keeping of
patients overnight.
      2.   Immediate Care Facility: A non-residential facility, whether public
or private, principally engaged in providing on an emergency basis out-patient
services for health diagnosis, treatment of human disease, pain, injury, or
physical condition, by licensed physicians and nurses, and providing access for
emergency vehicles. These facilities may also provide for the dispensing of
pharmaceutical or medical supplies.
      3.   Medical Or Dental Office Or Clinic: An establishment primarily
engaged in furnishing, on an outpatient basis, chiropractic, dental, medical,
surgical, medical imaging, or other services to individuals, including the
offices of chiropractors, physicians, dentists, and other health practitioners,
medical and dental laboratories, outpatient care, and outpatient care
facilities. Patients are not kept overnight except under emergency conditions.
   E.   Recreational Facilities: Park and open space uses focus on natural
areas, large areas consisting mostly of vegetative landscaping or outdoor
recreation, community gardens, or public squares. Lands tend to have few
structures. Accessory uses may include clubhouses, playgrounds, maintenance
facilities, concessions, caretaker's quarters, and parking. Specific use types
include, but are not limited to:
      1.   Athletic Fields And Courts: Land, often requiring equipment,
designed for outdoor games and sports such as baseball, football, tennis, and
soccer.
      2.   Community Garden: A public facility for cultivation of fruits,
flowers, vegetables, or ornamental plants by more than one person or family.
      3.   Open Space: An area that is not developable due to environmental
constraints or on which development has been limited for aesthetic,
environmental, or recreational purposes, not including golf courses.
      4.   Park: An area open to the general public and reserved for
recreational, educational, or scenic purposes.
      5.   General Outdoor Recreation, Commercial: Intensely developed
recreational uses such as amusement parks, miniature golf courses, commercial
tennis courts, batting cages, skateboard or skate parks or courses, bicycle
motocross courses, water parks or slides, drive-in movie theaters, and archery
facilities.
      6.   Equestrian Facilities: Facilities where horses are used for rentals,
riding lessons, rodeos, shows, or training, where training may include horses
not boarded on-site.
      7.   Playground: An active recreational area that may include a variety
of facilities, including equipment for younger children as well as court and
field games.
      8.   Private Residential Recreation Facility: A recreation facility
operated on behalf of and open only to bona fide residents and guests of a
residential development.
      9.   Golf Course: A tract of land laid out for at least nine (9) holes
for playing golf that may include a clubhouse, dining and snack bars, pro shop,
and practice facilities.
      10.   Driving Range: A tract of land for practicing long golf shots,
especially drives, with clubs and balls available for rent from the facility.
      11.   Special Events And Concerts: A special event is an activity or
series of activities, specific to an identifiable time and place, most often
produced in conjunction with community organizations, held on public property,
and generally occurring once a year. Special events include, but are not
limited to the following:
         a.   Any activity involving entertainment and/or amplified sound,
food, beverage, merchandise sales or any activity promoted as a festival, trade
show open to the public, craft show, public dance, special event, concert, or
performance.
         b.   Any activity that substantially increases or disrupts the normal
flow of traffic on any street or highway.
         c.   Any activity which involves the use of public facilities.
         d.   Any activity which involves the use of any city services that
would not be necessary in the absence of such an event.
      12.   Indoor Shooting Range: A facility designed to provide a confined
space for safe target practice with firearms, archery equipment, or other
weapons whether open to the public, open only to private membership, or open to
organizational training such as law enforcement, or any combination thereof.
      13.   Outdoor Shooting Ranges: A facility designed to provide a defined
outdoor space for safe target practice with firearms, archery equipment, or
other weapons whether open to the public, open only to private membership, or
open to organizational training such as law enforcement, or any combination
thereof. Includes trap/skeet ranges and sporting clay courses.
      14.   Paintball Facility: An indoor or outdoor facility for paintball
gaming and competition.
      15.   Racetrack - Generic: A circuit or course used for motor racing,
bicycle motocross, etc.
      16.   Private Use Airfield: Civilian airfields under private ownership
for private use only. Private use airfields meet the following criteria:
         a.   Designated by the Nevada Department of Transportation Airport and
Heliport System Plan as having either a access or backcountry role;
   F.   Educational Facilities: Public, private, and parochial institutions at
the primary, elementary, middle, high school, or post-secondary level, or trade
or business schools, that provide educational instruction to students.
Accessory uses include play areas, cafeterias, recreational and sport
facilities, auditoriums, and before- or after-school day care. Specific use
types include, but are not limited to:
      1.   College Or University: A degree-granting institution, other than a
trade school, that provides education beyond the high school level. The use
includes, but is not limited to, classroom buildings, offices, laboratories,
lecture halls, athletic facilities, and dormitories.
      2.   Elementary Or Secondary School: An educational institution that
satisfies the applicable Education Laws of the State of Nevada for students in
elementary or secondary grades.
      3.   Trade Or Vocational School: A secondary or higher education facility
primarily teaching usable skills that prepares students for jobs in a trade or
in industry, construction, or commerce, and meeting all applicable State
requirements for a facility of its type. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 637,
11-7-2024)
15.1200.04.3: AGRICULTURAL USES:
The use of land for farming, dairying, pasteurizing and grazing, horticulture,
floriculture, apiaries, animal and poultry husbandry, and accessory activities,
including but not limited to, storage, harvesting, feeding, or maintenance of
equipment excluding stockyards, slaughtering or commercial food processing.
Specific use types include, but are not limited to:
   A.   Farming, Traditional Or Ranch Uses: Land in active agricultural or
horticultural use characterized by conditions or activities which occur on a
farm in connection with the commercial production of land-based farm products,
and includes, but is not limited to, market produce at roadside stands or farm
markets; preparation for market, delivery to storage or to market, or to
carriers for transportation to market; transportation of equipment; noise,
dust, fumes, operation of machinery and irrigation pumps; ground and aerial
seeding or spraying; application of chemical and organic fertilizers,
conditioners, insecticides, pesticides and herbicides and associated drift of
such materials; and the employment and use of labor.
      1.   Agriculture: The tilling of the soil, the raising of crops, the
gathering and harvesting of native plants, horticulture, viticulture,
floriculture, apiary, livestock farming, dairying, animal feeding operations,
animal husbandry, composting associated with the primary agricultural use, land
application of soil amendments or agricultural waste at agronomic rates, and
farm oriented storage for commercial value. Synonymous with farming or
ranching.
      2.   Stables: A facility where equine animals are sheltered, fed, or kept
for hire.
      3.   Reserved.
      4.   Vineyard: A plantation of grapevines, especially where wine grapes
are produced.
      5.   Agriculture Related Industry - On Farm: An on-farm commercial
enterprise devoted to the direct marketing of unprocessed and/or value-added
and soil-dependent agricultural products that are produced, processed, and sold
on-site. Farm-based businesses are intended to supplement farm income, improve
the efficiency of farming, and provide employment to farm family members. Farm-
based businesses are separate and distinct from agriculture support services.
      6.   Agricultural Support Services: Any nonagricultural use which is
directly related to agriculture and directly dependent upon agriculture for its
existence. These support services generally exist off-site and within districts
that are intended to facilitate the production, marketing and distribution of
agricultural products. Agricultural support services are separate and distinct
from farm-based business.
      7.   Agricultural Tourism: Agricultural tourism means agriculturally
related accessory uses designed to bring the public to the farm on a temporary
or continuous basis, such as U-pick farm sales, retail sales of farm products,
farm mazes, pumpkin patch sales, farm animal viewing and petting, wagon rides,
farm tours, horticultural nurseries and associated display gardens, cider
pressing, wine or cheese tasting, etc.
      8.   Farm Market: A use primarily engaged in the retail sale of fresh
agricultural products, grown either on or off-site, but may include as
incidental and accessory to the principal use, the sale of factory sealed or
prepackaged food products and some limited non-food items. This definition does
not include the sale of livestock.
      9.   Winery: An establishment that manufactures an alcoholic beverage
through fermentation of the natural content of fruits or other agricultural
products containing sugars on-site and is authorized to sell those fermented
beverages at retail or serve by the glass pursuant to the provisions of Nevada
Revised Statutes 597. In addition to manufacturing the establishment may grow
the raw materials, blend, age, bottle and store the fermented beverage on-site.
Sales areas, sampling areas, food service, dancing and musical entertainment
are permitted subject to all applicable State and County regulations.
      10.   Estate Distillery: An establishment which manufactures distilled
spirits from agricultural raw materials through distillation processes and is
authorized to sell those distilled spirits at retail pursuant to the provisions
of Nevada Revised Statutes 597. In addition to manufacturing the facility may
blend, age, store and bottle the spirits as well as grow the agricultural raw
materials on-site. Sales areas, sampling areas, food service, dancing and
musical entertainment are permitted subject to all applicable State and County
regulations.
      11.   Craft Distillery: An establishment which manufactures distilled
spirits from agricultural raw materials through distillation processes and is
authorized to sell those distilled spirits at retail pursuant to the provisions
of Nevada Revised Statutes 597. In addition to manufacturing the facility may
blend, age, store and bottle the spirits as well as grow the agricultural raw
materials on-site. Sales areas, sampling areas, food service, dancing and
musical entertainment are permitted subject to all applicable State and County
regulations.
      12.   Brewery: An establishment that manufactures malt beverages but does
not sell those malt beverages at retail on-site pursuant to the provisions of
Nevada Revised Statutes 597. In addition to manufacturing the establishment may
grow the raw materials, age, store and bottle the malt beverages on-site.
      13.   Milk Processing: See subsection
15.1200.04.5B8 of this chapter.
      14.   Greenhouse Or Nursery, Commercial: Land or green houses used to
raise flowers, shrubs, and plants for sale.
   B.   Animal-Related Services: Animal-related services uses involve the
boarding and care of animals on a commercial basis. Accessory uses may include
confinement facilities for animals, parking, and storage areas. Specific use
types include, but are not limited to:
      1.   Kennels:
         a.   Breeder's Kennel: Any enclosure, premises, building, structure,
lot or area where more than three (3) dogs of a recognized registered breed
over six (6) months of age are kept, harbored or maintained as follows:
            (1)   For breeding;
            (2)   For showing in recognized dog shows, field or obedience
trials;
            (3)   For working or hunting; or
            (4)   For improving the variety or breed in temperament or
conformation with a view to exhibition in shows or trials or for use as working
dogs in hunting.
         b.   Commercial Kennel: Any enclosure, premises, building, structure,
lot or area where more than three (3) dogs over six (6) months of age are kept,
harbored or maintained for commercial purposes.
         c.   Hobby Kennel: A noncommercial kennel at or adjoining a private
residence where adult dogs are kept for purposes other than breeding as a
primary interest, such as for hunting or organized field trials, obedience or
confirmation competition. A hobby kennel may encompass up to ten (10) adult
domestic dogs, cats or combination thereof, and shall not produce more than
three (3) litters or cats or dogs or a combination thereof per year.
      2.   Veterinary Clinic/Hospital - Large Animal: A facility where
livestock and other large animals are given medical or surgical treatment and
are cared for during the time of such treatment. Extended boarding of animals
shall be incidental to the clinic/hospital use.
      3.   Veterinary Clinic/Hospital - Small Animal: A facility where
household pets and other small animals are given medical or surgical treatment
and are cared for during the time of such treatment. Use as a kennel shall be
limited to short-term boarding and shall be only incidental to the clinic/
hospital use.
      4.   Animal Rescue Facility: Animal rescue facility means a facility
which is used to house or contain stray, homeless, abandoned or unwanted
animals. Animal rescue facilities are owned, operated or maintained by a public
body, established humane society, animal welfare society, society for the
prevention of cruelty to animals or other nonprofit organization devoted to the
welfare, protection and humane treatment of animals. Animal rescue facilities
also include facilities for the rehabilitation of wildlife.
      5.   Zoo: A park-like area in which live animals are kept in cages or
large enclosures for public exhibition. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 607, 9-
19-2019)
15.1200.04.4: COMMERCIAL USES:
   A.   Financial Services: Establishments that provide retail banking
services, mortgage lending, and similar financial services to individuals and
businesses. This classification includes those institutions engaged in the on-
site circulation of cash money and check-cashing facilities, but does not
include bail bond brokers. Accessory uses may include automatic teller
machines, offices, and parking. The use may or may not be allowed to have a
drive- through facility, depending on the zone district.
   B.   Food And Beverage Services: Food and beverage service businesses serve
prepared food or beverages for consumption on or off the premises. Accessory
uses may include food preparation areas, offices, and parking. Specific use
types include, but are not limited to:
      1.   Bar Or Nightclub: A building or part of a building used primarily
for the sale or dispensing of alcoholic beverages or liquor by the drink.
Dancing and musical entertainment are permitted, subject to all applicable
County regulations.
      2.   Brew Pub: An establishment which manufactures malt beverages and
sells those malt beverages at retail pursuant to the provisions of Nevada
Revised Statutes chapter 597. Eating, dancing and musical entertainment are
permitted subject to all applicable County regulations.
      3.   Craft Distillery: An establishment which manufactures distilled
spirits from agricultural raw materials through distillation processes and is
authorized to sell those distilled spirits at retail pursuant to the provisions
of Nevada Revised Statutes 597. In addition to manufacturing the facility may
blend, age, store and bottle the spirits. Sales areas, sampling areas, food
service, dancing and musical entertainment are permitted subject to all
applicable State and County regulations.
      4.   Restaurant, With Drive-Through: An eating/drinking establishment in
which the principal business is the preparation and sale of foods or beverages
to the customer in a ready-to- consume state and in which the design or method
of operation of all or any portion of the business allows food or beverages to
be served directly to the customer in a motor vehicle without the need for the
customer to exit the motor vehicle.
      5.   Restaurant, Without Drive-Through: An area or structure in which the
principal business is the preparation and sale of foods and beverages to the
customer in a ready-to-consume state. Operations may or may not include outdoor
seating areas or outdoor food service, but the operation does not include a
drive- through facility.
      6.   Catering Services: An establishment in which food and beverages are
prepared for consumption off the premises and are not served to customers on
the premises or to take out, and does not include a food service establishment.
      7.   Food Truck/Food Carts: A food truck, mobile kitchen, mobile canteen,
roach coach, or catering truck is a mobile venue that transports and sells
food.
   C.   Lodging Facilities: For-profit facilities where lodging, meals, and the
like are provided to transient visitors and guests for a defined period.
Specific use types include, but are not limited to:
      1.   Bed And Breakfast ("B&B") Or Inn: One building containing no more
than eight (8) sleeping rooms that are occupied or intended or designed to be
occupied as temporary accommodations for persons who are lodged with or without
meals, for compensation, but not including a trailer court or camp, hospital,
asylum, orphanage, or correctional facility. B&B includes either the property
owner or a caretaker occupying the facility as a residence in addition to the
lodging use.
      2.   Campground Or RV Park: Any plot or parcel of real estate upon which
two (2) or more recreational vehicles or campsites are located, established,
maintained, or occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes for the general
public as temporary (not to exceed 14 days) living quarters for recreation or
vacation purposes regardless of whether a charge is made for such
accommodation.
      3.   Hotel, Motel, Or Lodge: A building or group of buildings containing
nine (9) or more sleeping rooms that are occupied or intended or designed to be
occupied as temporary accommodations for persons who are lodged with or without
meals, for compensation.
      4.   Vacation Rental: The renting out of a furnished dwelling unit on a
temporary basis. Hotel, motel, or lodge rooms are not considered vacation
rental units.
      5.   Guest Ranch Or Dude Ranch: Guest ranch shall mean a use
incorporating two (2) or more guest rooms, other than a boardinghouse, hotel or
motel, and including outdoor recreational facilities such as but not limited to
horseback riding, swimming, tennis courts, shuffleboard courts, barbecue and
picnic facilities, and dining facilities intended primarily for use by the
guests of the guest ranch. The facility may include meeting rooms and
restaurants which cater primarily to guests of the guest ranch.
   D.   Offices, Business And Professional: Business and professional office
provide executive, management, administrative, or professional services, but
not involving the sale of merchandise except as incidental to a permitted use.
Typical examples include real estate, insurance, property management,
investment, employment, travel, advertising, law, architecture, design,
engineering, accounting, call centers, and similar offices. Accessory uses may
include cafeterias, health facilities, parking, or other amenities primarily
for the use of employees in the firm or building.
   E.   Personal Services: Establishments that provide individual services
related to personal needs directly to customers at the site of the business, or
that receive goods from or return goods to the customer, which have been
treated or processed at that location or another location. Specific use types
include, but are not limited to:
      1.   Dry Cleaning And Laundry Service: An establishment where laundry or
dry cleaning is dropped off and picked up by customers, and that also includes
on-site laundry and/or cleaning activities.
      2.   General Personal Services: An establishment, whether for
consideration or not, that provides care, advice, aid, maintenance, repair,
treatment, or assistance, not including the practice of a profession and the
wholesale or retail sale of goods. Examples include, but are not limited to,
shoe repair, beauty and barber shops, massage therapy, tanning salons, tattoo
parlors, and dry cleaning pick-up and drop-off shops that do not conduct
cleaning on the premises.
   F.   Recreation And Entertainment, Indoor: Indoor recreation and
entertainment uses provide recreation or entertainment activities within an
enclosed environment. Accessory uses may include concessions, snack bars,
parking, and maintenance facilities. Specific use types include, but are not
limited to:
      1.   Adult Entertainment: Entertainment that is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on material depicting, describing, or relating to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. Uses shall include,
but shall not be limited to, the following:
         a.   Adult Bookstore: An establishment having as a substantial or
significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines, and other
periodicals and goods and items held for sale which are distinguished or
characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating
to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or an
establishment with a segment or sections devoted to the sale or display of such
material.
         b.   Adult Photo Studio: An establishment that, upon payment of a fee,
provides on-premises photographic equipment, services, and/or models for the
purpose of photographing specified anatomical areas.
         c.   Adult Theater: A theater used for the presentation of material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on material depicting,
describing, or relating to specified sexual activities.
      2.   Art Gallery: Any permanent facility for the collection and display
and/or sale of objects of art.
      3.   Movie Theater: An indoor theater for the showing of motion pictures.
      4.   Performance Hall: An indoor venue for staging live stage or musical
events.
   G.   Home Based Businesses:
      1.   Home Based Business: A limited small-scale commercial or
manufacturing activity conducted in whole or in part in either the resident's
single-family dwelling unit or in an accessory building on the resident's
residential lot, but is of a scale larger than a home occupation or home
business. A home based business may include limited small-scale fabrication,
with limited retail sales, that can be conducted without substantial adverse
impact on the residential character in the vicinity in compliance with the
standards listed for home based businesses and for artisan product
manufacturing and processing as set forth in section
15.335.03 of this title.
      2.   Home Occupation: A commercial activity conducted in a Residential
Zone District that complies with the home occupation standards as set forth in
section
15.335.03 of this title.
   H.   Retail Sales: Retail sales firms are involved in the sale, lease, or
rent of new or used products to the general public. Any outdoor display or sale
is subject to the regulations in chapter 336 of this title. Accessory uses may
include offices, parking, storage of goods, and assembly, repackaging, or
repair of goods for on-site sale. Specific use types include, but are not
limited to:
      1.   Grocery Store: A retail establishment primarily selling prepackaged
and perishable food as well as other convenience and household goods.
      2.   Convenience Store: A retail store that carries a limited selection
of basic items, as packaged foods and drug store items, and is open long hours
for the convenience of shoppers.
      3.   Liquor Store: A retail establishment licensed to sell alcoholic
beverages such as beer, wine, and liquor. No on-site consumption is allowed.
      4.   Peddling And Vending: Selling, offering for sale, or soliciting
orders for goods or services or distributing, disseminating, or gathering
information by written or spoken word upon the streets, sidewalks, or alleys,
or by going from place to place in a mobile nature, whether by foot or by other
means of transportation.
      5.   Retail, General: A commercial enterprise that provides goods
directly to the consumer, where such goods are available for immediate purchase
and removal from the premises by the consumer. Examples include, but are not
limited to, apparel shops, appliance sales, auto parts store, bait shops,
bakeries, bookstores, convenience stores without gas pumps, department stores,
factory outlet stores, florists, and souvenir shops. This use does not include
commercial greenhouses, grocery stores, or liquor stores.
   I.   Vehicles And Equipment: Vehicles and equipment uses include a broad
range of uses for the maintenance, sale, or rental of motor vehicles and
related equipment. Accessory uses may include incidental repair and storage and
offices. Specific use types include, but are not limited to:
      1.   Parking Lot: An open, hard-surfaced area, other than a street or
public way, to be used for the temporary storage of operable vehicles, and
available to the public, whether for compensation or for free. This use type
does not include off-street parking that is provided as accessory to principal
use. For the purposes of this title, parking structures shall also be
considered parking lots. Parking structures are structures designed to
accommodate vehicular parking spaces that are fully or partially enclosed or
located on the deck surface of a building. This definition includes parking
garages and deck parking.
      2.   Gasoline Sales: Any area used for retail sales of gasoline or other
fuels, or automobile accessories and incidental services.
      3.   Vehicle Sales And Rental: An establishment engaged in the display,
sale, leasing, or rental of new or used motor vehicles. Vehicles include, but
are not limited to, automobiles, light trucks, vans, trailers, recreational
vehicles, motorcycles, personal watercraft, utility trailers, all-terrain
vehicles, and mobile homes.
      4.   Vehicle Service And Repair: An establishment engaged in the repair
and maintenance of motor vehicles, including drive-thru car washes and vehicle
detailing services. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 607, 9-19-2019)
15.1200.04.5: INDUSTRIAL USES:
   A.   Industrial Service: Industrial service firms are engaged in the repair
or servicing of agricultural, industrial, business, or consumer machinery,
equipment, products, or by-products. Contractors and similar uses perform
services off-site. Few customers come to the site. Accessory activities may
include sales, offices, parking, and storage. Specific use types include, but
are not limited to:
      1.   Building Materials Sales: An establishment for the sale of
materials, hardware, and lumber customarily used in the construction of
buildings and other structures, including facilities for storage. Operations
may be indoor and/or outdoor.
      2.   General Industrial Service: All other industrial service
establishments not listed within one of the other enumerated use types.
Examples include: construction materials storage; welding shops; machine shops;
electric motor repair; repair, storage, salvage, or wrecking of heavy
machinery; and heavy truck servicing and repair.
      3.   Contractor's Yard Or Shop: Land or buildings used for the storage of
building and construction equipment and materials or for the performance of
shop or assembly work related to building and construction.
   B.   Manufacturing And Production: This use category includes firms involved
in the manufacturing, processing, fabrication, packaging, or assembly of goods.
Natural, constructed, raw, secondary, or partially completed materials may be
used. Products may be finished or semi-finished and are generally made for the
wholesale market, for transfer to other plants, or to order for firms or
consumers. Custom industry is included (i.e., establishments primarily engaged
in the on-site production of goods by hand manufacturing involving the use of
hand tools and small-scale equipment). Goods are generally not displayed or
sold on site, but if so, such activity is a subordinate part of sales.
Relatively few customers come to the manufacturing site. Accessory activities
may include retail sales, offices, cafeterias, parking, employee recreational
facilities, warehouses, storage yards, repair facilities, truck fleets, and
caretaker's quarters. Specific use types include, but are not limited to:
      1.   Assembly, Light: An establishment engaged only in the assembly of
goods. No manufacturing of parts occurs. Goods are shipped to the
establishment, assembled, packaged, and reshipped.
      2.   Manufacturing, Heavy: An establishment engaged in the manufacture or
compounding process of raw materials. Such activities may include the storage
of large volumes of highly flammable, toxic matter or explosive materials
needed for the manufacturing process. Examples include, but are not limited to:
refining or initial processing of raw materials; rolling, drawing, or extruding
of metals; asphalt batching plants; sawmills; meat slaughtering or packing
house; and manufacture or packaging of cement products, feed, fertilizer,
flour, glue, paint, petroleum products, soap, turpentine, varnish, charcoal, or
distilled products.
      3.   Manufacturing, Light: An establishment engaged in the manufacture,
predominantly from previously prepared materials, of finished products or
parts, including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, and packaging of
such products, and incidental storage, sales, and distribution of such
products, but excluding basic industrial processing. Examples include, but are
not limited to: airplane, automobile, or truck assembly, remodeling, or repair;
bottling works; boat building, machine or blacksmith shops; metalworking or
welding shops; paint shops; and printing and publishing shops.
      4.   Estate Distillery: An establishment which manufactures distilled
spirits from agricultural raw materials through distillation processes and is
authorized to sell those distilled spirits at retail pursuant to the provisions
of Nevada Revised Statutes 597. In addition to manufacturing the facility may
blend, age, store and bottle the spirits as well as grow the agricultural raw
materials on-site. Sales areas, sampling areas, food service, dancing and
musical entertainment are permitted subject to all applicable State and County
regulations.
      5.   Craft Distillery: An establishment which manufactures distilled
spirits from agricultural raw materials through distillation processes and is
authorized to sell those distilled spirits at retail pursuant to the provisions
of Nevada Revised Statutes 597. In addition to manufacturing the facility may
blend, age, store and bottle the spirits as well as grow the agricultural raw
materials on-site. Sales areas, sampling areas, food service, dancing and
musical entertainment are permitted subject to all applicable State and County
regulations.
      6.   Brewery: An establishment that manufactures malt beverages but does
not sell those malt beverages at retail on-site pursuant to the provisions of
Nevada Revised Statutes 597. In addition to manufacturing the establishment may
grow the raw materials, age, store and bottle the malt beverages on-site.
      7.   Winery: An establishment that manufactures an alcoholic beverage
through fermentation of the natural content of fruits or other agricultural
products containing sugars on-site and is authorized to sell those fermented
beverages at retail or serve by the glass pursuant to the provisions of Nevada
Revised Statutes 597. In addition to manufacturing the establishment may grow
the raw materials, blend, age, bottle and store the fermented beverage on-site.
Sales areas, sampling areas, food service, dancing and musical entertainment
are permitted subject to all applicable State and County regulations.
      8.   Milk Processing: A facility and/or process of preparing raw milk for
bottling or packaging prior to wholesale or retail sale.
   C.   Warehouse And Freight Movement: Firms involved in warehouse and freight
movement are engaged in the storage or movement of goods for themselves or
other firms. Goods are generally delivered to other firms or the final
consumer, except for some will call pickups. There is little on site sales
activity with the customer present. Accessory uses may include offices, truck
fleet parking, and maintenance areas. Specific use types include, but are not
limited to:
      1.   Self-Storage Or Mini-Storage: A building or group of buildings in a
controlled access and fenced compound that contains varying sizes of
individual, compartmentalized, and controlled access stalls or lockers for the
storage of customers' goods or wares.
      2.   Storage Yard: Any lot or portion of a lot that is used for the sole
purposes of the outdoor storage of fully operable motor vehicles, construction
equipment, construction materials, or other tangible materials and equipment.
      3.   Tank Farm: An open-air facility containing large, above ground
containers for the bulk storage of materials in liquid, gaseous, powder, or
pellet form.
      4.   Warehouse: A structure containing an area available for the purpose
of storing raw materials, goods, or property.
      5.   Wholesale Establishment: An establishment primarily engaged in the
sale or distribution of goods and materials in large quantity to retailers or
other businesses for resale to individual or business customers. This shall not
include heavy manufacturing, resource extraction, bulk storage of hazardous
materials, or scrap or salvage operations.
   D.   Waste And Salvage: Waste and salvage firms receive solid or liquid
wastes from others for disposal on the site or for transfer to another
location. The category includes uses that collect sanitary wastes, or uses that
manufacture or produce goods or energy from the composting of organic material
or processing of scrap or waste material. Waste and salvage uses also include
uses that receive hazardous wastes from others. Accessory uses may include
recycling of materials, offices, and repackaging and shipment of byproducts.
Specific use types include, but are not limited to:
      1.   Salvage Or Junk Yard: A parcel used for storage of non- operable
vehicles (autos, commercial equipment, RVs, etc.) or scrap materials (steel,
lumber, miscellaneous materials, etc.). A salvage yard must be completely
fenced with all accesses secured from the public.
      2.   Transfer Station: An intermediate destination for solid waste that
may include separation of different types of waste and aggregation of smaller
shipments into larger ones. May include a recycling facility where discarded
household products, such as aluminum and tin cans, glass, paper, plastic, and
other similar products are deposited, packaged and stored for future
reprocessing.
      3.   Hazardous Waste Treatment: The physical, chemical or biological
processing of dangerous waste to make wastes non- dangerous or less dangerous,
safer for transport, amenable for energy or material resource recovery,
amenable for storage or reduced in volume.
      4.   Auto Dismantling: The wrecking or dismantling of motor vehicles or
trailers, or the storage, sale or dumping of dismantled, partly dismantled, or
wrecked motor vehicles or their parts.
      5.   Recycling Facility: A building or enclosed space used for the
collection and processing of recyclable materials to prepare for either
efficient shipment, or to an end-user's specifications by such means as baling,
briquetting, compacting, flattening, grinding, crushing, mechanical sorting,
shredding, cleaning and remanufacturing. Recycling facilities include the
following:
         a.   Light Recycling Facility: Occupies an area of under forty five
thousand (45,000) square feet of collection, processing and storage area, and
averages two (2) outbound truck shipments per day. Light recycling facilities
are limited to baling, briquetting, crushing, compacting, grinding, shredding
and sorting of source separated recyclable materials sufficient to qualify as a
certified processing facility. A light recycling facility shall not shred,
compact, or bale ferrous metals other than food and beverage containers.
         b.   Heavy Recycling Facility: Any recycling facility other than a
light-recycling facility.
   E.   Resource Extraction:
      1.   Mining: The process of extracting metallic or non-metallic mineral
deposits from the earth. The term includes both underground and surficial
excavations, but excludes quarrying for sand, gravel and stone for building and
construction.
      2.   Mineral Exploration: The search for deposits of useful minerals or
fossil fuels and establishment of the nature of known mineral deposits
preparatory to development of the mineral resource.
      3.   Mineral/Resource Processing: See subsection B2, "Manufacturing,
Heavy", of this section.
      4.   Quarrying: The open extraction of stone, gravel or other useful
building or construction material from the earth.
   F.   Energy Production And Distribution:
      1.   Wind Energy Conversion System - Commercial (WECS): A system
consisting of one or more wind machines, towers/structures and associated
control or conversion electronics components for the purpose of producing
electricity to be used on site and/or sold and distributed through the
established commercial power grid. Commercial WECS are considered a principal
use on a parcel of land and require a conditional use permit. A commercial WECS
shall typically have a rated capacity of more than one hundred kilowatts
(100kW).
      2.   Private Use Wind Energy Conversion System (Private WECS): A system
consisting of a wind turbine, tower or supporting structure, and associated
control or conversion electronics for the purpose of providing electrical power
to a lawful principal use located on the same parcel. Private WECS are
considered accessory uses and are permitted in all zoning districts without the
requirement of a conditional use permit provided the system meets all
requirements of subsection
15.335.03FFF of this title. The property owner may enter into a "net metering"
agreement with the public utility as provided in Nevada Revised Statutes
704.766 through 704.775. The "net metering system" is intended to offset part
or all of the customer-generator's requirements for electricity on that parcel.
      3.   Geothermal Generating Facility: A facility for the generation of
electricity utilizing geothermal energy. Technologies include dry steam power
plants, flash steam power plants and binary cycle power plants.
      4.   Solar Power Facility - Commercial: A facility for the generation of
electricity utilizing the energy in sunlight for the purpose of producing
electricity to be used on site and/or sold and distributed through the
established commercial power grid. Technologies include photovoltaics and
concentrated solar power generators.
      5.   Fossil Fuel Generating Facility - Commercial: A facility for the
generation of electricity utilizing fossil fuels such as coal, gas, and oil for
the purpose of producing electricity to be used on site and/or sold and
distributed through the established commercial power grid.
   G.   Telecommunications: Telecommunications facilities transmit analog or
digital voice or communications information between or among points using
electromagnetic signals via antennas, microwave dishes, and similar structures.
Supporting equipment includes buildings, shelters, cabinets, towers, electrical
equipment, parking areas, and other accessory development. (Ord. 603, 11-1-
2018)
15.1200.05: PART 2 - GENERAL TERMS AND DEFINITIONS:
44 CFR: Part 44 of the Code of Federal Regulations - FEMA Guidance For
Emergency Management And Assistance For Floodplain Management.
ACCESSORY BUILDING: A building detached from a principal building located on
the same lot and customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal
building or use.
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT: A dwelling unit either attached to a single-family
principal dwelling or located on the same lot and having an independent means
of access.
ACCESSORY EQUIPMENT: Any equipment serving or being used in conjunction with a
telecommunications facility or support structure. This equipment includes, but
is not limited to, utility or transmission equipment, power supplies,
generators, batteries, cables, equipment buildings, cabinets and storage sheds,
shelters or other structures.
ACCESSORY USE: A use of land or of a building or portion thereof customarily
incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land or building and
located on the same lot with the principal use.
ACRE, GROSS: A gross acre consists of forty three thousand five hundred sixty
(43,560) square feet of land, and includes any public streets and alleys or
other rights-of-way or easements.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b3e37bf04674f7b3738d62883ef5a27ed6aa631/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2387.jpg]
   Gross Acreage (shaded area)
ACRE, NET: A net acre consists of forty three thousand five hundred sixty
(43,560) square feet of land, exclusive of any public streets and alleys or
other rights-of-way, but inclusive of public utility, drainage, or irrigation
maintenance easements. Unless otherwise stated, "acre" means "net acre"
wherever used in this title.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b3e37bf04674f7b3738d62883ef5a27ed6aa631/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2389.jpg]
 
   Net Acreage (shaded area)
ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW: Non-discretionary evaluation of an application by the
Director or designee. This process is not subject to a public hearing. The
procedures for administrative review are established in chapter 4 of this
title.
ALLUVIAL FAN: A geomorphologic feature characterized by a cone or fan-shaped
deposit of clay, silt, sand, gravel, and boulders that have been eroded from
mountain slopes, transported by flood flows, and deposited on the valley floor.
ALLUVIAL FAN FLOODING: Flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or
similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high
velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, deposition,
and unpredictable flow paths.
ALTER, OR ALTERATION: Any act or process that changes one or more of the
interior or exterior architectural or structural features of a building,
including but not limited to the erection, construction, reconstruction, or
removal of any building.
ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE: A support structure for wireless communications
facilities which is primarily for another principal use or accessory use to the
principal use on the lot where it is located, and partially or wholly conceals
the antenna or minimizes its appearance in relation to the principal use of the
structure. Examples of alternative tower structures include but are not limited
to existing buildings, grain silos, utility poles, light poles, clock towers
and steeples.
ANCHORING: A series of methods used to secure a structure to its footings or
foundation wall so that it will not be displaced by flood or wind forces.
ANTENNA: A device commonly in the form of a metal rod, wire panel or dish, for
transmitting or receiving electro-magnetic radiation. An antenna is typically
mounted on a supporting tower, pole, mast or building.
APEX: The highest point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the
flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and
alluvial fan flooding can occur.
APPEAL: A request for a review of a decision made pursuant to this title.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING: A designated AO Zone on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM). The base flood depths range from one foot (1') to three feet (3'); a
clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable
and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: The land in the floodplain subject to a one
percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
AVIGATION EASEMENT: A written privilege granted by a homeowner related to
aircraft overflight, noise, and associated effects which may arise in the
ordinary operation of the airport.
AWNING: A device attached to a building when the same is so erected as to
either permit its being raised or retracted to a position against the building
when not in use, or to provide shade.
BARNYARD ANIMALS: Smaller animals that are typically raised on a farm that are
required to be contained such as, but not limited to fowl (chicken, ducks,
etc.), lambs, and goats. Barnyard animals do not include livestock such as, but
not limited to cows, horses, llamas, domestic pigs, etc.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. Also referred to as the "100-year flood".
Designation on maps always includes the letters A or V.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION: The elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-
V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood
that has a one percent (1%) chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any
given year.
BASEMENT:
   A.   A story partly or completely underground. A basement shall be counted
as a story for purposes of height measurement where any portion of a basement
has more than one-half (1/2) of its height above grade.
   B.   For the purposes of flood management, a basement shall be considered
any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all
sides.
BERM: A mound or embankment of earth designed to provide visual interest,
screen undesirable views, or decrease noise.
BLOCK: Land on one side of a street lying between intercepting streets or
between such streets and any unsubdivided acreage or body of water or other
natural boundary or barrier.
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS: The Lyon County Board of Commissioners. The term "Board
of Commissioners" shall be known as the "Board".
BREAKAWAY WALLS: A wall that is not part of the structural support of the
building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under
specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion
of the building or supporting foundation system.
BUFFER: Land maintained in either a natural or landscaped state and used to
screen and/or mitigate the impacts of development on surrounding areas,
properties, or rights-of-way.
BUFFER-YARD: A continuous area of land which is required to be set aside along
the perimeter of a lot which is landscaped with a combination of plants, berms,
fences, or walls, the purpose of which is to provide a transition between and
to reduce the environmental, aesthetic, and other impacts of one type of land
use upon another.
BUILDABLE AREA: That portion of the platted lot exclusive of the required
front, rear and side yard setbacks, as established by the base zone for the
lot, and, for the purposes of hillside management, minus all designated
undevelopable area. Also called net buildable area. Also see definition of net
buildable area (cottage development).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b3e37bf04674f7b3738d62883ef5a27ed6aa631/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2391.jpg]
 
BUILDING: Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls, not
including a travel trailer or recreational vehicle.
BUILDING AREA: The total gross square footage of floor area of the buildings
located on a parcel of property.
BUILDING AREA, OCCUPIED: The total gross square footage of floor area of a
building occupied by an individual business or unit of operation.
BUILDING FRONTAGE: The portion of a building that faces and is most nearly
parallel to a public or private street.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance from any part of the structure to the
natural grade below, excluding chimneys and vents.
BUILDING INSPECTOR: As used in any adopted technical code of the County, the
County building inspector or subordinates.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: The primary building on a parcel intended for principal
use.
BUILDING SETBACK: The distance between the property line and the nearest
portion of a building on the property.
BUILDING SITE: A parcel or lot of land containing not less than the prescribed
minimum area required by any applicable regulations existing at the time and
occupied or intended to be occupied by buildings or structures.
BUILDING SITE SLOPE: The average natural slope of the area designated as the
building envelope measured at right angles to the natural contours along a line
passing through the center of the building envelope, such line shall terminate
at the opposite edges of the proposed building, or at the opposite edges of the
proposed cut or fill, whichever distance is greater.
CANOPY: A structure, other than an awning, attached or detached to a building,
and carried by a frame supported by the ground or sidewalk.
CARPORT: A permanent roofed structure not completely enclosed to be used for
vehicle parking.
CARRIER ON WHEELS OR CELL ON WHEELS (COW): A portable self- contained
telecommunications facility that can be moved to a location and set up to
provide wireless services on a temporary or emergency basis. A COW is normally
vehicle-mounted and contains a telescoping boom as the antenna support
structure.
CERTIFICATE OF ALTERATION: A certificate issued by the Lyon County Historical
Site Advisory Board indicating its approval of plans for alteration,
construction, or removal of a designated historic landmark.
CHANNEL CAPACITY: The maximum flow that can pass through a channel without
overflowing the banks.
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT, RESIDENTIAL: A land development project in which the site
planning technique of clustering dwelling units is employed.
CLUSTER OR CLUSTERING: A site-planning technique that concentrates buildings
and structures in specific areas on a lot, site, or parcel to allow the
remaining land to be used for recreation, open space, and/or preservation of
features and/or structures with environmental, historical, cultural, or other
significance. The techniques used to concentrate buildings may include, but
shall not be limited to, reduction in lot areas, setback requirements, and/or
bulk requirements, with the resultant open space being devoted by deed
restrictions for one or more uses.
COLLOCATION: The act of siting telecommunications facilities on an existing
structure without the need to construct a new support structure and without a
substantial increase in the size of an existing structure. This definition is
consistent with the FCC's Declaratory Ruling on Wireless Infrastructure Siting.
COMMERCIAL COACH: A structure without motive power which is designed and
equipped for human occupancy for industrial, professional or commercial
purposes. The term does not include a recreational park trailer or portable
building.
COMMON AREA: An area set aside within a land development for the use in common
by the residents thereof. Such areas shall be subject to conditions, covenants
and restrictions (CC&Rs) that must be submitted to the County and recorded with
the County Recorder.
COMMON OPEN SPACE: A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water or
easements, licenses or equitable servitudes within the site designated for a
planned unit development which is designed and intended for the use or
enjoyment of the residents or owners of the development. Common open space may
contain such complementary structures and improvements as are necessary and
appropriate for the benefit and enjoyment of the residents or owners of the
development.
COMMUNITY: Defined by the NFIP as "Any State or area or political subdivision
thereof, or any Indian tribe or authorized tribal organization, or Alaska
Native village or authorized native organization, which has authority to adopt
and enforce floodplain management regulations for the areas within its
jurisdiction."
COMMUNITY RATING SYSTEM (CRS): A program developed by FIA to provide incentives
for those communities in the regular program that have gone beyond the minimum
floodplain management requirements to develop extra measures to provide
protection from flooding.
COMPLEX, COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL: A building or group of buildings within a
single architectural plan housing three (3) or more commercial or industrial
units of operation where shared access, driveways, or parking is provided. A
complex may include separate parcels, parcels of record as part of a commercial
or industrial subdivision, or building pads or envelopes with shared or common
elements.
CONCEALED TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY: Any telecommunications facility that is
integrated as an architectural feature of an existing structure or any new
support structure designed so that the purpose of the facility or support
structure for providing wireless services is not readily apparent to a casual
observer.
CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (CLOMA): A letter from FEMA stating that a
proposed structure that is not to be elevated by fill would not be inundated by
the base flood if built as proposed.
CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (BASED ON FILL) (CLOMR-F): A letter from
FEMA stating that a parcel of land or proposed structure that is to be elevated
by fill would not be inundated by the base flood if fill is placed on the
parcel as proposed or the structure is built as proposed.
CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR): Procedures by which contractors,
developers and communities can request review and determination by the Federal
Insurance Administrator or scientific and technical data for a proposed
project, when complete and functioning effectively, would modify the elevation
of individual structures and parcels of land, stream channels, and floodplains
on the FIRM.
CONDITIONAL USE: A use permitted in a particular zoning district when it is
shown that such use will comply with all conditions and standards for the
location or operation of the use as specified in this title and authorized by
the approving authority.
CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT: A permit that authorizes the recipient to make use of
property in accordance with the requirements of this title and the specific
conditions established by the approving authority.
CONDOMINIUMS 1 : A development consisting of an undivided interest in common
for a portion of a parcel coupled with a separate interest in space in a
residential, commercial or industrial building on the parcel.
CONSERVATION SUBDIVISION: A residential subdivision in which some or all of the
lots are allowed to be smaller (in area and width) than otherwise required for
the underlying zoning district, in exchange for the protection of additional
common open space beyond the base requirements of this title.
CONSOLIDATION: The combining of two (2) or more lots, tracts, or parcels in a
platted subdivision, which removes the common boundary lines and forms a single
lot, tract or parcel.
CONTEXT: The relationship of the building to its surroundings in terms of size,
form, character and site development.
CONTRIBUTING BUILDING, STRUCTURE, SITE/AREA, OR OBJECT: Any building,
structure, site/area, or object that helps to define or reflect the historical
or architectural significance of a site or Historic District.
CRAWL SPACE: Unfinished accessible area below the first floor of a structure.
Height ranges from approximately one foot six inches (1'6") to four feet zero
inches (4'0"). Commonly used for components such as ductwork and piping.
CRITICAL FEATURE: An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood
protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire
system would be compromised.
CRITICAL STRUCTURES/ FACILITIES: Any structure for which even a slight chance
of flooding would reduce or eliminate its designed function of supporting a
community in an emergency. Fire stations, hospitals, municipal airports, police
stations, communication antennas or towers, elder care facilities (retirement
homes), fuel storage facilities, schools designated as emergency shelters,
fresh water and sewage treatment facilities are some examples of critical
structures.
CUMULATIVE SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: The total cost of all repairs to a repetitive
loss structure shall not cumulatively increase the market value of the
structure more than forty nine percent (49%) of the market value during the
life of the structure. When the improvements, modifications, additions,
reconstruction or repairs equals or exceeds the fifty percent (50%) substantial
damage threshold, the entire structure must be brought up to current floodplain
standards. This term does not, however, include either:
   A.   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
   B.   Any repair of flood damage to a "historic structure", provided the
repair will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic
structure."
For the purposes of determining substantial damage, market value pertains only
to the structure in question. It does not include the land, landscaping or
detached accessory structures on the property.
CUMULATIVE SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Improvements, modifications, or additions
to existing building are counted cumulatively for at least five (5) years and
reconstruction and repairs to damaged buildings are counted cumulatively for a
least five years. When the improvements, modifications, additions,
reconstruction or repairs equals or exceeds the fifty percent (50%) substantial
improvement threshold, the entire structure must be brought up to current
floodplain standards.
For the purposes of determining substantial improvements, market value pertains
only to the structure in question. It does not include the land, landscaping or
detached accessory structures on the property.
DEMOLISH, OR DEMOLITION: To tear down, wreck, or ruin a structure.
DENSE LANDSCAPE BUFFER OR PLANTING SCREEN: Landscaping which provides screening
of incompatible land uses. Landscape material shall be of a type and size that
reaches maturity within three (3) years.
DENSITY, GROSS: A measurement of the number of dwelling units per acre and/or
the number of square feet of enclosed commercial space per acre of land area.
DENSITY, NET: The same measurement as in gross density, except that the land
area considered excludes lands dedicated to the public, rights-of-way, and
dedicated open space, whether such open space is held in public or private
ownership.
DENSITY TRANSFER: An increase in density on one portion of a property to a
level that may exceed the underlying master plan designation of that portion of
the property while maintaining a gross density over the entire property that is
consistent with the underlying master plan designation.
DEPARTMENT: The Lyon County Community Development Department.
DESIGN FLOOD ELEVATION (DFE): The elevation to which development in the
regulatory flood-plain is built. The minimum requirement for this elevation in
NFIP communities is the base flood elevation (BFE). In areas where a higher
degree of protection is promoted or required, a freeboard is added; in this
case, the DFE is a height (1, 2, or more feet) above the BFE.
DESIGN GUIDELINE: A standard of appropriate architectural features and site
activity to include parking, landscaping, pedestrian provisions, etc., that
will preserve the historic and architectural character of a landmark, building,
area, or object.
DESIGNATED FLOODWAY: The channel of a stream and the portion of the adjoining
floodplain designated by a regulatory agency to be kept free of further
development to provide for unobstructed passage of flood flows.
DETACHED: Any building or structure that does not have a wall or roof in common
with any other building or structure.
DEVELOPER: Any person(s) completing allowed and permitted improvements on a
lot, parcel or tract of land. A developer may be the owner or a person
authorized by the owner.
DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY: An improvement that is allowed and permitted and
completed on a lot, parcel, or tract of land by a developer or property owner.
The term "development activity" shall include zoning, subdivision, planned unit
development, building permit issuance, construction, alterations, land grading,
excavating, and clearing. As used in chapter 800 of this title, development
means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate including, but
not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, filling, grading,
paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials
located within the area of special flood hazard.
DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL: Any final approval of a development activity.
DEVELOPMENT CODE ADMINISTRATIVE MANUAL: A document, available to the public,
that contains the requirements for development application contents, forms,
fees, and the submission and review schedule (including approximate time frames
for review).
DEVELOPMENT IMPROVEMENTS AGREEMENT: One or more agreements made between the
developer or owner and the County to ensure completion of the roads, streets,
water lines, sewer lines, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, storm sewers, or other
public or private improvements associated with subdivision approval, zoning or
other development activity.
DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM): The official map, in digital format,
on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance
Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the
risk premium zones applicable to the community. The DFIRM is the legal
equivalent of the FIRM in communities where a DFIRM is available (see
definition of Flood Insurance Rate Map).
DIMENSIONAL NONCONFORMITY: A situation that occurs when a dimensional
requirement (e.g., elevations, setbacks) was approved legally but no longer
conforms to the required standard of this title.
DIRECTOR: The Community Development Director, or his/her designee, or any
individual designated by the County Manager or Board of Commissioners to
administer this title.
DIVISION, DIVISION OF LAND AND DIVIDED: Any separation of land into two (2) or
more parts or parcels accomplished by recorded map, conveyance of right-of-way
or court decree, excepting any such conveyance made for the purpose of locating
or adjusting boundary lines between two (2) parcels.
DIVISION OF LAND INTO LARGE PARCELS: A division of land authorized to divide
pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 278.471 through 278.4725, inclusive.
DOUBLE-FRONTAGE LOT: A lot with two (2) sides abutting a street.
DRIVEWAY: A private roadway providing access to a street or other public right-
of-way.
DRY FLOOD PROOFING: A flood proofing method used to design and construct
buildings so as to prevent the entrance of floodwaters.
DWELLING UNIT: A place of residence and may be located in either a single or
multiple dwelling unit building as further defined by the adopted Building
Codes and Nevada Revised Statutes 278.4977.
EASEMENT: An interest in land owned by another that entitles the easement
holder to a specific use of the described land.
ECONOMIC HARDSHIP:
   A.   For investment or income-producing properties: The building, site, or
object cannot be feasibly used or rented at a reasonable rate of return in its
present condition; or if proposed to be rehabilitated, where denial of a
demolition permit would deprive the owner of all reasonable use of the
property.
   B.   For non-income producing properties and/or institutional properties not
solely operating for profit: The building, site or object has no beneficial use
as a residential dwelling, or for an institutional use in its present state; or
if proposed to be rehabilitated; where denial of the demolition permit would
deprive the owner of all reasonable use of the property.
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION: A school, college or university, supported wholly or
in part by public funds or giving general academic instruction equivalent to
the standards prescribed by the State Board of Education.
ELECTRIC SUBSTATION: An assemblage of equipment and appurtenant facilities
designed for voltage transformation, or voltage control of electricity in
amounts of sixty kilovolts (60kV) or greater.
ELECTRIC TRANSMISSION LINE: A series of three (3) or more structures and
appurtenant facilities erected above ground, supporting one or more conductors
emanating from a power plant or a substation, designed to transit electric
energy in voltages of sixty kilovolts (60kV) or greater.
ELECTRICAL DISTRIBUTION: Structures and appurtenant facilities used for the
distribution of electric energy in voltages less than sixty kilovolts (60kV).
ELEVATION CERTIFICATE: The Elevation Certificate is required in order to
properly rate post-FIRM buildings, which are buildings constructed after
publication of the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), for flood insurance Zones
A1-A30, AE, AH, A (with BFE), VE, V1-V30, V (with BFE), AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-
A30, AR/AH, and AR/AO. The Elevation Certificate is not required for pre-FIRM
buildings unless the building is being rated under the optional post-FIRM flood
insurance rules.
EMERGENCY REPAIRS: Repairs immediately necessary to protect the health and
safety of the property owner, user, or general public.
ENCLOSED AREA: The portion of an elevated building below the base flood
elevation that is partially or fully surrounded with solid (including
breakaway) walls. These enclosed areas can only be used for storage, parking
and access to the building; and are require to meet other construction
requirements.
ENCLOSURE: That portion of an elevated building below the lowest elevated floor
that is either partially or fully shut-in by rigid walls.
ENCROACHMENT: For the purposes of flood management only, an encroachment is any
physical object placed in the floodplain that hinders the passage of water or
otherwise affects flood flows, such as fill, excavation, storage or equipment
and materials or buildings. An encroachment is also considered to be any type
of development within the floodplain that results in a loss of its flood
carrying capacity. Encroachments in the floodway are particularly important in
floodplain development because, under the NFIP minimum requirements, any
development within the floodway that results in an increase in the base flood
elevation is prohibited.
EROSION: The process of the gradual wearing away of any landmass.
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION: Means for the purposes of determining national flood
insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced
before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs
effective before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as
"existing structures".
EXISTING STRUCTURE (WCF): Previously erected support structure or any other
structure, including but not limited to, buildings and water tanks, to which
telecommunications facilities can be attached.
EXPANSION OF AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for the servicing the
lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL FEATURES: The features that contribute to the
architectural character and general composition of the exterior of a building
or structure, including but not limited to the kind, color, and texture of the
building materials and the type, design, and character of all windows, doors,
light fixtures, signs and appurtenant features.
FAA: The Federal Aviation Administration.
FCC: The Federal Communications Commission.
FACADE: The front of a building including entries, parapets and rooflines,
specifically the principal face.
FAMILY: One or more persons living together as a single housekeeping unit.
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA): The Federal agency under which the
National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) is administered.
FEDERAL INSURANCE ADMINISTRATION (FIA): The government unit, a part of Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), which administers the National Flood
Insurance Program (NFIP).
FINAL MAP: A map of certain described land prepared typically to become part of
the public record of land division after approval by the Lyon County Board of
Commissioners or their designee.
FIVE-HUNDRED (500) YEAR FLOOD: A flood with a 0.2% (or 1 in 500) annual chance
of occurrence. The area of flooding caused by this flood is used to designate
base floodplains or lesser hazards, such as areas protected by levees from the
100-year flood, or shallow flooding areas, with average depths of less than one
foot or drainage areas less than on square mile. Referenced on the FIRM as X
(Shaded) areas.
FLAG, GOVERNMENTAL: Any device composed of flexible cloth, plastic, or similar
material that is affixed to a line or pole and that may display local, State,
or Federal emblems, seals, or colors.
FLAG, NONGOVERNMENTAL: Any device composed of flexible cloth, plastic, or
similar material that is affixed to a line or pole and that may display
emblems, business or corporate logos, symbols, or illustrations.
FLASH FLOOD: A flood that crests in a short period of time and is often
characterized by high velocity flows. It is often the result of heavy rainfall
in a localized area.
FLASHING SIGN: An illuminated sign in which artificial light is not maintained
in a stationary or constant intensity.
FLEET VEHICLE: Fleet vehicles are groups of automobiles with a single owner,
typically a company or corporation, rather than an individual or family.
FLOOD CONTROL: Keeping flood waters away from specific developments or
populated areas, areas by the construction of flood storage reservoirs, channel
alterations, dikes and levees, bypass channels, or other engineering works.
FLOOD DAMAGE-RESISTANT MATERIAL: Any building material capable of withstanding
direct and prolonged contact with floodwater without sustaining significant
damage. The term "prolonged contact" means at least for a 72 hour period, and
the term "significant damage" means any damage requiring more than low-cost
cosmetic repair.
FLOOD DEPTH: The difference in height of the water surface elevation at the
time of flooding and the normal grade elevation of the flooded area.
FLOOD HAZARD: Possible occurrence of overflow stormwater causing flooding of
lands or improvements or having sufficient velocity to transport or deposit
debris, to scour the surface soil, to dislodge or damage buildings or to cause
erosion of the banks or channels. See chapter 800 of this title.
FLOOD HAZARD AREA: Areas subject to inundation by the "base flood" as
identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency reports and maps.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): An official map of the County on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. This term
includes Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM) in communities where a DFIRM
is available (See Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map).
FLOOD INSURANCE RISK ZONE DESIGNATIONS: The zone designations indicate the
magnitude of the flood hazard in specific areas of a community.
   Zone A: Special flood hazard areas with a one percent (1%) annual chance of
flooding and a twenty six percent (26%) chance of flooding over the life of a
thirty (30) year mortgage; base flood elevations are not determined.
   Zone A1-30 And Zone AE: Special flood hazard areas with a one percent (1%)
annual chance of flooding and a twenty six percent (26%) chance of flooding
over the life of a thirty (30) year mortgage; base flood elevations are
determined.
   Zone A99: Special flood hazard areas with a one percent (1%) or greater
chance of flooding each year to be protected by a Federal flood protection
system under construction; no base flood elevations are determined.
   Zone AH: Special flood hazard areas with a one percent (1%) or greater
chance of shallow flooding each year, flood depths of one foot (1') to three
feet (3') (usually areas of ponding); base flood elevations are determined.
   Zone AO: Special flood hazard areas with a one percent (1%) or greater
chance of shallow flooding each year, with flood depths of one foot (1') to
three feet (3') (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain); average depths are
determined. For areas of alluvial fan flooding, velocities are also determined.
   Zone AR: Special flood hazard areas that result from the decertification of
a previously accredited flood protection system that is in the process of being
restored to provide a 100-year or greater level of flood protection.
   Zones AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AH, AR/AO, And AR/A: Special flood hazard areas
that result from the decertification of a previously accredited flood
protection system that is in the process of being restored to provide a 100-
year or greater level of flood protection. After restoration is complete, these
areas will still experience residual flooding from other flooding sources.
   Zone B And Zone X (Shaded): Areas of one percent (1%) annual chance sheet
flow flooding where average depths are less than one foot (1'), areas of one
percent (1%) annual chance flooding where the contributing drainage is less
than one square mile, or areas protected from the one percent (1%) annual
chance flood by levees (sometimes referred to as the 500-year floodplain/flood
zone).
   Zones C And X (Unshaded): Areas determined to be outside the 500-year
floodplain.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: The official report provided by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency that includes flood profiles, the Flood Boundary-Floodway
Map, and the water surface elevations of the base flood.
FLOOD, OR FLOODING: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow, and/or the unusual and
rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD PROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes or adjustments to nonresidential structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved property.
FLOOD RELATED EROSION: A condition that exists in conjunction with a flooding
event that alters the composition of the shoreline or bank of a watercourse;
one that increases the possibility of loss due to the erosion of the land area
adjacent to the shoreline or watercourse.
FLOODPLAIN: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any
source.
FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR: The individual given specific authority and
responsibilities to enforce chapter 800 of this title, specifically the
Community Development Director or their designee.
FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT: A permit to allow for any development activity
to occur within a SFHA, whether or not a building permit is required for any
proposed development activity. Floodplain Development Permit applications are
reviewed, issued, and managed by the Floodplain Administrator.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT: The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing,
where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited
to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management
plans, regulations and ordinances.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS: This title, and any Federal, State or local
regulations plus community zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, Building
Codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a grading and
erosion control) and other applications of police power which control
development in flood-prone areas to prevent and reduce flood loss and damage.
FLOOD VENT: Passive openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing
for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. Flood vent opening can be no
more than one foot (1') above the highest of inside or outside adjacent grade.
FLOODWAY: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot (1').
FLOOR AREA, GROSS: The total area of a building measured along the outside
dimensions of the building, including each floor or level used for occupancy
and storage.
FLOOR AREA, HABITABLE: The total area of a building measured along the outside
dimensions of the building, including each habitable floor or level used for
occupancy only.
FLOOR AREA RATIO: Determined by dividing the gross floor area of all buildings
on a lot by the area of that lot.
FOOTING: The enlarged base of a foundation wall, pier, or column, designed to
spread the load of the structure so that it does not exceed the soil bearing
capacity.
FOUNDATION: The base or substructure of a building that bears the weight of the
structure above. Foundations are typically located below grade and are
typically situated at or below the frost line depth.
FOUNDATION WALLS: A support structure that connects the foundation to the main
portion of the building or superstructure.
FRAUD/VICTIMIZATION: Related to variances of the floodplain management
regulations of this title, the variance granted must not cause fraud on or
victimization to the public. In examining this requirement, Lyon County will
consider the fact that every newly constructed building adds to government
responsibilities, and remains a part of the community for fifty (50) to one
hundred (100) years. Buildings permitted to be constructed below the base flood
elevation are subject during all those years to increased risk of damage from
floods, while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are
subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger, and suffering that those
increased flood damages bring. Additionally future owners may be unaware of the
risk potential to the property due to flood damage and the extremely high rates
for flood insurance.
FREEBOARD: A margin of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for
purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for the many
unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height
calculated for selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave
action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the
watershed.
FRONTAGE: Any boundary line of a lot or parcel of land that coincides with the
right-of-way of a street.
FUEL BREAK: A strategically located strip or block of land, varying in width,
on which vegetation has been modified to provide a safer place for fire
fighters to work and to help reduce the rate of fire spread.
GAMING: Any game played with cards, dice, equipment, or any other mechanical,
electromechanical, or electric device or machine for money, property, checks,
credit, or any representative of value as outlined in NRS 463.
   A.   Nonrestricted gaming license is a state license for the operation of:
      1.   16 or more slot machines;
      2.   Any number of slot machines together with any other game, gaming
device, race book, sports book at one (1) establishment;
      3.   A slot machine route;
      4.   An inter-casino linked system; or
      5.   A license for or the operation of a mobile gaming system.
   B.   Restricted gaming license is a state license that limits the gaming
operation to not more than fifteen (15) slot machines and no other game or
gaming device, race book, or sports pool at an establishment in which the
operation of slot machines is incidental to the primary use.
GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM (GIS): A set of integrated computer files
consisting of drawings, graphics and data that provide relation between
graphical and data information.
GREEN BOOK: The most recent edition of the Policy on Geometric Design of
Highways and Streets by the American Association of State Highway and
Transportation Officials.
GROSS AREA: The total area of the site, including the net buildable area and
public rights-of-way.
HARDSHIP: The exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant
the requested variance. The Board of County Commissioners requires that the
variance be exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere
economic or financial hardship alone is not considered exceptional.
Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal
preferences, or the disapproval of one's neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule,
qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved
through other means without granting a variance, even if the alternative is
more expensive, or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the
parcel to a different use than originally intended.
HAZARD MITIGATION PLAN: A plan that incorporates a process whereby the
potential of future loss due to flooding can be minimized by planning and
implementing alternatives to floodplain development community wide.
HEIGHT OF STRUCTURE: See definition of building height.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE: The highest natural elevation of ground surface prior
to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC DESIGNATION: The act of the Board of Commissioners, based on the
recommendation of the Lyon County Historical Site Advisory Board, designating
as "historic" a property, building or structure, pursuant to the procedures
prescribed herein, which is worthy of preservation because of its historic and/
or architectural significance locally, regionally or nationally.
HISTORIC DISTRICT: A geographic area, defined as historic by ordinance,
possessing a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of buildings,
structures, sites or objects united by past events, plans or physical
development. Historic District contains both contributing and non-contributing
properties.
HISTORIC LANDMARK: A property, building, structure, feature, object, and/or
area designated as a "landmark" by the Board of Commissioners, based on the
recommendation of the Lyon County Historical Site Advisory Board, which is
worthy of rehabilitation, restoration, and preservation because of its historic
and/or architectural significance.
HISTORIC PROPERTY: The cultural resources, including buildings, structures,
objects, or districts that are of historic significance.
HISTORIC SITE: The location of a former activity that has historic significance
locally, regionally or nationally. A site may or may not include structures.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
   A.   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the National Register;
   B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered Historic
District or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as
a registered Historic District;
   C.   Individually listed on a State Inventory of Historic Places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary
of Interior; or
   D.   Individually listed on a local Inventory of Historic Places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either
by an approved State program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or
directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
HISTORICAL SIGNIFICANCE: Having architectural, social, or geographical/
environmental significance.
HOLIDAY DECORATIONS: Temporary decorations, strings of lights, or displays,
clearly incidental to and customarily associated with any State, local,
religious or other holiday.
HYDRAULICS: The science that deals with practical applications of water in
motion.
HYDRODYNAMIC LOADS: Forces imposed on structures by floodwaters due to the
impact of moving water on the upstream side of the structure, drag along its
sides, and eddies or negative pressures on its downstream side.
HYDROLOGY: The science of the behavior of water in the atmosphere, on the
earth's surface and underground.
HYDROSTATIC LOADS: Forces imposed on a flooded structure due to the weight of
the water.
IMPROVEMENT PLAN: An engineering plan submitted by a civil engineer registered
in Nevada showing the location and construction details of all improvements
required by the developer.
IMPROVEMENT, PRIVATE: Those utility facilities, improvements, private streets,
highways and easements that are not offered for dedication to the County and
are to be maintained by the developer or owners' associations or utility.
IMPROVEMENTS: Any changes, additions, or deletions made to property that did
not naturally exist thereon.
IMPROVEMENTS GUARANTEE: A bond, certified check, loan commitment, public or
private escrow agreement, or other security determined acceptable in the sole
discretion of the County, covering the estimated cost of the required
improvements to be completed by the developer. Such improvements guarantee
shall be posted by the developer with the County in conjunction with the
execution of an improvements agreement.
INCIDENTAL ARCHITECTURE FEATURES: Ornamentations or decorative features that
project from a building or structure including cornices, eaves, canopies,
sunshades, gutters, chimneys, flues, belt courses, headers, sills, pilasters,
lintels, ornamental features, and other similar architectural features.
INCOMPATIBILITY OF LAND USES: The proximity or direct association of
contradictory, incongruous, or discordant land use or activities, including the
impact of noise, traffic, vibration, smoke, odors, and other similar
environmental conditions.
INDEPENDENT CONGREGATE SENIOR LIVING COMMUNITY: An independent living community
that entails private dwelling units/apartments designed for an adult population
aged fifty five (55) years and older that may include some supportive services
including, but not limited to, meals, housekeeping, home health, and other
supportive services. A number of common facilities, including kitchen
facilities, club houses, pools, health facilities, and other personal services
may be provided on the site.
INFRASTRUCTURE: The facilities and services needed to sustain residential,
commercial, industrial, institutional, and other activities.
INTENSITY OF USE: The type(s), amount, and level of use anticipated in the
development of any parcel of land.
INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENT: An agreement established between the County and
another government entity, such as the State or city or other municipalities or
Special Districts.
LANDSCAPING: Any combination of living plants such as grass, ground cover,
shrubs, flowers, vines, hedges, or trees, and nonliving landscape material such
as rocks, pebbles, sand, mulch, bark, walls, fences, and decorative paving
materials (excluding driveways, parking, loading, or storage areas), and
sculptural elements.
LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA): The procedure by which any owner or lessee of
property who believes his property has been inadvertently included in a special
flood hazard may submit scientific and technical information to the Federal
Insurance Administrator for review to remove the property from said area. The
Administrator will not consider a LOMA if the information submitted is based on
alteration of topography or new hydrologic or hydraulic conditions since the
effective date of the FIRM.
LETTER OF MAP REVISION (BASED ON FILL) (LOMR-F): A letter from FEMA stating
that an existing structure or parcel of land that has been elevated by fill
would not be inundated by the base flood.
LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR): The procedures by which contractors, developers,
and communities can request changes to flood zones, floodplain and floodway
delineations, flood elevations, and planimetric features based on the results
of structural works, improvements, or annexations; resulting in additional
flood hazard areas.
LEVEE: A man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control,
or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
LEVEE SYSTEM: A flood protection system that consists of a levee, or levees,
and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are
constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
LEVEL OF SERVICE: In the context of roadways or traffic impacts, a general term
that describes the operating conditions a driver will experience while
traveling on a particular roadway. Where roadway conditions (physical
characteristics of the highway) are fixed, levels of service on any particular
highway vary primarily with volume.
LOADING AREA: A portion of any site used for loading and unloading of goods,
equipment, people, etc.
LOT: A parcel, tract or area of land established by plat, subdivision, or as
otherwise permitted by law, to be used, developed or built upon and which abuts
upon a legal means of access. The classifications of lots are:
   A.   Corner: A lot located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets at
an angle of not more than one hundred thirty five degrees (135°). If the angle
is greater than one hundred thirty five degrees (135°), the lot shall be
considered an "interior lot".
   B.   Flag: A lot having access or an easement to a public or private street
by a narrow, private right-of-way.
   C.   Interior: A lot abutting only one street.
   D.   Key: A lot with a side line that abuts the rear line of any one or more
adjoining lots.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b3e37bf04674f7b3738d62883ef5a27ed6aa631/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2547.png]
 
   E.   Reverse Corner: A corner lot, the rear of which abuts the side of
another lot.
   F.   Through: A lot having frontage on two (2) generally parallel streets,
with only one primary access.
LOT AREA: The total horizontal area included within the lot lines of a lot.
LOT DEPTH: The average distance between the front and rear lot lines or between
the front line and the intersection of the two (2) side lines, if there is no
rear line.
LOT FRONTAGE: The portion of the lot contiguous to the street.
LOT LINE: Any boundary of a lot. The classification of lot lines are:
   A.   Front: On an interior lot, the line separating the parcel from the
street. On a corner lot, both lot lines abutting a street. On a through lot,
the lot line abutting the street providing the primary access to the lot.
   B.   Interior: Any lot line not abutting a street.
   C.   Rear: A lot line, not intersecting a front lot line, which is most
distant from and most closely parallel to the front lot line. In the case of an
irregularly shaped lot or a lot bounded by only three (3) lot lines, a line
within the lot having a length of at least ten feet (10'), parallel to and most
distant from the front lot line shall be interpreted as the rear lot line for
the purpose of determining required yards, setbacks, and other provisions of
this title.
   D.   Side: Any lot line which is not a front or rear lot line.
LOT WIDTH: The horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at
right angles to the lot depth at a midway point between the front and rear lot
lines.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirement of chapter 800 of this title.
LYON COUNTY HISTORICAL SITE ADVISORY BOARD: The Lyon County Planning Commission
acting in an advisory capacity in accordance with title 3, chapter 7 of this
Code.
MAINTENANCE, ORDINARY (WCF): Ensuring that telecommunications facilities and
support structures are kept in good operating condition. Ordinary maintenance
includes inspections, testing and modifications that maintain functional
capacity, aesthetic and structural integrity; for example the strengthening of
a support structure's foundation or of the support structure itself. Ordinary
maintenance includes replacing antennas of a similar size, weight, shape and
color and accessory equipment within an existing telecommunications facility
and relocating the antennas of approved telecommunications facilities to
different height levels on an existing monopole or tower upon which they are
currently located. Ordinary maintenance does not include minor and major
modifications.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure built in compliance with 42 USC 5401, the
National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Program
(adopted on June 15, 1976), and which is: a) transportable in one or more
sections, b) eight feet (8') or more in width, c) twenty four feet (24') or
more in length, or when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more
square feet, and d) is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as
a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities, including plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and
electrical systems. For floodplain management purposes, the term "manufactured
home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles
placed on a site for greater than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days.
For insurance purposes, the term "manufactured home" does not include park
trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MARKET VALUE: For the purposes of determining substantial improvement under the
floodplain management regulations, market value pertains only to the structure
in question. It does not pertain to the land, landscaping or detached accessory
structures on the property. For determining improvement, the value of the land
must always be subtracted.
Acceptable estimates of market value can be obtained from the following
sources:
   A.   Independent appraisals by a professional appraiser.
   B.   Detailed estimates of the structure's actual cash value (used as a
substitute for market value based on the preference of the community).
   C.   Property appraisals used for tax assessment purposes (adjusted assessed
value: used as a screening tool).
   D.   The value of buildings taken from NFIP claims data (used as a screening
tool).
   E.   "Qualified estimates" based on sound professional judgment made by
staff of the local Building Department or local or State Tax Assessor's Office.
As indicated above, some market value estimates should only be used as
screening tools to identify those structures where the substantial improvement
ratios are obviously less than or greater than fifty percent (50%) (e.g., less
than 40 percent or greater than 60 percent). For structures that fall between
the forty percent (40%) and sixty percent (60%) range, more precise market
value estimates should be used.
MASS/SCALE: The appearance of the building in terms of size, height, bulk, and
building mass, and its proportion to surrounding landforms, vegetation, and
buildings.
MEAN SEA LEVEL: For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the North
American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood
elevations shown on a County's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
MEDIAN: A paved or planted area separating a street or highway into two (2) or
more lanes of opposite direction of travel.
MINOR MODIFICATION: A minor deviation from otherwise applicable standards that
may be approved pursuant to provisions of this title.
MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENT: The development of parcels or structures with two (2) or
more different land uses such as, but not limited to, a combination of
residential, office, manufacturing, retail, public or entertainment in a single
or physically integrated group of structures.
MODIFICATIONS, MAJOR (WCF): Improvements to existing telecommunications
facilities or support structures that result in a substantial increase to the
existing structure. Collocation of new telecommunications facilities to an
existing support structure without replacement of the structure shall not
constitute a major modification.
MODIFICATIONS, MINOR (WCF): Improvements to existing structures that result in
some material change to the facility or support structure but of a level,
quality or intensity that is less than a substantial increase. Minor
modifications include the replacement of the structure.
MODULATION/ARTICULATION: Variation of the building facade (e.g., stepping out
or extending back the footprint/facade, variation in the roofline, addition of
building elements such as balconies, decks, porches, window patterns/types, and
variation in building materials/colors).
MURAL, ARTISTIC: A picture or decoration that is painted on or otherwise
applied directly to an external wall, visible to the public, and does not
contain advertising of any kind.
NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD): As corrected in 1929, is a vertical
control used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the
floodplain. Flood elevations on Flood Insurance Rate Maps published for Nevada
communities prior to 2007 were typically referenced to NGVD 29.
NATURAL AREA: A land area, unimproved and not occupied by any structures or
manmade elements, set aside for the conservation of permanent, undisturbed open
space.
NATURAL DRAINAGE: Water which flows by gravity in channels by the surface
topography of the earth prior to changes made by the efforts of man.
NATURAL GRADE: The grade unaffected by construction techniques such as fill,
landscaping, or berming.
NET BUILDABLE AREA (COTTAGE DEVELOPMENT): The portion of the cluster
development that may be developed or used for common open space, whether
publicly dedicated or private, but excluding private streets, public streets,
and other publicly dedicated improvements.
NET SITE AREA: The total area within the lot lines of a lot or parcel of land
after public street easements or other areas to be dedicated or reserved for
public use are deducted from such lot or parcel.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: Structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on
or after the effective date of any provisions in this title that placed
restrictions on construction of similar structures. For the purpose of
determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction"
commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December
31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means
structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the
effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and
includes any subsequent improvement to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of floodplain management regulations adopted by the County.
NON-RESIDENTIAL: Includes, but is not limited to: small business concerns,
churches, schools, farm buildings (including grain bins and silos), poolhouses,
clubhouses, recreational buildings, mercantile structures, agricultural and
industrial structures, warehouses, and hotels or motels with normal room
rentals for less than six (6) months' duration.
NONCONFORMING LOT: A lot that was in compliance with this title when created,
but that does not meet current requirements of this title.
NONCONFORMING PROJECT: Any structure, development, or undertaking that was
incomplete and being constructed in compliance with this title when created,
but which does not meet current requirements of this title.
NONCONFORMING SITUATION/USE: A situation or use that complied with this title
when created, but which does not currently conform to one or more of the
regulations applicable to the district in which the lot or structure is
currently located.
NONCONFORMITY: Any lawful use of property or any lawful structure, sign, or
platted lot, or any site feature: that exists or existed on the date of the
adoption of an ordinance that rendered it nonconforming with the provisions of
the new ordinance or this title; or that currently conforms to the regulations
in this title, but in the future will not conform to a future rezoning, or
amendment to the text of this title; or that currently conforms to the
regulations in this title, but because of future governmental action, such as
the acquisition of property for a public purpose, will not conform to the
provisions of the code in effect at the time.
NONCONTRIBUTING: All those structures that are new or not- historic
construction within a proposed or designated Historic District; or historic
structures with complete loss of integrity due to deterioration or modification
beyond recognition of historic elements.
NO-RISE: No increase in the flood height upstream, downstream or adjacent to
the parcel that is in the vicinity of the regulatory floodway.
NORTH AMERICAN VERTICAL DATUM (NAVD): A vertical control used as a reference
for establishing various elevations within the floodplain based upon the
General Adjustment of the North American Datum of 1988. Flood elevations on
Digital Flood Insurance Rate Maps for Nevada communities are referenced to NAVD
88.
OBSTRUCTION: Includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment,
levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge,
conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel refuse, fill, structure,
vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any
watercourse which propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of
water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream.
OFF-PREMISES SIGN: A sign, including portable sandwich or A-frame signs, which
advertises or informs about goods, products, services or uses not directly
concerning the use on the property upon which the sign is located.
ONE HUNDRED YEAR FLOOD (100-YEAR FLOOD): See base flood.
ONE-PERCENT FLOOD: See base flood.
ON-PREMISES SIGN: Any sign which advertises goods sold, manufactured or
produced, service or uses rendered on the property upon which the sign is
located, or the name of the business enterprise.
ORDINARY REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE: Work done on a building in order to correct
or prevent any deterioration, decay of, or damage to such building or any part
thereof, in order to restore or preserve the same as nearly as practicable to
its condition prior to such deterioration, decay or damage.
ORIENTATION: The relationship of a structure to streetscape, parking lots,
sidewalks, surrounding structures, and landforms.
OUTDOOR DISPLAY AND SALES: The display and sale of products and services,
primarily outside of a building or structure, which are normally vended within
the contiguous business or organization.
OUTDOOR STORAGE: The keeping, in an unroofed area, of any goods, junk,
material, merchandise, or vehicles in the same place for more than twenty four
(24) hours.
OVERLAY ZONE: An overlapping zone that identifies special physical and cultural
characteristics and requires specific use and development constraints in order
to maintain the uniqueness of the zone, and which constraints are in addition
to the underlying zone district restrictions.
OWNER: The fee owner, possessor or user of property, developer, contractor, or
any other person or organization who is obligated or responsible for performing
work with County approval. For purposes of sign regulation, an owner is the fee
owner or lessee of the sign, the fee holder or lease holder of the property
upon which the sign is located, or the individual, person or business who has
purchased the copy on a sign.
PARAPET: The top of a wall that forms the upper portions of a building facade.
PARCEL: A lot or tract of land typically delineated as part of a recorded
subdivision plat. Parcels may also exist outside the boundaries of a recorded
subdivision. See also the definition of lot.
PARCEL MAP: The document utilized to divide any land for transfer or
development into four (4) or fewer lots which does not qualify for division of
land into large parcels per Nevada Revised Statutes 278.471 et seq. Also
referred to as a minor subdivision.
PARKING AREA AISLES: A portion of the project site consisting of lanes
providing access to parking spaces.
PARKING AREAS: Those areas including parking lots, driveways, drive aisles,
loading and unloading spaces, and all other areas necessary to move vehicles in
and out of required parking spaces.
PARKING SPACE: A portion of the project site set aside for the parking of one
vehicle.
PARKWAY: The area of a public right-of-way that lies between the curb and the
adjacent property line or physical boundary definition such as fences or walls,
which is used for landscaping or passive recreational purposes.
PATH: A way designed for use primarily by pedestrians.
Private Path: A right-of-way established for the benefit of the owners of
certain building sites which may be specifically designated for that purpose on
a recorded map or provide an easement deed.
Public Path: A right-of-way dedicated by a development map or deed to the
County.
PEDESTRIAN TRAFFIC IMPROVEMENTS: Facilities and improvements, including but not
limited to concrete sidewalks that are typically not less than five feet (5')
wide, drainage improvements, bridges, site preparation, signage, gutters,
curbs, handicap access, and associated components typically associated with the
development and construction of sidewalks, walking and bicycle paths, and
walkways. Pedestrian traffic improvements include planning, preliminary
architectural and engineering services, architectural and engineering design
studies, land surveys, land acquisition, site improvements and off-site
improvements; the construction of facilities and improvements; and the purchase
of facilities and improvements with an average useable life of at least three
(3) years, necessary to adequately mitigate the pedestrian and bicycle traffic
generated by the land being developed. Pedestrian traffic improvements do not
include periodic or routine maintenance of facilities and improvements,
personnel costs or operational expenses.
PENNANT: Any advertising device made of flexible material such as cloth or
plastic, displayed singly or in multiples and attached to a rope or line.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social
club, fraternal organization, company, joint stock association, corporation,
estate, trust, organization, business, business trust, public agency, school
district, State of Nevada, and its political subdivisions or instrumentalities,
receiver, syndicate or any group or combination thereof, acting as a unit,
including any trustee, receiver or assignee.
PHYSICAL FEATURES: In reference to historic landmarks, the features of a
landmark that help to define its historic significance (e.g., archeological
resources, architectural features, structural foundations, gravestones,
tailings piles, etc.).
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT OR PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PD OR PUD): An area of land,
controlled by one or more land owners to be developed under unified control or
unified plan of development for a number of dwellings units, commercial,
educational, recreational, or industrial uses, or any combination of the
foregoing, and which does not typically correspond in lot size, bulk, or type
of use, density, lot coverage, open space or other restrictions in the
subdivision and zoning regulations, but instead establishes unique overlay
zoning, uses and design elements.
PLANNING COMMISSION: The duly designated Planning Board of Lyon County,
appointed by the Board of Commissioners as authorized by Nevada Revised
Statutes 278. The term "Planning Commission" shall be known as the
"commission".
PLANNING JURISDICTION: All areas of the County, excluding incorporated
municipalities and the tribal areas.
PONDING OF LOCAL WATER: As distinguished from sheet overflow, is water
originating on or in the vicinity of the development that, due to the condition
of the ground surface, does not reach a drainage channel or conduit.
PORTABLE FREESTANDING SANDWICH OR A-FRAME TYPE SIGN: A sign that is designed to
be moveable and is not structurally attached to the ground, a building, a
structure or any other sign. Such sign may or may not be in the configuration
of an "A".
POST-FIRM CONSTRUCTION: Construction or substantial improvement that started on
or after the effective date of the initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) of
the community or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later.
PRE-FIRM CONSTRUCTION: Construction or substantial improvement which started on
or before December 31, 1974 or before the effective date of the initial Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) of the community, whichever is later.
PREDEVELOPED ADJACENT GRADE: The natural elevation of ground surface prior to
construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
PREMISES: The physical location where an activity is routinely conducted, which
may include the primary structure, parking facilities and private roadways.
PRESERVATION: The protection, enhancement, and maintenance of historic
properties, which generally includes renovation, restoration, reconstruction,
and/or rehabilitation.
PRINCIPAL RESIDENCE: A single family dwelling in which at the time of loss, the
named insured or the named insured's spouse has lived for either: a) eighty
percent (80%) of the calendar year, or b) eighty percent (80%) of the period of
ownership, if less than one year.
PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE: A structure used for the principal use of the property as
distinguished from an accessory use.
PRINT: A blueprint, Photostat, direct process print or other copy that
reproduces exactly the original drawing from which it was made.
PRIVATE COMMON OPEN SPACE: Private open land area set aside for the exclusive
use and enjoyment of a development's residents, employees, or users.
PRIVATE DRIVEWAY: A driveway intended for the private benefit of the property
being accessed, leading to parking and/or loading areas that includes that
portion of the public right-of-way between the maintained roadway edge and the
property line, which is designed and used for the interchange of traffic
between the roadway and the abutting property and the driveway (as defined)
located on private property.
PRIVATE STREET: Any parcel of land or nonexclusive easement not owned by a
public body and not accepted for dedication to the public which is used or
intended to be used for vehicular access.
PROGRAM DEFICIENCY: A defect in a community's Floodplain Management Regulations
or administrative procedures that impairs effective implementation of those
Floodplain Management Regulations or of the NFIP standards, as per NFIP
sections 60.3, 60.4, 60.5, or 60.6.
PROPER OPENINGS FOR ENCLOSURES (APPLICABLE TO ZONES A, A1-A30, AE, AO, AH, AR,
AND AR DUAL): All enclosures below the lowest floor must be designed to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing
for the entry and exit of floodwaters. A minimum of two (2) openings, with
positioning on at least two (2) walls, having a total net area of not less than
one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding must
be provided.
PROVIDER: A person or company in business of designing, installing, marketing
and servicing wireless communication services including cellular telephone,
personal communications services (PCS), enhanced/specialized mobile telephones
and commercial paging services.
PUBLIC EASEMENT: A right-of-way granted and dedicated to the County where the
general use and maintenance of such right-of-way is governed by an agreement
that runs with the land, is unseverable therefrom, and is recorded on the deed.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY: Any parcel of land or nonexclusive easement dedicated to
the public that is used or intended to be used as a thoroughfare. Any offer of
dedication to public use is not effective until accepted by the County.
PUBLIC SAFETY, NUISANCE: Related to variances of this title. The granting of a
variance must not result in anything which is injurious to safety or health of
the community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or
unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any
way, navigable lake, river, bay stream or canal, or basin.
PUBLIC USE: Uses that, unless otherwise stated herein, are owned and operated
by a local, State or Federal government.
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM: Any water supply system furnishing potable water to
ten (10) or more dwelling units or businesses, or any combination thereof.
R VALUE (THERMAL RESISTANCE): The inverse of the time rate of heat flow through
a building thermal envelope element from one of its bounding surfaces to the
other for a unit temperature differences between the two (2) surfaces under
steady state conditions, per unit of area (h*sqft*F/Btu).
REASONABLY SAFE FROM FLOODING: Defined by the NFIP, means base flood waters
will not inundate the land or damage structures to be removed from the SFHA and
that nay subsurface waters related to the base flood will not damage existing
or proposed buildings.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV): A vehicle which is:
   A.   Built on a single chassis;
   B.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
   C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
   D.   Designed not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
Recreational Vehicles may not be used as a single family residential dwelling
except as outlined in chapter 15.335.04(C)(6).
REGULATORY FLOODPLAIN: The floodplain to which a community applies their
floodplain development regulations. A community participating in the NFIP is
required to adopt the floodplain on their FIRM or use a more restrictive
(larger aerial extent or higher floodplain water surface elevation) floodplain.
REMOTE OFF-SITE IMPROVEMENT: Any road improvement, public utilities or drainage
facilities not within, but serving any land development project.
REPETITIVE LOSS: Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two (2)
separate occasions during a 10-year period for which the cost of repairs at the
time of each said event, on the average, equals or exceeds twenty five percent
(25%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
REPLACEMENT (WCF): Constructing a new support structure of proportions and of
equal height or such other height that would not constitute a substantial
increase to a pre-existing support structure in order to support a
telecommunications facility or to accommodate collocation and removing the pre-
existing support structure.
REQUIRED AREA: The prescribed minimum area of a parcel of land as required by
any development, zoning or other regulations existing at the time and normally
occupied or intended to be occupied by buildings.
RESTRICTIVE COVENANTS: Private, contractual requirements or restrictions on the
use of property, which in the context of the Federal Fair Housing Act, may not
regulate the transfer, rental, or lease of any housing unit because of race,
creed, color, sex, national origin, or ancestry.
RIDGE LINE: A ground line connecting the series of highest elevation points or
a ridge, running center and parallel to the long axis of the ridge.
RIGHT-OF-WAY (ROW): An area of land designated for public use for access across
property, or location of private or government owned utilities, including
streets, roads, alleys, walkways, etc.
RIVERINE: Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river including tributaries,
stream, brook, etc.
ROAD CLASSIFICATIONS: See street definitions.
ROADWAY: The portion of a right-of-way surfaced for vehicular traffic,
including curb and gutter, when required.
ROOFLINE: The upper most edge of a roof or parapet.
SCREENING: A method for reducing the impact of noise and unsightly visual
intrusions with less offensive or more harmonious elements, such as plants,
berms, fences, walls or any appropriate combination thereof.
SETBACK: The required distance that a building, structure, parking or other
designated item must be located from a lot line.
SIGN: Any object, device, display or structure that is used to advertise,
identify, display, direct or attract attention to an object, person,
institution, organization, business, product, service, event or location by any
means, including words, letters, figures, designs, symbols, fixtures, colors,
motion, illumination or projected images.
SIGN, ANIMATED: Any sign or part of a sign that changes physical position by
any movement or rotation.
SIGN AREA: The total exposed surface on all surfaces devoted to a sign message,
including ornamentation, embellishment and symbols, but excluding supporting
structures.
SIGN, BANNER: Any advertisement device composed of flexible cloth, plastic,
paper, or similar material and affixed by wires, ropes, or other temporary
methods.
SIGN, BILLBOARD: A sign typically ranging in size between 14 feet high by 48
feet length (14'x48') to 10 feet high by 22 feet length (10'x22') that is
intended to advertise a business, commodity, service, entertainment, product,
or attraction sold, offered, or existing elsewhere than on the property where
the sign is located.
SIGN, CHANGEABLE COPY: A sign whereon provisions are made for letters or
characters to be placed in or upon the surface area either manually or
electronically to provide a message or picture.
SIGN, DIRECTIONAL: Any sign that directs the movement of pedestrian or
vehicular traffic without reference to or including the name of a product sold
or service performed on the lot.
SIGN DISPLAY SURFACE: The area made available on the sign structure for the
purpose of displaying the message (see also definition of sign face).
SIGN, ELECTRICAL: Any sign containing electrical wiring. This does not include
signs illuminated by indirect illumination.
SIGN FACE: The surface of a sign upon, against or through which the advertising
is displayed or illuminated.
SIGN, FREESTANDING: A sign that is supported by one or more columns or braces
extending from the ground and is not attached to any part of any building.
SIGN, GOVERNMENT: Signs erected by governments or government agencies for
regulatory and informational purposes.
SIGN, ILLUMINATED: A sign lighted by or exposed to artificial lighting either
by lights within the sign or lights directed towards the sign.
SIGN, INDIRECT ILLUMINATION: Light only from a concealed light source outside
the sign face that reflects upon the sign face.
SIGN, INTERNAL ILLUMINATION: Light from a source concealed or contained within
the sign that becomes visible through a translucent surface.
SIGN, NON-PROFIT: Signage used in conjunction with business, activities or
events sponsored by non-profit agencies.
SIGN, OFFSITE: A sign that conveys a political or ideological message or
directs attention to a business, product, commodity, service, entertainment or
attraction sold, offered or existing elsewhere than upon the same lot where
such sign is displayed.
SIGN, PEDESTRIAN-ORIENTED: A sign located in such manner as to be generally
viewed by a person who is walking. Typically, such signs are located within the
first story of a building or directly on the ground.
SIGN, PERMANENT: A sign that is permanently affixed or attached to the ground
or to a structure.
SIGN, POLITICAL: A non-commercial sign that either displays a message conveying
political or ideological views or supports a specific political candidate or
issue for election.
SIGN, PROJECTING: Any sign, other than a wall sign, which projects from and is
supported by a wall or building.
SIGN, ROOF-MOUNTED: A sign, any part of which is located on or attached to a
roof.
SIGN, SANDWICH: A flat sign composed of one or more boards attached together,
with supports enabling the sign to stand upright. It is designed to be a
moveable unit.
SIGN, SANDWICH BOARD: A temporary A-frame style sign, not exceeding ten (10)
square feet of sign area, placed directly on the ground and out of the public
right-of-way and which is intended for daily removal.
SIGN, TEMPORARY: A sign that would otherwise be classified as a permanent sign
in that it identifies an establishment, service(s) or product(s) provided on a
site, but is not permanently affixed to the ground or a building.
SIGN, UNUSED (ABANDONED): A sign that meets any of the following criteria:
   A.   A sign that identifies an establishment, product(s) or service(s) that
no longer exists or is no longer provided on the premises where the sign is
located.
   B.   A sign that identifies a time, event or purpose which has passed or no
longer applies.
   C.   A sign that is vacant of copy.
SIGN, VEHICLE: A sign that is painted or otherwise mounted upon a vehicle, van,
truck, trailer, automobile, bus, railroad car or other vehicle or movable
structure.
SIGN, WALL-MOUNTED: A sign painted on or mounted against a wall of a building
or structure that extends no more than twelve inches (12") from the wall
surface upon which it is attached and whose display surface is parallel to the
face of the building.
SIGN, WINDOW: Any sign visible from the exterior of a building that is painted,
attached, glued or otherwise affixed to a window or depicted upon a card, paper
or other material and placed on, taped or displayed from a window for the
specific purpose of advertising.
SIGN, YARD/GARAGE SALE: Temporary placards, posters and signs placed in front
of a yard or property advertising sale of goods.
SITE-SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT PLAN: A development plan submitted by a developer
seeking to obtain vested rights in that particular development plan.
Specifically, the following approvals shall be eligible for vesting as site
specific development plans: a final subdivision plat, or a planned unit
development.
SOLAR FACILITIES: A solar energy system which absorbs energy from the sun.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): A FEMA-identified high-risk flood area where
flood insurance is mandatory for properties defined by the NFIP as "The land in
the floodplain within a community subject to a 1-percent or greater chance of
flooding in any given year”. An area having special flood, mudflow, or flood-
related erosion hazards, and shown on a Flood Hazard Boundary Map or Flood
Insurance Rate Map as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, AH, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/AH,
AR/AO, or AR/A1-A30. The SFHA is also called the base floodplain, the 100-year
floodplain, or the 1-percent annual chance floodplain.
SPECIFICATIONS: Requirements for construction as approved by the County
Commissioners and made a part of this title by reference thereto.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: The time at which the developer begins substantial
improvement of a property, and means the date the building permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement,
or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit
date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a
structure on a site, such as the pouring of a slab, footings, the installation
of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of
excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and
filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor
does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the
erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as
dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not
that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STEEP SLOPES: Any land having an average cross slope of fifteen percent (15%)
or more. A steep slope shall be determined by measurement of the average slope
perpendicular to the proposed street line between the proposed rear line and
the center of the street. Any block frontage shall be considered a steep slope
area if the slope of thirty percent (30%) or more of its length equals or
exceeds fifteen percent (15%).
STORAGE: A space or place where goods, materials or personal property is put
for more than twenty four (24) hours.
STORY: That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and
the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is no floor above it, then
the space between such floor and the ceiling above it.
STREET, ALLEY: A public or private way, at the rear or side of property,
permanently reserved as an ancillary means of vehicular or pedestrian access to
abutting property.
STREET, ARTERIAL: A major street that serves as an avenue for the circulation
of traffic into, out of, or around the County, and carries high volumes of
traffic. Arterial classification requires in excess of four thousand (4,000)
average daily trips (ADT).
STREET, CUL-DE-SAC: A dead-end street that widens sufficiently at the end to
permit a vehicle to make a U-turn. The circular cul- de-sac should have a
minimum radius of forty feet (40') in residential areas and fifty feet (50') in
commercial areas.
STREET, LOCAL: A street whose sole function is to provide access to farms,
residences, businesses, or other abutting properties. It serves or is designed
to serve at least ten (10), but not more than twenty five (25) dwelling units
and is expected to handle between zero (0) and four hundred (400) ADT.
STREET, MAJOR COLLECTOR: A street whose principal function is to carry traffic
between local and minor collector streets and arterial streets, but may also
provide direct access to abutting properties. It serves or is designed to
serve, directly or indirectly, more than one hundred (100) dwelling units, and
is expected to handle between two thousand five hundred (2,500) and four
thousand (4,000) ADT.
STREET, MINOR COLLECTOR: A street designed and designated to carry traffic
volumes in the range of four hundred (400) to two thousand four hundred ninety
nine (2,499) vehicles per day.
STREET OR ROAD: Public or private thoroughfare used for passage of vehicular
traffic.
STREET, PRIVATE: Any right-of-way or area set aside to provide vehicular access
within a development that is not dedicated or intended to be dedicated to the
County and that is not maintained by the County.
STREET, STUB: A dead-end road used for access to a maximum of three (3) single-
family dwellings not exceeding six hundred feet (600') in length.
STRUCTURAL FILL: Engineered fill, compacted to ninety percent (90%) compaction,
Modified Proctor Test, ASTM D1557. It should have a minimum bearing capacity as
recommended by a geotechnical engineer, and be free of organic material such as
weeds, or grasses or other organic matter.
STRUCTURE:
   A.   A combination of materials forming an edifice or building of any kind,
or any piece of work artificially built or composed of parts joined together in
some definite manner, but excluding the following:
      1.   Fences not more than six feet (6') in height;
      2.   Retaining walls;
      3.   Platforms or decks not more than thirty inches (30") above grade and
not over any basement or story below;
      4.   Utility mains, lines and underground facilities; and
      5.   Yard and play equipment.
   B.   A permanent structure is built of materials in a manner which would
commonly be expected to remain useful for a substantial period of time.
   C.   A temporary structure is built of materials in a manner which would
commonly be expected to have a relatively short useful life, or is built for a
purpose that would be expected to be relatively short-term in duration.
   D.   For the purposes of flood management, a structure shall be a walled and
roofed building that is principally above ground and includes gas or liquid
storage tanks and manufactured homes.
STUDIO (PHOTOGRAPHY, PORTRAIT AND ART): An artist's or photographer's workplace
or establishment, where the artist's or photographer's work may be displayed
and sold.
SUBDIVISION: Any land, vacant or improved, that is divided or proposed to be
divided into five (5) or more lots, parcels, sites, units, plots, separate
interests or interests in common for the purpose of any transfer, development
or any proposed transfer or development unless exempted or partially exempted
under subsection A or B of this definition:
   A.   The term "subdivision" does not apply to:
      1.   Industrially or Commercially zoned subdivisions, to the extent such
are exempted by Nevada Revised Statutes 278.325(1).
      2.   The division of land into large parcels as authorized in Nevada
Revised Statutes 278.471 through 278.4725, inclusive.
   B.   Unless a method of disposition is adopted for the purpose of evading
this title or would have the effect of evading this title, the term
"subdivision" does not apply to:
      1.   Any division of land that is ordered by any court in this State or
created by operation of law.
      2.   A lien, mortgage, deed of trust or any security instrument.
      3.   A security or unit of interest in any investment trust regulated
under the laws of this State or any other interest in an investment entity.
      4.   Cemetery lots.
      5.   Interests in oil, gas, minerals or building materials that are now
or thereafter severed from the surface ownership of real property.
      6.   Any first time division of land for transfer or development into
four (4) or fewer lots, parcels, sites, units or plots.
SUBDIVISION DEVELOPMENT PLAN: Specific development plans for an approved
tentative parcel or subdivision map, including plot plans, building elevations,
grading plans and landscape plans applicable to individual lots within the
tentative map.
SUBDIVISION, MINOR: See definition of parcel map. The subdivision of land into
no more than four (4) lots from one lot, parcel or tract.
SUBDIVISION OR SUBDIVIDED LAND: The process and product of creating lots,
plots, tracts or any parcel of land that is to be designated for individual
titled ownership, along with completion of requirements within this title.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT:
   A.   Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of
which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the
structure either:
      1.   Before the improvement or repair is started, or
      2.   If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the
damage occurred.
   B.   For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is
considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the structure.
   C.   The term does not, however, include either:
      1.   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
State or local Health, Sanitary or Safety Code specifications that are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
      2.   Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or State Inventory of Historic Places.
SUPPORTING: In the context of historical preservation, all those historic
resources that have lost their original integrity, but are "retrievable" as
historic structures or sites. These structures have been substantially altered
over the years, but with substantial effort could be considered contributing
once again.
TENTATIVE MAP: A map made to show the design of a proposed subdivision and the
existing conditions in and around it.
TOTAL SYSTEM HEIGHT: The vertical height from existing grade to the highest
possible point of a wind energy conversion system.
TRACT: A section of land used interchangeably with the term lot, particularly
in the context of subdivisions, where one tract is subdivided into several
lots. See also the definition of "lot". Tract may also mean those portions of
subdivided land reserved for public purposes such as detention/retention,
infiltration, landscape, slope protection, etc., and not intended for private
use.
TRAFFIC SAFETY SIGHT AREA: That portion of both public and private property
located at any corner and bounded by the curb line or edge of a roadway of the
intersecting streets and a line joining points on the curb or edge of roadway
forty five feet (45') from the point of intersection of the extended curb lines
or edges of the roadway (see figure below).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7b3e37bf04674f7b3738d62883ef5a27ed6aa631/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2549.png]
 
TRAIL: A way designated for use by pedestrians, bicycles, trail bikes,
livestock and snowmobiles, unless otherwise specified.
TRANSFER: The conveyance of property to another by deed or other method.
UNIT OF OPERATION: An individual and separate unit of activity or function
within a building, such as a single shop within a business complex or a single
business occupying an entire building.
USE: The purpose (type and extent) for which land or a building is arranged,
designed, or intended, or for which either land or a structure is occupied or
maintained.
USE, PRINCIPAL: A use listed in the table of permitted uses in chapter 320 of
this title, which use shall be the dominant use on the property.
UTILITIES: Public services or facilities including domestic water, sanitary
sewer, cable TV, electric power, gas, telephone, irrigation, water, and
drainage.
UTILITY FACILITIES: Any structure or facility owned by a governmental entity, a
nonprofit organization, a corporation, or any entity defined as a public
utility under Nevada law, and used in conjunction with the production,
generation, transmission, delivery, collection, or storage of, water, sewage,
electricity, gas, oil, or electronic signals.
VARIANCE: A grant of permission by the Board of Adjustment that authorizes the
recipient to develop or use property in a manner that, according to the strict
letter of this title, is not otherwise legally permitted.
VEGETATION, NATIVE: Any plant species with a geographic distribution indigenous
to all or part of the State of Nevada. Plant species which have been introduced
by man are not native vegetation.
VEHICLE ACCOMMODATION AREA: That portion of a lot that is used by vehicles for
access, circulation, parking, loading and unloading.
VESTED PROPERTY RIGHT: The right to undertake and complete the development and
use of property under the terms and conditions of a site specific development
plan approval.
VIOLATION OF FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION REGULATIONS: The failure of a structure or
other development to be fully compliant with the County's floodplain management
regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation
certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in
chapter 800 of this title.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION: The height, in relation to the North American Vertical
Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various
magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplain of coastal or riverine areas.
WATERCOURSE: A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel, irrigation
canal or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least
periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which
substantial flood damage may occur.
WATERSHED PROTECTION AREA: The term "watershed protection area" means those
watershed areas which are being managed by Lyon County to protect both
groundwater and surface water resources. These areas are shown on maps
available at the Lyon County Utilities Department.
WELLHEAD PROTECTION AREA: The term "wellhead protection area" means those areas
or locations that are being managed by Lyon County to protect groundwater
resources. These areas are shown on maps available at the Lyon County Utilities
Department.
WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (WECS): An electrical generating facility
consisting of a tower, a wind turbine generator with rotating blades, guy wires
and anchors, and associated control and conversion electronic equipment to
convert wind movement into electricity, and that is incidental and subordinate
to another use on the same parcel. The energy may be used on-site or
distributed into the electrical grid.
WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM, COMMERCIAL: A WECS with a total system height
more than four hundred feet (400') and that is intended to produce electricity
to sell for consumption.
WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM, COMMERCIAL USE TEST SITE: The electrical
equipment, such as anemometers or pyranometers, which measures wind and solar
energy potential. Test sites may include communication devices, towers, guy
wires and anchors, and other associated controls to measure, monitor and report
wind and solar energy data.
WIND TURBINE: A wind conversion system that converts wind energy into
electricity through the use of a wind turbine generator, and includes the
nacelle, rotor, tower, and pad transformer, if any.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY, ATTACHED: A wireless communication facility
that is affixed to an existing structure; e.g., an existing building wall or
roof, mechanical equipment, tower or pole, water tank, utility or light pole,
which does not include additional wireless communication support structure.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION TRANSMISSIONS TOWERS: New structure, tower, pole or mast
erected to support wireless communication antennas and connecting
appurtenances. For the purposes of this title, such a support structure will be
referred to as a "tower". Support structure types include:
   A.   "Guyed tower" means a tower which is supported by the use of cables
(guy wires) which are permanently anchored;
   B.   "Lattice tower" means a tower characterized by an open framework of
lateral cross members which stabilize the tower;
   C.   "Monopole" means a single upright pole, engineered to be self-
supporting and requiring no guy wires or lateral cross-supports.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS: Any personal wireless services as defined in the
Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996, as amended, which includes FCC-licensed
commercial wireless telecommunications services including but not limited to
cellular, personal communications services (PCS), specialized mobile radio
(SMR), enhanced specialized mobile radio (ESMR), paging and similar services
that currently exist or that may be developed in the future.
XERISCAPE: Landscape methods which conserve water through the use of drought-
tolerant and low water consumptive plants and planting techniques.
YARD, FRONT: A clear, unoccupied space on the same lot with a building,
extending across the entire width of the lot and situated between the building
and the front lot line of the parcel. For corner lots, the front yard shall be
determined as follows:
   A.   The narrowest street frontage shall be the front yard in agricultural
and residential land use districts,
   B.   The widest street frontage shall be the front yard in all other land
use districts.
YARD, REAR: An area extending across the full width of the lot between the rear
lot line and the nearest line of the building. On corner lots, the rear yard
area extends from the interior side lot line to nearest line of the building
facing the street. Rear yard depth shall be measured at right angles to the
rear line of the lot.
YARD, SIDE: A yard lying between the side lot line and the building and
extending from the front yard to the rear yard. In the absence of a rear yard,
the side yard shall extend to the rear lot line. Side yard width shall be
measured at right angles to the side lot lines.
YARD, SIDE OF STREET (CORNER LOTS ONLY): An area extending from the lot line
abutting the secondary street or future street to the closest projecting front
line of the building.
ZONING DISTRICT: Any section or sections of the County for which the
regulations governing the use of land and the use, density, bulk, height, and
coverage of buildings and other structures are uniform.
ZONING MAP: The map of the County that delineates the extent of each district
or zone established in this title. (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 607, 9-19-
2019)
 
Notes
1 1. See NRS 117.010.
15.1200.06: PART 3 - ACRONYMS:
ADT    Average daily trips
AU     Animal unit
B&B    Bed and breakfast
BOA    Board of Adjustment
BOC    Board of Commissioners
CAFO   Concentrated animal feeding operation
CFR    Code of Federal Regulations
CLFPD  Central Lyon Fire Protection District
CLOMR  Conditional Letter of Map Revision
COW    Carrier on wheels or cell on wheels
CUP    Conditional use permit
DRB    Design Review Board
DVCD   Dayton Valley Conservation District
ESMR   Enhanced specialized mobile radio
FAA    Federal Aviation Administration
FCC    Federal Communications Commission
FEMA   Federal Emergency Management Agency
FHBM   Flood Hazard Boundary Map
FIRM   Flood Insurance Rate Map
FIS    Flood Insurance Study
GIS    Geographic Information System
HPB    Historic Preservation Board
HUD    U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
LOMA   Letter of Map Amendment
LOMR   Letter of Map Revision
LOMR-F Letter of Map Revision - Based on Fill
LOS    Level of service
LUDC   The Lyon County Land Use and Development Code
MVFPD  Mason Valley Fire Protection District
NAC    Nevada Administrative Code
NDEP   Nevada Division of Environmental Protection
NFIP   National Flood Insurance Program
NGVD   National Geodetic Vertical Datum
NLFPD  North Lyon Fire Protection District
NRS    Nevada Revised Statutes
PC     Lyon County Planning Commission
PCS    Personal Communications System
PUD    Planned development or planned unit development
ROW    Right-of-way
RV     Recreational vehicle
SFHA   Special flood hazard area
SHPO   State Historic Preservation Officer
SMR    Specialized mobile radio
SVFPD  Smith Valley Fire Protection District
TUP    Temporary use permit
WCF    Wireless communications facility
WECS   Wind Energy Conversion System
WRID   Walker River Irrigation District (Ord. 603, 11-1-2018; amd. Ord. 607, 9-
       19-2019)
 
