MUNICIPAL CODE
OF THE CITY OF
WYMORE, NEBRASKA
ORDINANCE NO. 263
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY OF THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
August 28, 1975
 
Contains 2025 S-22 Supplement,
Current through Ord. No. 683, passed 7/2/25
State Legislation through 2005
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
CITY OFFICERS
of
WYMORE, NEBRASKA
2025
 
Janet M. Riensche City Clerk
Krystal Rutti     City Treasurer
Tim Sedlacek      Utilities Superintendent
Andy Carothers    City Attorney
Mark Meints       Fire Chief
******
CITY COUNCIL
Collin Meints, Mayor
Sue Sapp, President of Council
Neil VanBoening
Roy “Max” Allen
Curt Oblinger
 
Chapter 1
ADMINISTRATIVE
Article 1. Elected Officials
§ 1-101   CITY MAYOR; SELECTION AND DUTIES.
The Mayor of the Municipality shall have the general, and immediate control
over all property, and officials, whether elected, or appointed, of the
Municipality. He shall preside at all meetings of the City Council, and may
vote when his vote shall be decisive and the Council is equally divided on any
pending matter, legislation, or transaction and the Mayor shall, for the
purpose of such vote, be deemed to be a member of the Council. His signature
must appear on the Municipal Clerk's minutes of all meetings, and he must sign
all resolutions which have been passed, and warrants for the payment of money
when ordered by the City Council; Provided, any ordinance vetoed by the Mayor
may be passed over his veto by a two-thirds (2/3) vote by the members of the
City Council, but if the Mayor neglects or refuses to sign any ordinance, and
returns it to the Council with his objections in writing at the next regular
Council meeting, the same shall become a law without his signature. He shall
from time to time communicate to the Council such information and
recommendations as, in his opinion, may improve the Municipality. He may
require at reasonable intervals any Municipal official to exhibit his accounts
and make reports to the Council on any subject pertaining to his office. He
shall have the power to remit fines or pardon any offense arising under the
ordinances of the Municipality. He may remove at any time an appointed police
officer of the Municipality. His territorial authority shall extend over all
places within five (5) miles of the corporate limits of the Municipality for
the enforcement of any health ordinance, and one half (1/2) mile in all matters
vested in him except taxation. He shall also have such other duties as the City
Council may by resolution confer upon him, or in any other matters which the
laws of the State of Nebraska repose in him. He shall be elected at the
Municipal Election, and shall serve a four (4) year term of office. Any
candidate for Mayor must have resided within the Municipality for forty (40)
days prior to filing for the said office and must in addition be a qualified
taxpayer. (Ref. 17-115, 17-116 RS Neb.)(Amended by Ord. Nos. 272, 4/27/77; 324,
10/1/80)
§ 1-102   CITY COUNCIL; ACTING PRESIDENT.
The City Council shall elect one (1) of its own body each year who shall be
styled the President of the Council, and who shall preside at all meetings of
the City Council in the absence of the Mayor. In the absence of the Mayor, and
the President of the Council, the City Council shall elect one (1) of its own
body to occupy his place temporarily, who shall be styled Acting President of
the Council. Both the President of the Council and the Acting President of the
Council, when occupying the position of the Mayor, shall have the same
privileges as the other members of the City Council, and all acts of the
President of the Council, or Acting President of the Council, while so acting,
shall be as binding upon the City Council, and upon the Municipality as if done
by the elected Mayor. (Ref. 17-148 RS Neb.)
§ 1-103   CITY COUNCIL; SELECTION AND DUTIES.
The members of the City Council shall be elected and serve for a four (4) year
term. The City Council shall be the legislative division of the Municipal
Government, and shall perform such duties, and have such powers as may be
authorized by law. The City Council shall maintain the peace, regulate
business, protect the public health and safety, and assess such taxes and fees
as are necessary and appropriate in the exercise of these functions. (Ref. 17-
103, 17-104 RS Neb.)
§ 1-104   CITY COUNCIL; ORGANIZATION.
City Councilmen of this Municipality shall take office, and commence their
duties on the first regular meeting in December following their election. The
newly elected Councilmen who have qualified as prescribed by law, together with
the members of the City Council holding over, shall assemble in a regular
meeting at the hour and place hereinafter prescribed and perfect the
reorganization of the City Council as herein provided, and all appointive
offices in which the terms of incumbents are expired shall be filled by
appointment. After the said meeting has been called to order, the Municipal
Clerk shall report to the City Council the names of all City Councilmen-elect
who have qualified for their respective offices, and this report shall be
spread upon the minutes of the meeting preceding the roll call. Each ward of
the Municipality shall be represented by at least two (2) Councilmen. No person
shall be eligible who is not at the time of his election an actual resident of
the ward for which he is qualified and should any City Councilman move from the
ward from which he was elected, his office shall thereby become vacant. (Ref.
17-107 RS Neb.) (Amended by Ord. No. 273, 4/27/77)
§ 1-105   ELECTED OFFICIALS; VACANCY.
Whenever a vacancy occurs in an elected office of the Municipality, except
Mayor, notice of said vacancy shall be presented in writing to the City Council
at a regular meeting and said notice shall appear as a part of the minutes of
such meeting.
   The City Council shall at once give public notice of the vacancy by causing
to be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the Municipality
or by posting in three (3) public places in the Municipality the office vacated
and the length of the unexpired term.
   The Mayor shall within two (2) weeks after the regular meeting at which such
notice has been presented, or upon the death of the incumbent, call a special
meeting of the City Council at which time the Mayor shall submit the name of a
qualified elector to fill the vacancy for the balance of the unexpired term.
   No officer who is removed at a recall election or resigns after the
initiation of the recall process shall be appointed to fill the vacancy
resulting from his or her removal or the removal of any other member of the
Governing Body during the remainder of his or her term of office.
   Upon a majority vote of approval by the City Council the vacancy shall be
filled. If a majority vote is not reached the nomination shall be rejected and
the Mayor shall at the next regular meeting submit the name of another
qualified elector. If the vote on the nominee fails to carry by majority vote,
the Mayor shall continue at such meeting to submit the names of qualified
electors and the City Council shall continue to vote upon such nominations
until the vacancy is filled.
   The Mayor shall cast his vote only in case of a tie vote of the City
Council.
   All City Council members shall cast a ballot for or against each nominee.
   The Mayor and Council may, in lieu of filling a vacancy in a City office as
provided above in this Section, call a special Municipal Election to fill such
vacancy.
   If there is a vacancy in the offices of a majority of the members of the
City Council, there shall be a special Municipal Election conducted by the
Secretary of State to fill such vacancies. (Ref. 32-4,152, 32-1406 RS Neb.)
(Amended by Ord. No. 381, 9/19/84)
§ 1-106   ELECTED OFFICIALS; MAYOR; VACANCY.
Whenever a vacancy occurs in the office of Mayor, or in case of his disability
or absence, the President of the Council shall exercise the office of Mayor
until such vacancy is filled or such disability is removed, or in case of
temporary absence, until the Mayor returns.
   When the successful candidate for Mayor shall be prevented from assuming
office, the incumbent Mayor shall not be entitled to hold over the term, but
such office shall automatically become vacant and the President of the Council
shall exercise the office of Mayor until such vacancy is filled.
   If the President of the Council shall for any cause assume the office of
Mayor for the remainder of the unexpired term, there shall be a vacancy on the
Council which shall be filled as provided in Section 1-105. (Ref. 17-107, 17-
115 RS Neb.)
Article 2. Appointed Officials
§ 1-201   APPOINTED OFFICIALS; GENERAL AUTHORITY.
   (1)   The Mayor, with the consent of the City Council, may appoint such
officers as shall be required or ordinance or otherwise required by law. Such
officers may be removed from office by the Mayor with the consent of the City
Council. The Mayor, with the consent of the City Council, shall appoint such a
number of regular police officers, and other officials as may be necessary, and
may establish a police reserve force as provided by law. All police officers
shall be subject to removal by the Mayor pursuant to the provisions of Section
3-1201 of this Code.
   (2)   The Mayor shall nominate his or her candidates for appointive offices
at the first regular meeting in December. Said nominations shall be acted on by
the City Council by the second regular meeting in December. All appointive
officers shall qualify within two weeks following their appointments.
Qualification for each officer who is not required to give bond shall consist
of subscribing and taking an oath to support the Constitution of the United
States, the Constitution of the State of Nebraska, the laws of the
Municipality, and to perform faithfully and impartially the duties of his or
her office; said oath to be filed in the office of the Municipal Clerk. Each
appointed official who is required to give a bond shall file the required bond
in the office of the Municipal Clerk with sufficient sureties, conditioned on
the faithful discharge of the duties of his or her office, with the oath
endorsed thereon. (Ref. 17-107, 81-1438 through 81-1446 RS Neb.) (Amended by
Ord. Nos. 274, 4/27/77; 517, 4/16/97; 541, 12/15/99; 679, 9/18/24)
§ 1-202   [RESERVED]
§ 1-203   APPOINTED OFFICIALS; MERGER OF OFFICES.
The Governing Body of the Municipality may, in its discretion, by ordinance
combine, and merge any elective, or appointive office, or employment, except
the Mayor or a City Councilmember with any other elective, or appointive office
so that one or more of such offices may be held by the officer or employee at
the same time. Any offices so merged and combined shall always be construed to
be separate, and the effect of the combination or merger shall be limited to a
consolidation of official duties only. The salary of the officer holding the
merged offices shall not be in excess of the maximum amount provided by law for
the salary of the offices so combined. For purposes of this Section, volunteer
firefighters and ambulance drivers shall not be considered officers. (Ref. 17-
108.02 RS Neb.) (Amended by Ord. No. 382, 9/19/84)
§ 1-204   APPOINTED OFFICIALS; MUNICIPAL CLERK.
   The Municipal Clerk shall attend the meetings of the Governing Body, and
keep a correct journal of the proceedings of that body. He shall keep a record
of all outstanding bonds against the Municipality and when any bonds are sold,
purchased, paid, or cancelled, said record shall show the fact. He shall make,
at the end of the fiscal year, a report of the business of the Municipality
transacted through his office for the year. That record shall describe
particularly the bonds issued, and sold during the year, and the terms of the
sale with each, and every item, and expense thereof. He shall file all official
bonds after the same shall have been properly executed, and approved. He shall
make the proper certificate of passage which shall be attached to original
copies of all bond ordinances hereafter enacted by the Governing Body.
   The Municipal Clerk shall issue, and sign all licenses, permits, and
occupation tax receipts authorized by law, and required by the Municipal
ordinances. He shall collect all occupation taxes, and license money except
where some other Municipal officer is specifically charged with that duty. He
shall keep a register of all licenses granted in the Municipality, and the
purpose for which they have been issued.
   The Municipal Clerk shall permit no records, public papers, or other
documents of the Municipality kept, and preserved in his office to be taken
therefrom, except by such officers of the Municipality as may be entitled to
the use of the same, but only upon their leaving a receipt therefor. He shall
keep all the records of his office, including a record of all licenses issued
by him in a blank book with a proper index. He shall include as part of his
records all petitions under which the Governing Body shall order public work to
be done at the expense of the property fronting thereon, together with
references to all resolutions, and ordinances relating to the same. He shall
endorse the date, and hour of filing upon every paper, or document so filed in
his office. All such filings made by him shall be properly docketed. Included
in his records shall be all standard codes, amendments thereto, and other
documents incorporated by reference, and arranged in triplicate in a manner
convenient for reference. He shall keep, and preserve the proceedings of the
Governing Body in two (2) separate, and distinct record books. The Minute
Records shall contain a record of all the miscellaneous, and informal doings of
the Governing Body. The Minute Record shall not include the passage, and
approval of ordinances except such resolutions incorporating by reference the
Ordinance Record into the Minute Record. The Ordinance Record shall contain the
formal proceedings of the Governing Body in the matter of passing, approving,
publishing, posting, and certifying of ordinances. After the formalities for
the legal enactment of an ordinance have been completed, the Municipal Clerk
shall record, and spread at large in the Ordinance Record his ordinance minutes
on printed forms. In all cases hereafter where single ordinances are introduced
for the consideration of the Governing Body, the Municipal Clerk shall cause to
be introduced an appropriate resolution incorporating by reference the
Ordinance Record into the Minute Record. He shall keep an accurate, and
complete account of the appropriation of the several funds, draw, sign, and
attest all warrants ordered for the payment of money on the particular fund
from which the same is payable. At the end of each month, he shall then make a
report of the amounts appropriated to the various funds, and the amount of the
warrants drawn thereon. Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent any
citizen, official, or other person from examining any public records at all
reasonable times.
   The Municipal Clerk shall deliver all warrants, ordinances, and resolutions
under his charge to the Mayor for his signature. He shall also deliver to
officers, employees, and committees all resolutions, and communications which
are directed at said officers, employees, or committees. With the seal of the
Municipality, he shall duly attest the Mayor's signature to all ordinances,
deeds, and papers required to be attested to when ordered to do so by the
Governing Body. Within thirty (30) days after any meeting of the Governing
Body, the Municipal Clerk shall prepare, and publish the official proceedings
of the Governing Body in a legal newspaper of general circulation in the
Municipality, and which was duly designated as such by the Governing Body. Said
publication shall set forth a statement of the proceedings thereof and shall
also include the amount of each claim allowed, the purpose of the claim, and
the name of the claimant, except that the aggregate amount of all payroll
claims may be included as one item. Between July 15 and August 15 of each year,
the names of all employees and their current annual, monthly, or hourly
salaries shall be published and any changes in salaries or the hiring of new
employees during the calendar quarter preceding the months of October, January,
and April shall be published during the months of November, February, and May;
Provided, the charge for such publication shall not exceed the rates provided
by the statutes of the State of Nebraska. Said publication shall be charged
against the General Fund. He shall then keep in a book with a proper index,
copies of all notices required to be published, or posted by the Municipal
Clerk by order of the Governing Body, or under the ordinances of the
Municipality. To each of the file copies of said notices shall be attached the
printer's affidavit of publication, if the said notices are required to be
published, or the Municipal Clerk's certificate under seal where the same are
required to be posted only.
   The Municipal Clerk shall receive all objections to creation of paving
districts, and other street improvements. He shall receive the claims of any
person against the Municipality, and in the event that the said claim is
disallowed in part, or in whole, the Municipal Clerk shall notify such
claimant, his agent, or attorney by letter within five (5) days after such
disallowance, and the Municipal Clerk shall then prepare transcripts on appeals
of any disallowance of a claim in all proper cases.
   The Municipal Clerk may charge a reasonable fee for certified copies of any
record in his office as set by resolution of the Governing Body. He shall
destroy Municipal records under the direction of the State Records Board
pursuant to Sections 84-1201 through 84-1220; Provided, the Governing Body
shall not have the authority to destroy the Minutes of the Municipal Clerk, the
permanent ordinances, and resolution books, or any other records classified as
permanent by the State Records Board. (Ref. 17-605, 19-1102, 19-1104, 84-1201
through 84-1220, 84-712 RS Neb.) (Amended by Ord. No. 275, 4/27/77)
§ 1-205   APPOINTED OFFICIALS; MUNICIPAL TREASURER.
(A) The City Treasurer shall be the custodian of all money belonging to the
City. He or she shall keep a separate account of each fund or appropriation and
the debts and credits belonging thereto. He or she shall give every person
paying money into the treasury a receipt therefor, specifying the date of
payment and on what account paid. He or she shall also file copies of such
receipts with his or her monthly reports. The City Treasurer shall, at the end
of every month, and as often as may be required, render an account to the City
Council, under oath, showing the state of the treasury at the date of such
account and the balance of money in the treasury. He or she shall also
accompany such accounts with a statement of all receipts and disbursements,
together with all warrants redeemed and paid by him or her, which warrants,
with any and all vouchers held by him or her, shall be filed with his or her
account in the City Clerk's office. If the City Treasurer fails to render his
or her account within twenty (20) days after the end of the month, or by a
later date established by the Governing Body, the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the City Council may use this failure as cause to remove the
Treasurer from office. (Ref. 17-606 RS Neb.)
   (B)   (1)   All warrants upon the City Treasurer shall be paid in the order
of their presentation therefor and as otherwise provided in sections 77-2201
through 77-2215 RS Neb. (Ref. 77-2201 RS Neb.)
      (2)   The City Treasurer shall keep a warrant register in the form
required by section 77-2202 RS Neb.
      (3)   The City Treasurer shall make duplicate receipts for all sums which
shall be paid into his or her office, which receipts shall show the source from
which such funds are derived, and shall, by distinct lines and columns, show
the amount received to the credit of each separate fund, and whether the same
was paid in cash, in warrants, or otherwise. The Treasurer shall deliver one of
the duplicates to the person making the payment and retain the other in his or
her office. (Ref. 77-2209 RS Neb.)
      (4)   The City Treasurer shall daily, as money is received, foot the
several columns of the cash book and of the register, and carry the amounts
forward, and at the close of each year, in case the amount of money received by
the Treasurer is insufficient to pay the warrants registered, he or she shall
close the account for that year in the register and shall carry forward the
excess. (Ref. 77-2210 RS Neb.)
   (C)   (1)   The City Treasurer shall prepare and publish annually within
sixty (60) days following the close of the municipal fiscal year a statement of
the receipts and expenditures by funds of the City for the preceding fiscal
year. (Ref. 19-1101 RS Neb.)
      (2)   Publication shall be made in one legal newspaper of general
circulation in the City. If no legal newspaper is published in the City, then
such publication shall be made in one legal newspaper published or of general
circulation within the county in which the City is located. (Ref. 19-1103 RS
Neb.)
   (D)   The City Treasurer shall keep all money belonging to the City separate
and distinct from his or her own money. He or she shall invest and collect all
money owned by or owed to the City as directed by the City Council. He or she
shall maintain depository evidence that all municipal money is, in the name of
the City, in a solvent and going financial institution of a type authorized by
state law for deposit of municipal funds. He or she shall cancel all bonds,
coupons, warrants, and other evidences of debt against the City, whenever paid
by him or her, by writing or stamping on the face thereof, "Paid by the City
Treasurer," with the date of payment written or stamped thereon. He or she
shall collect all special taxes, allocate special assessments to the several
owners, and obtain from the County Treasurer a monthly report as to the
collection of delinquent taxes.
§ 1-206   APPOINTED OFFICIALS; TREASURER'S MONTHLY REPORT.
(Repealed 2001)
§ 1-207   APPOINTED OFFICIALS; TREASURER'S ANNUAL REPORT.
(Repealed 2001)
§ 1-208   APPOINTED OFFICIALS; MUNICIPAL ATTORNEY.
   The Municipal Attorney is the Municipality's legal advisor, and as such he
shall commence, prosecute, and defend all suits on behalf of the Municipality.
When requested by the Governing Body, he shall attend meetings of the Governing
Body, and shall advise any Municipal Official in all matters of law in which
the interests of the Municipality may be involved. He shall draft such
ordinances, bonds, contracts, and other writings as may be required in the
administration of the affairs of the Municipality. He shall examine all bonds,
contracts, and documents on which the Governing Body will be required to act,
and attach thereto a brief statement in writing to all such instruments, and
documents as to whether, or not, the document is in legal, and proper form. He
shall prepare complaints, attend, and prosecute violations of the Municipal
ordinances when directed to do so by the Governing Body. Without direction, he
shall appear, and prosecute all cases for violation of the Municipal ordinances
that have been appealed to, and are pending in any higher court. He shall also
examine, when requested to do so by the Governing Body, the ordinance records,
and advise, and assist the Municipal Clerk as much as may be necessary to the
end that each procedural step will be taken in the passage of each ordinance to
insure that they will be valid, and subsisting local laws in so far as their
passage, and approval are concerned. The Governing Body shall have the right to
compensate the Municipal Attorney for legal services on such terms as the
Governing Body and the Municipal Attorney may agree, and to employ any
additional legal assistance as may be necessary out of the funds of the
Municipality.  (Ref. 17-610 RS Neb.)
§ 1-209   APPOINTED OFFICIALS; MUNICIPAL POLICE CHIEF.
The Municipal Police Chief shall direct the police work of the Municipality and
shall be responsible for the maintenance of law and order. He shall act as
Health Inspector, and Building Inspector, except in the event the Municipality
appoints another person. He shall file the necessary complaints in cases
arising out of violations of Municipal ordinances, and shall make all necessary
reports required by the Municipal ordinances, or the laws of the State of
Nebraska. He and the Policemen shall have the power and it shall be their duty
to arrest all offenders against the laws of the State or of the Municipality,
by day or by night, and keep them in the County Jail to prevent their escape,
until a trial or examination may be had before the proper official. He shall
diligently inquire into any and all violations of the Municipal laws and all
neglect to comply with the requirements thereof, and he shall ferret out all
those guilty of neglect or violation, and shall file and swear out complaints
against said violators as required by law. He shall dispose of all disorderly
houses and all persons carrying on any business inside of said Municipality
without a license, and in all cases where a license is required, make a
complaint thereof. He shall have the power to acquire the aid of any citizen or
citizens, and any person or persons who shall willfully neglect to obey the
summons of said officer in such case shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined
in any sum not exceeding fifty ($50.00) dollars and the costs of prosecution,
and shall stand committed to the County Jail until such fine and the costs are
paid. He shall cause any nuisance to be abated and shall give the necessary
orders for the abatement or removal of any nuisance to the persons committing
or maintaining the same, or suffering or permitting the same to be committed or
maintained on premises under his control. He may arrest and hold for trial all
persons guilty of committing or maintaining such nuisance. He shall bring all
persons who are under arrest for the violation of any Municipal law before the
Court having jurisdiction whenever required to do so by rules or by the order
of the Court. He shall make or cause to be made the necessary written complaint
against such person or persons when arrested. He shall perform such other
duties as may be imposed upon him by resolution, order, or ordinance of the
Governing Body. (Ref. 17-107, 17-121 RS Neb.)
§ 1-210   APPOINTED OFFICIALS; MUNICIPAL VOLUNTEER FIRE AND RESCUE DEPARTMENT;
DUTIES OF FIRE CHIEF; OFFICERS.
   (1)   The Municipal Fire Chief, Assistant Fire Chief, Second Assistant Fire
Chief, and President of the Wymore Volunteer Fire and Rescue Department shall
be appointed yearly by the Mayor, by, and with the consent of the City Council.
The members of the Fire and Rescue Department shall nominate individuals for
appointment as Fire Chief, Assistant Fire Chief, Second Assistant Fire Chief,
and President of the Wymore Volunteer Fire and Rescue Department, by the
following procedure:
      (a)   Prior to the first (1st) of December of each year, the members of
the Wymore Volunteer Fire and Rescue Department, by means of an election, shall
select individuals to be nominated as Fire Chief, Assistant Fire Chief, Second
Assistant Fire Chief, and President of the Wymore Volunteer Fire and Rescue
Department.
      (b)   Prior to the first (1st) regular meeting of the City Council in
December of each year, the Secretary of the Wymore Volunteer Fire and Rescue
Department shall report to the Mayor the names of the individuals so elected,
and said individuals’ names shall be placed in nomination by the Mayor in
accordance with the provisions of section 1-201(2).
      (c)   If no nominations are received from the Wymore Volunteer Fire and
Rescue Department, or if the individuals nominated are not confirmed by the
City Council, the Mayor, by, and with the consent of the City Council, shall
appoint a Fire Chief, Assistant Fire Chief, Second Assistant Fire Chief, and
President of the Wymore Volunteer Fire and Rescue Department.
   (2)   The Fire Chief shall enforce all laws and ordinances covering the
prevention of fires; the storage and use of explosives and flammable
substances; the installation of fire alarm systems; the maintenance of fire
extinguishing equipment; the regulation of fire escapes; and the inspection of
all premises requiring adequate fire escapes. The Fire Chief shall within two
(2) days investigate the cause, origin, and circumstances of fires arising
within the Wymore Volunteer Fire and Rescue Department’s jurisdiction. The Fire
Chief shall, on or before the first (1st) day of April and October of each
year, cause the Secretary of the Wymore Volunteer Fire and Rescue Department to
file with the Municipal Clerk a certified copy of the rolls of all members in
good standing in their respective companies in order to obtain the exemption
provided by law. The Fire Chief, or his or her assistant in charge of
operations at a fire may command the services of any person present at any fire
in extinguishing the same or in the removal and protection of property. Failure
to obey such an order shall be a municipal offense punishable by fine. The Fire
Chief shall have the right to enter at all reasonable hours into buildings, and
upon all premises within the Fire Department’s jurisdiction for the purpose of
examining the same for fire hazards and related dangers.
(Ref. 17-107, 17-147, 17-505, 35-102, 35-108, 81-506, 81-512 RS Neb.) (Amended
by Ord. Nos. 557A, 3/19/03; 683, 7/2/25)
§ 1-211   APPOINTED OFFICIALS; PUBLIC WORKS SUPERINTENDENT.
(1) The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Council, shall appoint a
Public Works Superintendent. The Public Works Superintendent shall, subject to
the supervision of the Mayor and City Council, have the general control,
management, and immediate charge over all municipal utilities and municipal
streets. He shall perform such other duties as may be required by the Mayor and
City Council in relation to said utilities and streets. The Public Works
Superintendent may be removed at any time by the Mayor, or a two-thirds (2/3)
vote of the City Council, for sufficient cause. The term of office of the
Public Works Superintendent shall be for one year or until his successor shall
be appointed and qualified, unless sooner removed. Any vacancy occurring in the
office of Public Works Superintendent by death, resignation or removal from
office, as aforesaid, or removal from the City, may be filled in the manner
hereinbefore provided. The Public Works Superintendent shall, before entering
upon the discharge of his duties, execute a bond to the Municipality in the sum
of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), conditioned upon the faithful discharge
of his duties, and signed by two or more good and sufficient sureties, to be
approved by the Mayor and City Council or executed by a corporate surety. The
Public Works Superintendent's duties over the following systems and streets
shall be as stated herein:
Water, Sewer, and Electric Systems
The Public Works Superintendent shall have the immediate control and
supervision over all employees and property that make up the Municipal Water,
Sewer, and Electric Systems, subject to the general control and directives of
the Mayor and City Council. The Public Works Superintendent shall be primarily
responsible for the economic operation and prudent management of said systems.
The Public Works Superintendent shall, at the request of the Mayor and City
Council, make a detailed report to the Mayor and City Council on the condition
of said systems and shall direct their attention to such improvements, repairs,
extensions, additions, and additional employees as he may believe are needed
along with an estimate of the cost thereof.
Streets
The Public Works Superintendent shall, subject to the general control and
directives of the Mayor and City Council, have general charge, direction, and
control of all work on the streets, sidewalks, culverts, and bridges of the
Municipality, and shall perform such other duties as the Mayor and City Council
may require. It shall be his responsibility to see that gutters and drains
therein function properly, and that the same are kept in good repair. The
Public Works Superintendent shall, at the request of the Mayor and City
Council, make a detailed report to the Mayor and City Council on the conditions
of the streets, sidewalks, culverts, alleys, and bridges of the Municipality,
and shall direct their attention to such improvements, repairs, extensions,
additions and additional employees as he may believe are needed to maintain a
satisfactory street system in the Municipality along with an estimate of the
cost thereof.
   (2) Wherever used in this Code, the terms "Superintendent", "Utilities
Superintendent", "Superintendent of Light and Water", "Superintendent of Water
and Light", "Superintendent of the Water Pumping Department", "Manager of
Wymore Utilities", "Superintendent of Streets" or "Municipal Street Inspector"
shall be interpreted and construed to mean the Public Works Superintendent.
(Ref. 17-107, 17-119, 17-541, 17-543 RS Neb.) (Amended by Ord. Nos. 412, 4/1/
87; 524, 12/3/97)
§ 1-212   APPOINTED OFFICIALS; SUPERINTENDENT OF THE WATER PUMPING DEPARTMENT.
(Repealed by Ord. No. 524, 12/3/97)
§ 1-213    APPOINTED OFFICIALS; MUNICIPAL STREET INSPECTOR.
(Repealed by Ord. No. 524, 12/3/97)
§ 1-214    APPOINTED OFFICIALS; MUNICIPAL BUILDING INSPECTOR.
The Municipal Building Inspector shall conduct surveys and make inspections in
any area of the Municipality to determine whether all buildings and structures
are in compliance with the Municipal ordinances. He shall investigate all
complaints whether they are verbal, written, or in the form of a petition
alleging, and charging that a violation of the Municipal ordinances exists, and
that a building, or structure is unfit, or unsafe for human habitation. The
Building Inspector is authorized upon properly identifying himself to enter,
inspect, survey, and investigate at any reasonable time, or at any time if an
emergency exists, or if requested by the owner or occupant thereof. He shall
keep records of all complaints received, inspection reports, orders, and
complaints issued. The records shall be available for public inspection, and he
shall prepare an annual report including statistics based on the records kept.
The Building Inspector shall have no financial interest in the furnishing of
labor, materials, or appliances for the construction, alteration, or
maintenance of a building, except where he is the owner of a building, and he
shall not act as an agent for any said dealer, or as an agent for the sale,
lease, or rental of any real estate. The Building Inspector shall report to the
Governing Body as often as they may deem necessary, and shall have such other
duties, and issue such permits as they may direct. The Building Inspector may
be removed at any time for good and sufficient cause by the Governing Body.
(Ref. 17-604 RS Neb.) (Amended by Ord. No. 524, 12/3/97)
§ 1-215    APPOINTED OFFICIALS; MUNICIPAL ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR.
The Municipal Electrical Inspector shall enforce all laws relating to the
installation of electrical wiring, and connections thereto. When acting in good
faith, and without malice in the scope of his official duties, he shall not
himself be held personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons, or
property as the result of any act required by him, or by reason of any act or
omission in the discharge of his duties. He shall, in the discharge of his
official duties, and upon proper identification, have authority to enter into
any building, structure, or premise at any reasonable hour. It shall be the
duty of each owner or electrician, upon being notified of any defect or failure
to comply with the provisions of this Code, immediately to remedy the same, and
if the same is not remedied within ten (10) days the Electrical Inspector or
his agent, shall disconnect such electric apparatus from the Electric
Distribution System; Provided, if such defect is such as to endanger life or
property, then the Electrical Inspector, or his agent, shall disconnect such
electric apparatus immediately. When any electric apparatus shall have been
disconnected, it shall be unlawful to again connect the same until all defects
have been remedied or until the installation complies strictly with the
provisions of this Code. The Electrical Inspector shall have general
supervision over and is hereby authorized, empowered, and directed to regulate
and determine the placing, stringing, and attaching of all telegraph,
telephone, or electric light and power or other wires so as to prevent fires,
accident, or injury to persons or property. He shall cause wires and all
electrical appliances to be so placed, constructed, and guarded as not to cause
fires or accident or endanger life or property. He shall perform such other
duties, and issue any permits at any reasonable hour. He shall perform such
other duties and issue any permits that the Governing Body may direct. The
Electrical Inspector may be removed at any time for good and sufficient cause
by the Governing Body.
§ 1-216   APPOINTED OFFICIALS; WYMORE EMS; OFFICERS.
   (1)   The officers of Wymore EMS shall consist of a President, Rescue Chief,
Assistant Rescue Chief, Training/Safety Officer, and Secretary/Treasurer. Said
officers shall be members of the Wymore EMS and shall be elected by ballot
every two (2) years at the regular meeting in November. The Rescue Chief and
Secretary/Treasurer shall be elected in the even-numbered years; and President,
Assistant Rescue Chief, and Training/Safety Officer shall be elected in the
odd- numbered years. Said officers shall not take office until nominated by the
Mayor and appointed by the City Council, and shall hold office for two (2)
years.
   (2)   Prior to the first (1st) regular meeting of the City Council in
December of each year, the Secretary of Wymore EMS shall report to the Mayor
the names of the individuals so elected, and said individuals’ names shall be
placed in nomination by the Mayor in accordance with the provisions of section
1-201(2).
   (3)   If no nominations are received from the Wymore EMS, or if the
individuals nominated are not confirmed by the City Council, the Mayor, by, and
with the consent of the City Council, shall appoint a President, Rescue Chief,
Assistant Rescue Chief, Training/Safety Officer, and Secretary/Treasurer.
(Ref. 13-303, 17-505 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 683, 7/2/25)
Article 3. Bonds and Oath
§ 1-301    BONDS; FORM.
Official bonds of the Municipality shall be in form, joint and several, and
shall be made payable to the Municipality in such penalty as the Governing Body
may set by resolution; Provided, the penalty amount on any bond shall not fall
below the legal minimum, when one has been set by the State of Nebraska, for
each particular official. All official bonds of the Municipal officials shall
be executed by the principal named in such bonds and by at least two (2)
sufficient sureties who shall be freeholders of the county, or by the official
as principal and by a guaranty, surety, fidelity, or bonding company; Provided
no Municipal official, while still in his official term of office, shall be
accepted as surety on any other official's bond, contractor's bond, license
bond, or appeal bond under any circumstances. Only companies that are legally
authorized to transact business in the State of Nebraska shall be eligible for
suretyship on the bond of an official of the Municipality. All said bonds shall
obligate the principal, and sureties for the faithful discharge of all duties
required by law of such principal, and shall inure to the benefit of the
Municipality and any persons who may be injured by a breach of the conditions
of such bonds. No bond shall be deemed to be given or complete until the
approval of the Governing Body, and all sureties are endorsed in writing on the
said instrument by the Mayor and Municipal Clerk pursuant to the said approval
of the Governing Body. The premium on any official bond required to be given
may be paid out of the General Fund, or other proper Municipal fund, upon a
resolution to that effect by the Governing Body at the beginning of any
Municipal year. All official bonds, meeting the conditions herein, shall be
filed with the Municipal Clerk for his official records, and it shall be the
duty of the Municipal Clerk to furnish a certified copy of any bond so filed
upon the payment of a fee which shall be set by resolution of the Governing
Body. In the event that the sureties on the official bond of any officer of the
Municipality, in the opinion of the Governing Body, become insufficient, the
Governing Body may, by resolution, fix a reasonable time within which the said
officer may give a new bond or additional sureties as directed. In the event
that the officer should fail, refuse, or neglect to give a new bond, or
additional sureties to the satisfaction, and approval of the Governing Body
then the office shall, by such failure, refusal, or neglect, become vacant, and
it shall be the duty of the Governing Body to appoint a competent, and
qualified person to fill the said office. Any official who is re-elected to
office shall be required to file a new bond after each election. All officials
required to be bonded, must be bonded within ten (10) days following their
election or appointment, and failure to be so bonded shall create a vacancy in
the office to which such person has been elected or appointed. (Ref. 11-103
through 11-118, 17-604 RS Neb.)
§ 1-302    BONDS; AMOUNTS.
The following officers shall give a bond for their respective offices in the
amounts hereinafter prescribed:
   Clerk-Treasurer   $10,000.00      Others (Blanket Bond)     $5,000.00
§ 1-303    OATH OF OFFICE; MUNICIPAL OFFICIALS.
All officials of the Municipality, whether elected or appointed, except when a
different oath is specifically provided herein, shall, before entering upon
their respective duties, take and subscribe to the oath designated by law which
shall be endorsed upon their respective bonds. (Ref. 11-101 RS Neb.)
Article 4. Corporate Seal
§ 1-401   SEAL; OFFICIAL CORPORATE.
The official Corporate Seal of the Municipality shall be kept in the office of
the Municipal Clerk, and shall bear the following inscription, "City of Wymore,
Nebraska, Seal." The Municipal Clerk shall affix an impression of the said
official seal to all warrants, licenses, permits, ordinances, and all other
official papers issued by order of the Governing Body and countersigned by the
Municipal Clerk. (Ref. 17-502 RS Neb.)
Article 5. Meetings
§ 1-501   MEETINGS; DEFINED.
Meetings, as used in this Article shall mean all regular, special, or called
meetings, formal or informal, of a public body for the purposes of briefing,
discussion of public business, formation of tentative policy, or the taking of
any action. (Ref. 84-1409(2) RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 276, 4/27/77) (Amended by Ord.
No. 365, 9/21/83)
§ 1-502   MEETINGS; PUBLIC BODY DEFINED.
Public Body as used in this Article shall mean:
A.   The Governing Body of the Municipality,
B.   All independent boards, commissions, bureaus, committees, councils,
subunits, Certificate of Need appeal panels, or any other bodies, now or
hereafter created by Constitution, statute, or otherwise pursuant to law, and
C.    Advisory committees of the bodies listed above.
This Article shall not apply to subcommittees of such bodies unless such
subcommittees are holding hearings, making policy or taking formal action on
behalf of their parent body. (Ref. 84-1409(1) RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 276, 4/27/77)
(Amended by Ord. No. 365, 9/21/82)
§ 1-503   MEETINGS; PUBLIC.
All public meetings as defined by law shall be held in a Municipal public
building which shall be open to attendance by the public. All meetings shall be
held in the public building in which the Governing Body usually holds such
meetings unless the publicized notice hereinafter required shall designate some
other public building or other specified place. The advance publicized notice
of all public convened meetings shall be simultaneously transmitted to all
members of the Governing Body and to the public by a method designated by the
Governing Body or by the Mayor if the Governing Body has not designated a
method. Such notice shall contain the time and specific place for each meeting
and either an enumeration of the agenda subjects known at the time of the
notice, or a statement that such an agenda kept continually current shall be
readily available for public inspection at the office of the Municipal Clerk.
Except for items of an emergency nature, the agenda shall not be enlarged later
than twenty-four (24) hours before the scheduled commencement of the meeting.
The Governing Body shall have the right to modify the agenda to include items
of an emergency nature only, at such public meetings. The minutes of the
Municipal Clerk shall include the record of the manner and advance time by
which the advance publicized notice was given, a statement of how the
availability of an agenda of the then known subjects was communicated, the time
and specific place of the meetings, and the names of each member of the
Governing Body present or absent at each convened meeting. The minutes of the
Governing Body shall be a public record open to inspection by the public upon
request at any reasonable time at the office of the Municipal Clerk. Any
official action on any question or motion duly moved and seconded shall be
taken only by roll call vote of the Governing Body in open session. The record
of the Municipal Clerk shall show how each member voted, or that the member was
absent and did not vote. (Ref. 84-1408, 84-1409, 84-1411, 84-1413 RS Neb.)
(Ord. No. 276, 4/27/77) (Amended by Ord. No. 365, 9/21/83)
§ 1-504   MEETINGS; CLOSED SESSIONS.
(1) Any public body may hold a closed session by the affirmative vote of a
majority of its voting members if a closed session is clearly necessary for the
protection of the public interest or for the prevention of needless injury to
the reputation of an individual and if such individual has not requested a
public meeting. Closed sessions may be held for, but shall not be limited to,
such reasons as:
(a)   Strategy sessions with respect to collective bargaining, real estate
purchases, pending litigation or litigation which is imminent as evidenced by
communication of a claim or threat of litigation to or by the public body;
(b)   Discussion regarding deployment of security personnel or devices;
(c)   Investigative proceedings regarding allegations of criminal misconduct;
or
(d)   Evaluation of the job performance of a person when necessary to prevent
needless injury to the reputation of a person and if such person has not
requested a public meeting.
Nothing in this section shall permit a closed meeting for discussion of the
appointment or election of a new member to any public body.
   (2) The vote to hold a closed session shall be taken in open session. The
vote of each member on the question of holding a closed session, the reason for
the closed session, and the time when the closed session commenced and
concluded shall be recorded in the minutes. The public body holding such a
closed session shall restrict its consideration to matters during the closed
portions to only those purposes set forth in the minutes as the reason for the
closed session. The meeting shall be reconvened in open session before any
formal action may be taken. For purposes of this section, formal action shall
mean a collective decision or a collective commitment or promise to make a
decision on any question, motion, proposal, resolution, order, or ordinance or
formation of a position or policy but shall not include negotiating guidance
given by members of the public body to legal counsel or other negotiators in
closed sessions authorized under subdivision (a) of this section.
   (3) Any member of the public body shall have the right to challenge the
continuation of a closed session if the member determines that the session has
exceeded the reason stated in the original motion to hold a closed session or
if the member contends that the closed session is neither clearly necessary for
(a) the protection of the public interest or (b) the prevention of needless
injury to the reputation of an individual. Such challenge shall be overruled
only by a majority vote of the members of the public body. Such challenge and
its disposition shall be recorded in the minutes.
   (4) Nothing in this section shall be construed to require that any meeting
be closed to the public. No person or public body shall fail to invite a
portion of its members to a meeting and no public body shall designate itself a
subcommittee of the whole body for the purpose of circumventing the provisions
of this Article. No closed session, informal meeting, chance meeting, social
gathering, or electronic communication shall be used for the purpose of
circumventing the provisions of this Article.
   (5) The provisions of this Article shall not apply to chance meetings, or to
attendance at or travel to conventions or workshops of members of a public body
at which there is no meeting of the body then intentionally convened and there
is no vote or other action taken regarding any matter over which the public
body has supervision, control, jurisdiction, or advisory power. (Ref. 84-1410
RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 276, 4/27/77) (Amended by Ord. Nos. 365, 9/21/83; 499, 7/5/
95)
§ 1-505   MEETINGS; EMERGENCY MEETINGS.
When it is necessary to hold an emergency meeting without reasonable advance
public notice, the nature of the emergency shall be stated in the minutes and
any formal action taken in such meeting shall pertain only to the emergency.
Such emergency meetings may be held by means of electronic or telecommunication
equipment. The provisions of section 1-508 of this Article shall be complied
with in conducting emergency meetings. Complete minutes of such emergency
meetings specifying the nature of the emergency and any formal action taken at
the meeting shall be made available to the public by no later than the end of
the next regular business day. (Ref. 84-1411 RS Neb.)(Ord. No. 276, 4/27/77)
(Amended by Ord. No. 365, 9/21/83)
§ 1-506   MEETINGS; MINUTES.
(A) Each public body shall keep minutes of all meetings showing the time,
place, members present and absent, and the substance of all matters discussed.
The minutes shall also include a record of the manner and time by which the
advance publicized notice was given and a statement of how the availability of
an agenda of the then-known subjects was communicated.
   (B)   The minutes of all meetings and evidence and documentation received or
disclosed in open session shall be public records and open to public inspection
at the office of the City Clerk during normal business hours.
   (C)   Minutes shall be written and available for inspection within ten (10)
working days, or prior to the next convened meeting, whichever occurs earlier,
except that the City may have an additional ten (10) working days if the
employee responsible for writing the minutes is absent due to a serious illness
or emergency. (Ref. 84-1412, 84-1413 RS Neb.)(Ord. No. 276, 4/27/77)
§ 1-507   MEETINGS; VOTES.
Any action taken on any question or motion duly moved and seconded shall be by
roll call vote of the public body in open session, and the record shall state
how each member voted, or if the member was absent or not voting.
   The vote to elect leadership within a public body may be taken by secret
ballot, but the total number of votes for each candidate shall be recorded in
the minutes. (Ref. 17-616, 84-1413 RS Neb.)(Ord. No. 276, 4/27/77)
§ 1-508   MEETINGS; NOTICE TO NEWS MEDIA.
The Municipal Clerk, Secretary, or other designee of each public body shall
maintain a list of the news media requesting notification of meetings and shall
make reasonable efforts to provide advance notification to them of the time and
place of each meeting, and the subjects to be discussed at that meeting. (Ref.
84-1411 RS Neb.)(Ord. No. 276, 4/27/77)
§ 1-509   MEETINGS; PUBLIC PARTICIPATION.
Subject to the provisions of this Article, the public shall have the right to
attend and the right to speak at meetings of public bodies and all or any part
of a meeting of a public body except for closed meetings called pursuant to
section 1-504 may be videotaped, televised, photographed, broadcast, or
recorded by any person in attendance by means of a tape recorder, camera, video
equipment, or any other means of pictorial or sonic reproduction or in writing.
   It shall not be a violation of this section for any public body to make and
enforce reasonable rules and regulations regarding the conduct of persons
attending, speaking at, videotaping, televising, photographing, broadcasting,
or recording its meetings. A body may not be required to allow citizens to
speak at each meeting, but it may not forbid public participation at all
meetings. No public body shall require members of the public to identify
themselves as a condition for admission to the meeting. The body may require
any member of the public desiring to address the body to identify himself or
herself. No public body shall for the purpose of circumventing the provisions
of this Article hold a meeting in a place known by the body to be too small to
accommodate the anticipated audience. No public body shall be deemed in
violation of this section if it holds its meeting in its traditional meeting
place which is located in this State. No public body shall hold a meeting
outside the State of Nebraska. The public body shall, upon request, make a
reasonable effort to accommodate the public's right to hear the discussion and
testimony presented at the meeting. Public bodies shall make available at the
meeting, for examination and copying by members of the public, at least one (1)
copy of all reproducible written material to be discussed at an open meeting.
(Ref. 84-1412 RS Neb.)(Ord. No. 276, 4/27/77) (Amended by Ord. Nos. 365, 9/21/
83; 396, 9/18/85)
§ 1-510   MEETINGS; GOVERNING BODY.
(Repealed by Ord. No. 397, 9/18/85)
§ 1-511   MEETINGS; ORDER OF BUSINESS.
All meetings of the Governing Body shall be open to the public. Promptly at the
hour set by law on the day of each regular meeting, the members of the
Governing Body, the Municipal Clerk, the Mayor, and such other Municipal
officials that may be required shall take their regular stations in the meeting
place, and the business of the Municipality shall be taken up for
consideration, and disposition in the following order:
   Roll Call
   Reading and Approval of the Minutes of the Previous           Meeting
   Consideration of Petitions and other Communications
   Reports of Officers, Boards, and Committees
   Unfinished Business of the Preceding Meeting
   Introduction of Ordinances and Resolutions; First              Reading
   Second Reading of Ordinances
   Third Reading of Ordinances
   Final Passage of Ordinances
   Special Order of Business
   Appropriations and Consideration of Claims
   Miscellaneous Business
   Adjournment
§ 1-512   MEETINGS; PARLIAMENTARY PROCEDURE.
The Mayor shall preserve order during meetings of the Governing Body and shall
decide all questions of order, subject to an appeal to the Governing Body. The
Mayor may refer back to any order of business after passing it if there are no
objections from the members of the Council. The Governing Body may reprimand or
censure its members for any breach of trust or disorderly behavior. When any
person is called to order, he shall be seated until the point is decided. When
the Mayor is putting the question, no person shall leave the meeting room.
Every person present, previous to speaking shall rise from his seat and address
himself to the presiding officer and while speaking shall confine himself to
the question. When two (2), or more persons rise at once, the Mayor shall
recognize the one who spoke first. All resolutions or motions shall be reduced
to writing before being acted upon, if requested by the Municipal Clerk, or any
member of the Governing Body. Every member of the Governing Body who is present
when a question is voted upon, shall cast his vote unless excused by a majority
of the Governing Body present. No motion shall be put or debated unless
seconded. When seconded, it shall be stated by the Mayor before being
debatable. In all cases where a motion or resolution is entered on the minutes,
the name of the member of the Governing Body making the motion, or resolution
shall be entered also. After each vote, the "Yeas" and "Nays" shall be taken,
and entered in the minutes upon the request of any member of the Governing
Body. Before the vote is actually taken, any resolution, motion, or proposed
ordinance may be withdrawn from consideration by the sponsor thereof with the
consent of the member of the Governing Body seconding the said resolution,
motion, or ordinance. When, in the consideration of an ordinance, different
times, or amounts are proposed, the question shall be put on the largest sum,
or the longest time. A question to reconsider shall be in order when made by a
member voting with the majority, but such motion to reconsider must be made
before the expiration of the third (3rd) regular meeting after the initial
consideration of the question. When any question is under debate, no motion
shall be made, entertained, or seconded except the previous question, a motion
to table, and to adjourn. Each of the said motions shall be decided without
debate. Any of the rules of the Governing Body for meetings may be suspended by
a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the members present. In all cases in which
provisions are not made by these rules, Robert's Rules of Order is the
authority by which the Governing Body shall decide all procedural disputes that
may arise.
§ 1-513   MEETINGS; ORGANIZATIONAL.
(1) The newly elected Council shall convene at the regular place of meeting in
the City on the first regular meeting in December of each year in which a
Municipal election is held immediately after the prior Council adjourns and
proceed to organize themselves for the ensuing year. The Mayor shall call the
meeting to order. The Council shall then proceed to examine the credentials of
its members and other elective officers of the City to see that each has been
duly and properly elected, and to see that such oaths and bonds have been given
as are required. After ascertaining that all members are duly qualified, the
Council shall then elect one of its own body who shall be styled as "President
of the Council." The Mayor shall then nominate his or her candidates for
appointive offices. The Mayor shall then proceed with the regular order of
business.
   (2) It is hereby made the duty of each and every member of the Council, or
his or her successor in office, and of each officer elected to any office, to
qualify prior to the first regular meeting in December following his or her
election. Qualification for each officer who is not required to give bond shall
consist in subscribing and taking an oath to support the Constitution of the
United States, the Constitution of the State of Nebraska, the laws of the
Municipality and to perform faithfully and impartially the duties of his or her
office, said oath to be filed in the office of the Municipal Clerk. Each
officer who is required to give bond shall file the required bond in the office
of the Municipal Clerk with sufficient sureties, conditioned on the faithful
discharge of the duties of his office, with the oath endorsed thereon. (Ord.
No. 273, 4/27/77) (Amended by Ord. No. 517, 4/16/97
§ 1-514   MEETINGS; REGULAR MEETING.
The meetings of the Governing Body shall be held in the meeting place of the
Municipality. Regular meetings shall be held on the first (1st) and third (3rd)
Wednesdays of each month at the hour of seven (7:00) o'clock P.M.
   At all meetings of the Council a majority of the Councilmembers shall
constitute a quorum to do business. (Ref. 17-105 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 397, 9/18/
85) (Amended by Ord. No. 470, 1/20/93)
§ 1-515   MEETINGS; SPECIAL MEETINGS.
Special meetings may be called by the Mayor, or by three members of the City
Council, the object of which shall be submitted to the Council in writing. The
call and object, as well as the disposition thereof, shall be entered upon the
journal by the Municipal Clerk. On filing the call for a special meeting, the
Municipal Clerk shall notify the Councilmembers of the special meeting, stating
the time and its purpose. Notice of a special meeting need not be given to a
Councilmember known to be out of the state, or physically unable to be present.
A majority of the members of the City Council shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business, but a smaller number may adjourn from day to day and
compel the attendance of the absent members. Whether a quorum is present or
not, all absent members shall be sent for and compelled to attend.
   At the hour appointed for the meeting, the Municipal Clerk shall proceed to
call the roll of members and announce whether a quorum is present. If a quorum
is present, the Council shall be called to order by the Mayor, if present, or
if absent, by the President of the Council. In the absence of both the Mayor
and the President of the Council, the City Councilmembers shall elect a
President pro tempore. All ordinances passed at any special meeting shall
comply with procedures set forth in Chapter 1, Article 6 herein. (Ref. 17-106
RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 397, 9/18/85)
Article 6. Ordinances
§ 1-601   ORDINANCES; GRANT OF POWER.
The Governing Body shall have the responsibility of making all ordinances, by-
laws, rules, regulations, and resolutions, not inconsistent with the laws of
the State of Nebraska, as may be necessary and proper for maintaining the
peace, good government, and welfare of the Municipality and its trade,
commerce, and security. (Ref. 17-505 RS Neb.)
§ 1-602   ORDINANCES; INTRODUCTION.
Ordinances shall be introduced by members of the City Council in either of the
following ways:
1.    With the recognition of the Chair, a member may, in the presence and
hearing of a majority of the members elected to the City Council, read aloud
the substance of his proposed ordinance and file a copy of the same with the
Municipal Clerk for future consideration;
2.    Or with the recognition of the Chair, a member may present his proposed
ordinance to the Clerk who in the presence and hearing of a majority of the
members elected to the City Council, shall read aloud the substance of the same
and shall file the same for future consideration.
§ 1-603   ORDINANCES; FORM.
The form of ordinances shall be as follows:
1.   The title, which clearly and fully expresses every subject contained in
the text of the ordinance;
2.    The statutory ordinance clause;
3.    The text of the ordinance properly divided into sections, each section to
contain and express, as nearly as possible, a single unit of legislative
matter;
4.    A section repealing prior ordinances in conflict with the ordinance;
5.   A section prescribing the time when the ordinance shall take effect;
6.    The date of the passage and approval of the ordinance, the signature of
the Mayor and the attestation of the Clerk.
§ 1-604   ORDINANCES; PASSAGE.
Ordinances, resolutions, or orders for the appropriation of money shall require
for their adoption a concurrence of the majority of the members of the
Governing Body. Ordinances of a general or permanent nature shall be read by
the title on three (3) different days unless three-fourths (3/4) of the
Governing Body vote to suspend this requirement, except that such requirement
shall not be suspended for any ordinance for the annexation of territory. In
case such requirement is suspended, the ordinance shall be read by title and
then moved for final passage. Three-fourths (3/4) of the Council may require
any ordinance to be read in full before final passage under either process.
(Ref. 17-614 RS Neb.) (Amended by Ord. No. 498, 6/21/95)
§ 1-605   ORDINANCES; SUSPENSION OF RULES.
In the event that three-fourths (3/4) of the members of the Governing Body
present vote to dispense with the rule that ordinances of a general or
permanent nature be fully read on three (3) different days, such ordinances may
be passed by reading the title one (1) time when introduced, shall be read by
title a second (2nd) time after the rule has been dispensed with, shall be read
at large a third (3rd) time, and then put upon final passage. (Ref. 17-614, 17-
615 RS Neb.)
§ 1-606   ORDINANCES; PUBLICATION.
All ordinances of a general nature shall be published one (1) time within
fifteen (15) days after they are passed in some newspaper published in the
Municipality, or if no paper is published in the Municipality, then by posting
a written or printed copy thereof in each of three (3) public places in the
Municipality. (Ref. 17-613 RS Neb.)
§ 1-607   ORDINANCES; TITLE.
No ordinance shall contain a subject not clearly expressed in its title. (Ref.
17-614 RS Neb.)
§ 1-608   ORDINANCES; EMERGENCY ORDINANCES.
In the case of riot, infectious or contagious diseases, or other impending
danger, failure of a public utility, or other emergency requiring its immediate
operation, such ordinance shall take effect upon the proclamation of the Mayor,
and the posting thereof in at least three (3) of the most public places in the
Municipality. Such emergency notice shall recite the emergency and be passed by
a three-fourths (3/4) vote of the Governing Body, and entered upon the
Municipal Clerk's minutes. (Ref. 17-613 RS Neb.)
§ 1-609   ORDINANCES; RATES.
The legal rate for the publication of all legal notices shall be twenty-four
($.24) cents a line, single column, standard newspaper measurements for the
first (1st) insertion, and shall be twenty ($.20) cents a line for each
subsequent insertion. Publication of such notices may be in any type selected
by the publisher, but as to fees for such publication the measurement shall be
in eight (8) point type. (Ref. 33-141 RS Neb.)
§ 1-610   ORDINANCES; RESOLUTIONS AND MOTIONS.
Resolutions and motions shall be introduced in one of the methods prescribed
for the introduction of ordinances. After their introduction, they shall be
fully and distinctly read one (1) time in the presence and hearing of a
majority of the members elected to the Council. The issue raised by said
resolutions or motions shall be disposed of in accordance with the usage of
parliamentary law adopted for the guidance of the Council. A majority vote
shall be required to pass any resolution or motion. The vote on any resolution
or motion shall be viva voce and "yeas" and "nays" thereon shall be recorded by
the Clerk if one or more members of the Council shall request a roll call;
provided, however, the roll shall be called in every instance where the matter
before the Council involves directly or indirectly the expenditure of public
funds.
§ 1-611   ORDINANCES; CERTIFICATE OF PUBLICATION.
The passage, approval, and publication or posting of all ordinances shall be
sufficiently proven by a certificate under the Seal of the Municipality from
the Municipal Clerk showing that the said ordinance was passed and approved,
and when, and in what paper the same was published, or when, and by whom, and
where the same was posted.  (Ref. 17-613 RS Neb.)
§ 1-612   ORDINANCES; AMENDMENTS AND REVISIONS.
No ordinance or section thereof shall be revised or amended unless the new
ordinance contains the entire ordinance or section as revised or amended, and
the ordinance or section so amended shall be repealed. (Ref. 17-614 RS Neb.)
Article 7. Elections
§ 1-701   ELECTIONS; GENERALLY.
The Municipal primary and general election shall be held in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter Thirty-two (32) Revised Statutes of Nebraska. Said
elections shall be held in conjunction with the State Primary and General
Election. Prior to February One (1) of the year in which the first (1st) such
joint election takes place, the Governing Body shall receive the consent in
writing of the County Board to so hold the election and such authorization
shall be prescribed according to state law. The County Clerk shall have charge
of the election and shall have the authority to deputize the Municipal Clerk
for Municipal election purposes.
   Commencing with the Statewide Primary Election in 1976, and every two (2)
years thereafter, those candidates for Mayor and for positions on the City
Council whose terms will be expiring shall be nominated at the Statewide
Primary Election and elected at the Statewide General Election. (Ref. 17-107.02
(1),(2), 32-4,146, 32-4,147 RS Neb.)(Amended by Ord. Nos. 277, 4/27/77; 288,
12/7/77)
§ 1-702   ELECTIONS; TERM OF OFFICE.
All elected officers of the Municipality shall serve a term of four (4) years
and until their successors are elected and have qualified. (Ref. 17-107.02 (2)
RS Neb.)(Ord. No. 277, 4/27/77)(Amended by Ord. No. 337, 12/2/81)
§ 1-703   ELECTIONS; PRIMARY ELECTION, NUMBER OF CANDIDATES FILING.
If the number of candidates properly filed for nomination at the primary
election does not exceed two (2) for each vacancy to be filled, all candidates
properly filed shall be considered nominated, and no primary election for their
nomination shall be required. (Ref. 17-107.02(4) RS Neb.)(Ord. No. 277, 4/27/
77)
§ 1-704   ELECTIONS; PRIMARY ELECTION, WRITE IN CANDIDATES.
(Repealed by Ord. No. 307, 10/3/79)
§ 1-705   ELECTIONS; TIE VOTES.
In the case of a tie vote of any of the candidates in either the primary or
general election, the County Clerk shall notify such candidates to appear at
his office on a given day and hour to determine the same by lot before the
canvassing board, and the certificate of nomination or election shall be given
accordingly. Notice to appear shall be given by certified mail. (Ref. 17-107.02
(6) RS Neb.)(Amended by Ord. No. 277, 4/27/77)
§ 1-706   ELECTIONS; GENERAL ELECTION, PREPARATION OF BALLOT.
When more than one person becomes a candidate by filing, petition, or write-in
procedures for the same position in the primary, the County Clerk, in preparing
the official ballot for the general election shall place thereon the names of
the persons who received the greatest number of votes in the primary, but in no
event shall the names on the general election ballot be more than twice the
number of vacancies to be filled at the general election.
   The County Clerk shall place the names of the candidates on the general
election ballot in the direct order according to the number of votes received
at the primary election. If no primary election was held, the name of the
candidates shall be placed upon the general election ballot in the order of
their filing. (Ref. 17-107.02(6)&(7) RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 277, 4/27/77) (Amended
by Ord. No. 338, 12/2/81)
§ 1-707   ELECTIONS; ELECTION TO TERMS.
(Repealed by Ord. No. 338, 12/2/81)
§ 1-708   ELECTIONS; PRIMARY OR GENERAL ELECTION NOTICE.
The County Clerk shall publish in a newspaper designated by the County Board
the notice of the election no less than forty (40) days prior to the Primary or
General Election. This notice will serve the notice requirement for all
Municipal Elections which are held in conjunction with the County. (Ref. 32-
402.01 RS Neb.)(Amended by Ord. No. 278, 4/27/77)
§ 1-709   ELECTIONS; SPECIAL ELECTION NOTICE.
No less than five (5) days nor more than ten (10) days, prior to any special
Municipal election, the Municipal Clerk shall prepare and cause to be published
once in a newspaper that is in or of general circulation in the Municipality,
but if no newspaper is published in or is of general circulation in the
Municipality, then by posting in each of three (3) public places in the
Municipality, a notice containing the proclamation concerning the said special
election. The notice shall be in the form prescribed by State law. (Ref. 19-
3006 RS Neb.)
§ 1-710   ELECTIONS; VOTER QUALIFICATIONS.
Electors shall mean every person of the constitutionally prescribed age or
upwards, who shall have the right to vote for all officers to be elected to
public office, and upon all questions and proposals, lawfully submitted to the
voters at any and all elections authorized or provided for by the Constitution
or the laws of the State of Nebraska, except school elections; provided, no
person shall be qualified to vote at any election unless such person shall be a
resident of the State and shall have been properly registered with the election
official of the county. (Ref. 32-102 RS Neb.)
§ 1-711   ELECTIONS; OFFICIALS.
The County Clerk shall at least fifteen (15) days prior to the State Primary
Elections, give notice of the appointment by each political party of three (3)
judges and two (2) clerks of election in each election unit in the
Municipality, to be known as the Receiving Board. Each of the appointees
referred to shall be of good character, approved integrity, well informed, able
to read, write, and speak the English language, reside in the election precinct
in which he is to serve, be entitled to vote in his election unit, and hold
office for a term of two (2) years, or until judges and clerks of election are
appointed for the next State Primary Election. (Ref. 32-403 through 32-412 RS
Neb.)(Amended by Ord. No. 279, 4/27/77)
§ 1-712   ELECTIONS; OFFICIALS OATH.
Previous to any votes being received, the judges and clerks of election shall
severally take an oath or affirmation according to the form authorized by State
law. If there is no judge present at the opening of the polls, it shall be
lawful for the judges of election to administer the oath to each other and the
clerks of election. The person administering such oath shall cause an entry to
be made thereof and affixed to each poll book. (Ref. 11-101.01, 19-3015, 32-
413, 32-414 RS Neb.)
§ 1-713   ELECTIONS; OFFICIALS.
The Municipal Clerk shall, at least fifteen (15) days prior to the Municipal
election, appoint three (3) judges and two (2) clerks of election in each
precinct in the Municipality, to be known as the Receiving Board. In precincts
where more than one hundred (100) votes were cast for Governor or President in
the last general election, the Municipal Clerk shall, in the same manner,
appoint two (2) additional judges and two (2) additional clerks to be known as
the Election Counting Board. In precincts where there were not one hundred
(100) votes cast for Governor or President in the last general election, the
Receiving Board shall act as the Counting Board and shall count the ballots
after the polls are closed and make return thereof in the same manner provided
as in the case of Counting Boards. In precincts having a Counting Board, the
Board shall commence its duties at a given time specified by the Municipal
Clerk, at which time it shall proceed with the counting. If the judges of
election or the Counting Board cannot agree as to the legality of the vote to
be counted, then the Clerk of election serving on the Board shall have the same
powers as the judges of election in determining the legality of such votes. The
Municipal Clerk shall, at the time of appointing the Receiving Board, designate
one of the appointees as messenger, whose duty it shall be to receive from the
Municipal Clerk the ballots, and other supplies necessary for holding the
election in the voting unit of which he is the judge or clerk. At the time of
appointing the Counting Board, the Municipal Clerk shall designate one (1) of
the appointees as a messenger to return the ballots and other supplies to the
Municipal Clerk as soon as possible after the votes are counted. The ballots
and other supplies for the election shall be delivered by the messengers to the
polling places in their respective precincts at least one (1) hour before the
time provided by law for opening the polls. No person shall be eligible for
serving on any Receiving or Counting Board who is a candidate for office at
such election. Each appointee shall be of good character, approved integrity,
well informed, able to read, write, and speak the English language, reside in
the precinct in which he is to serve, be entitled to vote in the election
precinct involved; and hold office for a term of two (2) years or until judges
and clerks of election are appointed for the next Municipal election. The
Municipal Clerk shall keep a written record of such appointments which record
must be made at the time of appointment, and which shall be considered part of
the public records of his office. (Ref. 19-3011 RS Neb.) (Amended by Ord. No.
280, 4/27/77)
§ 1-714   ELECTIONS; OFFICIALS APPEARANCE.
Each person appointed by the County Clerk as judge or clerk of election shall
be notified of the appointment by letter. Each appointee shall, unless excused
by reason of ill health, or other good and sufficient reason, serve as such
officer for the term of his appointment. Any person selected as a judge or
clerk of election may, at any time before election day, be excused by the
County Clerk from serving in such capacity by reason of his or her own
sickness, the serious illness of any member of his or her family, or
unavoidable absence from the voting precinct on election day. Upon excusing a
member of the Election Board, the County Clerk shall fill the position from a
list submitted by the Chairman of the same party as the members excused, and
the person selected to fill such vacancy shall be notified of such appointment
by mail. The Board shall be employed at all elections held in the county at
which the County Clerk directs them to serve. If any person ordered to serve by
the County Clerk fails, refuses, or neglects to serve without first being
excused, such person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction
thereof, shall be fined in any sum not less than five ($5.00) dollars nor more
than fifty ($50.00) dollars. The County Clerk is authorized to file a complaint
therein against such person failing to appear. (Ref. 32-409.01 through 32-412,
32-415 RS Neb.)
§ 1-715   ELECTIONS; WARDS.
The City of Wymore, Nebraska is hereby divided into two wards. All dividing
lines found in this section, whether they be streets, rivers or railroads,
shall be construed to run in the center of said dividing line.
   The First Ward shall consist of all of that part of said City lying South
and East of the following described line: commencing at the point where Seventh
Street intersects with the Burlington Northern Railroad line, thence Southeast
to the intersection of Fifth and "L" Street, thence West to Sixth Street,
thence South to "J" Street, thence West to Seventh Street, thence South to "F"
Street, thence West to Seventeenth Street, thence South to "E" Street, thence
West to Twentieth Street, thence South to "D" Street, thence West to Twenty-
Second Street, thence South to "B" Street, thence West to the City limits of
Wymore.
   Second Ward shall consist of all of that part of said City lying North and
West of the following described line: commencing at the point where Seventh
Street intersects with the Burlington Northern Railroad line, thence Southeast
to the intersection of Fifth Street and "L" Street, thence West to Sixth
Street, thence South to "J" Street, thence West to Seventh Street, thence South
to "F" Street, thence West to Seventeenth Street, thence south to "E" Street,
thence West to Twentieth Street, thence South to "D" Street, thence West to
Twenty-Second Street, thence South to "B" Street, thence West to the City
Limits of Wymore. (Ref. 17-102 RS Neb.)(Amended by Ord. No. 462, 2/5/92)
§ 1-716   ELECTIONS; BALLOTS.
It shall be the duty of the County Clerk to provide printed ballots for every
general Municipal election and the expense of printing and delivering the
ballots and cards of instruction shall be a charge upon the Municipality. (Ref.
32-417, 32-418 RS Neb.)
§ 1-717   ELECTIONS; CERTIFICATE OF ELECTION.
After the canvass of the vote at the Municipal election, the Municipal Clerk
shall prepare a certificate of election for each person whom the Canvassing
Board has declared to have received the highest vote, and in the form as nearly
as possible prescribed by State law, which shall be signed by the Mayor under
the seal of the Municipality, and countersigned by the Municipal Clerk. The
said certificate shall then be delivered to the persons so elected. (Ref. 19-
3040, 19-3041, 32-4,111, 32-4,152 RS Neb.)
§ 1-718   ELECTIONS; JUDGES AND CLERKS COMPENSATION.
The judges and clerks of election shall receive for each one (1) hour of
service rendered one dollar and sixty cents ($1.60); provided, that in
precincts having a County Board, no member of the Receiving Board shall receive
pay for more than thirteen (13) hours of service. Each member of the Election
Board shall make an affidavit before a qualified officer of the number of hours
he has worked. The messenger appointed to receive and deliver the election
supplies to the election place and the messenger appointed to make the return
to the County Clerk shall receive for such service three ($3.00) dollars and
mileage at the rate of ten ($.10) cents per miles necessarily traveled in the
performance of said duties. In the event that a voting machine is used, the
wages of the election officials shall be based on the rate of one ($1.00)
dollar per hour for the time served as follows: one half ($.50) dollar for one
half hour for making the examination of the voting machines before the hour for
opening the polls; one ($1.00) dollar for each hour that the polls are open;
and one ($1.00) dollar for one (1) hour for making the canvass. (Ref. 32-4,128,
33-137 RS Neb.)
§ 1-719   ELECTIONS; ABSENT AND SICK VOTERS.
Absent and sick voters shall be permitted to vote in all Municipal elections in
the same manner as provided in General and Primary elections by the laws of the
State of Nebraska. (Ref. 32-801 through 32-826 RS Neb.)
§ 1-720   ELECTIONS; HOURS.
The polls in the Municipal elections shall be open at eight (8:00) o'clock A.M.
and shall remain open until eight (8:00) o'clock P.M., and the manner of voting
shall be the Australian ballot system. The Mayor may detail a Police Officer to
each polling place upon the days fixed for holding Municipal elections. Said
Officers, when specifically detailed, in addition to the preservation of peace,
shall perform any special duties imposed upon him by the election laws of the
State. (Ref. 32-445 RS Neb.)
§ 1-721   ELECTIONS; RECALL PROCEDURE.
Any or all of the elected officials of the Municipality may be removed from
office by the registered voters of the Municipality. Petition papers, to do
such, shall be procured from and filed with the Municipal Clerk, who shall keep
a sufficient number of such blank petition papers on file for distribution. An
affidavit to procure such papers shall be made by one (1) or more registered
voters and filed with the Municipal Clerk, stating the name and office of the
officer or officers sought to be removed. The Clerk, upon issuing any petition
paper, shall enter in a record, to be kept in his or her office, the name of
the registered voter or voters to whom issued, the date of such issuance, and
the number of papers issued and shall certify on the papers the name of the
registered voter or voters to whom the papers were issued and the date they
were issued.
   Circulators of such petitions shall comply will all requirements of the
Statutes of Nebraska. Such petition demanding that recall be submitted to the
registered voters shall be signed by registered voters equal in number to at
least thirty-five (35%) percent of the total votes cast at the last General
Municipal Election, except for an office where more than one (1) candidate is
chosen in which case the petition shall be signed by registered voters equal in
number to at least thirty-five (35%) percent of the number of votes cast for
the person receiving the most votes for such office in the last General
Election. If officers are elected by ward, only registered voters of that
officer's ward may sign a recall petition or vote at the recall election.
   All petitions shall be filed with the Clerk for signature verification as
one instrument within thirty (30) days of issuance of the original petition
papers. Within ten (10) days after the filing of the petition, the Clerk shall
ascertain whether or not the petition is signed by the requisite number of
registered voters and shall attach to the petition a certificate showing
whether any signatures need to be corrected in order to comply with the
requirements of this section and State Statutes. If the Clerk finds incorrect
signatures, he or she shall promptly notify the person filing the petition that
the petition may be cured at any time within ten (10) days after the giving of
such notice by the filing of a supplementary petition, with the corrected
signatures, on additional petition papers issued and filed as provided for the
original petition. No new signatures may be added after the initial filing of
the petition and no signatures may be removed unless the Clerk receives an
affidavit signed by the person requesting his or her signature be removed. The
Clerk shall, within five (5) days after any correction, examine the corrected
petition and attach a certificate as in the case of the original petition. If
the certificate shows the corrected petition to be insufficient or if no
correction was made, the Clerk shall file the petition in his or her office
without prejudice to the filing of a new petition for the same purpose.
   If the petition or corrected petition is found to be sufficient, the Clerk
shall attach to the petition a certificate showing the result of such
examination and shall notify the officer whose removal is sought. If the
officer does not resign within five (5) days after the notice, the Clerk shall
submit, within ten (10) days after the five (5) day period has elapsed, the
original petition and supplement, together with his or her certificates, to the
Governing Body. Upon receipt of such petition and certificate, the Governing
Body shall order an election to be held not less than thirty (30) nor more than
forty-five (45) days after the five (5) day period, except that if any other
election is to held in that district within ninety (90) days of the five (5)
day period the Governing Body may provide for the holding of the removal
election on the same day.
   No recall petition shall be filed against members of the Governing Body
within twelve (12) months after a recall election has failed to remove him or
her from office or within six (6) months from the end of his or her term of
office. (Ref. 32-1401 through 32-1408 RS Neb.)(Ord. No. 308, 10/3/79)(Amended
by Ord. No. 383, 9/19/84)
§ 1-722   ELECTIONS; JOINT, SPECIAL.
In lieu of submitting a matter or issue at a separate special Municipal
Election, the Municipality may submit such matter or issue at a statewide
General or Primary Election or at a scheduled County Election or may request
the County to conduct a special election. Such matter or issue must be
certified by the Municipal Clerk to the County Clerk or Election Commissioner
at least fifty (50) days prior to the election. The Municipal Clerk shall be
responsible for the publication or posting of any required special notice of
the submission of such matter other than that required to be given of the
statewide or county election issues. (Ref. 32-4,153, 32-4,154 RS Neb.)(Ord. No.
383, 9/19/84)
§ 1-723   ELECTIONS; PETITION CANDIDATES.
Candidates for any Municipal office in the Municipality may be nominated by
petition. Petitions shall contain signatures of registered voters totaling not
less than ten (10%) percent of the total votes received by the candidate
receiving the highest number of votes in the Municipality or ward at the
preceding general election in which officers were last elected to such office.
They shall be accompanied by a treasurer's receipt for the filing fees for the
office being sought. All petitions shall provide a space at least two and one
half (2´") inches long for written signatures, a space at least two (2") inches
long for printed names, and sufficient space for any additional information
which may be required. Lines on such petitions shall not be less than one-
fourth (1/4") inch apart. Petitions may be designed in such a manner that lines
for signatures and other information run the length of the page rather than the
width. Petition signers and petition circulators shall conform to the
requirements of section 32-713 RS Neb. Petitions must be filed at least sixty
(60) days prior to the State Primary. (Ref. 32-4,156, 32-504, 32-513, 32-535,
32-713, RS Neb.)(Ord. No. 383, 9/19/84)
§ 1-724   ELECTIONS; CANDIDATE QUALIFICATIONS.
Any person seeking elected office in the Municipality shall be a registered
voter prior to holding such office and in addition shall have reached the age
of majority. The Mayor and members of the Council shall be residents and
qualified electors of the City. They shall not hold any other public elective
public office, except for officers of public power districts, public power and
irrigation districts, and public utility companies. (Ref. 17-108.02, 32-4,157
RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 383, 9/19/84)
§ 1-725   ELECTIONS; EXIT POLLS.
No person shall conduct any exit poll, public opinion poll, or any other
interview with voters on election day seeking to determine voter preference
within twenty (20') feet of the entrance of any polling place room or, if
inside the polling place building, within one hundred (100') feet of any voting
booth. (Ref. 32-1221 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 398, 9/18/85)
Article 8. Fiscal Management
§ 1-801   FISCAL MANAGEMENT; FISCAL YEAR.
The fiscal year of the Municipality for the purposes of taxation and
appropriations, shall begin, the first (1st) day in August of each year. (Ref.
17-701 RS Neb.)
§ 1-802   FISCAL MANAGEMENT; FILING BUDGET STATEMENT.
The Governing Body shall, not later than the first (1st) day of August of each
year on forms prescribed and furnished by the Nebraska State Auditor, prepare
in writing and file with the Municipal Clerk: a proposed budget statement
containing the following:
1.   For the immediate two (2) prior fiscal years, the budgeted revenue and
expenditures from all sources, separately stated as to each such source, and
for each fund the budgeted unencumbered cash balance of such fund at the
beginning of each fiscal year;
2.   For the current fiscal year, the budgeted revenue and expenditures, from
all sources, separately stated as to each such source and for each fund the
budgeted unencumbered cash balance of such fund at the beginning of the year.
Such statement shall contain the cash reserve for each such fund for each
fiscal year. Such cash reserve projections shall be based upon the actual
experience of prior years. The cash reserve shall not exceed fifty (50%)
percent of the total budget adopted for such fund, exclusive of capital outlay
items; and
3.   For the immediate ensuing fiscal year the budget statement should include
an estimate of the non-tax revenue from each source and which fund it is to be
allocated to the actual or estimated unencumbered cash balance for each fund
which will be available at the beginning of the next fiscal year, amounts
proposed to be expended during the year, and the amount of cash reserve which
shall not exceed fifty (50%) percent of the total budget adopted, exclusive of
capital outlay items.
The estimated expenditures plus the required cash reserve for the ensuing
fiscal year less all estimated and actual unencumbered balances at the
beginning of the year and less the estimated income from all sources other than
taxation shall equal the amount to be received from taxes, and such amount
shall be shown on the proposed budget statement filed pursuant to this Section.
The amount to be raised from taxation, as determined herein. plus the estimated
revenue from sources other than taxation, and the unencumbered balances shall
equal the estimated expenditures plus the required cash reserve for the ensuing
year. (Ref. 23-923, 23-924 RS Neb.) (Amended by Ord. No. 384, 9/ 19/84)
§ 1-803   FISCAL MANAGEMENT; BUDGET HEARING.
Subsequent to the filing of the proposed budget statement, the Governing Body
shall conduct a public hearing on the proposed budget statement. Notice of the
place and time of the said hearing, as well as a copy of the proposed budget,
shall be published at least five (5) days prior to the date set for the hearing
in a newspaper of general circulation in the Municipality. After such hearing,
the statement shall be adopted, or amended, and adopted as amended, and a
written record shall be made of such hearing. If the adopted budget statement
reflects a change from that shown in the published proposed budget statement, a
summary of such changes shall be published within twenty (20) days after its
adoption. (Ref. 23-925 RS Neb.)
§ 1-804   FISCAL MANAGEMENT; BUDGET FILING.
The Governing Body shall file with, and certify to the levying board on, or
before September First (1st) and file with the Nebraska State Auditor a copy of
the adopted budget statement, together with the amount of the tax to be levied
and proof of publication. The Governing Body shall not certify any tax that
exceeds the maximum levy prescribed by State law; Provided, in certifying the
amount to be so levied, allowance may be made for delinquent taxes not
exceeding five (5%) percent of the amount to be levied plus the actual
percentage of delinquent taxes for the preceding tax year. (Ref. 23-927 RS
Neb.) (Amended by Ord. No. 289, 12/7/77)
§ 1-805   FISCAL MANAGEMENT; ANNUAL AUDIT; FINANCIAL STATEMENT'S.
The Governing Body shall cause an audit of the Municipal accounts to be made by
a qualified accountant as expeditiously as possible following the close of the
fiscal year. Such audit shall be made on a cash or accrual method at the
discretion of the Governing Body. The said audit shall be completed, and the
annual audit report made not later than six (6) months after the close of the
fiscal year. The accountant making the audit shall submit not less than three
(3) copies of the audit report to the Governing Body. All public utilities or
other enterprises which substantially generate their own revenue shall be
audited separately, except in Villages having a population of less than eight
hundred (800), and the results of such audits shall appear separately in the
annual audit report, and such audits shall be on an accrual basis and shall
contain statements and materials which conform to generally accepted accounting
principles. The audit report shall set forth the financial position and results
of financial operations for each fund or group of accounts of the Municipality
as well as an opinion by the accountant with respect to the financial
statements. Two (2) copies of the annual audit report shall be filed with the
Municipal Clerk, and shall be provided a part of the public records of the
Municipal Clerk's office, and will at all times thereafter be open for public
inspection. One (l) copy shall be filed with the Auditor of Public Accounts;
Provided, that all Villages may file an unaudited statement of cash receipts
and disbursements annually in lieu of an annual audit. Such unaudited statement
shall be filed with the Auditor of Public Accounts in a form prescribed by him.
The unaudited statement of cash receipts and disbursements shall become a part
of the public records of the Municipal Clerk and shall at all times thereafter
be open and subject to public inspection. Every Governing Body that is required
herein to submit to an audit of its accounts shall provide and file with the
Municipal Clerk, not later than August 1 of each year, financial statements
showing its actual and budgeted figures for the most recently completed fiscal
year. (Ref. 19-1901 thru 19-2909, 23-934 RS Neb.) (Amended by Ord. Nos. 2909,
12/7/77; 385, 9/19/84)
§ 1-806   FISCAL MANAGEMENT; GENERAL PROPERTY TAX.
The Governing Body shall cause to be certified to the County Clerk the amount
of tax to be levied upon the assessed value of all the tax- able property of
the Municipality for the requirements of the adopted budget for the ensuing
year, including all special assessments and taxes. The maximum amount of tax
which may be certified and assessed shall not require a tax levy in excess of
the legal maximum as prescribed by State law. (Ref. 17-702 RS Neb.)
§ 1-807 FISCAL MANAGEMENT; APPROPRIATIONS.
The Governing Body shall, within the last quarter of each fiscal year, pass an
ordinance to be termed The Annual Appropriation Bill, in which are appropriated
such sums of money as may be deemed necessary to defray all necessary expenses
and liabilities of the Municipality, not exceeding in the aggregate the amount
of tax authorized to be levied. The said ordinance shall specify the objects
and purposes for which such appropriations are to be made, and the amount
appropriated for each purpose. No further appropriation shall be made at any
other time within the fiscal year, unless the proposition to make such
additional appropriations has been first sanctioned by a majority of the legal
voters of the Municipality, either by a petition signed by them or at a general
or special election duly called therefor, and all appropriations shall end with
the fiscal year for which they were made. Any balance unexpended and
unobligated at the end of the fiscal year shall, unless re-appropriated, lapse
into the general fund. (Ref. 17-706 RS Neb.)
§ 1-808   FISCAL MANAGEMENT; EXPENDITURES.
No Municipal official shall have the power to appropriate, issue, or draw any
order or warrant on the Municipal Treasury for money, unless the same has been
appropriated or ordered by ordinance. Neither the Governing Body nor any
department or office of the Municipality shall add to the Municipal
expenditures in any one (1) year anything over and above the amounts provided
for in the annual appropriation bills for that year. No expenditure for an
improvement to be paid for out of the general fund of the Municipality shall
exceed in any one (1) year the amount provided for that improvement in the
adopted budget statement; Provided, that nothing herein contained shall prevent
the Governing Body from ordering by a three-fourths (3/4) vote of its members,
the repair or rehabilitation of any improvement, the necessity of which is
caused by any casualty or accident happening after the Annual Appropriation is
passed and approved. The Council may, by a three-fourths (3/4) vote of its
members, order the Mayor and Municipal Treasurer to borrow a sufficient sym or
provide for the expenses necessary to be incurred in making any repairs to or
rehabilitations of improvement, the necessity of which has arisen, for a period
of time not exceeding the close of the fiscal year, which sum, and the
interest, shall be added to the amount authorized to be raised in the next
general tax levy and embraced therein. Should any judgment be obtained against
the Municipality, the Mayor and Treasurer, under the sanction of the Council,
may borrow a sufficient amount of money to pay the same for a period of time
not exceeding the close of the next fiscal year, which sum so borrowed, and
interest, shall in like manner be raised to the amount authorized to be raised
in the general tax levy of the next year and shall be embraced therein. (Ref.
17-708 RS Neb.)
§ 1-809   FISCAL MANAGEMENT; CONTRACT.
The Governing. Body shall before making any contract in excess of ten thousand
($10,000.00) dollars as estimated by the Municipal Engineer, for general
improvements, such as water extensions, sewers, public heating system, bridges,
or work on streets, or any other work or improvement where the cost of such
improvement shall be assessed to the property, advertise for bids, unless such
contract shall be entered into for the benefit of the Municipal Electric
Utility. A Municipal Electric Utility may enter into a contract for any such
work or improvement or for the purchase of such equipment without advertising
for bids if the: (a) Price is ten thousand ($10,000.00) dollars or less; (b)
price is twenty thousand ($20,000.00) dollars or less and the Municipal
Electric Utility has a gross annual revenues from retail sales in excess of one
million ($1,000,000.00) dollars; (c) price is thirty thousand ($30,000.00)
dollars or less and the Municipal Electric Utility has gross annual revenues
from retail sales in excess of five million ($5,000,000.00) dollars; or (d)
price is forty thousand ($40,000.00) dollars or less and the Municipal Electric
Utility has gross annual revenues from retail sales in excess of ten million
($10,000,000.00) dollars. In advertising for bids for any such work, or for the
purchase of such equipment, the Governing Body may cause the amount of such
estimate to be published therewith.
Such advertisement shall be published once each week for three (3) consecutive
weeks in a legal newspaper published in or of general circulation in the
Municipality, or by posting a written or printed copy thereof in each of three
(3) public places in the Municipality; Provided that in case of a public
emergency resulting from infectious or contagious diseases, destructive
windstorms, floods, snow, an exigency or pressing necessity or unforeseen need
calling for immediate action or remedy to prevent a serious loss of, or serious
injury or damage to life, health, or property, or war, estimates of costs and
advertising for bids may be waived in the emergency ordinance when adopted by a
three-fourths (3/4) vote of the Governing Body.
If, after advertising for bids as provided in this section, the Governing Body
receives fewer than two (2) bids on a contract for services, material, or
labor, or if the bids received by the Governing Body contain a price which
exceeds the estimated cost of the project, the Governing Body shall have the
authority to negotiate a contract for services, material, or labor in an
attempt to complete the proposed project at a cost commensurate with the
estimated given.
If the materials are of such a nature that, in the opinion of the manufacturer
and with the concurrence of the Governing Body, or Board of Public Works, no
cost can be estimated until the materials have been manufactured or assembled
to the specific qualifications of the purchasing Municipality, the Governing
Body or Board of Public Works, may authorize the manufacture and assemblage of
such materials and may thereafter approve the estimated cost expenditure when
it is provided by the manufacturer.
The Municipal bidding procedure shall be waived when materials or equipment are
purchased at the same price and from the same seller as material or equipment
which have formerly been obtained pursuant to the State bidding procedure.
(Ref. 17-568.01, 17-613 RS Neb.)(Amended by Ord. Nos. 281, 4/27/77; 309, 10/3/
79; 366, 9/21/83.)
§ 1-810   FISCAL MANAGEMENT; CLAIMS.
All claims against the Municipality shall be presented to the governing Body in
writing with a full account of the items, and no claim or demand shall be,
audited or allowed unless presented as provided for in this Section. No costs
shall be recovered against the Municipality in any action brought against it
for an unliquidated claim which has not been presented to the Governing Body to
be audited, nor upon claims allowed in part, unless the recovery shall be for a
greater sum than the amount allowed, with the interest due. No order, or
warrant shall be drawn in excess of eighty-five (85%) percent of the current
levy for the purpose for which it is drawn unless there shall be sufficient
money in the Municipal Treasury for the appropriate fund against which it is to
be drawn; Provided, that in the event there exists obligated funds from the
Federal and/or State government for the general purpose of such warrant, then
such, warrant maybe drawn in excess of eighty-five (85%) percent, but not more
than one hundred (100%) percent of the current levy for the purpose for which
said warrant is drawn. (Ref. 17-714, 17-715 RS Neb.)
§ 1-811   FISCAL MANAGEMENT; TRANSFER OF FUNDS.
The Governing Body may, whenever during the current fiscal year it becomes
apparent due to unforeseen emergencies that there is temporarily insufficient
money in a particular fund to meet the requirements of the adopted budget of
expenditures for that fund by a majority vote transfer money from other funds
to such fund. No expenditure during any fiscal year shall be made in excess of
the amounts indicated in the adopted budget statement, except as authorized
herein. If, as the result of unforeseen circumstances, the revenue of the
current fiscal year shall be insufficient, the Governing Body may propose to
supplement the previously adopted budget statement and shall conduct a public
hearing at which time any taxpayer may appear, or file a written statement
protesting the application for additional money, A written record shall be kept
of all such hearings. Notice of a place, and time for the said hearing shall be
published at least five (5) days prior to the date set for the hearing in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Municipality. The published notice
shall set forth the time, and place of the proposed hearing, the amount of
additional money required, the purpose of the required money, a statement
setting forth the reasons why the adopted budget of expenditures cannot be
reduced to meet the need for additional money, and a copy of the summary of the
originally adopted budget previously published. Upon the conclusion of the
public hearing on the proposed supplemental budget and the approval by the
Governing Body, the Governing Body shall file with the County Clerk and the
Nebraska State Auditor a copy of the supplemental budget, and shall certify the
amount of additional tax to be levied. The Governing Body may then issue
warrants in payment for expenditures authorized by the adopted supplemental
budget. The said warrants shall be referred to as "registered warrants" and
shall be repaid during the next fiscal year from funds derived from taxes
levied therefor. (Ref. 23-928, 23-929 RS Neb.)
§ 1-812   FISCAL MANAGEMENT; UNEXPENDED FUNDS.
The Governing Body may, if notice shall have been given in the annual estimate
or yearly budget, reappropriate any unexpended balance in any fund for the use
of some other fund if there are no outstanding bonds, warrants, or claims
against such fund whose unexpended balance, or portion thereof, is found to be
unexpended. No sinking funds or interest funds on outstanding bonds or balances
in any fund required to meet depreciation, repairs, or betterments remaining
unexpended, shall ever be reappropriated. In the event that no reappropriation
of funds is authorized, as aforesaid, unexpended balances shall be carried
forward and placed to the credit of the funds to which they belong when the
books of the Treasurer are opened at the commencement of each fiscal year.
§ 1-813   FISCAL MANAGEMENT; SPECIAL ASSESSMENT FUND.
All money received on special tax assessments shall be held by the Municipal
Treasurer as a special fund to be applied to the payment of the improvement for
which the assessment was made, and such money shall be used for no other
purpose unless to reimburse the Municipality for money expended for any such
improvement. (Ref. 17-710 RS Neb.)
§ 1-814    FISCAL MANAGEMENT; SINKING FUNDS.
The Governing Body, subject to the limitations set forth herein, shall have the
power to levy a tax not to exceed that prescribed by State law upon the
assessed value of all taxable property within the Municipality for a term not
to exceed that prescribed by State law in addition to the amount of tax which
may be annually levied for the purposes of the adopted budget statement of the
Municipality, for the purpose of establishing a sinking fund for the
construction, purchase, improvement, extension, or repair of the approved uses
as authorized by State law. To initiate the said sinking fund, the Governing
Body shall declare its purpose by resolution to submit to the qualified
electors of the Municipality the proposition to provide the improvement at the
next general Municipal election. The resolution shall set forth the
improvement, the estimated cost, the amount of the annual levy, the number of
years required to provide the required revenue, the name of the sinking fund
proposed, and the proposition as it will appear on the ballot. Notice of the
said proposition shall be published in its entirety three (3) times on
successive weeks before the day of the election in a legal newspaper of general
circulation in the Municipality. The sinking fund may be established after the
election if a majority, or more of the legal votes were in favor of the
establishment of the fund. The Governing Body may then proceed to establish the
said fund in conformity with the provisions of the proposition and applicable
State law. The funds received by the Municipal Treasurer shall, as they
accumulate, be immediately invested with the written approval of the Governing
Body in the manner provided by State law. No sinking fund so established shall
be used for any purpose or purposes contrary to the purpose as it appeared on
the ballot unless the Governing Body is authorized to do so by sixty (60%)
percent of the qualified electors of the Municipality voting at a general
election favoring such a change in the use of the sinking fund. (Ref. 19-1301
thru 19-1304, 77-2337, 77-2339 RS Neb.)
§ 1-815   FISCAL MANAGEMENT; FUNDS CLASSIFICATION.
All moneys in the hands of the Municipal Treasurer and all moneys hereafter
coming into the possession of the Treasurer shall be kept and deposited under
such headings or titles as the Governing Body may prescribe. All other moneys
of the Municipality, not belonging to or included in the Annual Appropriation
Bill and not otherwise designated, shall be held, kept, and deposited in the
General Fund and shall be used for the payment of all expenses and liabilities
of the Municipality.
§ 1-816   FISCAL MANAGEMENT; DEPOSIT OF FUNDS.
The Governing Body, at its first (1st) meeting in each fiscal year, shall
designate one (1) or more banks of approved and responsible standing in which
the Municipal Treasurer shall keep at all times all money held by him;
Provided, if more than one (1) bank in the Municipality meets the requirements
for approved banks as herein defined, the said funds shall be deposited in each
of them, and the Municipal Treasurer shall not give a preference to any one (1)
or more of them in the money he shall deposit. A bond shall be required from
all banks so selected in a penal sum which equals the maximum amount on deposit
at any time less the amount insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation or a pledge of sufficient assets of the bank to secure the payment
of all such deposits. (Ref. 17-607, 77-2362 thru 77-2364 RS Neb.)
§ 1-817   FISCAL MANAGEMENT; INVESTMENT OF FUNDS.
   Whenever a city has accumulated a surplus of any fund in excess of its
current needs or has accumulated a sinking fund for the payment of its bonds
and the money in such sinking fund exceeds the amount necessary to pay the
principal and interest of any such bonds which become due during the current
year, the governing body of such city may invest any such surplus in
certificates of deposit, in time deposits, and in any securities in which the
state investment officer is authorized by law and as provided in the authorized
investment guidelines of the Nebraska Investment Council in effect on the date
the investment is made. (Ref. 17-608, 17-609, 21-1316.01, 77-2341 RS Neb.)
(Amended by Ord. No. 435, 11/15/89)
§ 1-818   FISCAL MANAGEMENT; BOND AUTHORIZATION.
   In all cases where the issuance of bonds by the Municipality has been or
shall hereafter be authorized, it shall be the duty of the Mayor and Municipal
Clerk to sign and countersign respectively, said bond and upon the signing of
same, such bonds shall immediately be registered in the Office of the Audi-tor
of the State of Nebraska. Whenever any sale of bonds is made by the
Municipality, the Treasurer shall, under the direction of the Governing Body,
deliver the bonds to the purchaser and receive the money therefor, and shall
place the same to the credit of the fund to which the same shall properly
belong as provided by ordinance or by direction of the Governing Body.
§ 1-819   FISCAL MANAGEMENT; BOND ISSUES.
The Governing Body may, after meeting all the requirements of State law, issue
bonds, fund bonds, and retire bonds for such purposes as may be permitted by
State law. The Governing Body shall have the authority to levy special
assessments for the payment of interest and principal on such bonds, and may
spread the payments up to the maximum number of years permitted by State law.
(Ref. 10-201 thru 10-411, 10-601 thru 10-614, 12-1001, 17-529.01, 17-529.08,
17-534, 17-905, 17-908, 17-911, 17-939, 17-958, 17-968, 18-1801 thru 18-1805,
23-343.13, 39-836 RS Neb)
§ 1-820   FISCAL MANAGEMENT; SALES AND USE TAX.
   (1)   The City of Wymore imposes an additional sales and use tax of one-half
of one percent (0.50%) upon the same transactions which the State of Nebraska
is authorized to impose a tax, which additional sales and use tax shall
commence April 1, 2006, for the purpose of paying the principal of and the
interest on Swimming Pool bonds in the principal amount of not to exceed
$1,875,000, to be issued by the City, said tax to remain in effect only so long
as any of the indebtedness evidenced by said bonds (including any refunding
bonds issued to refund such indebtedness) shall remain outstanding and unpaid;
and,
   (2)   The City Clerk be and hereby is authorized and directed to submit a
certified copy of this section to the State Tax Commissioner of the State of
Nebraska to be accompanied by a certified map of the City of Wymore, Nebraska.
(Ord. No. 576, 11/28/05)
Article 9. Compensation
§ 1-901   COMPENSATION; MUNICIPAL OFFICIALS.
The Compensation of any elective official to the Municipality shall not be
increased or diminished during the term for which he shall have been elected
except when there has been a merger of officers; Provided, the compensation of
the members of the Governing Body, a board, or commission may be increased or
diminished at the beginning of the full term of any member whether or not the
terms of one or more members commence and end at different times. No elected
official may be rehired at a greater salary if he resigns an desires to be
rehired during the unexpired term of office. He may be rehired after the term
of office during which he resigned at a greater salary. All salaries shall be
set by ordinance of the Governing Body. The annual salaries of the elective
officers of the Municipality are fixed in the following sums and payable
quarterly:
Mayor   $1,700.00
City Councilman   $1,500.00
The salaries of all other officers and employees of the Municipality shall be
set by the Governing Body at the time of their appointment or employment and
shall be on file at the office of the Municipal Clerk.
(Ref. 17-108.02, 17-612 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 675, 10/17/23)
§ 1-902   COMPENSATION; CONFLICT OF INTEREST.
For purposes of this Section officer shall mean (a) any member of any Board or
Commission of the Municipality, (b) any Appointed Official if such Municipal
Official (i) serves on a Board or Commission which spends and administers its
own funds and (ii) is dealing with a contract made by such Board or Commission,
or (c) any elected Municipal Official. Unless specified otherwise, volunteer
firefighters and ambulance drivers shall not be considered officers for
purposes of this Section, with respect to their duties firefighters and
ambulance drivers.
No officer of the Municipality shall be permitted to benefit from any contract
to which the Municipality is a party. The existence of such an interest in any
contract renders the contract voidable by decree of a court of competent
jurisdiction, as to any person who entered into the contract or took assignment
thereof with actual knowledge of the prohibited conflict. An action to have a
contract declared void under this Section may be brought by the Municipality or
by any resident thereof and must be brought within one (1) year after the
contract is signed or assigned. Any such decree may provide the reimbursement
of any person for the reasonable value of all money, goods, material, labor,
or, services furnished under the contract, to the extent that the Municipality
has benefitted there-by. The prohibition in this Section shall apply only when
the officer or his or her parent, spouse, or child (a) has an ownership
interest of five (5%) percent or more in any business involved in the contract
or (b) will receive a direct pecuniary fee or commission as a result of the
contract; Provided however, if such officer (a) is an employee of the business
involved in the contract and (b) has no ownership interest or will not receive
a pecuniary fee such officer shall not be de¢med to have an interest within the
meaning, of this Section.
The provisions of this Section shall not apply if the interested officer:
A.   Makes declaration on the record to the Governmental Body responsible for
approving the contract regarding the nature. and extent of his or her interest,
prior to official consideration of the contract;
B.   Does not vote on the matter of granting the contract, except that if the
number of members of the Board declaring an interest in the contract would
prevent the Board, with all members present, from securing a quorum on the
issue, then all members may vote on the matter; and
C.   Does not act for the Municipality as to inspection or performance under
the contract in which he or she has an interest.
The receiving of deposits, cashing of checks, and buying and selling of
warrants and bonds of indebtedness of any Municipality by a financial
institution shall not be considered a contract under the provisions of this
Section. The ownership of less than five (5%) percent of the outstanding shares
of a corporation shall not constitute an interest within the meaning of this
Section. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections A thru C above, if an
officer's parent, spouse or child is an employee of the Municipality, the
officer may vote on all issues of the contract which are generally applicable
to all employees or all employees within a classification and do not single out
his or her parent, spouse, or child for special action. If an officer has the
power to employ personnel and he or she hires his or her parent, spouse, or
child, such officer shall disclose the hiring pursuant to subsections 1 thru 5
below, except that if the parent, spouse, or child is already employed in the
position at the time the officer takes office and such position does not
change, no disclosure need be made. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
Section, any contract entered into with an interested officer shall be subject
to applicable competitive bidding requirements and shall be fair and reasonable
to the Municipality.
The Municipal Clerk shall maintain, separ- ately from other records, a ledger
containing the information listed in subsections 1 thru 5 of this Section about
every contract entered into by the Municipality in which an officer has an
interest as specified above for which disclosure is made as provided in
subsections A thru C above. Such information shall be kept in the ledger for
five (5) years from the date of the officer's last day in office and shall
include the:
1.   Names of the contracting parties;
2.   Nature of the interest of the officer in question;
3.   Date that the contract was approved by the Municipality involved;
4.   Amount of the contract; and
5.   Basic terms of the contract.
The information supplied relative to the contract shall be provided to the
Clerk not later than ten (10) days after the contract has been signed by both
parties. The ledger kept by the Clerk shall be available for public inspection
during the normal working hours of the office in which it is kept.
An open account established for the benefit of any Municipality or entity
thereof, with a business in which an officer has an interest, shall be deemed a
contract subject to the provisions of this Section. The statement required to
be filed pursuant to this Section shall be filed within ten (10) days after
such account is opened. Thereafter, the Clerk shall maintain a running account
of all amounts purchased on the open account. Purchases made from petty cash or
a petty cash fund shall not be subject to the provisions of this Section.
Any officer who knowingly violates the provisions of Sections 18-301.01 thru
18-301.03 RS Neb., shall be guilty of a Class III misdemeanor. Any officer who
negligently violates Section 18-301.01 thru 18-301.03 RS Neb. shall be guilty
of a Class V misdemeanor.
The Municipality may enact ordinances exempting from the provisions of this
Section, contracts involving one hundred ($100.00) dollars or less in which an
officer of such Municipality may have an interest.
No officer, including volunteer firefighters and ambulance drivers, shall
receive any pay or perquisites from the Municipality other than his or her
salary. The Governing Body shall not pay or appropriate any money or other
valuable thing to pay a person who is not an officer for the performance of any
act, service, or duty, which shall come within the proper scope of the duties
of any officer of. the Municipality.
(Ref. 17-611, 18-301.01 thru 18-301.03, 18-305 thru 18-312, 70-624.04 RS Neb.)
(Amended by Ord. Nos. 352, 9/15/82; 367, 9/21/83; 376, 1/4/84; 386, 9/19/84)
Article 10. Eminent Domain
§ 1-1001   EMINENT   DOMAIN;   PROCEDURE.
The Governihg Body may, after negotiations in good faith have failed. bring
condemnation actions for the. acquisition of property within the Municipality.
Such procedure shall be prescribed by State law and damages shall be paid to
the condemnee accord- ing to. the provisions therein. (Ref. 76-701 thru 76-724
RS Neb.)
Article 11. Social Security
§ 1-1101   SOCIAL SECURITY; FEDERAL OLD AGE AND SURVIVORS INSURANCE.
The Municipality hereby accepts for itself and on behalf of its officials,
appointees, and employees (except such as are hereinafter excluded from the
provisons hereof), their dependents and survivors, the provisions, benefits,
and protection of the Federal Old Age and Survivors Insurance System,
hereinafter designated the "System," established by Title II of the Social
Security Act,. the same being Public Law 734 (81st Congess, 2nd Session, H.R.
6000) and cited as the "Soclal Security Act Amendments of 1950.) The term
"employee'' as used herein shall mean an employee defined by said Social
Security Act and shall include both officers and appointees of this
Municipality. The Mayor is hereby authorized and directed to enter into such
contracts and make such agreements and stipulations as required by law to
extend the benefits and protection of such system to the eligible employees of
this Municipality, their dependents, and survivors. Such contracts, agreements,
or stipulations shall be executed in duplicate by the Mayor and attested by the
signature of the Municipal Clerk with the seal of the Municipality attached.
thereto, one (1) copy to be filed with and become a part of the permanent
records of the Municipality.
§ 1-1102   SOCIAL SECURITY; EXCLUDED EMPLOYEES.
The following employees are determined to be excluded from participation in
said system:
1.   Any employee employed in a position which is covered by an existing
Municipal retirement or pension system or authorized to be so covered by
general law.
2.   Any employee employed in a position not authorized for coverage by
applicable State or Federal law.
§ 1-1103   SOCIAL SECURITY; WITHHOLDINGS.
Withholdings from the compensation of eligible employees are hereby authorized,
and the Municipality shall impose upon such employees as to services covered by
this Article such withholdings to be made in amounts and at such times as may
be required by law.
§ 1-1104   SOCIAL SECURITY; FUND.
There is hereby created. and the Municipal Treasurer is hereby authorized and
directed to set up an account to be known as the "Social Security Fund" into
which the withholdings authorized above and any appropriations made from time
to time by the Municipal authority for the benefit of said fund shall be paid,
Said fund shall be kept segregated and shall be used for no other purposes. The
Municipal Clerk shall keep such records and make such reports relevant to the
administration of the Social Security Act as may be required by law.
§ 1-1105   SOCIAL SECURITY; TAX LEVIED.
The Governing Body shall levy a tax upon the actual value of all taxable
property in the Municipality to defray the cost of meeting the obligations
arising by reason of the contracts, agreements, or stipulations authorized
hereinbefore. All revenue gathered from said tax and deposited in the Social
Security Fund shall be paid over to the State Official prescribed by law in the
administration of the Social Security Act for the State of Nebraska.
Article 12. Initiative and Referendum
[Editor's Note: Article 12 was adopted in its entirety by Ordinance No. 349,
Passed on September 15, 1982. Sections 1-1202 thru 1-1205, 1-1208 thru 1-1214
were amended by Ordinance No. 394, Passed 9/19/84]
§ 1-1201 INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM; DEFINITIONS.
The powers of initiative and referendum are reserved to the qualified electors
of the Municipality by State law. This Article shall govern the use of
initiative to enact, and the use of referendum to amend or repeal measures
affecting the governance of the Municipality. For purposes of this Article, the
definitions set out in this Section, unless the context otherwise requires,
shall apply.
CIRCULATOR shall mean any person who solicits signatures for an initiative or
referendum petition.
CLERK shall mean the Municipal Clerk or the Municipal Official in charge of
elections.
GOVERNING BODY shall mean the legislative authority of the Municipality.
MEASURE shall mean an ordinance, charter provision, or resolution which is
within the legislative authority of the Governing Body to pass, and which is
not excluded from the operation of referendum by the exceptions in Section 1-
1212.
MUNICIPALITY shall mean the City of Wymore, Nebraska.
PETITION shall mean a document authorized for circulation pursuant to Section
1-1202, or any copy of such document.
PLACE OF RESIDENCE shall mean the street and number of the residence. If there
is no street and number for the residence, place of residence shall mean the
mailing address.
PROSPECTIVE PETITION shall mean a sample document containing the information
necessary for a completed petition, including a sample signature sheet, which
has not yet been authorized for circulation.
QUALIFIED ELECTORS shall mean all persons registered to vote, at the time the
prospective petition is filed, in the jurisdiction governed or to be governed
by any measure sought to be enacted by initiative, or altered or repealed by
referendum.
RESIDENCE shall mean that place at which a person has established his or her
home, where he or she is habitually present, and to which, when he or she
departs, he or she intends to return.
SIGNATURE SHEET shall mean a sheet of paper which is part of a petition and
which is signed by persons wishing to support the petition effort. (Ref. 18-
2501 thru 18-2511 RS Neb.)
§ 1-1202 INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM; PETITIONS, BALLOTS.
Before circulating an initiative or referendum petition, the petitioner shall
file with the Clerk a prospective petition. The Clerk shall date the
prospective petition immediately upon its receipt. The Clerk shall verify that
the prospective petition is in proper form and shall provide a ballot title for
the initiative or referendum proposal, as described below. If the prospective
petition is in proper form, the Clerk shall authorize the circulation of the
petition and such authorization shall be given within three (3) working days
from the date the prospective petition was filed. If the form of the
prospective petition is incorrect, the Clerk shall, within three (3) working
days from the date the prospective petition was filed, inform the petitioner of
necessary changes and request that those changes be made. When the requested
changes have been made and the revised prospective petition has been submitted
to the Clerk in proper form, the Clerk shall authorize the circulation of the
petition and such authorization shall be given within two (2) working days from
the receipt of the properly revised petition. Verification by the Clerk that
the prospective petition is in proper form does not constitute an admission by
the Clerk, Governing Body, or Municipality that the measure is subject to
referendum or limited referendum or that the measure may be enacted by
initiative.
   The ballot title of any measure to be initiated or referred shall consist
of:
A. A briefly-worded caption by which the measure is commonly known or which
accurately summarizes the measure;
B. A briefly-worded question which plainly states the purpose of the measure,
and is phrased so that an affirmative response to the question corresponds to
an affirmative vote on the measure; and
C. A concise and impartial statement, of not more than seventy-five (75) words,
of the chief purpose of the measure.
The ballots used when voting on an initiative or referendum proposal shall
contain the entire ballot title. Proposals for initiative and referendum shall
be submitted on separate ballots and the ballots shall be printed in lower case
ten point type, except that the caption shall be in bold face type. All
initiative and referendum measures shall be submitted in a nonpartisan manner
without indicating or suggesting on the ballot that they have or have not been
approved or endorsed by any political party or organization. (Ref. 18-2512, 18-
2513 RS Neb.)
§ 1-1203   INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM; PETITIONS; FORM; DECLARATORY JUDGMENTS.
The Secretary of State shall design the form to be used for initiative and
referendum petitions, including signature sheets. These forms shall be made
available to the public by the Clerk, and they shall serve as a guide for
individuals preparing prospective petitions. Substantial compliance with
initiative and referendum forms is required before authorization to circulate
such petition shall be granted by the Clerk pursuant to Section 1-1202. Chief
Petitioners or Circulators preparing prospective petitions shall be responsible
for making copies of the petition for circulation, once authorization for
circulation has been granted, and each petition presented for signature must be
identical to the petition authorized for circulation by the Clerk pursuant to
Section 1-1202.
   The Municipality or any Chief Petitioner may seek a declaratory judgment
regarding any questions arising under this Article, as it may be from time to
time amended, including, but not limited to, determining whether a measure is
subject to referendum or limited referendum or whether a measure may be enacted
by initiative. If a Chief Petitioner seeks a declaratory judgment, the
Municipality shall be served by personal, residence, or certified mail service
upon the Chief Executive Officer, or Clerk. If the Municipality seeks a
declaratory judgment, only the Chief Petitioner or Chief Petitioners shall be
required to be served. Any action brought for declaratory judgment for purposes
of determining whether a measure is subject to limited referendum or
referendum, or whether a measure may be enacted by initiative, may be filed in
the district court at any time after the filing of a referendum or initiative
petition with the Municipal Clerk for signature verification until forty (40)
days from the date the Governing Body received notification pursuant to Section
1-1206. If the Municipality does not bring an action for declaratory judgment
to determine whether the measure is subject to limited referendum or
referendum, or whether the measure may be enacted by initiative until after it
has received notification pursuant to Section 1-1206, it shall be required to
proceed with the initiative or referendum election in accordance with the
provisions of this Article. If the Municipality does file such an action prior
to receiving notification pursuant to Section 1-1206, it shall not be required
to proceed to hold such election until a final decision has been rendered in
the action. Any action for a declaratory judgment shall be governed generally
by Sections 25-21,149 to 25-21,164 RS Neb., except that only the Municipality
and each Chief Petitioner shall be required to be made parties. The
Muncipality, Clerk, Governing Body, or any of the Municipality's officers shall
be entitled to rely on any order rendered by the court in any such proceeding.
Any action brought for declaratory judgment pursuant to this Section shall be
given priority in scheduling, hearings and in disposition as determined by the
court when an action is brought to determine whether the measure is subject to
limited referendum or referendum, or whether a measure may be enacted by
initiative, a decision shall be rendered by the court no later than five (5)
days prior to the election. The pro visions of this Section relating to
declaratory judgments shall not be construed as limiting, but construed as
supplemental and additional to other rights and remedies conferred by law.
      Every petition shall contain the name and place of residence of not more
than three (3) persons as Chief Petitioners or sponsors of the measure. The
Chief Petitioners or sponsors shall be qualified electors of the Municipality
potentially affected by the initiative or referendum proposal. Every petition
shall contain the caption and ballot title required in Section 1-1202, and only
qualified electors shall circulate petitions. When a special election is being
requested, such fact shall be stated on every petition. (Ref. 25-510.02, 25-
2514, 25-515 RS Neb.)
§ 1-1204   INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM; SIGNATURE SHEETS.
Every signature sheet shall:
1. Contain the caption required in subdivision A. of Section 1-1202 of this
Article;
2. Be part of a complete and authorized petition when presented to potential
signatories;
3. Provide space for signatories to write their names, residential addresses,
and the date of signing; and
4. Contain a statement that anyone falsifying information on a signature sheet
shall be subjec to penalties provided by law.
      No more than twenty-five (25) signatures on each signature sheet shall be
counted. In order to be valid, a signature shall be that of an individual
registered to vote, at the time of signing, in the jurisdiction governed or to
be governed by the measure addressed in the petition. A signature shall include
the signatory's full name, his or her place of residence, and the date of
signing. No signatory shall use ditto marks as a means of affixing his or her
place of residence or date on any petition. A wife shall not use her husband's
Christian or given name when she signs a petition and she shall sign her own
Christian or given name along with her surname. (Ref. 18-2516 RS Neb.)
§ 1-1205 INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM; PETITIONS, AFFIDAVIT.
Included in the contents of every petition shall be an affidavit, to be signed
by the circulator in the presence of a notary, which states that the circulator
is a qualified elector, that each person who signed the petition did so in the
presence of the circulator on the date indicated, and that the circulator
believes that each signatory was registered to vote in the affected
jurisdiction at the time he or she signed the petition and that the circulator
believes that each signatory has stated his or her name and place of residence
correctly. (Ref. 18-2517 RS Neb.)
§ 1-1206 INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM; PETITIONS, NOTIFICATION.
A. Signed petitions shall be filed with the Clerk for signature verification.
Upon the filing of a petition, and passage of a resolution by the Governing
Body, the Municipality and the County Clerk or Election Commissioner of the
County in which such Municipality is located may by mutual agreement provide
that the County Clerk or Election Commissioner shall ascertain whether the
petition is signed by the requisite number of voters. The Municipality shall
reimburse the County for any costs incurred by the County Clerk or Election
Commissioner. When the verifying official has determined that one hundred
(100%) percent of the necessary signatures required by this Article have been
obtained, he or she shall notify the Governing Body of that fact, and shall
immediately forward to the Governing Body a copy of the petition.
B. In order for an initiative or referendum proposal to be submitted to the
Governing Body and the voters, the necessary signatures shall be on file with
the Clerk within six (6) months from the date the prospective petition was
authorized for circulation. If the necessary signatures are not obtained by
such date, the petition shall be void.
(Ref. 18-2518 RS Neb.)
§ 1-1207 INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM; FREQUENCY OF OCCURENCE.
The same measure, either in form or in essential substance, may not be
submitted to the people by initiative petition, either affirmatively or
negatively, more often than once every two (2) years. No attempt to repeal or
alter an existing measure or portion of such measure by referendum petition may
be made within two (2) years from the last attempt to do the same. Such
prohibition shall apply only when the subsequent attempt to repeal or alter is
designed to accomplish the same, or essentially the same purpose as the
previous attempt. (Ref. 18-2519 RS Neb.)
§ 1-1208 INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM; DIRECT VOTE.
The Executive Officer and Governing Body of the Municipality may at any time,
by resolution, provide for the submission to a direct vote of the electors of
any measure pending before it, passed by it, including an override of any veto,
if necessary, or enacted by the electors under this Article and may provide in
such resolution that such measure shall be submitted at a special election or
the next regularly scheduled primary or general election. Immediately upon the
passage of any such resolution for submission, the Clerk shall cause such
measure to be submitted to a direct vote of the electors, at the time specified
in such resolution and in the manner provided in this Article for submission of
measures upon proposals and petitions filed by voters. Such matter shall become
law if approved by a majority of the votes cast. (Ref. 18-2520 RS Neb.)
§ 1-1209   INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM; ELECTIONS.
The Clerk shall call elections under this Article, either at a special election
or regularly scheduled primary or general election. He or she shall cause
notice of every such election to be printed in one (1) or more newspapers of
general circulation in such Municipality at least once not less than thirty
(30) days prior to such election and also posted in the office of the Clerk and
in at least three (3) conspicuous places in such Municipality at least thirty
(30) days prior to such election. The notice shall be substantially as follows:
   Notice is hereby given that on Tuesday, the
   ________ day of _____________, 19____, at
   (identify polling place or precinct) of the Mu
   nicipality of _________________________, Nebras
   ka, an election will be held at which there will
   be submitted to the electors of the Municipality
   for their approval or rejection, the following
   measures, propositions, or issues:
   _______________________________________________
   _______________________________________________
   _______________________________________________
   (naming measures, propositions, or issues),
   which election will be open at 8:00 a.m. and will
   continue open until 8:00 p.m., of the same day.
   Dates this _______ day of _____________________,
   19_____.
      _______________________________________
      Clerk of the City/Village of
      ___________________, Nebraska.
      The Clerk shall make available for photocopying a copy in pamphlet form
of measures initiated or referred. Such notice provided in this Section shall
designate where such a copy in pamphlet form may be obtained. (Ref. 18-2521 RS
Neb.)
§ 1-1210   INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM; BALLOTS.
All ballots for use in special elections under this Article shall be prepared
by the Clerk and furnished by the Governing Body, unless the Governing Body
contracts with the County for such service, and shall be in form the same as
provided by law for election of the Executive Officer and Governing Body of
such Municipality. When ordinances under such sections are submitted to the
electors at a regularly scheduled primary or general election they shall be
placed upon the official ballots as provided in this Article. (Ref. 18-2522 RS
Neb.)
§ 1-1211 INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM; INITIATIVE.
A. The power of initiative allows citizens the right to enact measures
affecting the governance of the Municipality. An initiative proposal shall not
have as its primary or sole purpose the repeal or modification of existing law
except if such repeal or modification is ancillary to and necessary for the
adoption and effective operation of the initiative measure.
B. An initiative shall not be effective if the direct or indirect effect of the
passage of such initiative measure shall be to repeal or alter an existing law,
or portion thereof, which is not subject to referendum or subject only to
limited referendum pursuant to Section 1-1212.
C. Whenever an initiative petition bearing signatures equal in number to at
least fifteen (15%) percent of the qualified electors of the Municipality has
been filed with the Clerk and verified, it shall be the duty of the Governing
Body to consider passage of the measure contained in the petition including an
override of any veto, if necessary. If the Governing Body fails to pass the
measure without amendment, including an override of any veto, if necessary,
within thirty (30) days from the date it received notification, the Clerk shall
cause the measure to be submitted to a vote of the people at the next regularly
scheduled primary or general election held within the Municipality. If the
Governing Body desires to submit the measure to a vote of the people at a
special election prior to the next regularly scheduled primary or general
election held within the Municipality, the Governing Body, shall, by
resolution, direct the Clerk to cause the measure to be submitted at a special
election. Such resolution shall not be subject to referendum or limited
referendum.
D. Whenever an initiative petition bearing signatures equal in number to at
least twenty (20%) per cent of the qualified electors which requests that a
special election be called to submit the initiative measure to a vote of the
people, has been filed with the Clerk and verified pursuant to Section 1-1206,
it shall be the duty of the Governing Body to consider passage of the measure
contained in the petition including an override of any veto, if necessary. If
the Governing Body fails to pass the measure, without amendment, including an
override of any veto, if necessary, within thirty (30) days from the date it
received notification, the Clerk shall cause the measure to be submitted to a
vote of the people at a special election called for such purpose. The date of
such election shall not be less than thirty (30) nor more than sixty (60) days
from the date the Governing Body received notification pursuant to Section 1-
1206.
E. If a majority of voters voting on the initiative measure shall vote in favor
of such measure, it shall become a valid and binding measure of the
Municipality thirty (30) days after certification of the election results,
unless the Governing Body by resolution orders an earlier effective date or the
measure itself provides for a later effective date, which resolution shall not
be subject to referendum or limited referendum.
   A measure passed by such method shall not be amended or repealed except by
two-thirds (2/3) majority of the members of the Governing Body. No such attempt
to amend or repeal shall be made within one (1) year from the passage of the
measure by the electors.
(Ref. 18-2523 thru 18-2526 RS Neb.)
§ 1-1212 INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM; REFERENDUM LIMITATIONS.
The power of referendum allows citizens the right to repeal or amend existing
measures, or portions thereof, affecting the governance of the Municpality.
1. The following measures shall not be subject to referendum or limited
referendum:
   (a) Measures necessary to carry out contractual obligations including, but
not limited to, those relating to the issuance of or provided for in bonds,
notes, warrants, or other evidences of indebtedness, for projects previously
approved by a measure which was, or is, subject to referendum or limited
referendum or previously approved by a measure adopted prior to the effective
date of this Article;
   (b) Measures relating to any industrial development projects, subsequent to
measures giving initial approval to such projects;
   (c) Measures adopting proposed budget statements following compliance with
procedures set forth in the Nebraska Budget Act;
   (d) Measures relating to the immediate preservation of the public peace,
health, or safety which have been designated as urgent measures by unanimous
vote of those present and voting of the Governing Body and approved by its
Executive Officer;
   (e) Measures relating to projects for which notice has been given as
provided for in subsection 4 of this Section for which a sufficient referendum
petition was not filed with in the time limit stated in such notice or which
received voter approval after the filing of such petition;
   (f) Resolutions directing the Clerk to cause measures to be submitted to a
vote of the people at a special elections as provided in Section 1-1211
subsection C and Section 1-1213 subsection A; and
   (g) Resolutions ordering an earlier effective date for measures enacted by
initiative as provided in Section 1-1211 subsection E.
2. The following measures shall be subject to limited referendum:
   (a) Measures in furtherance of a policy of the Municipality or relating to
projects previously approved by a measure which was subject to referendum or
which was enacted by initiative or has been approved by the voters at an
election, except that such measures shall not be subject to referendum or
limited referendum for a period of one (1) year after any such policy or
project was approved at a referendum election, enacted by initiative, or
approved by the voters at an election;
   (b) Measures relating to the acquisition, construction, installation,
improvement, or enlargement, including the financing or refinancing of the
costs of public ways, public property, utility systems, and other capital
projects, and measures giving initial approval for industrial development
projects; and
   (c) Measures setting utility system rates and charges, except for measures
necessary to carry out contractual obligations provided for in previously
issued bonds, notes, warrants, or other evidences of indebtedness, and pay
rates and salaries for Municipal employees other than the members of the
Governing Body and the Executive Officer.
3. Measures subject to limited referendum shall ordinarily take effect thirty
(30) days after their passage by the Governing Body, including an override of
any veto, if necessary. Referendum petitions directed at measures subject to
limited referendum shall be filed for signature verification pursuant to
Section 1-1206 within thirty (30) days after such measure's passage by the
Governing Body, including an override of any veto, if necessary, or after
notice is first published pursuant to subdivision 4(c) of this Section. If the
necessary number of signatures as provided in Section 1-1211 has been obtained
within the time limitation, the effectiveness of the measure shall be suspended
unless approved by the voters.
4. For any measure relating to the acquisition, construction, installation,
improvement, or enlargement of public ways, public property, utility systems,
or other capital projects, a Municipality may exempt all subsequent measures
relating to the same project from the referendum and limited referendum
procedures provided for in this Article by the following procedure:
(a) By holding a public hearing on the project, the time and place of such
hearing being published at least once not less than five (5) days prior to the
date set for hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the Governing
Body's jurisdiction;
   (b) By passage of a measure approving the project, including an override of
a veto, if necessary, at a meeting held on any date subsequent to the date of
hearing; and
   (c) After passage of such measure, including an override of a veto, if
necessary, by giving notice as follows:
      (i) For those projects for which applicable statutes require an ordinance
or resolution of necessity, creating a district or otherwise establishing the
project, notice shall be given for such project by including either as part of
such ordinance or resolution or as part of any publicized notice concerning
such ordinance or resolution a statement that the project as described in the
ordinance or resolution is subject to limited referendum for a period of thirty
(30) days after the first (1st) publication of such notice and that, after such
thirty (30) day period, the project and measures related to it will not be
subject to any further right of referendum; and
      (ii) For projects for which applicable statutes do not require an
ordinance or resolution of necessity, notice shall be given by publication of a
notice concerning such projects stating in general terms the nature of the
project and the Engineer's estimate of costs of such project and stating that
the project described in the notice is subject to limited referendum for a
period of thirty (30) days after the first (1st) publication of such notice and
that, after such thirty (30) day period, the project and measures related to it
will not be subject to any further right of referendum.
      The notice required by this subdivision shall be published in at least
one (1) newspaper of general circulation within the Municipality and shall be
published not later than fifteen (15) days after passage by the Governing Body,
including an override of a veto, if necessary, of a measure approving the
project.
       The right to hold such a hearing prior to the passage of the measure by
the Governing Body and give such notice after passage of such measure by the
Governing Body to obtain exemption for any particular project in a manner
described in this subsection is optional and the Municipality shall not be
required to hold such a hearing or give such notice for any particular project.
5. All measures, except as provided in Subsection 1, 2, and 4 of this Section,
shall be subject to the referendum procedure at any time after such measure has
been passed by the Governing Body, including an override of a veto, if
necessary, or enacted by the voters by initiative.
(Ref. 18-2527, 18-2528 RS Neb.)
§ 1-1213 INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM; REFERENDUM, PASSAGE.
A. Whenever a referendum petition bearing signatures equal in number to at
least fifteen (15%) percent of the qualified electors of the Municipality has
been filed with the Clerk and verified pursuant to Section 1-1206, it shall be
the duty of the Governing Body to reconsider the measure or portion of such
measure which is the object of the referendum. If the Governing Body fails to
repeal or amend the measure or portion thereof in the manner proposed by the
referendum, including an override of any veto, if necessary, within thirty (30)
days from the date the Governing Body receives notification pursuant to Section
1-1206, the Clerk shall cause the measure to be submitted to a vote of the
people at the next regularly scheduled primary or general election held within
the Municipality.
   If the Governing Body desires to submit the measure to a vote of the people
at a special election prior to the next regularly scheduled primary or general
election held within the Municipality, the Governing Body shall, by resolution,
direct the Clerk to cause the measure to be submitted at a special election.
Such resolution shall not be subject to referendum or limited referendum.
B. Whenever a referendum petition bearing signatures equal in number to at
least twenty (20%) percent of the qualified voters of the Municipality which
requests that a special election be called to submit the referendum measure to
a vote of the people, has been filed with the Clerk and verified, it shall be
the duty of the Governing Body to reconsider the measure or portion of such
measure which is the object of the referendum. If the Governing Body fails to
repeal or amend the measure or portion thereof, in the manner proposed by the
referendum, including an override of any veto, if necessary, the Clerk shall
cause the measure to be submitted to a vote of the people at a special election
called for such purpose within thirty (30) days from the date the Govering Body
received notification. The date of such special election shall not be less than
thirty (30) nor more than sixty (60) days from the date the Governing Body
received notification.
C. If a majority of the electors voting on the referendum measure shall vote in
favor of such measure, the law subject to the referendum shall be repealed or
amended. A measure repealed or amended by referendum shall not be reenacted or
returned to its original form except by a two-thirds (2/3) majority of the
members of the Governing Body. No such attempt to reenact or return the measure
to its original form shall be made within one (1) year of the repeal or
amendment of the measure by the electors. If the referendum measure does not
receive a majority vote, the ordinance shall immediately become effective or
remain in effect.
(Ref. 18-2529 thru 18-2531 RS Neb.)
§ 1-1214 INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM; VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES.
A. Whoever knowingly or willfully makes a false affidavit or takes a false oath
regarding the qualifications of any person to sign petitions under Sections 18-
2501 thru 18-2531 RS Neb. shall be guilty of a Class I misdemeanor with a limit
of three hundred ($300.00) dollars on the fine.
B. Whoever falsely makes or willfully destroys a petition or any part thereof,
or signs a false name thereto, or signs or files any petition knowing the same
or any part thereof to be falsely made, or suppresses any petition, or any part
thereof, which has been duly filed, pursuant to Sections 18-2501 thru 18-2531
RS Neb. shall be guilty of a Class I misdemeanor with a limit of five hundred
($500.00) dollars on the fine.
C. Whoever signs any petition under Sections 18-2501 thru 18-2531 RS Neb.
knowing that he or she is not a registered voter in the place where such
petition is made, aids or abets any other person in doing any of the acts
mentioned in this Section, bribes or gives or pays any money or thing of value
to any person directly or indirectly to induce him or her to sign such
petition, or engages in any deceptive practice intended to induce any person to
sign a petition, shall be guilty of a Class I misdemeanor with a limit of three
hundred ($300.00) dollars on the fine.
D. Any Clerk who willfully refuses to comply with the provisions of Sections
18-2501 thru 18-2531 RS Neb. or who willfully causes unreasonable delay in the
execution of his or her duties under such sections shall be guilty of a Class I
misdemeanor but imprisonment shall not be included as part of the punishment.
(Ref. 18-2532 thru 18-2535 RS Neb.)(Amended by Ord. No. 11-83-2, 11/14/83)
§ 1-1215   INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM; APPLICABILITY.
The provisions of the statutes of the State of Nebraska relating to election
officers, voting places, election apparatus and blanks, preparation and form of
ballots, information to voters, delivery of ballots, calling of elections,
conduct of elections, manner of voting, counting of votes, records and
certificates of election, and recounts of votes, so far as applicable, shall
apply to voting on ordinances by the electors pursuant to this Article.
   Nothing in this Article shall apply to procedures for initiatives or
referendums provided in Nebraska Revised Statutes Sections 18-412 and 18-412.02
relating to Municipal light and power plants, Sections 70-504, 70-650.01 and
70-650.02, relating to public power districts, and Sections 80-203 to 80-205
relating to soldiers and sailors monuments. (Ref. 18-2536, 18-2537 RS Neb.)
Article 13. Penal Provision
§ 1-1301   VIOLATION; PENALTY.
Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with the enforcement of any of
the provisions of this Chapter, set forth at full length herein or incorporated
by reference, shall be deemed guilty of an offense, and upon conviction
thereof, shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each
offense. A new violation shall be deemed to have been committed every twenty-
four (24) hours of such failure to comply. (Ref. 17-505 RS Neb.) (Amended by
Ord. Nos. 350, 9/15/82; 538, 9/15/99)
Chapter 2
COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS
Article 1. Standing Committees
§ 2-101   STANDING COMMITTEES; GENERAL PROVISIONS.
At the organizational meeting of the City Council, the Mayor shall appoint
members of such standing committees as the City Council may by ordinance, or
resolution create, The following shall be appointed each year unless otherwise
provided:
   Finance Committee
   Water and Light Committee
   Streets and Alleys Committee
   Fire and Fire Companies Committee
The membership of such standing committees may be changed at any time by the
Mayor. The Mayor shall be a member ex officio of each standing committee. The
members of the standing committees shall serve a term of office of one (1)
year, unless reappointed.
Article 2. Municipal Commissions and Boards
§ 2-201   LIBRARY BOARD.
The Library Board shall be appointed or elected. At the first (1st) regular
meeting of the Governing Body in January of each even numbered year the
Governing Body shall, by ordinance, adopt the manner in which the five (5)
members of the Board are to be chosen. If the members are to be chosen by
appointment, the nominated members must receive a majority vote of the
Governing Body. If the members are to be elected, the usual election procedures
of the Municipality shall be followed. The Board shall consist of five (5)
members who shall be residents of the Municipality. The members of the Library
Board shall serve a four (4) year term of office as specified by Nebraska
Statutes. The Board shall serve without compensation and may be required, in
the discretion of the Governing Body, to give a bond in a sum set by resolution
of the Governing Body, and conditioned upon the faithful performance of their
duties. At the time of the Board's first (1st) meeting in June of each year,
the Board shall organize by selecting from their number a chairman and
secretary. It shall be the duty of the secretary to keep the full and correct
minutes and records of all meetings, and to file the same with the Municipal
Clerk where they shall be available for public inspection at any reasonable
time. A majority of the Board members shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business. The Board shall meet at such times as the Governing
Body may designate. Special meetings may be held upon the call of the chairman,
or any three (3) members of the Board. The Library Board shall have the
authority to appoint a librarian and all other employees. It shall be the duty
of the Board to have general charge of the Municipal Library and to establish
appropriate rules and regulations for the management, operation, and use of the
same. The Board shall have supervisory authority over all employees of the
library including the librarian. All actions of the Board shall be subject to
the review and supervision of the Governing Body. The Board shall be
responsible for making such reports and performing such additional duties as
the Governing Body may designate from time to time. No member of the Governing
Body shall serve as a member of the Library Board while serving a term of
office as a member of the Governing Body. No member of the Library Board shall
serve in the capacity of both the chairman and secretary of the Board. (Ref.
51-202 RS Neb.) (Amended by Ord. No. 282, 4/27/77)
§ 2-202   PLANNING COMMISSION.
The Mayor, by and with the advice and consent of three-fourths (¾) of the
Council shall appoint the Planning Commission. The Commission shall consist of
nine (9) members who shall be residents of the Municipality and who shall
represent insofar as is possible different professions and occupations. Three
(3) members of the Planning Commission shall be appointed each year. The
members of the Commission shall serve a three (3) year term of office, or until
their successors are duly appointed and take office. The Commission shall serve
without compensation and may be required, in the discretion of the Governing
Body, to give a bond in a sum set by resolution of the Governing Body, and
conditioned upon the faithful performance of their duties. At the time of the
Commission's first (1st) meeting of each yearD the Commission shall organize by
selecting from its membership a chairman and such other officials as they may
deem necessary. It shall be the duty of the secretary to keep the full and
correct minutes and records of all meetings, and to file the same with the
Municipal Clerk where they shall be available for public inspection at any
reasonable time. The Planning Commission shall be funded by the Governing Body
from time to time out of the General Fund. A majority of the Commission shall
constitute a quorum for the purpose of doing business. The Commission shall
meet monthly. Special meetings may be held upon the call of the chairman or any
three (3) members of the Commission. It shall be the duty of the Commission to
make and adopt plans for the physical development of the Municipality,
including any areas outside its boundaries which, in the Commission's judgment,
bear relation to the planning of the Municipality. All actions by the
Commission shall be subject to the review and supervision of the Governing
Body, The Commission shall be responsible for making such reports and
performing such other duties as the Governing Body may, from time to time,
designate. No member of the Governing Body, or other Municipal official, except
where otherwise specifically provided, shall serve as a member of the Planning
Commission while serving any other term of office. No member of the Planning
Commission shall serve in the capacity of both the chairman and secretary of
the Commission. All members of the Planning Commission may be removed by the
Mayor by and with the advice and consent of a three-fourths (%) vote of the
Council for inefficiency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office or other
good and sufficient cause. Vacancies occurring otherwise than through the
expiration of a term shall be filled for the unexpired term by the Mayor in the
manner of all other commissions and boards. (Ref. 18-1302 thru 18-1306 RS Neb.)
§ 2-203   PARK BOARD.
The Mayor, by and with the consent of the City Council, shall appoint the Park
Board. The Park Board shall consist of five (5) members, who shall be reside
within corporate limits of the City. The members shall serve a one (1) year
term of office or until their successors are duly appointed and take office,
unless reappointed. The members of the Park Board shall serve without
compensation. Before taking office, each member of the Park Board shall take an
oath, to be filed with the Municipal Clerk, that he or she will faithfully
perform the duties of his or her office. At the time of the Park Board's first
meeting of the year, the Board shall organize by selecting from their members a
Chairperson, and a Secretary. It shall be the duty of the Secretary to keep the
full and correct minutes and records of all meetings, and to file the same with
the Municipal Clerk where they shall be available for public inspection at any
reasonable time. A majority of the Park Board members shall constitute a quorum
for the transaction of business. The Park Board shall meet at such times as may
be necessary, or at such times as the Governing Body may designate. Special
meetings may be held upon the call of the Chairperson, or any three (3) members
of the Park Board. The Park Board shall have control over all Municipal Parks
and the facilities thereon, the Community Center, and the Wymore Aquatic
Center. The Park Board may establish appropriate rules and regulations for the
management, use and operation of the same. All employees of the Municipality
doing work in or for the Municipal Parks, Community Center, and the Wymore
Aquatic Center shall be under the supervision and direction of the Park Board.
All actions of the Park Board shall be subject to the review and control of the
Governing Body. No member of the Governing Body shall serve as a member of the
Park Board while serving a term of office as a member of the Governing Body. No
member of the Park Board shall serve in the capacity of both Chairperson and
Secretary of the Park Board. (Ref. 17-952 RS Neb.) (Amended by Ord. No. 645, 5/
17/17)
§ 2-204   BOARD OF HEALTH.
The Governing Body shall appoint a Board of Health which shall consist of four
(4) members. The members of the Board shall include the Mayor, who shall serve
as chairman; the Police Chief, who shall serve as secretary and quarantine
officer; a physician who shall serve as the medical advisor; and the President
of the City Council. The members of the Board shall serve, without
compensation, a one (1) year term of office, unless reappointed, and shall
reorganize at the first (1st) meeting in June of each year. It shall be the
duty of the secretary to keep the full and correct minutes and records of all
meetings and to file the same with the Municipal Clerk where they shall be
available for public inspection at any reasonable time. The Board of Health
shall be funded by the Governing Body from time to time out of the General
Fund. A majority of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of
doing business. The Board shall meet at such times as the Governing Body may
designate. Special meetings may be held upon the call of the chairman, or any
two (2) members of the Board. It shall be the duty of the Board to enact rules
and regulations which shall have the full force and effect of law, to safeguard
the health of the residents of the Municipality. Included in the duties of the
Board shall be to enforce the said rules and regulations, and to provide fines
and punishments for any violations thereof. It may regulate, suppress, and
prevent the occurrence of nuisances and shall actively enforce all laws of the
State of Nebraska and ordinances of the Municipality relating to matters of
sanitation which affect the health and safety of the people. The Board shall
regularly inspect such premises and businesses as the Governing Body may
direct. All members of the Board shall be responsible for making such reports
and performing such other duties as the Governing Body may, from time to time,
designate. No member of the Board of Health shall hold more than one (1) Board
of Health position. (Ref. 17-121 RS Neb.) (Amended by Ord. No. 291, 12/7/77)
§ 2-205   BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION.
The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall be composed of the Fire Chief and the
members of the Municipal Fire Department. The Fire Chief is hereby designated
as Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention. The Chief shall keep in the office
of the Bureau of Fire Prevention a record of all fires and of all the facts
concerning the same, including statistics to the extent of such fires and the
damage caused thereby, and whether such losses were covered by insurance, and
if so, in what amount. All records shall be open to the public. The annual
report of the Bureau shall be made on or before April first (1st) of each year.
It shall contain all proceedings of the Bureau for the past year and shall
recommend any amendments to this section or amendments and additions to any of
the laws relating to the Fire Department or fire prevention generally as the
Bureau may deem beneficial. The Bureau of Fire Prevention, or any person
designated and authorized by it, may at all reasonable hours, enter any
building or premise within the Municipality for the purpose of making
inspections and investigations relating to fires and fire prevention.
The Bureau shall enforce the laws of the Municipality and have the following
specific duties:
1.   The prevention of fire.
2.   The inspection and regulation of the storage and use of all explosives and
inflammables.
3.   To inspect the installation and maintenance of automatic and other fire
alarm systems and fire extinguishing equipment.
4.   To inspect the maintenance and regulation of fire escapes.
5.   To inspect and test the means and adequacy of exit, in case of fire, from
all public places in which numbers of persons work, live, or congregate from
time to time for any purpose.
6.   To investigate the cause, origin, and circumstance of every fire occurring
in the Municipality by which property has been destroyed or damaged, and so far
as possible shall determine whether the fire is the result of carelessness or
design. Such investigation shall be begun immediately upon the occurrence of
such fire. If it appears that such fire is of a suspicious origin, the Bureau
of Fire Prevention shall take charge of all physical evidence and shall notify
the proper authorities designated by law to pursue the investigation of such
matters, and shall further cooperate with the authorities in the collection of
evidence and the prosectltion of each case.
7.   Such other powers and duties as may be set forth in other Sections of this
Code or conferred on the Bureau by the Governing Body or State law.
§ 2-206   CEMETERY BOARD.
The Mayor, by and with the advice and consent of the Council shall appoint the
Cemetery Board which shall consist of six (6) members who are residents of the
Municipality. Each member shall serve without compensation for a term of three
(3) years and may be required in the discretion of the Governing Body, to give
a bond in a sum set by resolution of the Governing Body, and conditioned upon
the faithful performance of their duties. At the first (1st) meeting each year,
the Board shall organize by selecting from its membership a chairman and
secretary. The secretary shall keep the full and correct minutes and records of
all meetings and file the same with the Municipal Clerk where they shall be
available for public inspection at any reasonable time. All accounts against
such funds shall be drawn by the chairman, countersigned by the secretary and
paid by the Municipal Clerk. A majority of the Board members shall constitute a
quorum for the purpose of doing business. The Board shall meet at such times as
the Governing Body may designate. Special meetings may be held upon the call of
the chairman or any three (3) members of the Board. The Board shall have the
general care, management, and supervision of the Municipal Cemetery with the
power and authority to limit and regulate the number of cemetery lots that may
be owned by the same person; to prescribe rules for enclosing, adorning, and
erecting monuments and tombstones on cemetery lots; and to prohibit any diverse
or improper use thereof; Provided, no religious tests shall be made as to the
ownership of lots, the burial therein, and the ornamentation of graves. The
Board shall pass rules and regulations for the proper use of the Cemetery and
prescribe penalties and fines for violations thereof. The Board shall use all
revenue received from the sale of lots, gifts, or by devise for the care,
management and administration of the Cemetery. All actions of the Board shall
be subject to the review and supervision of the Governing Body and it shall be
responsible for making such reports and performing such additional duties as
the Governing Body may designate. No member of the Governing Body shall serve
as a member of the Board while serving a term of office as a member of the
Governing Body. No member of the Cemetery Board shall hold more than one (1)
Cemetery Board office. (Ref. 12-401 through 12-403 RS Neb.)
§ 2-207   JOINT HOUSING AUTHORITY.
Any two (2) or more Cities, Villages or Counties, or any combination thereof,
may, by resolution of their separate governing bodies, determine that there is
a need for a Joint Housing Authority to provide decent, safe and sanitary
housing for persons of low income living in a multijurisdictional area, and
that this need would be more efficiently served by the establishment of such
Joint Housing Authority. Such Joint Housing Authority shall have perpetual
existence; except that any City, Village, or County, as the case may be, may
withdraw from participation in the Joint Housing Authority by resolution of its
Governing Body only under the conditions set out in State law. The area of
operation of such Joint Housing Authority would be an area equivalent to the
total areas of operation which the housing authories, if created separately by
the Cities, Villages, or Counties establishing the Joint Authority would have.
The creation of subsequent housing authorities shall not affect the area of
operation or territorial jurisdiction of any existing housing authority.
Whenever a Joint Housing Authority is created, it shall bear such name as the
political subdivision or subdivisions creating it shall choose, and such name
shall include the words Joint Housing Authority.
   When it is determined by resolution of the Governing Bodies of two (2) or
more Cities, Villages, or Counties, or any combination thereof, that it is
expedient to create a Joint Housing Authority and to participate therein, the
Governing Bodies shall appoint persons who shall be residents of the area of
operations of the Authority and who shall constitute the Joint Housing
Authority, and such persons shall be called Commissioners. The Commissioners
shall be appointed as follows:
(a)   When two (2) political subdivisions constitute the participating members
in such Joint Authority, each shall appoint two (2) persons to act as
Commissioners and such Commissioners shall elect a fifth (5th) person to act as
a Commissioner;
(b)   When three (3) political subdivisions constitute the participating
members in such Joint Authority, each shall appoint one (1) person to act as a
Commissioner and such Commissioners shall elect a fourth (4th) and fifth (5th)
person to act as Commissioners;
(c)   When four (4) political subdivisions constitute the participating members
in such Joint Authority, each shall appoint one (1) person to act as
Commissioner and such Commissioners shall elect a fifth (5th) person to act as
a Commissioner; and
(d)   When five or more political subdivisions constitute the participating
members in the Joint Authority, each shall appoint one (1) person to act as
Commissioner.
   Each Commissioner shall serve a term of five (5) years from the date of his
or her appointment. All vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term by the
entity originally appointing such Commissioner. Tenancy in a project
established by a Joint Housing Authority shall not preclude the appointment of
any person to serve as a Commissioner of such Joint Housing Authority. After a
Joint Housing Authority has been created, additional political subdivisions may
elect to participate as members of such Joint Housing Authority after
compliance with section 71-1523 RS Neb., if the majority of existing
Commissioners in such Joint Housing Authority and all participating political
subdivisions by their respective Governing Bodies consent to such additional
member. A Joint Housing Authority having twelve (12) or more Commissioners may,
by resolution, establish an Executive Committee of at least five (5) but not
more than seven (7) Commissioners. The Committee shall have such powers over
the management and operation of such Joint Housing Authority as the
Commissioners of such Joint Housing Authority shall specify and shall declare
in the resolution. No person shall serve as a Commissioner unless he or she
resides within the area of operation of the Joint Housing Authority involved.
(Ref. 71-1520, 71-1522 through 71-1524 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 353, 9/15/82)
§ 2-208   CITY TREE BOARD.
The Mayor, by and with the consent of the Council shall appoint the City Tree
Board which shall consist of six (6) members who are residents of the
Municipality. Each member shall serve without compensation for a term of three
(3) years; provided, that the term of two members appointed to the first board
shall be for only one (1) year and the term of two members appointed to the
first board shall be for only two (2) years. In the event that a vacancy shall
occur during the term of any member, his or her successor shall be appointed
for the unexpired portion of the term.
   The operation, duties and responsibilities of the Board shall be as follows:
   1.   The City Tree Board shall elect its own officers, make its own rules
and regulations, and keep a journal of its proceedings. A majority of the
members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
   2.   The City Tree Board shall study, investigate, council and develop a
written plan for the care, preservation, trimming, planting, replanting,
removal or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, on public rights-of-ways
and in other public areas. Such plan will be presented to the Governing Body
and upon its acceptance and approval shall constitute the official
comprehensive tree plan for the City of Wymore, Nebraska. The City Tree Board
shall review annually and update, if needed, the comprehensive city tree plan.
The City Tree Board shall prepare and present an annual work plan to the
Governing Body for its acceptance and approval.
   The City Tree Board, when requested by the Governing Body shall consider,
investigate, make findings, report and recommend upon any special matter or
question coming within the scope of its work. (Ord. No. 469, 1/20/93)
§ 2-209   COMMUNITY REDEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY; CREATION; MEMBERS; TERMS; OFFICERS
AND EMPLOYEES; CONFLICTS.
   (1)   There is hereby created a Community Redevelopment Authority which
shall be legally known as the Community Redevelopment Authority of the City.
   (2)   The Mayor, with the approval of the City Council, shall appoint five
(5) persons who shall constitute the Authority. The terms of office of the
members of the Authority initially appointed shall be for one (1) year, two (2)
years, three (3) years, four (4) years, and five (5) years as designated by the
Mayor. As the terms of the members of the Authority, the Mayor, with the
approval of the City Council, shall appoint or reappoint a member of the
Authority for a term of five (5) years to succeed the member whose term
expires. Vacancies shall be filled for any unexpired term in the same manner as
the original appointment. Members of the Authority so appointed shall hold
office until their successors have been appointed and qualified. All members of
the Authority shall serve without compensation, but shall be entitled to be
reimbursed for all necessary expenses incurred.
   (3)   The Authority shall organize by electing one (1) of its members,
Chairperson and another person Vice-Chairperson, and shall have the power to
employ counsel, a director who shall be ex official Secretary of the Authority
and such other officers and employees as may be desired, and shall fix the term
of office, qualifications and compensation of each.
   (4)   The Authority may validly and effectively act on all matters requiring
a resolution or other official action by a majority vote of its membership
present at a meeting of the Authority if a quorum of four (4) is present.
   (5)   No member of employee of the Authority shall have any interest
directly or indirectly in any contract for property, materials, or services to
be required by the Authority. (Ref. 18-2102.01 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 564, 7/21/
04) 
§ 2-210   POLICE DEPARTMENT ADVISORY COMMITTEE; CREATION; MEMBERSHIP;
RESPONSIBILITIES; DURATION.
   (1)   There is hereby created the Police Department Advisory Committee. The
Committee shall consist of nine voting members, one of which shall be a member
of the City Council. The other eight members shall be nominated by the Mayor
and approved by the City Council. The Chief of Police shall be a non-voting ex-
officio member of the Committee. All members of the Committee shall be
residents of Wymore, and shall serve for a term of two years.
   (2)   The Committee shall be an advisory committee of the Municipality and
shall have the following responsibilities:
      (a)   Review Police Department accreditation requirements and make
recommendations regarding the adoption or amendment of standard operating
guidelines and/or standard operating procedures;
      (b)   Make recommendations to the Mayor and City Council regarding the
adoption of rules and regulations governing the removal, demotion, or
suspension of any police officer, including the Chief of Police in accordance
with Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-107(3)(b);
      (c)   Study and make recommendations to the Mayor and City Council
regarding the proper staffing of the Police Department which shall include:
         (i)   Review of the frequency and types of calls for service and the
time spent in investigation;
         (ii)   The time handling administrative functions by the Chief of
Police and police officers; and
         (iii)   Recruitment and retention recommendations as to proper
compensation and employee benefits.
      (d)   Study and make recommendations regarding the feasibility of
maintaining a police department, and other options of providing law enforcement
services within the corporate limits of the Municipality.
   (3)   The duration of the Committee shall be perpetual, unless the section
is repealed.
(Ord. 670, 3/1/23) (Amended by Ord. 673, 4/5/23)
Article 3. Penal Provision
§ 2-301   VIOLATION; PENALTY.
Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with the enforcement of any of
the provisions of this Chapter, set forth at full length herein or incorporated
by reference, shall be deemed guilty of an offense, and upon conviction
thereof, shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each
offense. A new violation shall be deemed to have been committed every twenty-
four (24) hours of such failure to comply. (Ref. 17-505 RS Neb.) (Amended by
Ord. No. 538, 9/15/99)
Chapter 3
DEPARTMENTS
Article 1. Fire and Rescue Department
§ 3-101   MUNICIPAL VOLUNTEER FIRE AND RESCUE DEPARTMENT; OPERATION AND
FUNDING.
   The Municipality operates the Wymore Volunteer Fire and Rescue Department
through the Municipal Fire Chief and Firemen. The Governing Body, for the
purpose of defraying the cost of the management, maintenance, and improving the
Wymore Volunteer Fire and Rescue Department may each year levy a tax not
exceeding the maximum limits prescribed by state law, on the actual valuation
of all real estate and personal property within the Municipality that is
subject to taxation. The revenue from said tax shall be known as the Wymore
Volunteer Fire and Rescue Department Fund. The Fund shall be at all times in
possession of the Municipal Treasurer. All claims against the Wymore Volunteer
Fire and Rescue Department Fund shall be presented to the Governing Body by the
Fire Chief for audit and allowance or disallowance. The Fire Chief shall manage
the Wymore Volunteer Fire and Rescue Department and it shall be his or her duty
to inform the Governing Body when any of the buildings, grounds, fire engines,
rescue apparatus, house, ladders, or other apparatus are in need of
maintenance, repair or replacement. The Fire Chief shall provide to the
Governing Body written estimates regarding the cost to complete said work, and
when required by state law or at the request of the Governing Body, advertise
for bids and submit said bids to the Governing Body for review and approval.
Upon written consent and directive of the Governing Body, the Fire Chief shall
cause the maintenance, repair, improvement, or replacement of said equipment or
property and shall personally supervise and approve of the same.
(Ref. 17-147, 17-568.01, 17-718, 17-953, 35-901 RS Neb.) (Amended by Ord. Nos.
557A, 3/19/03; 683, 7/2/25)
§ 3-102   MUNICIPAL FIRE AND RESCUE DEPARTMENT; MEMBERSHIP; ORGANIZATION;
EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE; BENEFITS; REMOVAL.
    (1)   The Fire Chief shall appoint no more than twenty-five (25) members
for each Wymore Volunteer Fire and Rescue Department Company subject to the
review and approval of the Governing Body. All vacancies shall be filled in
this manner.
   (2)   The Wymore Volunteer Fire and Rescue Department shall consist of so
many members as may be decided by the Governing Body subject to the limitation
of subsection (1) above. The members may organize themselves any way they
decide, subject to review of the Governing Body. They may hold meetings and
engage in social activities with the approval of the Governing Body. The
Secretary of the Wymore Volunteer Fire and Rescue Department shall keep a
record of all meetings. The Governing Body may approve recruitment and
retention payments for members going on calls in an amount set by resolution.
All members of the Wymore Volunteer Fire and Rescue Department shall be subject
to such rules and regulation established by the Wymore Volunteer Fire and
Rescue Department and approved by the Governing Body, and shall perform such
duties as may be prescribed or required to them by the Fire Chief or the
Governing Body.
   (3)   There is hereby established the Executive Committee of the Wymore
Volunteer Fire and Rescue Department which shall consist of the Fire Chief,
Assistant Fire Chief, Second Assistant Fire Chief, and President of the Wymore
Volunteer Fire and Rescue Department.
   (4)   The members of the Wymore Volunteer Fire and Rescue Department, shall,
for the sole purpose of the Nebraska Workers’ Compensation Act, be deemed
employees of the Municipality while in the performance of their duties as
members of the Wymore Volunteer Fire and Rescue Department and shall be
considered as having entered and as acting in the regular course and scope of
their employment from the instant such volunteers commence responding to a call
of active duty, whether to the fire station or other place where firefighting
equipment that their company is to use is located or to any activities that the
volunteer firefighters may be directed to do by the Fire Chief or some other
person authorized to act for the Fire Chief. Such volunteers shall be deemed
employees of the Municipality until their return to the location from which
they were initially called to active duty or until they engage in any activity
beyond the scope of the performance of their duties, whichever occurs first.
Members of the Volunteer Fire and Rescue Department, before they are entitled
to benefits under the Nebraska Workers’ Compensation Act, shall be recommended
by the Fire Chief or some other person authorized to act for the Fire Chief to
the Governing Body, and upon confirmation shall be deemed employees of the
Municipality. Members of the Wymore Volunteer Fire and Rescue Department after
confirmation to membership may be removed by a majority vote of the Governing
Body and thereafter shall not be considered employees of the Municipality.
Firefighters shall be considered acting in the performance of within the course
and scope of their employment when performing activities outside of the
corporate limits of the Municipality, but only if directed to do so by the Fire
Chief or some person authorized to act for the Fire Chief.
   (5)   Each member shall be entitled to a term life insurance policy in the
amount of at least ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for death from any cause
to age sixty-five (65), and such policy shall reduce twenty percent (20%) on
the first (1st) day of the policy month on or after the insured person’s sixty-
fifth (65th) birthday, fifty percent (50%) on or after the seventieth (70th)
birthday, and sixty-five percent (65%) on or after the seventy-fifth (75th)
birthday; provided that the firemen covered are active members and are
faithfully performing the duties of their position.
   (6)   Members of the Wymore Volunteer Fire and Rescue Department, after
their confirmation to membership by the Governing Body, may be removed by a
majority vote of the Governing Body, and thereafter shall not be considered
members of the Wymore Volunteer Fire and Rescue Department.
(Ref. 35-101 through 35-103, 35-108, 48-115 RS Neb.) (Amended by Ord. Nos. 399,
9/18/85; 557A, 3/19/03; 683, 7/2/25)
§ 3-103   MUNICIPAL VOLUNTEER FIRE AND RESCUE DEPARTMENT; DISTANT FIRES.
   Upon permission of the Mayor or Fire Chief, such fire equipment of the
Municipality as may be designated by the Governing Body as rural equipment may
be used beyond the corporate limits to extinguish reported fires.
(Ref. 17-147, 17-505, 35-101 RS Neb.) (Amended by Ord. No. 683, 7/2/25)
§ 3-104   MUNICIPAL FIRE DEPARTMENT; PRESERVATION OF PROPERTY.
   (Repealed by Ord. No. 557A, 3/19/03)
§ 3-105   MUNICIPAL VOLUNTEER FIRE AND RESCUE DEPARTMENT; MANDATORY ASSISTANCE
.
   Any official of the Wymore Volunteer Fire and Rescue Department may command
the assistance and services of any person present at a fire to help in
extinguishing the same, in directing traffic, or in the removal and protection
of property.
(Ref. 17-147, 17-505, 35-101 RS Neb.) (Amended by Ord. No. 683, 7/2/25)
§ 3-106   MUNICIPAL FIRE DEPARTMENT; POWER OF ARREST.
   (Repealed by Ord. No. 557A, 3/19/03)
§ 3-107   MUNICIPAL FIRE DEPARTMENT; BADGES AND UNIFORMS.
   ---The Fire Chief shall make suitable regulations under which the officers
and men of the Municipal Fire Department shall be required to wear some
appropriate uniform and badge, by which the authority and relation of such
officers and men may be known as the exigencies of their duties may require.
§ 3-108   MUNICIPAL VOLUNTEER FIRE AND RESCUE DEPARTMENT; VOLUNTEER DEPARTMENT
TRUST FUND; EXPENDITURES; CLAIMS; BUDGET.
    (1)   There is hereby established the Volunteer Department Trust Fund. All
donations, contributions, bequests, or annuities made to the Wymore Volunteer
Fire and Rescue Department, and all money raised through fund- raising
activities by or for the Wymore Volunteer Fire and Rescue Department shall be
deposited in the Volunteer Department Trust Fund. The Treasurer of the Wymore
Volunteer Fire and Rescue Department shall be the custodian of the Volunteer
Department Trust Fund.
   (2)   The Volunteer Department Trust Fund shall not be considered public
funds or funds of the Municipality, nor shall the Municipality incur any
liability solely by reason of any expenditure from the Volunteer Department
Trust except liability for property the Municipality receives title to property
acquired with money from the Volunteer Department Trust Fund.
   (3)   All expenditures of funds from the Volunteer Department Trust Fund
shall be submitted as claims for approval by the Executive Committee of the
Wymore Volunteer Fire and Rescue Department. No claim or demand against the
Volunteer Department Trust Fund shall be allowed or approved unless presented
to the Executive Committee in writing with full account of the expenditure or
proposed expenditure.
   (4)   The Executive Committee shall, prior to the beginning of the Wymore
Volunteer Fire and Rescue Department’s fiscal year, adopt a budget of estimated
expenditures from the Fire Department Fund and the Volunteer Department Trust
Fund. In addition, the Executive Committee shall adopt a one- and six-year plan
regarding estimated expenditures for said periods of time.
(Ref. 35-901 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 557A, 3/19/03) (Amended by Ord. No. 683, 7/2/
25)
Article 2. Library
§ 3-201   MUNICIPAL LIBRARY; OWNERSHIP.
The Municipality owns and manages the Municipal Library through the Library
Board. The Governing Body, for the purpose of defraying the cost of the
management, purchases, improvements, and maintenance of the Library shall each
year levy a tax not exceeding the maximum limit prescribed by State law, on the
actual valuation of all real estate and personal property within the
Municipality that is subject to taxation. The revenue from the said tax shall
be known as the Library Fund and shall include all gifts, grants, deeds of
conveyance, bequests, or other valuable income-producing personal property and
real estate from any source for the purpose of endowing the Municipal Library.
The Library Fund shall at all times be in the custody of the Municipal
Treasurer. The President of the Library Board shall draw warrants on the
Library Fund and when countersigned by the Secretary shall be honored by the
Municipal Treasurer. The Board shall have the power and authority to appoint
the Librarian and to hire such other employees as they may deem necessary and
may pass such other rules and regulations for the operation of the Library as
may be proper for its efficient operation. All actions by the Board shall be
under the supervision and control of the Governing Body. (Ref. 51-201, 51-202,
51-211 RS Neb.)
§ 3-202   MUNICIPAL LIBRARY; RULES AND REGULATIONS.
The Library Board shall establish rules and regulations for the governing of
the Municipal Library for the preservation and efficient management thereof.
They shall fix and impose by general rules, penalties and forfeitures for
injury to the Library grounds, rooms, books, or other property, or for failure
to return a book. All fees, penalties, and forfeitures may be collected in
civil action in the event of failure, neglect, or refusal to pay the said
assessments. (Ref. 51-205, 51-214 RS Neb.)
§ 3-203   MUNICIPAL LIBRARY; DAMAGED AND LOST BOOKS.
Any person who injures or fails to return any book taken from the Library shall
forfeit and pay to the Library not less than the value of the book in addition
to any replacement costs and penalty which the Library Board may assess. (Ref.
51-211 RS Neb.)
§ 3-204   MUNICIPAL LIBRARY; MONEY COLLECTED.
   Any money collected by the Library shall be turned over monthly by the
Library Board to the Municipal Treasurer along with a report of the sources of
the revenue. (Ref. 51-209 RS Neb.)
Article 3. Cemetery
§ 3-301   MUNICIPAL CEMETERY; OWNERSHIP.
The Municipality owns and manages the Municipal Cemetery through the Cemetery
Board. The Governing Body, for the purpose of defraying the cost of the care,
management, maintenance, and beautification of the Cemetery shall each year
levy a tax not exceeding the maximum limit prescribed by State law, on the
actual valuation of all real estate and personal property within the
Municipality that is subject to taxation. The revenue from the said tax shall
be known as the Cemetery Fund and shall include all gifts, grants, deeds of
conveyance, bequests, money, stocks, bonds, or other valuable income-producing
personal property and real estate from any source for the purpose of endowing
the Cemetery. The Cemetery Fund shall at all times be in the custody of the
Municipal Treasurer. The Cemetery Board shall manage the Cemetery and warrants
drawn by the Chairman of the Board and countersigned by the Secretary shall be
honored by the Municipal Treasurer. The Board shall have the power and
authority to hire and supervise such employees as they may deem necessary and
to pass such rules and regulations for the operation of the Cemetery as may be
proper for its efficient operation. All actions by the Board shall be under the
supervision and control of the Governing Body. (Ref. 12-301 thru 12-403 RS
Neb.)
Article 4. Municipal Dumping Grounds
§ 3-401   MUNICIPAL DUMPING GROUNDS; OWNERSHIP.
The Municipality owns and operates the Municipal Dumping Grounds. The Governing
Body, for the purpose of defraying the cost of the care, management, and
maintenance of the Municipal Dumping Grounds shall each year levy a tax not to
exceed the maximum limit prescribed by State law, on the actual valuation of
all real estate and personal property within the corporate limits that is
subject to taxation. The revenue from the said tax shall be known as the Dump
Fund and shall remain in the custody of the Municipal Treasurer. Such territory
within and adjacent to the Municipality shall be under the direct authority of
the Governing Body and corporate authority is hereby extended over said real
estate for all purposes, including what, how, and when dumping may be permitted
or allowed thereon. It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or deposit any
garbage, rubbish, or other waste in any place other than on said dumping ground
so designated except as otherwise specifically provided. (Ref. 19-2101 thru 19-
2106 RS Neb.)
§ 3-402   MUNICIPAL DUMPING GROUNDS; STATE REGULATIONS.
The Municipality shall each year apply for a license to operate the Municipal
Dumping Grounds. Application shall be made to the Department of Environmental
Control on forms provided by the Department. No fee shall be charged for such
licensing. Each license so issued shall expire on October 1, following the date
of issuance. It shall be the duty of the Dump Commissioner to comply with the
rules and regulations prescribed by the Department of Environmental Control for
the use and operation of the Municipal Dumping Grounds. (Ref. 81-1517, 81-1519
RS Neb.)
§ 3-403   MUNICIPAL DUMPING GROUNDS; PRIVATE HAULING.
In the event the Governing Body deems it neither expedient nor advisable to
enter into a contract for the collection of garbage, rubbish, trash, or waste,
any person may, upon written application to the Municipal Clerk, if he can
satisfy said Clerk that he will comply with the laws of the Municipality, be
issued a written permit to engage in said work on such form as the Clerk shall
provide for that purpose. No fee shall be charged for the issuance of said
permit which shall entitle the recipient thereof to haul and collect garbage,
from residents of the Municipality until April thirtieth (30th) after the date
of issuance. The permit may be renewed annually, if said Governing Body shall
not in the meantime have elected to enter into said contract with a licensed
collector. The application for said permits shall be on standard forms,
prepared by the Municipal Clerk, and shall elicit such information as the Clerk
shall deem in the public interest. It shall be unlawful for any person to haul
or collect for hire any garbage in the Municipality, without first procuring
the permit aforesaid, or to do to do so after his permit is revoked.
§ 3-404   MUNICIPAL DUMPING GROUNDS; HAULING REQUIREMENTS.
No person shall haul any manure, rubbish, waste, or other refuse matter over
the public ways and property except in some tight truck or wagon box or bed so
made and loaded that none of its contents shall be spilled. No person shall
haul any garbage in any vehicle unless the same is watertight, cleaned, and
disinfected with sufficient frequency so as not to cause offense to the eye or
nose and be enclosed; Provided, the Governing Body may at any time by
resolution provide that all say conveyances be constructed or provided with
metal bodies or beds.
§ 3-405   MUNICIPAL DUMPING GROUNDS; MUNICIPAL HAULING.
The Governing Body may, in their discretion, by resolution, provide for the
letting of a contract for the collection of garbage to any person on a City-
wide basis. In such event, bids for such service shall be invited under such
specifications as the Board of Health may recommend and the Governing Body
shall approve. The Governing Body may, also in their discretion, by resolution
provide for the collection of garbage, rubbish, trash, and waste by the
Municipality at public expense, or on such terms as the Governing Body in such
resolution shall designate. In the event the Municipality shall pass such a
resolution for the letting of a contract for the collection of garbage by the
Municipality all permits to private collectors shall be thereby forthwith
terminated and thereafter, and until such resolution shall be rescinded, it
shall be unlawful for any person other that the holder of said contract, of the
Municipality itself, as the case may be, to collect garbage, rubbish, trash, or
waste within the Municipality.
Article 5. Free Music and Entertainment
§ 3-501   FREE MUSIC AND ENTERTAINMENT; ESTABLISHED.
Upon a three-fourths vote of all the members of the Governing Body in favor of
the expenditure of Municipal funds for free music and entertainment, the
Governing Body is hereby expressly authorized to levy a tax not exceeding the
maximum limit prescribed by State law, or the actual valuation of all real
estate and personal property within the corporate limits that is subject to
taxation. Said tax shall be used to establish and maintain a vocal,
instrumental, and amusement organization for the purpose of rendering free
public concerts, musical festivals, and recitals within the Municipality and
for the inhabitants of the Municipality.
§ 3-502    FREE MUSIC AND ENTERTAINMENT; MANAGEMENT OF FUNDS.
The Governing Body shall make and adopt all suitable and necessary rules,
regulations, and bylaws concerning the government, organization, expenditures,
and other necessary matters pertaining to such organization.
Article 6. Parks
§ 3-601   MUNICIPAL PARKS; OPERATION AND FUNDING.
The Municipality owns and manages the Municipal Park through the Board of Park
Commissioners. The Governing Body, for the purpose of defraying the cost of the
management, purchases, improvements and maintenance of the Parks, Swimming
Pools, and other similar areas of recreation and amusement shall each year levy
a tax not exceeding the maximum limit prescribed by State law, on the actual
valuation of all real estate and personal property within the Municipality that
is subject to taxation. The revenue from the said tax shall be known as the
Park Fund and shall include all gifts, grants, deeds of conveyance, bequests,
or other valuable income producing personal property and real estate from any
source for the purpose of endowing the Parks and recreational areas of the
Municipality. The Park Fund shall at all times be in the custody of the
Municipal Treasurer. The Chairman of the Board of Park Commissioners shall draw
warrants on the Park Fund and when countersigned by the Secretary shall be
honored by the Municipal Treasurer. The Board shall have the power and
authority to hire such employees as they may deem necessary for the operation
of the Parks and recreational areas and may pass such other rules and
regulations as may be proper for their efficient operations. All actions by the
Board shall be subject to the supervision and control of the Governing Body.
(Ref. 17-948 thru 17-952 RS Neb.)
Article 7. Housing Authority
§ 3-701   HOUSING AUTHORITY; DEFINITIONS.
Except as otherwise specifically provided, the definitions and terms set out in
the Nebraska Statutes relating to Housing Authorities under the Nebraska
Housing Authority Law are hereby adopted by reference as they now exist or may
hereafter be amended. (Ref. 71-1522 RS Neb.)
§ 3-702   HOUSING AUTHORITY; CONTINUED EXISTENCE.
The Wymore Housing Authority established under State law prior to December 25,
1969 shall have continued existence after that date under the Nebraska Housing
Authority Law. All Commissioners of such Authority and all officers, legal
counsel, technical experts, directors, and other appointees or employees of
such authority, holding office or employment by virtue of prior State law on
December 25, 1969 shall be deemed to have been appointed or employed by the
Mayor under the provisions of the Nebraska Housing Authority Law and shall from
that date forward conduct their operations consistent with the provisions of
that Act. (Ref. 71-1527 RS Neb.)
§ 3-703   HOUSING AUTHORITY; OWNERSHIP.
The Wymore Housing Authority is owned by the Municipality and operated through
the Housing Authority Commission for the benefit of the Municipality. The
Housing Authority shall constitute a body corporate and politic, and shall make
provisions for the preservation of the public health, safety, morals, and
welfare by facilitating sanitary housing conditions and the elimination of
inadequate housing conditions. The Housing Authority shall have all the powers
necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions
of the Nebraska Housing Authority Law. (Ref. 71-1529 RS Neb.)
§ 3-704   HOUSING AUTHORITY; COMMISSIONERS.
The Mayor shall appoint five (5) persons who shall constitute the Housing
Authority and such persons shall be called the Commissioners. One (1)
Commissioner shall be appointed each year. Each Commissioner shall serve a five
(5) year term of office or until his successor is duly appointed; Provided,
that all vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired terms. A certificate of
the appointment or reappointment of any Commissioner shall be filed with the
Municipal Clerk and such certificate shall be conclusive evidence of the proper
appointment of such Commissioner. A Commissioner shall receive no compensation
for his services, but he shall be entitled to the necessary expenses, including
travel expenses, incurred in discharge of his duties. Three (3) Commissioners
shall constitute a quorum of the Authority for the purpose of conducting its
business, exercising its powers, and for all other purposes. Action may be
taken by the Authority upon the vote of the majority of the Commissioners
present unless in any case the bylaws of the Authority shall require a larger
number. The Commissioners shall elect a Chairman and Vice-Chairman from among
the Commissioners and shall have the power to employ an Executive Director who
shall serve as ex officio secretary of the Authority. The Authority may also
employ legal counsel, or it may call upon the chief law officer of the
Municipality, for such legal services as it may require. It may employ
technical experts and such other officers, agents, and employees as it may
require and shall determine their qualifications, duties, compensations, and
terms of office. The Authority may delegate such other powers and duties to its
agents or employees as it may deem proper. During his tenure, and for one (1)
year thereafter, no commissioner, officer, or employee of the Wymore Housing
Authority shall voluntarily acquire any interest, direct or indirect, in any
project or in any property included or planned to be included in any project,
or in any contract or proposed contract relating to any housing project. If any
such commissioner, officer, or employee, he shall immediately disclose his
interest in writing to the Authority, and such disclosure shall be entered upon
the minutes of the Authority, and he shall not participate in any action by the
Authority relating to the property or contract in which he has any such
interest; Provided, that nothing herein shall apply to the acquisition of any
interest in notes or bonds of the Authority issued in connection with any
housing project, or to the execution of agreements by banking institutions for
deposit or handling of funds in connection with a project or to act as trustee
under any trust indenture, or to utility services, the rates for which are
fixed or controlled by a governmental agency. The Mayor may remove a
Commissioner for neglect of duty or misconduct in office in the manner
prescribed hereinafter. The Mayor shall send a notice of removal to such
Commissioner which notice shall contain a statement containing the charges
against him. Unless within ten (10) days from the receipt of such notice, such
Commissioner files with the Clerk a request for a hearing before the Governing
Body, the Commissioner shall be deemed as removed from office. If a request for
a hearing is filed with the Clerk, the Governing Body of the Municipality shall
hold a hearing at which the Commissioner shall have the right to appear in
person or by counsel and the Governing Body shall determined whether the
removal shall be disapproved or upheld. If the removal is disapproved, the
Commissioner shall continue to hold his position. (Ref. 71-1524 thru 71-1525 RS
Neb.)
§ 3-705   HOUSING AUTHORITY; OPERATION AND MANAGEMENT.
The Authority shall at all times observe the following duties with respect to
rentals and tenant selection:
1.   It may rent or lease dwelling accommodations therein only to persons of
low income, elderly, or handicapped persons of low income, and displaced
persons in need.
2.   There shall be no discrimination in the eligibility or occupancy of
tenants on the basis of race, religion, color, creed, national origin, or
ancestry.
3.   The Authority shall not accept any person as a tenant in any dwelling in a
housing project if the person who would occupy the dwelling has an aggregate
annual income which equals or exceeds the amount which the Authority
determines, which determination shall be conclusive, to be necessary in order
to enable such persons to secure, safe, sanitary, and uncongested dwelling
accommodations within the area served by the Authority and to provide an
adequate standard of living for themselves.
4.   The Authority may rent or lease to a tenant a dwelling consisting of a
number of rooms which is deemed necessary to provide safe and sanitary
accommodations to the occupants thereof, without overcrowding.
5.    The Authority shall fix income limits for occupancy and rents after
taking into consideration:
(a)   The family size, composition, age, physical handicaps, and other factors
which might affect the rent-paying ability of the person.
(b)   The economic factors which affect the financial stability and solvency of
the project.
6.    An Authority may accept as a tenant any displaced person or persons in
need, regardless of income, but in no event shall such person or persons remain
as a tenant or tenants of the Authority for more than a period of six (6)
months unless such persons also qualify as persons of low income, elderly, or
handicapped persons of low income.
7.    All persons of low income, elderly, or handicapped persons of low income,
or displaced persons in need, shall be entitled to the benefits of this Article
and the Authority may establish rules and regulations consistent with the
purposes of this Article concerning eligibility and occupancy of the housing
project or other such shelter.
8.    Nothing in this act shall prohibit the right of the Authority to inquire
into the financial condition, family composition, medical, personal, and
employment history of any tenant or prospective tenant.
9.    The Authority shall prohibit subletting by tenants.
(Ref. 71-1536 RS Neb.)
§ 3-706   HOUSING AUTHORITY; RULES AND REGULATIONS.
The Housing Authority may establish from time to time rules and regulations
consistent with the purposes of this Article concerning the priority of
eligible applicants for occupancy and may give consideration to the applicant's
status as a serviceman or veteran or relative of a serviceman or veteran to a
disabled serviceman or veteran; the applicant's age or disability, housing
conditions, urgency of housing need, and source of income; Provided, that in
any such system of priority, displaced persons in need shall have a priority
ahead of all other such persons; and provided further, that no tenant in good
standing in occupancy and qualified for continued occupancy shall have his or
her tenancy terminated in order to provide dwelling units for classes or
categories of applicants as the Authority may establish. (Ref. 71-1537 RS Neb.)
§ 3-707   HOUSING AUTHORITY; REPORTS.
The Housing Authority shall keep an accurate account of all its activities and
of all its receipts and disbursements and shall make an annual report to the
Governing Body on all such information at such time as the Governing Body shall
prescribe. (Ref. 71-1552 RS Neb.)
Article 8. General Utilities
[Editor's Note: See §1-211 for provisions related to the Public Works
Superintendent.]
§ 3-801   UTILITIES; SUPERINTENDENT OF WATER AND LIGHT.
It shall be the duty of the Superintendent of Water and Light to take the
immediate charge of the Municipal Water Department, the Municipal Sewerage
Department, and the Municipal Electrical Distribution System. All acts by the
Superintendent shall be subject to the control and supervision of the Governing
Body.
§ 3-802   UTILITIES; EMPLOYEES.
The Governing Body shall by resolution provide for the employment of such
persons for the public utility departments, both skilled and unskilled, as it
may deem necessary for the assistance of the Superintendent in the discharge of
his duties, and shall in said resolution provide the terms and conditions of
the employment of said employees. It shall be the duty of the Superintendent to
report and recommend to the Governing Body any changes he may deem proper in
the employment and removal of such employees. All such employees shall, during
the time of their employment, be subject to the directives of the
Superintendent.
§ 3-803   UTILITIES; UNLAWFUL DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY.
It shall be unlawful for any person top interfere with, cut, injure, remove,
break, destroy, or deface any pole, wire, fixture, instrument, or other
property of any telegraph, telephone, electric, or gas company or association.
It shall further be unlawful for any person to injure in any way the property
of any public utility owned and operated by the Municipality.
§ 3-804   UTILITIES; UNLAWFUL USE.
Any person who connects any wire, cord, socket, motor, pipe conduit, or other
instrument, device, or contrivance with any wire transmitting or supplying or
intending to transmit or supply electricity or electric current, or connects
any pipe or conduit supplying gas, water, or sewer service, without the
knowledge and consent of the person, partnership, corporation, company, or
Municipality furnishing the said services shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction, shall be punished as hereinafter provided. It
shall be additionally unlawful for any person to tamper with any meter or other
measuring device without the express and written permission for the same from
the public or private utility owning or operating the same for the purpose of
making the measuring device inaccurate and ineffective. Any person who
knowingly uses or permits the use of any instrument or other method for the
purpose of inaccurate measurement of utility services or indulges knowingly in
the profit and benefit of such illegal activities shall be deemed to be guilty
of a misdemeanor. Proof of the existence of any device, method, injury,
alteration, or obstruction of a meter or utility appurtenance shall be taken as
prima facie evidence of the guilt of the person in possession of the premise
where the device, connection, injury, alteration, or obstruction is proven to
exist.
§ 3-805   UTILITIES; CONVICTION OF USER.
Upon conviction of the offenses hereinbefore named against any public or
private utility, the utility, if it continues its service or sale of
commodities to such convicted person, or any other person or corporation
selling the same service or commodities to such person, shall install for such
convicted person, an enclosed, externally-operated-and sealed type of meter,
having all fuses and connections readily accessible to the consumer through an
approved opening therefor, but without opening the switchbox proper. Such
service-switch or connection must be of an approved safety type permitting the
line-meter-fuse order of connections. Approved, as used in this section, shall
mean favorably passed upon by the inspector of the seller as suitable for the
purpose designed, and such consumer shall, before obtaining such service of
commodities, pay for the cost of installation of such meter, and upon the
failure or refusal of such consumer to pay for such installation, the seller
shall refuse to sell to such consumer the service or commodities hereinbefore
referred to.
§ 3-806   UTILITIES GENERALLY; DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE; NOTICE; DISPUTES;
PROCEDURE.
    (1) The Municipality shall have the right to discontinue water or electric
service and remove its properties to any domestic subscriber for nonpayment of
any past due account. Before any discontinuance of service, the Municipality
shall first give notice by first class mail or in person to any domestic
subscriber whose service is proposed to be terminated. If notice is given by
first class mail, such mail shall be conspicuously marked as to its importance.
Service shall not be discontinued for at least seven (7) days, weekends and
holidays excluded.
   (2)   The notice shall contain the following information:
      (a)   The reason for the proposed disconnection;
      (b)   A statement of the intention to disconnect unless the domestic
subscriber either pays the bill or reaches an agreement with the Municipality
regarding payment of the bill;
      (c)   The date upon which service will be disconnected if the domestic
subscriber does not take appropriate action;
      (d)   The name, address, and telephone number of the employee or
department to whom the domestic subscriber may address an inquiry or complaint;
      (e)   The domestic subscriber's right, prior to the disconnection date,
to request a conference regarding any dispute over such proposed disconnection;
      (f)   A statement that the Municipality may not disconnect service
pending the conclusion of the conference;
      (g)   A statement to the effect that disconnection may be postponed or
prevented upon presentation of a duly licensed physician's certificate which
shall certify that the domestic subscriber or resident within such subscriber's
household has an existing illness or handicap which would cause such subscriber
or resident to suffer an immediate and serious health hazard by the
disconnection of the Municipality's service to that household. Such certificate
shall be filed with the Municipal Clerk's office within five (5) days of
receiving notice under this section and will prevent the disconnection of the
Municipality's service for a period thirty (30) days from such filing.
Only one (1) postponement of disconnection shall be allowed under this
subsection for each incidence of non-payment of any past-due account;
      (h)   The cost that will be borne by the domestic subscriber for
restoration of service;
      (i)   A statement that the domestic subscriber may arrange with the
Municipality for an installment payment plan in accordance with the policies
adopted by the Governing Body;
      (j)   A statement to the effect that those domestic subscribers who are
welfare recipients may qualify for assistance in payment of their utility bill
and that they should contact their caseworker in that regard; and
      (k)   Any additional information not inconsistent with this section which
has received prior approval from the Governing Body.
   (3)   A domestic subscriber may dispute the proposed discontinuance of water
or electric service by notifying the Municipality with a written statement that
sets forth the reasons for the dispute and relief requested. If a statement has
been made by the subscriber, a conference shall be held before the Municipality
may discontinue service.
   (4)   This section shall not apply to any disconnection or interruption of
services made necessary by the Municipality for reasons of repair or
maintenance or to protect the health or safety of the domestic subscriber or
the general public. (Ref. 70-1605, 70-1606, 70-1609, 70-1615 RS Neb.) (Ord. No.
321, 10/3/79) (Amended by Ord. Nos. 368, 9/21/83; 375, 10/19/83; 387, 9/19/84;
612, 9/21/11)
§ 3-807   UTILITIES GENERALLY: DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE; CONFERENCE ON
DISPUTED MATTERS; DECISION; POLICIES AND PROCEDURES.
(1) A domestic subscriber may request, in writing, a conference in regard to
any dispute over a proposed discontinuance of electric or water service before
an employee appointed by the Governing Body to hear such matters. The employee
appointed shall hear and decide all matters disputed by domestic subscribers.
The subjects to be heard shall include matters relating to a disputed bill.
   (2)   Upon notice to the employee appointed by the Governing Body of any
request for a conference by a domestic subscriber, the employee shall:
      (a)   Notify the domestic subscriber, in writing, of the time, place, and
date scheduled for the conference; and
      (b)   Hold a conference within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the
domestic subscriber's request. Such conference shall be informal and not
governed by the Nebraska Evidence Rules. If the employee determines at the
conference that the domestic subscriber did not receive proper notice or was
denied any other right afforded under sections 70-1605 through 70-1615 RS Neb.,
the employee shall recess and continue the conference at such time as the
subscriber has been afforded his or her rights. Failure of the domestic
subscriber to attend a scheduled conference shall relieve the Municipality of
any further action prior to the discontinuance of service. If a domestic
subscriber contacts the utility prior to the scheduled conference and
demonstrates that failure to attend is for a legitimate reason, the
Municipality shall make a reasonable effort to reschedule the conference.
   (3)   The employee of the Municipality shall, based solely on the evidence
presented at the conference, affirm, reverse, or modify any decision by the
Municipality involving a disputed bill which results in a threatened
termination of utility service. The employee shall allow termination of utility
service only as a measure of last resort after the Municipality has exhausted
all other remedies less drastic than termination.
   (4)   The Governing Body shall adopt policies and procedures for the
discontinuance of service and resolving disputed utility bills. Said policies
and procedures shall be on file in the office of the Municipal Clerk and are
available for public inspection during business hours. (Ref. 70-1608, 70-1610,
70-1611 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 321, 10/3/79) (Amended by Ord. No. 612, 9/21/11)
§ 3-808   UTILITIES GENERALLY; DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE; APPEAL TO GOVERNING
BODY; HEARING; NOTICE.
   (1)   Any domestic subscriber may appeal an adverse decision of the employee
to the Governing Body. The hearing before the Governing Body shall be conducted
in accordance with procedures adopted by the Governing Body, a copy of which
shall be furnished to the domestic subscriber upon request. The request for an
appeal shall be made with the Municipal Clerk within five (5) business days of
the adverse decision.
   (2)   At the hearing held on the appeal to the Governing Body, the domestic
subscriber may:
      (a)   Be represented by legal counsel or other representative or
spokesperson;
      (b)   Examine and copy, not less than three (3) business days prior to
such hearing, the Municipality's file and records pertaining to all matters
directly relevant to the dispute or utilized in any way by the Municipality in
reaching the decision to propose termination or to take other action which is
the subject of the hearing;
      (c)   Present witnesses and offer evidence;
      (d)   Confront and cross-examine such other witnesses as may appear and
testify at the hearing; and
      (e)   Make to have made a record of the proceedings at his or her own
expense.
   (3)   The Municipality shall notify the domestic subscriber of the time,
place, and date scheduled for such hearing. (Ref. 70-1612, 70-1613, 70-1614 RS
Neb.)  (Ord. No. 321, 10/3/79) (Amended by Ord. No. 612, 9/21/11)
§ 3-808.01   UTILITIES GENERALLY; DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE; RESUMPTION OF
SERVICE; RE-CONNECTION FEE.
   In the event utility service is discontinued by the Municipality at the
request of the consumer or for non-payment of a utility bill, the consumer
shall pay a re-connection fee to the Municipal Clerk in the amount of thirty
dollars ($30.00) if service is resumed during business hours and seventy-five
dollars ($75.00) if service is resumed during non-business hours. Said re-
connection fee shall be paid prior to utility service being resumed. (Ref. 17-
505, 17-537 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 612, 9/21/11)
§ 3-809   UTILITIES GENERALLY; DIVERSION OF SERVICES; PENALTY.
(1)   The Municipality may bring a civil action for damages against any person
who commits, authorizes, solicits, aids, abets, or attempts:
      (a)   Bypassing,
      (b)   Tampering, or
      (c)   Unauthorized metering when such act results in damages to a
Municipal Utility.
   (2)   A Municipality may bring a civil action for damages pursuant to this
section against any person receiving the benefit of utility service through
means of bypassing, tampering or unauthorized metering.
   (3)   In any civil action brought pursuant to this section, the Municipality
shall be entitled, upon proof of willful or intentional bypassing, tampering,
or unauthorized metering to recover as damages:
      (a)   The amount of actual damage or loss if the amount of the damage or
loss is susceptible of reasonable calculation; or
      (b)   Liquidated damages of:
         1.   Until July 1, 1985, five hundred ($500.00) dollars and
         2.   On July 1, 1985, and thereafter, seven hundred fifty ($750.00)
dollars if the amount of actual damage or loss is not susceptible of reasonable
calculation.
   (4)   In addition to damage or loss under subdivisions (3)(b)1. and 2. of
this section the Municipality may recover all reasonable expenses and costs
incurred on account of the bypassing, tampering, or unauthorized metering
including, but not limited to, disconnection, reconnection, service calls,
equipment, costs of the suit, and reasonable attorneys' fees in cases within
the scope of section 25-1801 RS Neb.
   (5)   There shall be a rebuttable presumption that a tenant or occupant at
any premises where bypassing, tampering or unauthorized metering is proven to
exist caused or had knowledge of such bypassing, tampering, or unauthorized
metering if the tenant or occupant:
      (a)   Had access to the part of the utility supply system on the premises
where the bypassing, tampering, or unauthorized metering is proven to exist;
and
      (b)   Was responsible or partially responsible for payment, either
directly or indirectly, to the utility or to any other person for utility
services to the premises.
   (6)   There shall be a rebuttable presumption that a customer at any
premises where bypassing, tampering, or unauthorized metering is proven to
exist caused or had knowledge of such bypassing, tampering, or unauthorized
metering if the customer controlled access to the part of the utility supply
system on the premises where the bypassing, tampering, or unauthorized metering
was proven to exist.
   (7)   The remedies provided by this section shall be deemed to be
supplemental and additional to powers conferred by existing laws and the
remedies provided in this section are in addition to and not in limitation of
any other civil or criminal statutory or common law remedies. (Ref. 86-331.01
through 86-331.04 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 369, 9/21/83)
§ 3-810   UTILITIES GENERALLY; UTILITY SERVICE DEPOSIT; FUND; RETURN.
   (1)   Every person or persons desiring water, electric, and/or sewer service
must make application to the Municipal Clerk on forms furnished by the
Municipality. Each application for utility service shall be accompanied by a
service deposit of $250.00 for residential consumers and $500.00 for commercial
consumers. The Municipal Clerk shall give each applicant or consumer a receipt
for the utility service deposit received by him or her. Service deposits shall
be held separate and apart in a fund to be known as the "Utility Service
Deposit Fund", which is in the nature of a trust fund.
   (2)   If a consumer discontinues service, fails to pay his or her final
bill, and the utility service deposit is insufficient to cover the final bill,
the Municipality, after attempts to collect the past due amount, may turn the
past due amount over to a collection agency for collection. If a past consumer
who has an unpaid past due amount requests a new account for water, electric,
and/or sewer service, no new account may be opened until the past due amount is
paid in full, and the past consumer pays to the Municipality a new utility
service deposit in the amount of $500.00 for residential consumers and
$1,000.00 for commercial consumers. The Municipal Clerk shall follow the same
procedures contained in subsection (1) of this section with respect to
receipting for the service deposit and the depositing of funds.
   (3)   When for any reason, utility services are no longer required or
needed, said utility service deposit shall, upon demand, be returned to said
consumer, which proper deductions therefrom, if unpaid indebtedness due the
Municipality from past due accounts and depreciation on meter or meters
surrendered, caused by wilful negligence of the consumer in caring for such
meter, the amount to be deducted to such sum as fixed by the Public Works
Superintendent.
(Ref. 17-505,17-537 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 612, 9/21/11) (Amended by Ord. 677, 4/3/
24)
Article 9. Water Department
[Editor's Note: See §1-211 for provisions related to the Public Works
Superintendent.]
§ 3-901   MUNICIPAL WATER DEPARTMENT; DEFINITIONS.
   MAIN.
The term ''main'' is hereby defined to be any pipe other than a supply or
service pipe that is used for the purpose of carrying water to, and dispersing
the same in the Municipality.
   METER RATE.
The term "meter rate" as used in this Code is hereby defined to be the rate or
price to be charged for water based upon the quantity of water consumed on any
premise as measured by a water meter, or estimated where a meter has been taken
out for repair or not in working order, or for any other reason requiring an
estimate to be made.
   SERVICE PIPE.
The term ''service pipe'' is hereby defined to be any pipe extending from the
shut-off, stop box, or curb cock at or near the lot line to and beyond the
property line of the consumer to the location on the premise where the water is
to be dispersed.
   SUPPLY PIPE.
The term ''supply pipe'' is hereby defined to be any pipe tapped into a main
and extending from there to a point at or near the lot line of the consumer's
premise where the shut-off, stop box, or curb cock is located.
   WATER DEPARTMENT.
The term "water department" shall be deemed to include the property,
organization, and operation of the water supply system, water works, and every
part thereof.
§ 3-902   MUNICIPAL WATER DEPARTMENT; OWNERSHIP.
The Municipality owns the Municipal Water Department and operates the same
through the Superintendent of Water and Light. The Governing Body, for the
purpose of defraying the cost of the care, management, and maintenance of the
Municipal Water Department may each year levy a tax not exceeding the maximum
limit prescribed by State law, on the actual valuation of all real estate and
personal property within the corporate limits that is subject to taxation. The
revenue from the said tax shall remain in the custody of the Municipal
Treasurer. The Superintendent shall have the direct management and control of
the Municipal Water Department and shall faithfully carry out the duties of his
office. The Superintendent shall have the authority to adopt rules and
regulations for the sanitary and efficient management of the Water Department
subject to the supervision and review of the Governing Body. The Governing Body
shall set the rates to be charged for services rendered by ordinance. (Ref. 17-
531, 17-534, 19-1305 RS Neb.)
§ 3-903   MUNICIPAL WATER DEPARTMENT; CONSUMER'S APPLICATION.
Every person or persons desiring a supply of water must make application
therefor to the Municipal Clerk on forms to be furnished by the Municipality
for that purpose. The Municipal Clerk may require any applicant to make a
utility service deposit in an amount established in section 3-810. Water
service shall not be supplied to any house or private service pipe except upon
written order of the Public Works Superintendent. The Department shall not
supply water service to any person outside the corporate limits without special
permission from the Governing Body; provided, the entire cost of laying mains,
service pipe, and supply pipe shall be paid by the consumer. Nothing herein
shall be construed to obligate the Municipality to provide water service to
non-residents. (Ref. 17-505, 17-537 RS Neb.) (Amended by Ord. No. 612, 9/21/11)
§ 3-904   MUNICIPAL WATER DEPARTMENT; DEPOSIT FUND.
(Repealed by Ord. No. 612, 9/21/11)
§ 3-905   MUNICIPAL WATER DEPARTMENT; TAP FEE.
The applicant for new service from the water system shall accompany his
applications for water service with a tap fee of sufficient amount as
determined by the Superintendent, to compensate the Municipality for labor and
material sufficient to tap the main and run a supply pipe from the said main to
six (6') feet outside the consumer's property line, and shall include the
furnishing of a suitable meter pit. Upon receipt of the tap fee together with
any service deposit required, the Superintendent shall tap, or authorize the
tapping, of the commercial main at a point where applicant's service pipe will
be joined, and shall furnish and install at the expense of the Municipality
such labor and materials as the Governing Body and the Superintendent may deem
necessary. An applicant whose premise does not abut a street in which a
commercial main is laid, shall be supplied with service by connection with the
nearest commercial main; provided, that he shall, at his own expense, bring
said water service to his own premise from a point near the curb line on a
street in which said commercial main to be tapped is laid. (Amended by Ord. No.
332, 5/6/81)
§ 3-906   MUNICIPAL WATER DEPARTMENT; INSTALLATION PROCEDURE.
In making excavations in streets, alleys, or sidewalks for the purpose of
installing pipe, or making repairs, the paving, stones, and earth must be
removed and deposited in a manner that will occasion the least inconvenience to
the public and provide for adequate drainage. No person shall leave an
excavation made in the street, alley, or sidewalk open at any time without a
barricade, and during the night, warning lights. After service pipes are laid,
the streets, alleys, and sidewalks shall be restored to good condition. If the
excavation in any street, alley, or sidewalk is left open or unfinished for a
period of twenty-four (24) hours or more, the Superintendent shall have the
duty to finish or correct the work, and all expenses so incurred shall be
charged to the consumer. All installation shall be done under the supervision
and strictly in accordance with the rules, regulations, and specifications
prescribed for such installation by the Superintendent; provided that the said
rules, regulations, and specifications have been reviewed and approved by the
Governing Body. (Ref. 17-537 RS Neb.)
§ 3-907   MUNICIPAL WATER DEPARTMENT; INSTALLATION EXPENSE.
The expense of providing water service to within six (6') feet of the lot line
shall be paid by the Municipality. The consumer shall then pay the cost of
installation and pipe from the lot line to the place of dispersement. The cost
of the installation of the stop box and meter shall be paid by the consumer.
The consumer shall be required to pay the expense of procuring the services of
a licensed plumber and shall pay the expense of furnishing and installing pipe,
trenching, and the necessary labor to bring water service from the said lot
line to the place of dispersement. (Ref. 17-542 RS Neb.)
§ 3-908   MUNICIPAL WATER DEPARTMENT; UNAUTHORIZED TURNING ON.
It shall be unlawful for any person from whose premise the water has been shut
off for any reason to turn said water on or permit it to be turned on, without
the written consent of the Superintendent or his authorized agent.
§ 3-909   MUNICIPAL WATER DEPARTMENT; RECONNECTION FEE.
Whenever the water shall have been shut off from any premise for any reason,
the same shall not be turned on again until payment has been made of all past
due bills from said premise, and until the removal of the cause for which said
water was shut off, and until a reconnection fee as prescribed by section 3-
808.01 has been paid to the Municipal Clerk by the customer as a fee for
turning the water on again. (Amended by Ord. No. 624, 5/15/13)
§ 3-910   MUNICIPAL WATER DEPARTMENT; COMMERCIAL MAINS.
   No person, other than the Superintendent, or his authorized employees, shall
disturb, tap, change, obstruct, interfere with, or in any manner have access to
any of the commercial mains of the Water Department, except by special
authorization from the Superintendent.
§ 3-911   MUNICIPAL WATER DEPARTMENT; REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE.
All repairs to the service pipe, meters, or other appurtenances leading from
the shut-off to the meter shall be paid by the consumer. Maintenance of the
supply pipe and the main shall be the responsibility of the Municipality. All
other expenses shall be charged to the consumer. All meters set and installed
by the Municipality shall be kept in repair at the expense of the Municipality,
unless the same are damaged by the negligence or the willful conduct of the
consumer. When meters are no longer serviceable, they shall be replaced at the
expense of the Municipality. Meters heretofore owned by consumers shall be kept
in repair at the expense of the owner and shall be charged against him in the
same manner as water rent; provided, however, that any such owner may, by
written instrument, assign and transfer his meter to the Municipality, and
thereafter, such meter shall be kept in repair at the expense of the
Municipality and when unserviceable be replaced at the expense of the
Municipality. All testing and repair of meters shall be done by the
Municipality. Water meters may be tested at the expense of the Municipality any
reasonable number of times. In the event any water customer shall refuse to
permit the Superintendent or his authorized agent to inspect the meter upon his
premise, or to repair said meter or to replace a defective water meter with a
serviceable meter, the Superintendent shall discontinue water service to said
customer. (Ref. 17-537 RS Neb.)
§ 3-912   MUNICIPAL WATER DEPARTMENT; INSTALLATION OF METERS.
All meters and meter pits shall be installed and maintained strictly in the
manner and at the location prescribed by the Superintendent.
§ 3-913   MUNICIPAL WATER DEPARTMENT; METERS READ.
   All meters of consumers shall be read by the Superintendent, or his duly
authorized agent, between the twentieth (20th) day of the month during which
the water service is used and the first (1st) day of the month after the meters
are read and shall be payable monthly at the office of the Municipal Clerk.
Water bills are due and payable without any further notice to the consumer. The
Governing Body, when it deems it advisable, may order any water bill due and
payable at any time, and may proceed to collect the same. The Governing Body
may, in its discretion, order that any water bill be paid in advance of
service. In the event that service is discontinued after due notice to the
Superintendent, the consumer shall pay a pro rata amount of the minimum monthly
charge. If any meter fails to register correctly, the Superintendent, subject
to the review of the Governing Body, may set a fair and equitable charge based
upon the consumer's use in the same month of the previous year or in any other
equitable manner prescribed by the Governing Body.
§ 3-914   MUNICIPAL WATER DEPARTMENT; FEES AND COLLECTIONS.
   (1)   The Governing Body has the power and authority to fix the rates to be
paid by the water consumers for the use of water from the Water Department. No
flat rates shall be quoted or allowed. All water must be metered and charged
for at the metered rate. No water service shall be furnished to any consumer
inside the Municipality under any other rate than allowed by this section,
provided, that temporary users, including other branches or agencies of the
Municipality, or non-resident consumers, shall pay such rates as the Governing
Body shall establish herein. In the event that it becomes apparent that any
group of users, or any individual user, is being charged a rate that is unfair
either to the Municipality or to that consumer or group of consumers, the
Governing Body shall order the consumer or consumers, to pay such reasonable
sum as they may in each case fix. It shall be the duty of the Municipal Clerk
to keep, or cause to be kept, a separate, detailed and accurate account of all
water rents and charges received and due from each consumer in such bookkeeping
method as the Governing Body may prescribe.
   (2)   The following is hereby established as a tariff of water rates to be
paid by consumers within the corporate limits of the City based on a monthly
consumption.
      (a)   From January 1, 2015, through December 31, 2015:
         1.   Minimum Bill of $30.50.
         2.   All gallons used or consumed in any month, $1.65 per 1,000
gallons.
Provided, however, that in no event shall the minimum monthly rate be less than
$30.50 per month for each tap through which water is furnished. In the event
the service is discontinued after notice to the Public Works Superintendent,
the consumer shall pay the amount of the minimum monthly charge.
      (b)   From January 1, 2016, through December 31, 2016:
         1.   Minimum Bill of $31.75.
         2.   All gallons used or consumed in any month, $1.70 per 1,000
gallons.
Provided, however, that in no event shall the minimum monthly rate be less than
$31.75 per month for each tap through which water is furnished. In the event
the service is discontinued after notice to the Public Works Superintendent,
the consumer shall pay the amount of the minimum monthly charge.
      (c)   From January 1, 2017, through December 31, 2017:
         1.   Minimum Bill of $33.00.
         2.   All gallons used or consumed in any month, $1.80 per 1,000
gallons.
Provided, however, that in no event shall the minimum monthly rate be less than
$33.00 per month for each tap through which water is furnished. In the event
the service is discontinued after notice to the Public Works Superintendent,
the consumer shall pay the amount of the minimum monthly charge.
      (d)   From January 1, 2018, through December 31, 2018:
         1.   Minimum Bill of $34.25.
         2.   All gallons used or consumed in any month, $1.90 per 1,000
gallons.
Provided, however, that in no event shall the minimum monthly rate be less than
$34.25 per month for each tap through which water is furnished. In the event
the service is discontinued after notice to the Public Works Superintendent,
the consumer shall pay the amount of the minimum monthly charge.
   (3)   The following is hereby established as a tariff of water rates to be
paid by the Village of Barneston based on monthly consumption:
      (a)   From January 1, 2015, through December 31, 2015:
         1.   Minimum bill of $197.50.
         2.   All gallons used or consumed in any month, $1.09 per 1,000
gallons.
      (b)   From January 1, 2016, through December 31, 2016:
         1.   Minimum bill of $205.50.
         2.   All gallons used or consumed in any month, $1.09 per 1,000
gallons.
      (c)   From January 1, 2017, through December 31, 2017:
         1.   Minimum bill of $213.75.
         2.   All gallons used or consumed in any month, $1.09 per 1,000
gallons.
      (d)   From January 1, 2018, through December 31, 2018:
         1.   Minimum bill of $222.25.
         2.   All gallons used or consumed in any month, $1.09 per 1,000
gallons.
   (4)   The following is hereby established as a tariff of water rates to be
paid by the City of Blue Springs based on monthly consumption:
      (a)   From January 1, 2015, through December 31, 2015:
         1.   Minimum bill of $604.25.
         2.   All gallons used or consumed in any month, $1.09 per 1,000
gallons.
      (b)   From January 1, 2016, through December 31, 2016:
         1.   Minimum bill of $628.25.
         2.   All gallons used or consumed in any month, $ 1.09 per 1,000
gallons.
      (c)   From January 1, 2017, through December 31, 2017:
         1.   Minimum bill of $653.50.
         2.   All gallons used or consumed in any month, $1.09 per 1,000
gallons.
      (d)   From January 1, 2018, through December 31, 2018:
         1.   Minimum bill of $679.50.
         2.   All gallons used or consumed many month, $1.09 per 1,000 gallons.
   (5)   The following is hereby established as a tariff of water rates to be
paid by the Lower Big Blue Natural Resources District based on monthly
consumption:
      (a)   From January 1, 2015, through December 31, 2015:
         1.   Minimum bill of $682.25.
         2.   All gallons used or consumed in any month, $1.09 per 1,000
gallons.
      (b)   From January 1, 2016, through December 31, 2016:
         1.   Minimum bill of $709.50.
         2.   All gallons used or consumed in any month, $ 1.09 per 1,000
gallons.
      (c)   From January 1, 2017, through December 31, 2017:
         1.   Minimum bill of $738.00.
         2.   All gallons used or consumed in any month, $1.09 per 1,000
gallons.
      (d)   From January 1, 2018, through December 31, 2018:
         1.   Minimum bill of $767.50.
         2.   All gallons used or consumed in any month, $1.09 per 1,000
gallons.
(Amended by Ord. Nos. 269, 12/15/76; 318, 10/3/79; 347, 2/3/82; 418, 5/21/86;
447, 9/5/90; 471, 3/17/93; 510, 10/16/96; 568, 7/21/04; 595, 10/15/08; 628, 11/
6/13; 636, 12/17/14)
§ 3-915   MUNICIPAL WATER DEPARTMENT; MINIMUM RATES.
All water consumers shall be liable for the minimum rate provided in section 3-
914 of this Article unless and until the consumer shall, by written order,
direct the Superintendent to shut off the water at the stop box, in which case
he shall not be liable thereafter for water rental until the water is turned on
again. (Ref. 17-542 RS Neb.)
§ 3-916   MUNICIPAL WATER DEPARTMENT; DELINQUENT PAYMENTS.
Water fees shall be due and payable monthly at the office of the Municipal
Clerk. If the said fees are not paid within eighteen (18) days after the same
become due, the water will be turned off after seven (7) days written notice by
mail to the customer and not turned on again until all past due payments and
charges are paid, including any penalty charge which the Governing Body may, by
ordinance, prescribe.(Ref. 17-543 RS Neb.) (Amended by Ord. No. 624, 5/15/13)
§ 3-917   MUNICIPAL WATER DEPARTMENT; LIENS.
The Municipality may refuse to furnish water service to the occupants of any
premise against which the Municipality holds a lien for water rent.
Superintendent shall notify in writing, or cause to be notified in writing,
non-occupying owners of premises, or their agents, whenever their tenants or
lessees are a quarter delinquent in the payment of water rent. It shall be the
duty of the Superintendent, on the first (1st) day of June of each year or at
any other time, when he shall deem it necessary, or when ordered by the
Governing Body to report all unpaid accounts due for water which are three (3)
months or more past due, together with a description of the premises or real
estate upon or for which the same was used or supplied. Said report shall be
examined and, if approved by the Governing Body, the Governing Body shall pass
a resolution levying said delinquent water rentals as special assessments
against said real estate, and the amount so assessed shall be certified by the
Municipal Clerk to the County Clerk of Gage County, Nebraska, giving the amount
due and a description of the premises or real estate upon or for which water
from the Water Department was used or supplied, the same to be collected as
other taxes by the County Treasurer of Gage County, Nebraska.
§ 3-918   MUNICIPAL WATER DEPARTMENT; SINGLE PREMISE.
No consumer shall supply water to other families, or allow them to take water
from his premise, nor after water is supplied into a building shall any person
make or employ a plumber or other person to make a tap or connection with the
pipe upon the premise for alteration, extension, or attachment without the
written permission of the Superintendent.  (Ref. 17-537 RS Neb.)
§ 3-919   MUNICIPAL WATER DEPARTMENT; RESTRICTED USE.
The Governing Body or the Superintendent may order a reduction in the use of
water or shut off the water on any premise in the event of a water shortage due
to fire or other good and sufficient cause. The Municipality shall not be
liable for any damages caused by shutting off the supply of water of any
consumer while the system or any part thereof is undergoing repairs or when
there is a shortage of water due to circumstances over which the Municipality
has no control. (Ref. 17-537 RS Neb.)
§ 3-920   MUNICIPAL WATER DEPARTMENT; FIRE HYDRANTS.
All hydrants for the purpose of extinguishing fires are hereby declared to be
public hydrants, and it shall be unlawful for any person other than members of
the Municipal Fire Department under the orders of the Fire Chief, or the
Assistant Fire Chief; or members of the Water Department to open or attempt to
open any of the hydrants and draw water from the same, or in any manner to
interfere with the hydrants.
§ 3-921   MUNICIPAL WATER DEPARTMENT; POLLUTION.
It shall be unlawful for any person to pollute or attempt to pollute any stream
or source of water for the supply of the Municipal Water Department. (Ref. 17-
536 RS Neb.)
§ 3-922   MUNICIPAL WATER DEPARTMENT; WATER SERVICE CONTRACTS.
Contracts for water service are not transferable. Any person wishing to change
from one location to another shall make a new application and sign a new
contract. If any consumer shall sell, dispose, or remove from the premise where
service is furnished, or if the said premise is destroyed by fire or other
casualty, he shall at once inform the Superintendent who shall cause the water
service to be shut off at the said premise. If the consumer should fail to give
such notice, he shall be charged for all water used on the said premise until
the Superintendent is otherwise advised of such circumstances. All provisions
of this Article concerning the Water Department and all Water Department
regulations made pursuant thereto shall be considered a part of the contract
with every person who is supplied with water through the Water Department and
every such person shall be considered to be bound thereby as they now exist or
may hereafter be amended. (Ref. 17-537 RS Neb.)
§ 3-923   MUNICIPAL WATER DEPARTMENT; INSPECTION.
The Superintendent, or his duly authorized agents, shall have free access,
between seven (7:00) o'clock A.M. and six (6:00) o'clock P.M., to all parts of
each premise and building to, or in which, water is delivered for the purpose
of examining the pipes, fixtures, and other portions of the system to ascertain
whether there is any disrepair or unnecessary waste of water. The customer must
at all times, frankly and without concealment, answer all questions relative to
the consumption of water. The Superintendent may, in his discretion,
discontinue water service to the premise f any customer who may refuse to
permit the Superintendent or his duly authorized agents to carry out the duties
of their position, or to be otherwise uncooperative. (Ref. 17-537 RS Neb.)
§ 3-924   MUNICIPAL WATER DEPARTMENT; POLICE REPORTS.
It shall be the duty of the Municipal Police to report to the Superintendent
all cases of leakage and waste in the use of water and all violations of the
Municipal Code relating to the Water Department. They shall have the additional
duty of enforcing the observance of all such regulations.
§ 3-925   MUNICIPAL WATER DEPARTMENT; WASTED WATER.
Consumers shall prevent unnecessary waste of water and shall be required to
keep all hydrants, faucets, valves, and all necessary appurtenances, in good
condition at their own expense. All waterways shall be closed when not in use.
There will be a charge for all water correctly registered, whether wasted or
not.
§ 3-926   MUNICIPAL WATER DEPARTMENT; FIRE PREVENTION.
Any consumers of water, wishing to lay large pipes with fire hydrants and hose
couplings to be used only in case of fire, will be permitted to connect with
the street mains at their own expense, upon application to the Superintendent.
Under his direction, they shall be allowed the use of water free of charge for
fire purposes only. Such installations shall be maintained at the expense of
the consumer.
[Editor's Note: Sections 3-927 through 3-938 of Chapter 3, Article 9 were
adopted in their entirety by Ordinance No. 450 passed on November 21, 1990]
BACKFLOW AND BACKSIPHONAGE PREVENTION
§ 3-927   GENERAL.
(1)   Definitions. The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation
and enforcement of this ordinance.
(a)   "Air-gap separation" means the unobstructed vertical distance through the
free atmosphere between the lowest opening of any pipe or faucet supplying
water to a tank, plumbing fixture, or other device and the flood level rim of
the said receptacle. An approved air-gap shall be at least double the diameter
of the supply pipe, measured vertically, above the top of the rim of the
receptacle and, in no case less than one inch.
(b)   "Antisiphon vacuum breaker" is a device which restricts the backflow of
water into a potable water system by a simple check valve. The vacuum is broken
by allowing air to enter upstream of the check valve.
(c)   "Approved" means that a backflow prevention device or method have been
accepted by the Manager as being suitable for the intended use.
(d)   "Auxiliary water system" means any water supply system available to the
premises other than the public water supply system and includes the water
supplied by such system. These auxiliary water systems may include water from
another owner's public water supply system; polluted or contaminated water,
process fluids; used water; or other sources of water which the owner of the
public water supply system does not have sanitary control.
(e)   "Backflow" or "backsiphonage" means the flow of water or other liquids,
mixtures, or substances into the water distribution system from any other
source than the intended source of the potable water supply.
(f)   "Backflow prevention device" means any device, method or type of
construction intended to prevent backflow into a potable water system. Devices
such as an "Approved Air-gap," "Double Check Valve Assembly," "Antisiphon
Vacuum Breaker" or a "Reduced Pressure Principle Devices" can be used which
have been approved by the Manager.
(g)   "Consumer means the owner or person in control of any premises supplied
by or in any manner connected to a public water supply system.
(h)   "Consumers water supply system" mean any water supply system, located on
the consumer's premises, supplied by or in any manner connected to a public
water supply system. A household plumbing system is considered to be a
consumer's water supply system. A fire suppression system is also considered a
consumer's water supply system.
(i)   "Contamination" means an impairment of the quality of the water by
sewage, or waste to a degree which could cause an actual hazard to the public
health through poisoning or through spread of disease by exposure.
(j)   "Cross-connection" means any arrangement whereby contamination due to
backflow or backsiphonage can occur.
(k)   "Degree of hazard" is a term derived from an evaluation of the potential
risk to health and the adverse effects upon the potable water system.
(l)   "Double check valve assembly" means an assembly composed of two single,
independently acting, check valves including one hundred percent closing
shutoff ball valves located at each end of the assembly and suitable
connections for testing the water-tightness of each check valve.
(m)   "Health hazard" means any condition, device, or practice in a water
system or its operation that creates, a real or potential danger to the health
and well being of the consumer.
(n)   "Interchangeable connection" means an arrangement or device that will
allow alternate but not simultaneous uses of two sources of water.
(o)   "Licensed plumber" means a person which has obtained the appropriate
license from the Mayor and Council to perform plumbing related work within the
City of Wymore.
(p)   "Non-potable water" means water not safe for drinking, personal, or
culinary use, or which does not meet the requirements of the Nebraska
Department of Health.
(r)   "Owner" means the person delivering water through a public water supply
system. The owner is City of Wymore operating through the Board of Public
Works.
(s)   "Person" means the state, any political subdivision, public or private
corporation, individual, partnership, or other legal entity. When the term he,
or his is used, it shall mean any male or female person.
(t)   "Plumbing hazard" means a plumbing type cross-connection in a consumer's
potable water system that has not been properly protected by air-gap separation
or backflow prevention devices.
(u)   "Pollution" means the presence in water of any foreign substance
(organic, inorganic, or biological) that degrades the quality of water to a
degree which does not necessarily cause an actual hazard to the public health
but which does adversely and unreasonably affect such waters for any desired
use.
(v)   "Pollution hazard" means a condition through which an aesthetically
objectionable or degrading material not dangerous to health may enter the
public water supply system or the consumer's water supply system.
(w)   "Potable water' means water which is satisfactory for drinking, culinary,
and domestic purposes and meets the requirements of the Nebraska Department of
Health.
(x)   "Public water supply system" means a water supply system designed and
intended to provide potable water to a designated consumer. The water supply
shall include the water supply source and distribution piping network. The
water supply source is defined as any artificial or natural accumulation of
water used to supply the potable water system. The distribution piping network
includes all piping, pumping and treatment devices used to convey an adequate
quality and quantity of potable water to the consumer.
(y)   "Reduced pressure zone backflow prevention device" means a device
containing a minimum of two independently acting check valves together with an
automatically operated pressure differential relief valve located between two
check valves. During normal flow and at the cessation of normal flow, the
pressure between these two checks shall be less than the supply pressure. In
case of leakage of either check valve, the differential relief valve, by
discharging to the atmosphere, shall operate to maintain the pressure between
the check valves at less than the supply pressure. The unit must include one
hundred percent closing shutoff ball valves located at each end of the device,
and each device shall befitted with properly located test cocks.
      (z)   "Service connection" means the terminal end of a service line from
the public water system. If a meter is installed at the end of the service,
then the service connection means the downstream end of the meter.
      (aa)   "System hazard" means a condition posing an actual or potential
threat of damage to the physical properties of the public's or the consumer's
water supply system.
      (bb)   "Used water" means any water supplied by the public water supply
system to a consumer's water supply system after it has passed through the
service connection and is no longer under the sanitary control of the water
supplier.
   (2)   Responsibility. The consumer as defined in these regulations, if
requested by the Manager shall designate an individual or individuals, who
shall be responsible for contact and communications with the Manager in matters
relating to system alteration and construction, monitoring and sampling,
maintenance, operation, record keeping, and reporting, as required by law and
these regulations. Any change in assigned responsibilities or designated
individuals shall be promptly reported to the Manager.
   (3)   Title. Wymore City Code Chapter 3, Article 9, Sections 3-927 through
3-938, and any amendments thereto, shall be known as the backflow prevention
ordinance.
§ 3-928   POLICY AND PURPOSE.
(1)   The purpose of sections3-927 through 3-938 is to protect the public water
supply system of the City of Wymore from the possibility of contamination by
isolating real or potential sources of contamination or pollution which may
backflow into the public water supply system. Sections 3-927 through 3-938
provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross-connection control
which will systematically and effectively prevent the contamination or
pollution of the potable water supply system.
(2)   The Manager shall be responsible for the implementation of the backflow
prevention program as outlined within sections 3-927 through 3-938. If in the
judgment of the Manager, an approved backflow prevention device is required for
the safety of the public water supply system then the Manager shall give notice
in writing to the consumer to install said device at each recommended location.
The Manager shall inspect and approve all installations of the required
backflow prevention devices. The costs for purchasing, installing, and
maintaining a backflow prevention device shall be the responsibility and sole
expense of the consumer. The installation of backflow prevention devices,
except for outlet fixture vacuum breakers, shall be by a licensed plumber.
Annual testing of all testable devices shall be performed by a Department of
Health and Human Services grade VI certified operator. If maintenance or
repairs are necessary, the consumer shall be contacted and issued an order to
make all necessary repairs or maintenance. The consumer shall complete all
maintenance or repairs within thirty (30) days. If the consumer fails to
complete all maintenance or repairs within thirty (30) days, the consumer shall
be considered in violation of the backflow ordinance and will be subject to
disconnection of service as provided in section 3-936.
(3)   No person shall install or maintain a water service connection,
containing cross-connections to a public water supply system or a consumer's
potable water supply system unless such cross-connections are abated or
controlled in accordance with sections 3-927 through 3-928 and as required by
the laws and regulations of the Nebraska Department of Health.
(4)   For the purposes of sections 3-927 through 3-938, whenever the Manager is
to make any decision or interpretation, or whenever reference is made to the
fact that the Manager is to exercise judgment, such decision, interpretation or
judgment shall be in accordance with the provisions of sections 3-927 through
3-938, and any other applicable provisions of the Wymore Municipal Code, and
state and federal law.
(Amended by Ord. No. 555, 8/7/02)
§ 3-929   SURVEYS AND INVESTIGATIONS.
(1)   It shall be the responsibility of the water consumer to conduct or cause
to be conducted, periodic survey of water use practices on his premises as
necessary to determine whether there are actual or potential cross-connections
in the consumer's water supply system. The Manager shall have the authority to
conduct or cause to be conducted periodic surveys and investigations, of a
frequency as determined by the Manager, of water use practices within a
consumer's premises to determine whether there are actual of potential cross-
connections to the consumer's water supply system through which contaminants or
pollutants could backflow into the public water supply system.
The Manager may conduct these surveys to provide information in determining
what level of protection will be necessary to protect the public health and
safety.
(2)   On request by the Manager the consumer shall furnish the Manager
information on water use practices within the consumer's premises. If the
consumer refuses to submit the proper information or to cooperate in obtaining
the proper information, the Manager shall treat the premises as if no
appropriate cross-connection survey has been completed, and in such event the
consumer shall be required to install an approved backflow prevention device as
required to section 3-930.
(3)   The Manager shall have the right to enter a premises served by the public
water supply system at all reasonable times for the purpose of making surveys
and investigations of water use practices within the premises. In order to
inspect a premise, the Manager shall give notice setting forth a proposed date
and time to the consumer at least ten (10) days in advance. If the consumer
cannot make the premises available for inspection at the proposed ate and time,
the consumer shall contact the Manager and arrange for another date and time
for the inspection. If the Manager and the consumer cannot agree on a date and
time, then the Manger shall treat the premises as if not appropriate cross-
connection survey has been completed, and in such event the consumer shall be
required to install an approved backflow prevention device as required to
section 3-930.
(4)   The Board of Public Works is hereby appointed as a Hearing Board to hear
differences between the Manager and the consumer on matters concerning
interpretation and execution of the provisions of this ordinance by the
Manager. Any consumer aggrieved by being required to pay the expense of
installing, furnishing, and/or maintaining a backflow prevention device may,
within fourteen (14) days of the act or event causing the grievance, request a
hearing in writing to present those grievances to the Hearing Board. The
Hearing Board shall schedule the matter for hearing within thirty (30) days,
and provide written notice of the meeting by first class mail to the consumer.
The notice shall be mailed to the consumer at least seven (7) days and not more
than twenty-one (21) days before the hearing. At the hearing the consumer shall
first state the nature of the grievance, and the Manager shall be entitled to
respond thereto, whereupon the Hearing Board shall render its decision which
will be binding upon the consumer and the Manager.
§ 3-930   WHERE PROTECTION IS REQUIRED.
(1)   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed between the
service connection and the point of potential backflow into a consumer's water
supply system when in the judgment of the Manager, a health, plumbing,
pollution of system hazard exists.
(2)   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed when the
following conditions are found by the Manager to exist:
(a)   Premises on which any substance is handled in such a fashion as to create
an actual or potential hazard to a public water supply system. This shall
include premises having sources or systems containing process fluids or waters
originating from a public water supply system which are no longer under the
sanitary control of the owner;
(b)   Premises having internal cross-connections that, in the judgment of the
Manager, are not correctable, or there exist intricate plumbing arrangements
which make it impracticable to determine whether or not cross-connections
exists;
(c)   Premises where, because of security requirements or other prohibitions or
restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a complete cross-
connection survey;
(d)   Premises having a repeated history of cross-connections being established
or re-established;
(e)   Premises having more than one customer service connection which could
constitute a potential cross-connection.
(3)   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each service
line to a customer's water supply system serving the following types of
facilities unless the Manager determines that no health, pollution, or system
hazard to the public water supply system exists:
(a)   Hospitals, mortuaries, dental clinics, nursing and convalescent homes,
medical buildings;
(b)   Testings laboratories, film laboratories, film development facilities;
(c)   Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations, or storm water pumping
stations;
(d)   Food or beverage processing plants;
(e)   Chemical plants;
(f)   Metal de-greasing, plating industries, machine tool plants, dye and metal
processing or productions;
(g)   Chemical and petroleum processing or storage plants;
(h)   Car washes, automobile servicing facilities;
(i)   Lawn irrigation systems and swimming pools;
(j)   Laundries and dry cleaners;
(k)   Packing houses;
(l)   Power Plants;
(m)   Premises having radioactive materials such as laboratories, industries,
hospitals;
(n)   Rendering plants;
(o)   Premises having water recirculating system as used for boilers or cooling
systems;
(p)   Veterinary establishments, kennels, feedyards, stables, rodeo grounds,
stockyards, pet grooming salons;
(q)   Beauty salons, barbershops, massage parlors, health clubs;
(r)   Fire suppression systems;
(s)   Multi-storied buildings greater than three (3) stories in height;
(t)   Schools, universities, colleges;
(u)   Other commercial or industrial facilities which may constitute potential
cross-connection.
§ 3-931   TYPE OF PROTECTION REQUIRED.
(1)   The type of protection required under Sections 3-930(1) and 3-930(2) of
this Article shall depend on the degree of hazard that exists as follows:
(a)   An approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle
backflow prevention device shall be installed where a public water supply
system may be contaminated with any substance that could cause a system hazard
or health hazard;
(b)   An approved double check valve assembly shall be installed where a public
water supply system may be contaminated with any substance that could cause a
pollution hazard;
(c)   An approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall
be installed at the service connection where there exists a plumbing hazard;
(d)   In the case of any premises where, because of security requirements or
other prohibitions it is impossible or impractical to make a complete cross-
connection survey of the consumers potable water system, a reduced pressure
principle backflow prevention device shall be installed at the service
connection.
(2)   An approved antisiphon vacuum breaker may be used as a backflow
prevention device where it is not subjected to back pressures. This device
shall not be used for applications where water flow is expected to be
continuous for 12 or more hours. The device shall be installed ahead of the
potential source of contamination on the discharge side of the last control
valve. It shall be place at least 18" above the highest point reached by any
water passing through the potential source of contamination. Typically this
type of device is used for such equipment as lawn sprinklers, water-cooled
compressors, or other water-cooled equipment.
§ 3-932   BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES.
(1)   Any approved backflow prevention device required by section 3-930 shall
be installed at a location and in a manner approved by the Manager. The
consumer, at his sole expense, shall obtain and install said approved backflow
prevention device(s) within 90 days of notice and as directed by the Manager.
(2)   Existing backflow prevention devices approved by the Manager prior to the
effective date of this rule and which are properly maintained shall, except for
inspection, testing, and maintenance requirements, be excluded from the
requirements of section 3-932(1) but only if the Manager determines that the
devices will satisfactorily protect the public water supply system. One hundred
percent closing shut off ball valves for testing shall be provided on existing
backflow prevention devices, if deemed necessary for proper testing by the
Manager. If deemed necessary by the Manager that an existing backflow
prevention device requires replacement, it shall be replaced with an approved
backflow prevention device.
§ 3-933   BOOSTER PUMPS.
(1)   No person shall install or maintain a water services connection to any
premises where a booster pump has been installed on the service line to or
within such premises, unless such booster pump is equipped with a low pressure
cut-off designed to shut-off the booster pump when the pressure in the service
line on the suction side of the pump drops to twenty (20) pounds per square
inch gauge or less.
(2)   It shall be the duty of the water customer to maintain the low pressure
cut-off device in proper working order.
§ 3-934   YARD HYDRANTS.
(1)   The installation of yard hydrants where water is available or accessible
for drinking or culinary purposes and which have drip openings below ground
surface, is prohibited unless such hydrants are equipped with an approved
device to prevent entrance of ground water into chambers connected with the
water supply.
(2)   Yard hydrants or hose bibs which would be used by the consumer to provide
water to mix pesticides, fertilizer, or other chemicals, for direct use or
aerial application to surface areas shall be equipped with an antisiphon vacuum
breaker.
(3)   All underground lawn and garden sprinkler systems shall be equipped with
an approved backflow prevention device.
§ 3-935   FIRE SUPPRESSION SYSTEM.
(1)   All proposed installations of fire suppression systems shall be reviewed
by the Manager to determine the appropriate type of backflow prevention device
(s) required.
(2)   All proposed fire suppression systems requiring an antifreeze solution
shall use a pharmaceutical grade antifreeze. The Consumer shall provide to the
Manager a certification identifying the type of pharmaceutical grade antifreeze
which shall be used. A double check valve backflow prevention device shall be
installed in an approved manner.
(3)   A double check valve of an approved type shall be installed on all
proposed fire suppression systems not utilizing antifreeze, but this may be
done only when there are no other cross-connections.
(4)   All existing fire suppression systems shall meet the requirements of
Subsections (2) or (3) above, whichever applies. An inspection by a certified
fire suppression specialist shall be done to determine whether pharmaceutical
grade antifreeze(s) have been utilized. This shall be done at the expense of
the consumer. If it cannot be certified that only pharmaceutical grade
antifreezes have been used, then a reduced pressure principle backflow
prevention device shall be installed as approved by the Manager. This also
shall be done at the expense of the consumer.
(5)   In the event cross-connections, such as those found in using auxiliary
water supply systems or in providing other water additives such as foaming
agents are necessary for the proper operation of the fire suppression system,
then a reduced pressure zone backflow prevention device shall be installed in
an approved manner.
§ 3-936   VIOLATIONS.
(1)   The Manager shall deny or discontinue, after notice to the consumer
thereof, the water service to any premises wherein:
(a)   Any backflow prevention device required by these regulations is not
installed or maintained in a manner acceptable to the Manager;
(b)   It is found that the backflow prevention device has been removed or by-
passed;
(c)   An unprotected cross-connection exists on the premises;
(d)   A low pressure cut-off required by section 3-933 is not installed and
maintained in working order; or
(e)   The Manager is denied entry to determine compliance with these
regulations.
(2)   The Manager shall immediately deny or discontinue, without notice to the
consumer thereof, the water service to any premises wherein a severe cross-
connection exists which constitutes an immediate threat to the safety of the
public water system. The Manager shall notify the consumer within twenty-four
(24) hours of said denial or discontinuation of service.
(3)   Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the consumer
has corrected or eliminated such conditions or defects in conformance with
these regulations, and to the satisfaction of the Manager.
§ 3-937   APPROVAL STANDARDS.
(1)   Any backflow prevention device required herein shall be of a model and
size approved by the Manager. The term "Approved Backflow Prevention Device"
shall mean a device that has been manufactured in full conformance with the
standards established by the American Water Works Associations (AWWA) entitled:
AWWA C506-698 Standards for Reduced Pressure Principle and Double Check Valve
Backflow Prevention Devices and by the American Society of Sanitary Engineers
(ASSE) entitled:
No. 1001   Pipe Applied Atmospheric Type Vacuum Breakers - ANSI Approved-1982-
Revised, 1988
No. 1011   Hose Connection Vacuum Breakers -ANSI Approved 1982
No. 1012   Backflow Preventer/Intermediate Atmospheric Vent-1978
No. 1013   Reduced Pressure Principle Backflow Preventer-Revised 1988
No. 1015   Double Check Backflow Prevention Assembly-Revised 1988
No. 1019   Wall Hydrants, Freezeless, Automatic Draining, Anti-Backflow Types-
ANSI Approved 1978
No. 1020   Vacuum Breakers, Anti-siphon, Pressure Type-ANSI Approved 1982
No. 1024   Dual Check Valve Type Backflow Preventers-ANSI Approved 1984-Revised
1988
No. 1032   Dual Check Valve Type Backflow Preventer for Carbonated Beverage
Dispensers-1980
No. 1035   Laboratory Faucet Vacuum Breakers-Approved 1984
No. 1048   Double Check Detector Assembly Backflow Preventer-1989
   Said standards and specifications have been adopted by the Manager. Final
approval shall be evidenced by a "Certificate of Approval" issued by an
approved testing laboratory certifying full compliance with said standard and
specifications.
(2)   The Manager shall keep a current list of all certified suppliers and
their appropriate list of makes and models of backflow prevention devices which
the Manager has deemed approved.
(3)   The Manager may require a strainer of approved type and size to be
installed in conjunction with required backflow prevention devices. The
installation of strainers shall preclude the fouling of backflow device(s) due
to foreseen and unforeseen circumstances occurring to the water supply system
such as water main repairs, water main breaks, fires, periodic cleaning and
flushing of mains. These occurrences may cause debris such as scale deposits
and sand to flush through the mains causing fouling of backflow device(s).
§ 3-938   LIABILITY CLAIMS.
The Manager shall be relieved from personal liability. The City shall hold
harmless the Manager when acting in good faith and without malice, from all
personal liability for any damage that may occur to any person or property as a
result of any act required or authorized by this title, or by reason of any act
or omission of the Manager in the discharge of his duties hereunder. Any suit
brought carrying out the provisions of the title shall be defended by the City,
or the City's insurance carrier, if any, through final determination of such
proceeding.
§ 3-939   MUNICIPAL WATER DEPARTMENT; WELL-HEAD PROTECTION; PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of section 3-940 to establish control by the City over the
location of future potential soures of contamination within the proximity of
any Municipal water well so as to prevent or minimize contamination or threat
of contamination to the Municipal water supply system. (Ref. 17-505 RS Neb.)
(Ord. No. 554, 8/7/02)
§ 3-940   MUNICIPAL WATER DEPARTMENT; WELL-HEAD PROTECTION; RESTRICTIONS OF
USES IN PROXIMITY OF MUNICIPAL WATER WELLS.
   No person shall establish or operate any of the following described
facilities within the indicated number of feet from any Municipal water well:
FACILITY   DISTANCE
Non-potable water well   1,000 feet
Any other well   1,000 feet
Sewage lagoon   1,000 feet
Absorption or disposal field for waste   500 feet
Cesspool   500 feet
Dump   500 feet
Feedlot or feedlot runoff   500 feet
Corral   500 feet
Pit toilet   500 feet
Sanitary landfill   500 feet
Chemical or petroleum product storage   500 feet
Septic tank   500 feet
Sewage treatment plant   500 feet
Sewage wet well   500 feet
Sanitary sewer connection   100 feet
Sanitary sewer manhole   100 feet
Sanitary sewer line   50 feet
Sanitary sewer line (permanently water tight)   10 feet
(Ref. 17-505 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 554, 8/7/02)
§ 3-941   MUNICIPAL WATER DEPARTMENT; WELL-HEAD PROTECTION; VIOLATION;
ABATEMENT.
   Any person, corporation, or other legal entity who violates section 3-940
shall be guilty of an offense. In addition, the Municipality may obtain
injunctive relief, sue for damages and remediation, and pursue any other remedy
available to it under the laws of the State of Nebraska or other authority
having jurisdiction over such matters. (Ref. 17-505 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 554, 8/
7/02)
Article 10. Sewer Department
[Editor's Note: See §1-211 for provisions related to the Public Works
Superintendent.]
§ 3-1001   MUNICIPAL SEWER DEPARTMENT; OWNERSHIP.
   The Municipality owns the Municipal Sewer System and operates the same
through the Superintendent of Water and Light. The Governing Body, for the
purpose of defraying the cost of the management and maintenance of the
Municipal Sewer System may each year levy a tax not exceeding the maximum limit
prescribed by State law on the actual valuation of all real estate and personal
property within the corporate limits that is subject to taxation. The official
in charge of sewers shall have the direct management and control of the Sewer
Department and shall faithfully carry out the duties of his office. The chief
sewer official shall have the authority to adopt rules and regulations for the
sanitary and efficient management of the Department subject to the supervision
and review of the Governing Body. (Ref. 17-149, 17-925.01 RS Neb.)
§ 3-1002   MUNICIPAL SEWER DEPARTMENT; APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
Any person desiring to connect with the Municipal Sewer System shall make an
application therefore to the Municipal Clerk on forms to be furnished by the
Municipality for that purpose. The Municipal Clerk shall require any applicant
to make a utility service deposit in an amount established by the Governing
Body in section 3-810. Sewer service shall not be supplied to any house or
building except upon the written order of the Public Works Superintendent. The
Department shall not supply sewer service to any person outside the corporate
limits without special permission from the Governing Body; provided, the entire
cost of pipe and other installation charges shall be paid by such consumer.
Nothing herein shall be construed to obligate the Municipality to provide sewer
service to non-residents. (Ref. 17-149 RS Neb.) (Amended by Ord. No. 612, 9/21/
11)
§ 3-1003   MUNICIPAL SEWER DEPARTMENT; PRIVY VAULT.
(Repealed by Ord. No. 504, 12/6/95)
§ 3-1004   MUNICIPAL SEWER DEPARTMENT; LICENSED PLUMBER.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to engage in or
conduct the business of sewer connection and house drainage, excavate any
trenches for sewer pipe, open, uncover, or in any manner make connection with
or lay any sewer drain, or attach to, modify, or repair any appurtenances
thereto without holding a Municipal Plumber's License and without complying
with the rules and regulations of the chief sewer official; provided, that
nothing herein shall be construed to apply to persons, firms, or corporations
under special contract with the Municipality for the construction, extension,
or repair of the Municipal Sewer System.
§ 3-1005   MUNICIPAL SEWER DEPARTMENT; PLUMBER'S LIABILITY.
The licensed plumber or drainlayer who connects with the public sewer shall be
held responsible for any damage he may cause to the sewers or the public ways
and property. He shall restore to the complete satisfaction of the chief sewer
official all property that he has excavated and make good any settlement of the
ground or pavement caused by his excavations within the subsequent six (6)
month period.
§ 3-1006   MUNICIPAL SEWER DEPARTMENT; PERMITS.
No excavation for sewer pipe, or work in connection with such pipes,
attachments, appurtenances, connections, or modifications shall be done by any
licensed plumber or corporation without a permit which shall be obtained from
the Superintendent of Water and Light. All special permits for doing sewer work
shall be given only after application has been made in writing on blanks
furnished by the Superintendent. Such application shall show the exact location
of the proposed connections, and appurtenances thereto. A record shall be kept
by each plumber covering full details of such work, and a return shall be filed
with the Superintendent on the first (1st) of each month of all such work
completed during the previous month. Willful violations of the provisions of
this Article shall be cause for the suspension of the license of the offender.
It shall further be unlawful for any plumber to allow his name to be used by
any other person to obtain a permit, or to do any work under his bond, and upon
the violations of this provision, the Governing Body shall revoke the license
of such offending plumber. Should any plumber in good standing procure, or
attempt to procure a tap or permit for the benefit of any suspended plumber, or
one whose license has been revoked, the license of each such plumber shall also
be revoked.
§ 3-1007   MUNICIPAL SEWER DEPARTMENT; INSPECTION.
(Repealed by Ord. No. 504, 12/6/95)
§ 3-1008   MUNICIPAL SEWER DEPARTMENT; INSTALLATION PROCEDURE.
(Repealed by Ord. No. 504, 12/6/95)
§ 3-1009   MUNICIPAL SEWER DEPARTMENT; INSTALLATION EXPENSE.
(Repealed by Ord. No. 504, 12/6/95)
§ 3-1010   MUNICIPAL SEWER SYSTEM; REPAIRS AND REPLACEMENT.
The Municipal Sewer Department may require the owner of any property which is
within the Municipality and connected to the public sewers or drains to repair
or replace any connection line which serves the owner's property and is broken,
clogged or otherwise in need of repair or replacement. The property owner's
duty to repair or replace such a connection line shall include those portions
upon the owner's property and those portions upon public property or easements
up to and including the point of junction with the public main.
   The Municipal Clerk shall give the property owner notice by registered
letter or certified mail, directed to the last-known address of such owner or
the agent of such owner, directing the repair or replacement of such connection
line. If within thirty (30) days of mailing such notice the property owner
fails or neglects to cause such repairs or replacements to be made, the
Superintendent of Light and Water may cause such work to be done and assess the
cost upon the property served by such connection. (Ref. 18-1748 RS Neb.)
(Amended by Ord. No. 388, 9/19/84)
§ 3-1011   MUNICIPAL SEWER DEPARTMENT; FEES AND COLLECTIONS.
(Repealed by Ord. No. 650, 2/21/18)
§ 3-1011.01   MUNICIPAL SEWER DEPARTMENT; SERVICE CHARGE; COLLECTION; WHEN
DELINQUENT; LIEN.
Each user connected to the Municipal Sanitary Sewer System shall pay a service
charge of twenty-nine dollars and fifty cents ($29.50) per month effective with
the billing to be sent to customers April 1, 2018. The service charge shall be
collected at the same time and in the same manner and by the same officers as
water charges are collected. If the said service charge is not paid within the
same time in which the water service charge for the same customer is required
to be paid, then the sewer service charge prescribed by this section shall be
deemed delinquent, and the sewer service of such customer shall be discontinued
until the delinquent charge is paid. All service charges prescribed by this
section shall be a lien against the real estate for which the sewer service is
supplied and used, and if not paid when due, such charges may be certified by
the Municipal Clerk and may be recovered by the Municipality in an action at
law, or a lien may be filed against the property served at the Gage County
Register of Deeds. All monies collected from sewer service charges shall be
placed in the "Sewer Fund" and shall be used for the purpose of paying the cost
of operation and maintenance of the existing sewer system; the cost of levying,
collecting and administering said service charges; for paying the principal and
interest of sewer bonds issued as provided by law; and to create a reserve fund
for future maintenance or construction of a new sewage system and disposal
plant for the Municipality.
(Amended by Ord. Nos. 319, 10/3/79; 408, 5/21/86; 449, 9/5/90; 477, 8/18/93;
485, 7/20/94; 512, 11/6/96; 589, 10/3/05; 650, 2/21/18)
§ 3-1012   MUNICIPAL SEWER DEPARTMENT; CLASSIFICATION.
The Governing Body may classify for the purpose of rental fees the customers of
the Municipal Sewer Department; provided, that such classifications are
reasonable and do not discriminate unlawfully against any consumer or group of
consumers. (Ref. 17-925.02 RS Neb.)
§ 3-1013   MUNICIPAL SEWER DEPARTMENT; SPECIAL EQUIPMENT.
(Repealed by Ord. No. 504, 12/6/95)
§ 3-1014   MUNICIPAL SEWER DEPARTMENT; IN- SPECTIONS.
The chief sewer official or his authorized agents, shall have free access at
any reasonable time between the hours of seven (7:00) o'clock A.M. and six (6:
00) o'clock P.M. to all parts of each premise and building which is connected
with the Sewer System to ascertain whether there is any disrepair or violations
of this Article therein.
§ 3-1015   MUNICIPAL SEWER DEPARTMENT; SERVICE TO NONRESIDENTS.
Any person whose premise is located outside the corporate limits of the
Municipality and who desires to install a house or building sewer that will be
connected with the Municipal Sewer System, shall file a written application
with the Municipal Clerk for a permit for such connection and setting forth the
name of the owner, occupant, or lessee of the premise, the use to which the
premise is devoted, and such other information as the Governing Body may
require. (Ref. 17-149, 19-2701 RS Neb.)
§ 3-1016   MUNICIPAL SEWER DEPARTMENT; REFUSE.
(Repealed by Ord. No. 504, 12/6/95)
§ 3-1017   MUNICIPAL SEWER DEPARTMENT; AIR CONDITIONER DISCHARGE.
(Repealed by Ord. No. 504, 12/6/95)
§ 3-1018   MUNICIPAL SEWER DEPARTMENT; STORM SEWERS.
(Repealed by Ord. No. 504, 12/6/95)
§ 3-1019   MUNICIPAL SEWER DEPARTMENT; WASH RACKS.
(Repealed by Ord. No. 504, 12/6/95)
[Editor's Note: Sections 3-1020 through 3-1060 were adopted by Ordinance No.
504 which was passed on December 6, 1995]
§ 3-1020   MUNICIPAL SEWER DEPARTMENT; DEFINITIONS.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used
in this Article shall be as follows:
"BOD" (denoting Biochemical Oxygen) shall mean the quantity of oxygen utilized
in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure in five (5) days at twenty (20°) degrees C. Expressed in milligrams
per liter.
"BUILDING DRAIN" shall mean that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other
drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building
sewer, beginning five (5) feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the
building wall.
"BUILDING SEWER" shall mean the extension from the building drain to the public
sewer or other place of disposal.
"GARBAGE" shall mean solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of
produce.
"INDUSTRIAL WASTES" shall mean the liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing
processes, trade, or business as distinct from sanitary sewage.
"NATURAL OUTLET" shall mean any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake,
or other body of surface or groundwater.
"PERSON" shall mean any individual, firm, company, association, society,
corporation, or group.
"pH" shall mean the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions
in grams per liter of solution.
"PROPERLY SHREDDED Garbage" shall mean the wastes from the preparation,
cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that
all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, with no particle larger than one-half (1/2) inch
(1.27 centimeters) in any dimension.
"PUBLIC SEWER" shall mean a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties
have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority.
"SANITARY SEWER" shall mean a sewer which carries sewage and to which storm,
surface, and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted.
"SEWAGE" shall mean a combination of the water carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments together with
such ground, surface, and stormwaters as may be present.
"SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT" shall mean any arrangement of devices and structures
used for treating sewage.
"SEWAGE WORKS" shall mean all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and
disposing of sewage.
"SEWER" shall mean a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
"SHALL" is mandatory; ''May'' is permissive----
"SLUG" shall mean any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any
period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times
the average twenty-four (24) hour concentration or flows during normal
operation.
"STORM DRAIN" (sometimes termed ''Storm Sewer'') shall mean a sewer which
carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and
industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water.
"SUPERINTENDENT" shall mean the (Superintendent of Sewage Works and/or of Water
Pollution Control) of the City of Wymore or his authorized deputy, agent, or
representative.
"SUSPENDED SOLIDS" shall mean solids that either float on the surface of, or
are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable
by laboratory filterings.
"WATERCOURSE" shall mean a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
§ 3-1021   PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED; UNLAWFUL DEPOSIT OF WASTES.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited
in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the City of
Wymore or in any area under the jurisdiction of said City of Wymore any human
or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste.
§ 3-1022   PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED; UNLAWFUL DISCHARGE OF UNTREATED SEWAGE.
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the City of
Wymore, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said City of Wymore, any
sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been
provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this Article.
§ 3-1023   PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED; CESSPOOLS, PRIVIES AND SEPTIC TANKS
PROHIBITED.
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain
any privy, privy vault or other facility intended or used for the disposal of
sewage.
§ 3-1024   PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED; MANDATORY HOOK-UP.
The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human employment,
recreation, or other purposes, situated within the City of Wymore and abutting
on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in
the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the City of Wymore, is hereby
required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to
connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance
with the provisions of this Article, within (ninety (90) days) after date of
official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within one hundred
fifty (150) feet of the property line.
§ 3-1025   PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM; WHEN APPLICABLE.
Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section
3-1024, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal
system complying with the provisions sections 3-1026 to 3-1032.
§ 3-1026   PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM; PERMIT REQUIRED.
Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the
owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the Superintendent. The
application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the City of
Wymore, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications, and
other information as are deemed necessary by the Superintendent. A permit
inspection fee of $25.00 dollars shall be paid to the City of Wymore at the
time the application is filed.
§ 3-1027   PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM; PERMIT, WHEN EFFECTIVE; INSPECTIONS.
A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until
the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the Superintendent. He
shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any
event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the Superintendent when the
work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are
covered. The inspection shall be made (72) hours of the receipt of notice by
the Superintendent.
§ 3-1028   PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM; SPECIFICATIONS.
The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal system
shall comply with the Nebraska Department of Environmental Control's Title 124
Rules and Regulations for the Design, Operation and Maintenance of Septic Tank
Systems. 
§ 3-1029   PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM; PUBLIC SEWER AVAILABLE.
At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property serviced by a
private sewage disposal system, as provided in section 3-1028, a direct
connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this Article,
and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage disposal facilities
shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material.
§ 3-1030   PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM; MAINTENANCE.
The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in
a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the City of Wymore.
§ 3-1031   PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM; ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
No statement contained in sections 3-1025 to 3-1032 shall be construed to
interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Health
Officer.
§ 3-1032   PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM; MANDATORY ABANDONMENT.
When a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer shall be connected to
said sewer within sixty (60) days and the private sewage system shall be
abandoned in accordance with the Nebraska Department of Environmental Control's
Title 124 Rules and Regulations for the Design, Operation and Maintenance of
Septic Tank Systems.  
§ 3-1033   BUILDING SEWER INSTALLATION; PERMIT REQUIRED.
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening
into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without
first obtaining a written permit from the Superintendent.
§ 3-1034   BUILDING SEWER INSTALLATION; CLASSIFICATION; PERMIT APPLICATION.
(A) There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits:
      (1)   For residential and commercial services, and
      (2)   For service to establishments producing industrial wastes.
   (B)   In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a
special form furnished by the City of Wymore. The permit application shall be
supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered
pertinent in the judgment of the Superintendent. A permit and inspection fee of
$50.00 shall be paid to the City of Wymore at the time the application is
filed. (Amended by Ord. No. 575, 11/16/05)
§ 3-1035   BUILDING SEWER INSTALLATION; EXPENSE.
All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the City
of Wymore from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned
by the installation of the building sewer.
§ 3-1036   BUILDING SEWER INSTALLATION; SINGLE PREMISES.
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building;
except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and
no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building
through an adjoining alley, courtyard, or driveway, the building sewer from the
front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as
one building sewer.
§ 3-1037   BUILDING SEWER INSTALLATION; USE OF EXISTING SEWERS.
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they
are found, on examination and test by the Superintendent to meet all
requirements of this Article.
§ 3-1038   BUILDING SEWER INSTALLATION; CONSTRUCTION CODES.
The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and
the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing
and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the
building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the
City of Wymore. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof,
the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the
A.S.T.M. and W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply.
§ 3-1039   BUILDING SEWER INSTALLATION; ELEVATION.
   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an
elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building
drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage
carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and
discharged to the building sewer.
§ 3-1040   BUILDING SEWER INSTALLATION; UNLAWFUL CONNECTION.
No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, interior and exterior
foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or
groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected
directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
§ 3-1041   BUILDING SEWER INSTALLATION; COMPLIANCE WITH CODES.
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the
requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and
regulations of the City of Wymore or the procedures set forth in appropriate
specifications of the A.S.T.M. and the S.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9. All
such connections shall be made gas tight and water tight. Any deviation from
the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the Superintendent
before installation.
§ 3-1042   BUILDING SEWER INSTALLATION; INSPECTION.
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Superintendent
when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public
sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the Superintendent
or his representative.
§ 3-1043   BUILDING SEWER INSTALLATION; EXCAVATIONS.
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the
work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the City of Wymore.
§ 3-1044   MUNICIPAL SEWER DEPARTMENT; ABANDONED SEWER.
Any abandoned sewer shall be plugged with a mechanical seal by the owner at the
owner's expense. The mechanical seal shall be of a type approved by the
Superintendent and, upon installation shall be inspected by the Superintendent.
§ 3-1045   PROHIBITED DISCHARGES; STORMWATER, SURFACE WATER, GROUNDWATER,
COOLING WATER AND PROCESS WATER.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface
water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, including interior and
exterior foundation drains, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted
industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
   Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such
sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet
approved by the Superintendent. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process
waters may be discharged on approval of the Superintendent, to a storm sewer or
natural outlet.
§ 3-1046   HAZARDOUS AND PROHIBITED DISCHARGES; FLAMMABLE, TOXIC, CORROSIVE AND
OBSTRUCTIVE SUBSTANCES; PRELIMINARY TREATMENT.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
1.   Any gasoline, benzene, naptha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive
liquid, solid, or gas.
2.   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or
gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitutes a
hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in
the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, including but not limited
to cyanides in excess of two (2) mg/1 as CN in the wastes as discharged to the
public sewer.
3.   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment, and personnel of the sewage works.
4.   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, mild containers, etc., either whole
or ground by garbage grinders.
§ 3-1047   HAZARDOUS AND PROHIBITED DISCHARGES; SPECIFIC PROHIBITIONS AS
DETERMINED BY SEWER COMMISSIONER.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described
substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of
the Superintendent that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage
treatment process, or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving
stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a
nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the
Superintendent will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of
subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of
construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of
the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. These substances are
prohibited:
1.   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty
(150) degrees F (65 degrees C).
2.   Any water or wastes containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred (100) mg/1 or containing substances
which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty-two (32)
and one hundred fifty (150) degrees F (0 and 65 degrees C).
3.   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and
operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/4)
horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Superintendent.
4.   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid from pickling wastes, or
concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not.
5.   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and similar
objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine
requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the composite
sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established by the
Superintendent for such materials.
6.   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor producing
substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by
the Superintendent as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to
meet the requirements of State, Federal, or other public agencies of
jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.
7.   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as
may exceed limits established by the Superintendent in compliance with
applicable State or Federal regulations.
8.   Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of (9.5).
9.   Materials which exert or cause:
a.   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited
to, Fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids
(such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride or sodium sulfate).
b.   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions).
c.   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such
quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works.
d.   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting "slugs" as
defined herein.
10.   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction
over discharge to the receiving waters.
11.   Any waters or wastes having (a) a five (5) day BOD greater than 300 parts
per million by weight, or (b) containing more than 350 parts per million by
weight of suspended solids, or (c) having an average daily flow greater than
two (2) percent of the average sewage flow of the City of Wymore, shall be
subject to the review of the Superintendent. Where necessary in the opinion of
the Superintendent, the owner shall provide, at his expense, such preliminary
treatment as may be necessary to (i) reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to
300 parts per million by weight, or (ii) reduce the suspended solids to 350
parts per million by weight, or (iii) control the quantities and rates of
discharge of such waters or wastes. Plans, specifications, and any other
pertinent information relating to the proposed preliminary treatment facilities
shall be submitted for the approval of the Superintendent and no construction
of such facilities shall be commenced until said approvals are obtained in
writing.
§ 3-1048   DISCHARGE OF HAZARDOUS AND PROHIBITED SUBSTANCES; REJECTION,
PRETREATMENT, CONTROL OR DISCHARGE RATE OR USE FEE SURCHARGE.
If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the
public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the
characteristics enumerated in section 3-1047 and which in the judgment of the
Superintendent, may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes,
equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life to
constitute a public nuisance, the Superintendent may:
1.   Reject the wastes,
2.   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the
public sewers,
3.   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge, and/or
4.   Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the
wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of
section 3-1053.
   If the Superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste
flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject
to the review and approval of the Superintendent, and subject to the
requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
§ 3-1049   GREASE, OIL AND SAND INTERCEPTORS; WHEN REQUIRED.
Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of
the Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes
containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, or other
harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for
private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type
and capacity approved by the Superintendent, and shall be located as to be
readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
§ 3-1050   PRELIMINARY TREATMENT OR FLOW EQUALIZING FACILITIES; MAINTENANCE BY
OWNER.
Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any
waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and
effective operation by the owner at his expense.
§ 3-1051   CONTROL MANHOLES/SAMPLING STATIONS; WHEN REQUIRED; INSTALLATION AND
MAINTENANCE.
When required by the Superintendent, the owner of any property services by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the
wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located,
and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the
Superintendent. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and
shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
§ 3-1052   CONTROL MANHOLES/SAMPLING STATIONS; METHOD.
All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in this Article shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of ''Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater,'' published by the American Public Health Association,
and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable
samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has
been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest
downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer
is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to
reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the
existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. (The particular analyses
involved will determine whether a twenty-four (24) hour composite of all
outfalls of a premise is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should
be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are
obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls whereas pH's are determined
from periodic grab samples).
§ 3-1053   HAZARDOUS AND PROHIBITED SUBSTANCES; SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS PERMITTED;
USE FEE SURCHARGE.
No statement contained in sections 3-1045 to 3-1053 shall be construed as
preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the City of Wymore and
any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or
character may be accepted by the City of Wymore for treatment, subject to
payment therefor, by the industrial concern.
§ 3-1054   SANITARY SUPPLY SYSTEM; DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY.
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance,
or equipment which is part of the sewage works. Any person violating this
provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly
conduct.
§ 3-1055   COMPLIANCE WITH ARTICLE; INSPECTIONS GENERALLY.
The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the City of Wymore
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling,
and testing in accordance with the provisions of this Article. The
Superintendent or his representatives shall have no authority to inquire into
any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper,
or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and
source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste
treatment.
§ 3-1056   COMPLIANCE WITH ARTICLE; INSPECTIONS; INJURY LIABILITY.
While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in
section 3-1055 above, the Superintendent or duly authorized employees of the
City of Wymore shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises
established by the company and the company shall be held harmless for injury or
death to the City of Wymore employees and the City of Wymore shall indemnify
the company against loss or damage to its property by City of Wymore employees
and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage
asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling
operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company
to maintain safe conditions as required by section 3-1051.
§ 3-1057   COMPLIANCE WITH ARTICLE; INSPECTIONS; EASEMENTS.
The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the City of Wymore
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
private properties through which the City of Wymore holds a duly negotiated
easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage
works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on
said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly
negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.
§ 3-1058   VIOLATION; NOTICE.
Any person found to be violating any provision of this Article except section
3-1054 shall be served by the City of Wymore with written notice stating the
nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the
satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time
stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.
§ 3-1059   VIOLATION; PENALTY.
Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for
in section 3-1058 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof
shall be fined in the amount not exceeding ($100) dollars for each violation.
Each 24-hour in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a
separate offense.
§ 3-1060   VIOLATION; LIABILITY.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Article shall become liable
to the City of Wymore for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the City of
Wymore by reason of such violation.
Article 11. Electrical System
[Editor's Note: See §1-211 for provisions related to the Public Works
Superintendent.]
§ 3-1101   MUNICIPAL ELECTRICAL SYSTEM; OWNERSHIP.
   The Municipality owns and operates the Municipal Electrical System through
the Superintendent of Water and Lights. The Governing Body, for the purpose of
defraying the cost of the care, management, and maintenance of the Municipal
Electrical System may each year levy a tax not exceeding the maximum limit
prescribed by State law, on the actual valuation of all real estate and
personal property within the corporate limits that is subject to taxation. The
revenue from the said tax shall be known as the Electrical Fund and shall
remain in the custody of the Municipal Treasurer. The Superintendent shall have
the direct management and control of the Municipal Electrical System and shall
faithfully carry out the duties of his office. He shall have the authority to
adopt rules and regulations for the safe and efficient management of the
Electrical System subject to the supervision and review of the Governing Body.
The Governing Body shall by ordinance set the rates to be charged for services
rendered and shall file the same in the office of the Municipal Clerk for
public inspection at any reasonable time. (Ref. 17-902 through 17-904, 17-906,
17-909 RS Neb.)
§ 3-1102   MUNICIPAL ELECTRICAL SYSTEM; CONSUMER'S APPLICATION.
Every person or persons desiring electrical service must make application
therefore to the Municipal Clerk on forms to be furnished by the Municipality
for that purpose. The Municipal Clerk shall require any applicant to make a
utility service deposit in an amount established by the Governing Body in
section 3-810. Electricity may not be supplied to any house or building except
upon the written order of the Public Works Superintendent. The Electrical
System shall not supply electric service to any person outside of the corporate
limits without special permission from the Governing Body; provided, that the
entire cost of wire, installation, and other expenses shall be paid by the
consumer. Nothing herein shall be construed to obligate the Municipality to
supply electrical service to nonresidents. All applicants shall state fully all
the uses to which said electric current shall be used and no additional use
will be allowed except by written permission of the Public Works
Superintendent. The Municipality shall run supply wire or wires, hereafter
considered the property of the Municipality to the building or buildings of the
applicant or consumer and thereafter will keep said supply wire in good repair
and safe condition at the expense of the Municipality, except as may
hereinafter be specifically prescribed. All meters required for measuring
electric current used by the applicant or consumer shall be furnished, shall be
set in place, and shall remain the property of the Municipality. Not more than
one (1) house or building shall be supplied from one (1) connection, except by
special permission. (Ref. 17-902 RS Neb.) (Amended by Ord. Nos. 413, 5/21/86;
533, 11/4/98; 556, 9/18/02; 612, 9/21/11)
§ 3-1103   MUNICIPAL ELECTRICAL SYSTEM; UNDERGROUND INSTALLATION EXPENSE.
    The expense of installation and equipment of the electrical system with any
consumer's property shall be shared by the consumer and the Municipality. The
Municipality shall furnish labor and material from the electrical pole to the
electrical disconnection box. The Municipality shall furnish the electrical
meter and maintain the same. The Municipality shall furnish wire from the
disconnection box to the place of distribution and bill the customer the entire
cost of all material and labor so supplied. The consumer shall have the
responsibility of paying all costs of installation and materials from, and
including, the disconnection box to the place of disbursement including the
meter base and other required apparatus necessary for service as prescribed by
the Superintendent. The consumer shall have the additional responsibility of
digging or causing to be dug the trench required for underground electrical
service and shall bear the entire cost of maintenance from, and including, the
disconnection box to the place of distribution.
§ 3-1104   MUNICIPAL ELECTRICAL SYSTEM; OVERHEAD INSTALLATION EXPENSE.
The expense of installation and equipment of the electrical system with any
consumer's property shall be shared by the consumer and the Municipality. The
Municipality shall furnish labor and material from the electrical pole to the
point of distribution. The Municipality shall furnish the electrical meter and
maintain the same. The consumer shall have the responsibility of paying all
costs of installation and materials from, and including, the disconnection box
to the place of disbursement including the meter base and other required
apparatus necessary for service as prescribed by the Superintendent.
Maintenance of the equipment from the pole to the point of distribution shall
be paid by the consumer, except for maintenance of the meter which shall be the
responsibility of the Municipality. The consumer shall buy from the
Municipality, at its cost, the meter base. All presently installed overhead
electrical wire apparatus from and including the disconnection box to the point
of distribution shall hereafter be maintained by the customer.
§ 3-1105   MUNICIPAL ELECTRICAL SYSTEM; METER INSTALLATION.
No person except an authorized agent of the Municipality shall be allowed to
set meters, or to make connections to the electric service of the Municipality.
The owner or tenant of a premise where a meter is located shall provide ready
and convenient access to the meter so that it may easily be examined and read
by the Municipality or its authorized agents. Any consumer of electric current
has the right to request the Municipality to test his meter any reasonable
number of times, and the Municipality or its agents shall comply with said
request, subject to such reasonable rules and regulations as the Municipality
and the Superintendent may adopt. The Municipality reserves the right to test
and replace any meter in use at any time. The Municipality will keep clean and
in proper repair and will replace without cost to consumer any service meter
where such repair or replacements result from ordinary wear and tear and not
from the willful negligence or recklessness of the consumer. In consideration
of said service rendered or to be rendered in the matter of repairing or
replacing a meter, the applicant or consumer specifically consents and agrees
to keep all service meters and supply wires insured for the benefit of the
Municipality against fire or other casualty and hereby designates the
Municipality to collect from the insurance carrier, in the event of the loss or
destruction of said meter or supply wire by fire or other casualty from the
proceeds payable to consumer out of any policy of insurance in which he is made
beneficiary affecting said premise where said meter of supply wire is located,
the reasonable value of said meter or supply wire and deduct said value from
payment to be made to the insured under said policy; provided, if the consumer
carries no insurance on the premise or contents of the premise or place where
meter is set, the consumer hereby consents and agrees to reimburse the
Municipality for the reasonable value of said meter or supply wire in the event
of destruction by fire or other casualty.
§ 3-1106   MUNICIPAL ELECTRICAL SYSTEM; READING METER.
All electric current furnished consumers of the Municipal Electric Distribution
System shall be measured by meters approved by the Municipality. All said
meters shall be read monthly and said electric service meter reading shall be
kept by the Municipal Clerk for billing and collection. Should a meter get out
of repair or fail to register properly, the consumer will be charged for
electric current during the time such meter is out of order or repair on the
basis of monthly consumption during the same month of the preceding year;
provided, however, if no such basis for comparison exists then such consumer
shall pay such amount as may be reasonably fixed by the Municipal Clerk.
§ 3-1107   MUNICIPAL ELECTRIC SYSTEM; RATES.
   (1) The following is established as a minimum tariff of rates to consumers
of electric service from the Electric Distribution System:
   A.   Residential Service (RS-1)
      Availability: Available to single family residential and individually
metered apartments for domestic purposes, including space heating, when all
services are supplied through a single meter and whose entire requirements are
provided by the electric utility. Residential customers who use a majority of
their total consumption for operation of a commercial or professional
enterprise in connection with their residence shall be required to take service
under Commercial Service (CS-1) or Commercial Service-All Electric (CS-1 WHSH)
rate schedule. Not applicable to resale, stand-by or auxiliary service.
      Character of Service: AC, 60 Hertz, single-phase, at any of the City's
standard voltages where the service may be supplied by a single power
transformation.
      Rates:
    Effective Date
 April 1, 2024 April 1, 2025
                                Effective Date
                             April 1, 2024 April 1, 2025
Customer Charge, per month   $10.00        $13.00
Energy Charge
   Summer
      First 650 kWh, pe0.1320        0.1360
      Excess kWh, per k0.0980        0.1040
   Winter
      First 650 kWh    0.1320        0.1360
      Excess kWh, per k0.0880        0.0960
 
      Minimum Bill: The customer charge.
   B.   Residential Service -All Electric (RS-1 WHSH)
      Availability: Available to all customers taking service under the
residential rate who have no natural gas or propane service or hookup to any
appliance, furnace or water heater, provided they were taking service under
this rate schedule as of February 1, 2024. Not applicable to resale, stand-by
or auxiliary service. Not available to new customers.
      Character of Service: AC, 60 Hertz, single-phase or three-phase, at any
of the City's standard voltage where the service may be supplied by a single
power transformation.
      Rates:
    Effective Date
 April 1, 2024 April 1, 2025
                                Effective Date
                             April 1, 2024 April 1, 2025
Customer Charge, per month   $10.00        $13.00
Energy Charge
   Summer
      First 650 kWh, pe0.0990        0.1110
      Excess kWh, per k0.0700        0.0710
   Winter
      First 650 kWh    0.0990        0.1110
      Excess kWh, per k0.0560        0.0630
 
      Minimum Bill: The Customer Charge.
   C.   Residential Electric Hot Water
      Availability: Available to all customers taking service under the
residential rate who have no natural gas or propane service hookup to any water
heater, provided they were taking service under this rate schedule as of
February 1, 2024. Not applicable to resale, stand-by or auxiliary service. Not
available to new customers.
      Character of Service: AC, 60 Hertz, single-phase or three-phase, at any
of the City's standard voltage where the service may be supplied by a single
power transformation.
      Rates:
 Effective Date
 April 1, 2024 April 1, 2025
                             Effective Date
                             April 1, 2024 April 1, 2025
Customer Charge, per month   $10.00        $13.00
Energy Charge
   Summer
      First 650 kWh, pe0.1200        0.1330
      Excess kWh, per k0.0950        0.0950
   Winter
      First 650 kWh    0.1150        0.1330
      Excess kWh, per k0.0830        0.0830
 
      Minimum Bill: The customer Charge.
   D.   Commercial Service (CS-1)
      Availability: Available to any customer for general commercial lighting
and miscellaneous power service at standard voltages. This rate shall also
apply, at the option of the City, when more than one dwelling unit is served
through one meter. Not applicable to resale, stand-by or auxiliary service.
      Character of Service: AC, 60 Hertz, single-phase or three-phase, at any
of the City's standard voltages where the service may be supplied by a single
power transformation.
      Rates:
 Effective Date
 April 1, 2024 April 1, 2025
                               Effective Date
                               April 1, 2024 April 1, 2025
Customer Charge, per month     $12.00        $17.00
Energy Charge
   Summer
      First 3,000 kWh, pe0.1350        0.1350
      Excess kWh, per kWh0.0970        0.1060
   Winter
      First 3,000 kWh    0.1350        0.1350
      Excess kWh, per kWh0.0850        0.0960
 
      Minimum Bill: The Customer Charge.
   E.   Commercial Service-All Electric (CS-1 WHSH)
      Availability: Available to all customers taking service under the
commercial rate who have no natural gas or propane service or hookup to any
appliance, furnace or water heater, provided they were taking service under
this rate schedule as of February 1, 2024. Not applicable to resale, stand-by
or auxiliary service. Not available to new customers.
      Character of Service: AC, 60 Hertz, single-phase or three-phase, at any
of he City's standard voltages where the service may be supplied by a single
power transformation.
      Rates:
 Effective Date
 April 1, 2024 April 1, 2025
                             Effective Date
                             April 1, 2024 April 1, 2025
Customer Charge, per month   $12.00        $17.00
Energy Charge
   Summer
      First 500 kWh, pe0.1350        0.1350
      Excess kWh, per k0.0730        0.0800
   Winter
      First 500 kWh    0.1350        0.1350
      Excess kWh, per k0.0620        0.0710
 
      Minimum Bill: The Customer Charge
   F.   Street Lights
      Availability: To the City for municipal street lighting (dusk to
daylight) from the electric department distribution system.
      Character of Service: The electric department will construct, operate and
maintain the complete system and furnish such lighting services every night
from dusk until daylight or approximately 4,000 hours per annum.
      Rates:
 
                       Effective Date
                       April 1, 2024 April 1, 2025
Energy Charge          $0.0567       $0.0612
   All kWh, per kWh
 
      Minimum Bill: The energy charge plus the production cost adjustment.
   G.   Non-Metered Rental Lights. Applicable to any rental lights that are not
individually metered or part of the metered usage for a retail customer.
      Rates:
 
                                   Effective Date
                                   April 1, 2024 April 1, 2025
Customer charge, per light fixture $10.00        $13.00
 
   H.   Electric Heating Equipment. All customers taking service under all-
electric rate schedules are subject to verification that they are using natural
gas or propane for any appliances. Any customers taking natural gas or propane
service for use in any appliance is subject to removal from the applicable all-
electric rate.
   I.   Production Cost Adjustment (PCA). There shall be applied to each
monthly electric bill to consumers of electric service from the Electric
Distribution System of the City any Production Cost Adjustment charges included
in the monthly billings to the City for electric power from Nebraska Public
Power District (NPPD) under the Wholesale Power Contract between NPPD and the
City. The monthly energy rate of each consumer shall be increased an amount
equal to the NPPD Production Cost Adjustment, as expressed in $/kWh. Any
Production Cost Adjustment credit received from NPPD will not be applied to
consumer bills without approval of the City Council.
   J.   Contribution in Aid of Construction. Consumers who make contributions
in aid of construction are eligible for consumer credits in accordance with the
Contribution in Aid of Construction and Consumer Credits policy adopted by the
Governing Body.
   K.   Billing. Bills for electricity consumed shall be prepared for each
consumer based on the rates herein set forth. The amount owing by each consumer
and thus computed shall be called the "net" bill and must be paid within
eighteen (18) days after its due date. If the "net" bill is not paid within
eighteen (18) days after the due date, the consumer will be required to pay a
penalty of ten percent (10%) thereof which shall be added to the "net" bill and
shall be called the "gross" bill.
   L.   Effective Date. The minimum tariff of rates established by this section
shall be effective beginning with the billing cycle for February/March 2024.
(Amended by Ord. Nos. 246, 8/16/72; 264, 12/3/75; 320, 10/3/79; 346, 2/3/82;
448, 9/5/90; 507, 3/6/96; 545, 2/7/01; 561, 3/3/04; 585, 2/7/07; 592, 4/16/08;
598, 6/17/09; 607, 10/6/10; 614, 9/21/11; 620, 9/19/12; 623, 5/15/13; 627, 9/
18/13; 637, 2/4/15; 676, 3-20-24)
§ 3-1108   MUNICIPAL ELECTRIC SYSTEM; SPECIAL RATES.
   Should any consumer using or agreeing to use more than seven hundred (700)
KW hours per month, make application for electric service, the Governing Body,
if deemed advisable, shall fix and determine a schedule of special rates for
the electric service so furnished and may enter into contract with such
consumer covering the furnishing of electric service at such special rates;
provided, however, that the special rate so agreed upon shall in no event be
less than the cost of electric energy so sold, plus depreciation and other
proper fixed charges. (Amended by Ord. No. 246, 8/16/72)
§ 3-1109   MUNICIPAL ELECTRICAL SYSTEM; SERVICE DEPOSIT FUND.
The service deposit required for electrical service shall be promptly paid upon
demand by all customers of the Electrical System. From the said deposit shall
be deducted all delinquent electrical charges. The service deposit shall be
collected by the Municipal Clerk who shall keep the said fees in a trust fund
for the customers of the Electrical System. Said fund shall be put out at
interest separate and apart from other funds. Interest arising therefrom shall
be expended solely for the repair of equipment and property of the Municipal
Electrical System.
§ 3-1110   MUNICIPAL ELECTRIC SYSTEM; DELINQUENT PAYMENTS.
Electrical fees shall be due and payable monthly at the office of the Municipal
Clerk. If said fees are not paid within eighteen (18) days after the same
become due, the electricity will be turned off after seven (7) days notice by
mail to the consumer and not turned on again until all back fees and charges
are paid; including any penalty charge which the Governing Body may, by
ordinance, prescribe. (Ref. 17-902, 18-416 RS Neb.) (Amended by Ord. No. 624,
5/15/13)
§ 3-1111   MUNICIPAL ELECTRICAL SYSTEM; ELECTRICAL SERVICE CONTRACTS.
Contracts for electrical service are not transferable. Any person wishing to
change from one location to another shall make a new application and sign a new
contract. If any consumer shall sell, dispose, or remove from the premise where
service is furnished in his name, or if the said premise is destroyed by fire
or other casualty, he shall at once inform the Superintendent who shall cause
the electrical service to be shut off from the said premise. If the consumer
should fail to give such notice, he shall be charged for all electricity used
on the said premise until the Superintendent is otherwise advised of such
circumstances. The rules, regulations, and rates for electric service named in
this Article, shall be deemed and considered a part of every contract between
the Municipality and every consumer of electricity. If the consumer shall
violate any of the said provisions of the contract or the rules and regulations
pertaining to electrical distribution, the Superintendent, or his duly
authorized agent, shall cut off the electrical service from the property where
such violation occurred and no further connection shall be made except by order
of the Superintendent or his duly authorized agent. (Ref. 17-902 RS Neb.)
§ 3-1112   MUNICIPAL ELECTRICAL SYSTEM; TRIMMING TREES.
Any person desiring to cut or remove trees or branches thereof in close
proximity to the lines of the Municipal Electrical System shall, before doing
the said work, give reasonable written notice to the Utilities Superintendent
and shall follow any and all rules and regulations which he may prescribe for
doing such work. It shall be unlawful for any person felling or removing such
trees or branches to disrupt or damage the lines without first giving proper
notice and receiving permission in writing to do so. Whenever it becomes
necessary to protect the lines or property of the Electrical System, the
Governing Body shall have the power to order cut and remove any overhanging
branches, or limbs of trees so that the lines will be free and safe.
§ 3-1113   MUNICIPAL ELECTRIC SYSTEM; RIGHT OF ACCESS.
The Electrical Inspector, or any competent person delegated to assist him,
shall upon proper identification, have the right during reasonable hours to
enter any building or manhole in the discharge of his official duties, or for
the purpose of making any test of the electric apparatus or appliances therein
contained. He shall be given prompt access to all buildings, private of public,
on application to the company or individual owning or in charge or control of
the same. The Electrical Inspector shall have the authority to cause the
turning off of all electric current and to cut or disconnect, in cases of
emergency, any wire where such electric current is dangerous to life or
property or may interfere with the work of the Fire Department. The Chief of
the Fire Department or person in charge at times of fire, as well as said
Electrical Inspector, or either of them, shall have power at once to cause the
removal of all wires, or the turning off of all electric current where the
circuits interfere with the work of the Fire Department during the progress of
fire.
§ 3-1114   MUNICIPAL ELECTRIC SYSTEM; INSPECTIONS.
Whenever, in the judgment of the Electrical Inspector, any electric wire or
appliance shall be defective by reason of improper or insufficient insulation,
or for any other cause, the Electrical Inspector shall at once notify the owner
thereof of such defect and order him to repair, rearrange, or remove the same,
and upon the owner's failure or refusal to do so, he shall be deemed guilty of
a misdemeanor. Each day which shall elapse after the expiration of a ten (10)
day period of grace shall be deemed to be a separate and distinct offense.
§ 3-1115   MUNICIPAL ELECTRIC SYSTEM; APPEALS.
Any person feeling himself aggrieved, may, at any time within ten (10) days
after the entry of any ruling or order by the Electrical Inspector, appeal to
the Governing Body from such order or ruling, by filing with the Clerk a
petition, duly verified, setting forth the facts relating to such disputed
ruling or order. The Governing Body at any regular or special meeting, after
the filing of said petition, shall conduct an open hearing with reference to
said matter, at the conclusion of said hearing, shall enter an order either
reversing or annulling the order or ruling of said Inspector or affirming the
same. The decision of the Governing Body in said matter shall be final. If the
order or ruling of the Electrical Inspector is reversed, the Governing Body
shall make such order as it may deem necessary, which order shall have the same
force and effect as if made by the Electrical Inspector in the first instance,
and if the order or ruling of the Electrical Inspector be affirmed, the same
shall be enforced in the same manner and with like effect as if no such hearing
had been held.
§ 3-1116   MUNICIPAL ELECTRICAL SYSTEM; FLUORESCENT LIGHTING.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to connect any
fluorescent lighting, neon signs, or other lighting or display facilities
having similar load characteristics to the Electric Distribution System unless
such fluorescent lighting, neon signs, or other lighting or display facilities
having similar load characteristics, be connected with capacitors or other
auxiliaries of sufficient size to maintain a power factor of ninety-five (95%)
percent or more lagging whenever above mentioned lighting, signs of display
equipment is in operation.
Article 12. Police Department
§ 3-1201   POLICE DEPARTMENT; POLICE OFFICERS; DISCIPLINE OR REMOVAL FROM DUTY;
NOTICE AND HEARING; DETERMINATION.
(1) No police officer, including the Chief of Police, shall be disciplined,
suspended, demoted, removed, or discharged except upon written notice stating
the reasons for such disciplinary action, suspension, demotion, removal, or
discharge. Such notice shall also contain a statement informing the police
officer of his or her right to a hearing before the City Council.
   (2) Any police officer so disciplined, suspended, demoted, removed, or
discharged may, within ten days after being notified by of such disciplinary
action, suspension, demotion, removal, or discharge, file with the Municipal
Clerk a written demand for a hearing before the City Council. The City Council
shall set the matter for hearing not less than ten nor more than twenty days
after the filing of the written demand for a hearing. The City Council shall
give the police officer written notice of the hearing not less than seven nor
more than fourteen days prior to the hearing.
   (3) At the hearing, the police officer shall have the right to: (a) respond
in person to the charges and to present witnesses and documentary evidence; (b)
confront and cross-examine available adverse witnesses; and (c) to be
represented by counsel.
   (4) Not later than thirty days following the adjournment of the meeting at
which the hearing was held, the City Council shall vote to uphold, reverse, or
modify the disciplinary action, suspension, demotion, removal, or discharge.
The failure of the City Council to act within thirty days or the failure of a
majority of the elected Councilmembers to vote to reverse or modify the
disciplinary action, suspension, demotion, removal, or discharge shall be
construed as a vote to uphold the disciplinary action, suspension, demotion,
removal, or discharge. The decision of the City Council shall be based upon its
determination that, under the facts and evidence presented at the hearing, the
challenged disciplinary action, suspension, demotion, removal, or discharge was
necessary for the proper management and the effective operation of the Police
Department in the performance of its duties under the state statutes.
   (5) Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the preemptory
suspension or immediate removal from duty of an officer, pending the hearing
authorized by this section, in cases of gross misconduct, neglect of duty, or
disobedience of orders. (Ref. 17-107 RS Neb.)  (Ord. No. 505, 12/20/95)
Article 13. Emergency Medical Services Department
§ 3-1301   MUNICIPAL EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES DEPARTMENT; OPERATION AND
FUNDING.
   The Municipality operates the Municipal Emergency Medical Services
Department, hereinafter known as Wymore EMS, through the Municipal Rescue
Chief, and emergency medical technicians (EMTs) and other volunteers. The
Governing Body, for the purpose of defraying the cost of the management,
maintenance, and improving Wymore EMS may each year levy a tax not exceeding
the maximum limits prescribed by state law, on the actual valuation of all real
estate and personal property within the Municipality that is subject to
taxation. The revenue from said tax shall be known as the Wymore EMS Fund. The
Fund shall be at all times in possession of the Municipal Treasurer. All claims
against the Wymore EMS Fund shall be presented to the Governing Body by the
Rescue Chief for audit and allowance or disallowance. The Rescue Chief shall
manage Wymore EMS and it shall be his or her duty to inform the Governing Body
when any of the buildings, grounds, ambulance/rescue units, or other apparatus
are in need of maintenance, repair or replacement. The Rescue Chief shall
provide to the Governing Body written estimates regarding the cost to complete
said work, and when required by state law or at the request of the Governing
Body, advertise for bids and submit said bids to the Governing Body for review
and approval. Upon written consent and directive of the Governing Body, the
Rescue Chief shall cause the maintenance, repair, improvement, or replacement
of said equipment or property and shall personally supervise and approve of the
same.
(Ref. 13-303, 17-505 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 683, 7/2/25)
§ 3-1302   EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES; PURPOSE; PHYSICIAN MEDICAL DIRECTOR;
RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (1)   The purpose of Wymore EMS shall be the protection of life and to
provide emergency medical services to those individuals residing in the Wymore
EMS coverage area.
   (2)   The Wymore EMS shall operate under the direction of a Physician
Medical Director. The Wymore EMS shall recommend to the Mayor the appointment
of a qualified individual to serve as a Physician Medical Director. The
Physician Medical Director shall be nominated by the Mayor and confirmed by the
Governing Body. When responding to calls, members of the Wymore EMS shall
follow the orders, policies, procedures and protocols of the Physician Medical
Director, as well as State and Federal rules and regulations.
   (3)   The Wymore EMS shall have the authority to establish by-laws,
policies, protocols, procedures, standard operating procedures, standard
operating guidelines, and rules and regulations governing the provision of
emergency medical services and the operation of this department. All policies,
protocols, procedures, standard operating procedures, standard operating
guidelines, and rules and regulations relating to the provision of emergency
medical services to individuals shall not be implemented until approved by the
Physician Medical Director. All by-laws, policies, protocols, procedures,
standard operating procedures, standard operating guidelines, and rules and
regulations relating to the operation of this department shall not take effect
until approved by the Governing Body.
(Ref. 13-303, 17-505 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 683, 7/2/25)
§ 3-1303   EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES; MEMBERSHIP; EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE;
MEETINGS; BENEFITS; REMOVAL.
   (1)   Any person who is at least eighteen (18) years of age and a resident
within the Wymore EMS service area may apply for membership by filling out an
application for membership to the Wymore EMS. The application shall be
presented at the next regular meeting at which time the membership shall vote
on the application. If the application is approved, the Secretary shall submit
the new member’s name to the Mayor for nomination and confirmation by the
Governing Body.
   (2)   There is hereby established the Executive Committee of the Wymore EMS
which shall consist of the President, Rescue Chief, Assistant Rescue Chief,
Training/Safety Officer, and Secretary/Treasurer.
   (3)   The membership and the Executive Committee may hold meetings and
engage in social activities with the approval of the Governing Body. The
Secretary of Wymore EMS shall keep a record of all meetings.
   (4)   The Governing Body may approve recruitment and retention payments for
members of Wymore EMS going on calls in an amount set by resolution.
   (5)   The members of Wymore EMS (ambulance drivers, attendants, and
emergency care providers) shall, for the sole purpose of the Nebraska Workers’
Compensation Act, be deemed employees of the Municipality while in the
performance of their duties as members of Wymore EMS and shall be considered as
having entered and as acting in the regular course and scope of their
employment from the instant such volunteers commence responding to a call of
active duty, whether to the fire station or other place where the ambulance is
to use is located or to any activities that the volunteer Wymore EMS members
may be directed to do by the Rescue Chief or some other person authorized to
act for the Rescue Chief. Such volunteers shall be deemed employees of the
Municipality until their return to the location from which they were initially
called to active duty or until they engage in any activity beyond the scope of
the performance of their duties, whichever occurs first. Members of Wymore EMS,
before they are entitled to benefits under the Nebraska Workers’ Compensation
Act, shall be recommended by the Rescue Chief or some other person authorized
to act for the Rescue Chief to the Governing Body, and upon confirmation shall
be deemed employees of the Municipality. Members of Wymore EMS after
confirmation to membership may be removed by a majority vote of the Governing
Body and thereafter shall not be considered employees of the Municipality.
Wymore EMS members shall be considered acting in the performance of within the
course and scope of their employment when performing activities outside of the
corporate limits of the Municipality, but only if directed to do so by the
Rescue Chief or some person authorized to act for the Rescue Chief.
   (6)   Each member of Wymore EMS shall be entitled to a term life insurance
policy in the amount of at least ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for death
from any cause to age sixty-five (65), and such policy shall reduce twenty
percent (20%) on the first (1st) day of the policy month on or after the
insured person’s sixty-fifth (65th) birthday, fifty percent (50%) on or after
the seventieth (70th) birthday, and sixty-five percent (65%) on or after the
seventy-fifth (75th) birthday; provided that the members covered are active
members and are faithfully performing the duties of their position.
   (7)   A member of Wymore EMS may be removed from membership pursuant to the
procedures established in the Wymore EMS by-laws. No member shall be officially
removed from membership until such removal has been confirmed by the Governing
Body.
(Ref 13-303, 17-505 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 683, 7/2/25)
§ 3-1304   EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES; TRUST FUND; EXPENDITURES; CLAIMS;
BUDGET.
   (1)    There is hereby established the Wymore EMS Trust Fund. All donations,
contributions, bequests, devises, or annuities made to the Wymore EMS, and all
money raised through fund-raising activities by or for the Wymore EMS shall be
deposited in the Wymore EMS Trust Fund. The Treasurer of the Wymore EMS shall
be the custodian of the Wymore EMS Trust Fund.
   (2)   The Wymore EMS Trust Fund shall not be considered public funds or
funds of the Municipality, nor shall the Municipality incur any liability
solely by reason of any expenditure from the Wymore EMS Trust Fund, except
liability for property when the Municipality receives title to property
acquired with money from the Wymore EMS Trust Fund.
   (3)   All expenditures of funds from the Wymore EMS Trust Fund shall be
submitted as claims for approval by the Executive Committee. No claim or demand
against the Wymore EMS Trust Fund shall be allowed or approved unless presented
to the Executive Committee in writing with a full account of the expenditure or
proposed expenditure.
   (4)   The Executive Committee shall, prior to the beginning of the Wymore
EMS’ fiscal year, adopt a budget of estimated expenditures from the Wymore EMS
Trust Fund. In addition, the Executive Committee shall adopt a one- and six-
year plan regarding estimated expenditures for said periods of time.
(Ref. 13-303, 13-901, 17-505 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 683, 7/2/25)
Article 14. Penal Provision
§ 3-1401   VIOLATION; PENALTY.  
--- Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with the enforcement of
any of the provisions of this Chapter, set forth at full length herein or
incorporated by reference, shall be deemed guilty of an offense, and upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00)
for each offense. A new violation shall be deemed to have been committed every
twenty-four (24) hours of such failure to comply.
(Ref. 17-505 RS Neb.) (Amended by Ord. No. 538, 9/15/99)
§ 3-1402   ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE.
   (1)    Whenever a nuisance exists as defined in this Chapter, the
Municipality may proceed by a suit in equity to enjoin and abate the same, in
the manner provided by law.
   (2)   Whenever, in any action, it is established that a nuisance exists, the
court shall together with the fine or penalty imposed, enter an order of
abatement as part of the judgement of the case.
(Ref. 17-505, 18-1720 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 538, 9/15/99)
Chapter 4
HEALTH AND SANITATION
Article 1. General Provisions
§ 4-101   Health; Regulations.
For the purpose of promoting the health and safety of the residents of the
Municipality, the Board of Health shall, from time to time, adopt such rules
and regulations relative thereto and shall make such inspections, prescribe
such penalties, and make such reports as may be necessary toward that purpose.
(Ref. 17-121 RS Neb.)
§ 4-102   Health; Enforcement Official.
The Municipal Physician shall be the health officer of the Municipality. It
shall be his duty to notify the Governing Body of health nuisances and of every
case of contagious, infectious, or malignant disease. The Municipal Physician
shall attend to the complaints of nuisances, and all orders relating thereto,
and all other services as the Governing Body may impose by Ordinance, or which
the Board of Health may lawfully require of him.
§ 4-103   Health; Quarantine.
When any person infected with any infectious, contagious, or dangerous disease
has not been removed to a hospital, or removed from the Municipality, as herein
provided, but is permitted to remain in his own home, the Board of Health is
hereby authorized to guard against the spread of such disease by establishing
limits beyond which the inmates of such place shall not pass. Within such
limits no person shall enter except those necessary in attendance upon such
person or upon the order of the Board. The Board may adopt any other means
which may seem advisable to prevent the spread of any such disease. It shall be
the duty of the Board of Health to cause a notice to be placed upon the door of
the house or room occupied by any person affected or sick with any such
diseases. Such notice shall contain printed letters about one ( 1) inch high
stating the name of such disease, and below the name of the disease, printed in
letters about one-fourth (¥.i) of an inch high, the following shall be printed:
"Inmates of this place not allowed to pass beyond the limits of this premise,
and no person except attendants, or except by permission of the Board of
Health, allowed to enter this premise, under penalty of one hundred ($100.00)
dollars."
   When the limits aforesaid with reference to any place at which there is a
case of any such disease, have been established by the Board of Health, and the
notice aforesaid placed on the door thereof, it shall be unlawful for any of
the inmates of such place to pass beyond such limits, and it shall be unlawful
for any person except attendants, or except by permission of the Board of
Health, to enter within such limits. It shall be unlawful for anyone to deface,
alter, mutilate, destroy, tear down or remove such notice so attached, as
aforesaid, without the permission of the Board of Health.
§ 4-104   Health; State Rules.
The "Rules and Regulations Relating to Public Health," Department of Health of
the State of Nebraska are hereby incorporated by reference when the same are
applicable to the Municipality, in their present form and as they may hereafter
be amended. Three (3) copies of the said pamphlet are filed at the office of
the Municipal Clerk and shall be available for public inspection at any
reasonable time.
(Ref 18-132 RS Neb.)
§ 4-105   Health; County Health Board.
It shall be the duty of the Board of Health to work closely with the County
Health Board in protecting the health and welfare of the residents of the
Municipality.
Article 2. Garbage Disposal
§ 4-201   GARBAGE; DEFINED.
The term "garbage" as used herein shall be defined to mean kitchen refuse,
decayed waste, or dead animals, or anything that may decompose and become
offensive to the public health.
§ 4-202   RUBBISH; DEFINED.
The terms "rubbish" or "trash" as used herein shall be defined as discarded
machinery, chips, pieces of wood, stocks, dead trees, branches, bottles, broken
glass, crockery, tin cans, boxes, papers, rags, or other litter or debris that
is not an immediate hazard to the health of the residents of the Municipality.
§ 4-203   WASTE; DEFINED.
The term "waste" as herein defined shall mean cinders, ashes, plaster, brick,
stone, sawdust, or sand.
§ 4-203.01   SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL; YARD WASTE; DEFINED.
The term "yard waste" shall mean grass and leaves. (Ref. 13-2016.01 RS Neb.)
(Ord. No. 492, 3/15/95)
§ 4-204   GARBAGE, TRASH, AND WASTE.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep in, on, or about any dwelling,
building, or premise, or any other place in the Municipality, decayed vegetable
or animal substance, garbage, or refuse matter of any kind that may be
injurious to the public health or offensive to the residents of the
Municipality unless the same is kept in receptacles with a five (5) to ten (10)
gallon capacity and as nearly airtight as may be practical. It shall be
unlawful to throw or sweep into the streets, alleys, parks, or other public
grounds any dirt, paper, nails, pieces of glass, refuse, waste, or rubbish of
any kind. No person may permit garbage, rubbish, waste, or refuse to collect
and all persons shall remove the same from their property within twenty-four
(24) hours after being notified to do so by the Mayor, Board of Health, or
Governing Body. Any person having garbage, rubbish, waste, or refuse that is
subject to decay or fermentation within a short period of time shall be
required to place the same in a standard garbage can with a tight cover, or a
durable plastic container that is securely tied at its opening. All persons
shall have t he contents of their garbage cans removed at least once a week
during the months of May through October of each year, inclusive. During the
remainder of each year the garbage cans shall be removed once every two weeks.
It shall be within the power and authority of the Board of Health to require
that additional garbage cans be provided on any premise where the accumulation
of garbage, rubbish, trash, or waste is greater than the capacity of the
receptacles located on such premise for the purpose of collecting such garbage,
rubbish, trash, or waste.
§ 4-205   WASTE; RECEPTACLES.
It shall be the duty of all property owners or tenants occupying any premise to
provide boxes or barrels for the reception of any rubbish and waste and to haul
such receptacles and the contents thereof, at their own expense, to the dumping
grounds provided for in this Chapter. No rubbish or waste shall be placed in
garbage cans, but shall be accumulated solely in the containers provided for in
this Section.
§ 4-206   WASTE; UNLAWFUL DEPOSIT.
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, deposit, or cause to be thrown or
deposited any rubbish, waste, or garbage on any vacant lot, public
thoroughfare, street, alley, public property or any place whatsoever except in
places provided by the said Board of Health.
§ 4-207   DEAD ANIMALS.
All dead animals shall be immediately removed and buried by the owner of such
animal; and if the owner of such animal cannot be found within two (2) hours
after discovering the same, then such animal shall be removed by and at the
expense of the Municipality. Dead animals shall not be buried within the
corporate limits of the Municipality, nor within one (1) mile thereof, nor in
or above the course of ground water that is used for drinking purposes by the
Municipality of its inhabitants. Such animals may, however, be buried in the
Municipal Dumping Ground.
§ 4-208   MANURE.
It shall be the duty of all owners and tenants of property upon which manure of
any kind accumulates to provide adequate and sufficient receptacles for such
manure. Such receptacles shall be emptied promptly upon becoming full and shall
be disposed of in a manner satisfactory to the Board of Health.
§ 4-209   GARBAGE AND REFUSE COLLECTION; AUTHORITY.
The governing body for the city may provide for the collection and removal of
garbage or refuse found upon any lot or land within its corporate roads, or
alleys abutting such lot or land which constitutes a public nuisance. The city
may require the owner, duly authorized agent, or tenant of such lot or land to
remove the garbage or refuse from such lot or land and streets, roads, or
alleys. (Ref 16-230, 16-231, 16-246, 16-901, 18-1303 R.S. Neb).
§ 4-210   GARBAGE AND REFUSE COLLECTION; NOTICE; REMOVAL.
Notice that removal of garbage or refuse is necessary shall be given to each
owner or owner's duly authorized agent and to the tenant if any. Such notice
shall be provided by personal service or by certified mail. After providing
such notice, the city through its proper offices shall, in addition to other
proper remedies, remove the garbage or refuse, or cause it to be removed, from
such lot or land and streets, roads, or alleys.  (Ref 16-230, 16-231, 16-246,
16-901, 18-1303 R.S. Neb).
§ 4-211   GARBAGE AND REFUSE COLLECTION; NUISANCE.
If the mayor/city manager declares that the accumulation of such garbage or
refuse upon any lot or land constitutes an immediate nuisance and hazard to
public health and safety, the city shall remove the garbage or refuse, or cause
it to be removed, from such lot or land within forty-eight hours after notice
by personal service or following receipt of a certified letter in accordance
with section 4-210 if such garbage or refuse has not been removed.  (Ref 16-
230, 16-231, 16-246, 16-901, 18-1303 R.S. Neb).
§ 4-212   GARBAGE AND REFUSE COLLECTION; LIEN.
Whenever a city removes any garbage or refuse, or causes it to be removed, from
any lot or land pursuant to this article, it shall, after a hearing conducted
by the governing board, assess the cost of the removal against such lot or
land. (Ref 16-230, 16-231, 16-246, 16-901, 18-1303 R.S. Neb.)
Article 3. Pollution and Nuisance
§ 4-301   NUISANCES; GENERAL DEFINITION.
A nuisance consists in doing any unlawful act, or omitting to perform a duty,
or suffering or permitting any condition or thing to be or exist, which act,
omission, condition or thing either:
1.   Injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of others, or,
2.   Offends decency, or,
3.   Is offensive to the senses, or,
4.   Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs or tends to obstruct, or renders
dangerous for passage any stream, public park, parkway, square, street or
highway in the City of Wymore, or,
5.   In any way renders other persons insecure in life or the use of property,
or,
6.   Essentially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life and
property, or tends to depreciate the value of the property of others.
§ 4-302   SPECIFIC NUISANCES.
The following specific acts, omissions, places, conditions, and things, in
addition to all other prohibitions of this Article, are hereby declared to be
nuisances.
   The maintaining, using, placing, depositing, leaving, or permittimg to be or
remain in or upon any private lot, building, structure or premise, or in or
upon any street, avenue, alley, park or parkway, or at any other public or
private place, of any one or more of the following conditions or things, to
wit:
1.   Privies, vaults, cesspools, dumps, pits, or like places which are not
securely protected from flies or rats.
2.   Filthy, littered, or trash-covered cellars, house-yards, barn-yards,
stable-yards, factory-yards, vacant areas in rear of stores, vacant lots,
houses, buildings, or premises.
3.   Liquid household waste, human excreta, garbage, butchers' trimmings and
offal, parts of fish or any waste vegetable or animal matter in any quantity;
Provided, nothing herein contained shall prevent the temporary retention of
waste in receptables in a manner provided by the Health Officer of the City of
Wymore, nor the dumping of non-purifying waste in a place and manner approved
by the said Health Officer.
4.   Tin cans, bottles, glass, cans, ashes, small pieces of scrap iron, wire,
metal articles, bric-a-brac, broken stone or cement, broken crockery, broken
glass, broken plaster, and all trash or abandoned material, unless the same be
kept in covered bins or galvanized iron receptacles approved by the Health
Officer.
5.   Trash, litter, rags, accumulations of barrels, boxes, crates, packing
crates, mattresses, bedding, excelsior, packing hay, straw, or other packing
material, lumber not neatly piled, iron, tin, or other metal not neatly piled,
old automobiles or parts thereof, or any other waste material, when any of said
articles or materials create a condition in which flies or rate may breed or
multiply, or which may be a fire danger, or which are so unsightly as to
depreciate property valued in the vicinity thereof.
6.   Any unsightly building, billlboard, or other structure, or any old,
abandoned or partially destroyed building or structure or any building or
structure commenced and left unfinished, which said buildings, billboards, or
ther structures are either a fire hazard, a menace to the public health or
safety, or are so unsightly as to depresiate the value of property in the
vicinity thereof.
7.   All places used or maintained as junk yards, dumping grounds, or for the
wrecking and dissembling of automobiles, trucks, tractors, or machinery of any
kind, or for the storing or leaving of worn-out, wrecked or abandoned
automobiles, trucks, tractors, or machinery of any kind, or of any of the parts
thereof, or for the storing or leaving of any machinery or equipment used by
contractors or builders or by other persons, which said places are kept or
maintained so as to essentially interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of
life or property by others, or which are so unsightly as to tend to depreciate
property values in the vicinity thereof.
§ 4-303   AIR POLLUTION; PROHIBITED.
It shall be uulawful for any person, firm, or corporation to permit the
emission of smoke from any source that is injurious or offensive to the
residents of the Municipality in the judgment of the Board of Health. Air shall
be considered to be polluted when the discharge into the open air of dust,
fumes, gases, mist, odors, smoke, or any combination thereof is of such
character and in a quantity which to any group of persons interferes with their
health, repose, or safety, or causes severe annoyance or discomfort or is
offensive and objectionable to normal persons and causes injury to real and
personal property of any kind. It is hereby unlawful for any such person, firm,
or corporation to permit or cause the escape of the aforesaid nuisances and the
escape of the said dust, fumes, gases, mists, odors, and smoke is hereby
declared to be a nuisance and shall be summarily abated upon written notice by
the Board of Health to the violator. Such abatement rnay be in addition to the
penalty for air pollution in the Municipality. (Ref. 28-1016 RS Neb.)
§ 4-304   WATER POLLUTION; PROHIBITED.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to obstruct or impede
without legal authority any river or collection of water, or to corrupt and
render unwholesome or impure any watercourse, stream, or other water. Such a
corruption of the water in or about the Municipality shall constitute a
nuisance and shall be summarily abated upon written notice to the violator by
the Board of Health. The said abatement may be in addition to the penalty for
water pollution. (Ref. 28-1012, 28-1016 RS Neb.)
§ 4-305   NOXIOUS SUBSTANCES; PROHIBITED.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or permit the accumulation of
any foul, decaying, or rotting substance, including stagnant water, in or upon
any lot, street, public way, or private property in the Municipality. It shall
be also unlawful to permit the overflow of any foul liquids to the extent that
they may be hazardous to the public health or a source of discomfort to persons
living or passing in the vicinity thereof. Such noxious substances constitute a
nuisance and shall be removed or otherwise made safe and inoffensive for the
residents of the Municipality upon the written notice of the Board of Health.
The said notice shall allow five (5) days to remove the nuisance. At the
expiration of that date, the property owner shall be deemed to be guilty of a
misdemeanor if he has failed, neglected, or refused to remove the said
nuisance.
§ 4-306   ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL.
The Mayor and Chief of Police of the Municipality shall have the duty and
authority to enforce the provisions of this Article. In enforcing these
provisions, the jurisdiction of the herein named officials shall include all
territory within a two (2) mile radius of the corporate limits.
§ 4-307   NUISANCES; ABATEMENT PROCEDURE.
It shall be the duty of every owner, occupant, lessee, or mortgagee of real
estate in the Municipality to keep such real estate free of public nuisances.
Upon determination by the Board of Health that said owner, occupant, lessee, or
mortgagee has failed to keep such real estate free of public nuisances, the
Governing Body shall thereupon cause notice to be served upon the owner,
occupant, lessee, mortgagee or agent thereof, by publication and by certified
mail. Such notice shall describe the condition as found by the Board of Health
and state that said condition has been declared a public nuisance, and that the
condition must be remedied at once. If the person receiving the notice has not
complied therewith or taken an appeal from the determination of the Board of
Health within five (5) days after receipt of certified mail or within five (5)
days after date of publication whichever is later, the Board of Health shall
notify the Governing Body of such noncompliance and the Governing Body shall,
upon receipt of such notice, cause a hearing date to be fixed and notice
thereof to be served upon the owner, occupant, lessee, or mortgagee, or agent
of the real estate. Such notice of hearing shall be by personal service or
certified mail and require such party or parties to appear before the Governing
Body to show cause why such condition should not be found to be a public
nuisance and remedied. A return of service shall be required by the Governing
Body. Such notice shall be given not less than five (5) days prior to the time
of hearing, provided that whenever the owner, lessee, occupant, or mortgagee of
such real estate is a non-resident or cannot be found in the State, then the
Municipal Clerk shall publish, in a newspaper of general circulation in the
Municipality, such notice of hearing for two (2) consecutive weeks, the last
publication to be at least one (1) week prior to the date set for the hearing.
Upon the date fixed for the hearing and pursuant to notice, the Governing Body
shall hear all objections made by interested parties and shall hear evidence
submitted by the Board of Health. If after consideration of all of the
evidence, the Governing Body shall find that the said condition is a public
nuisance, it shall, by resolution, order and direct the owner, occupant,
lessee, or mortgagee to remedy the said public nuisance at once; Provided, the
party or parties may appeal such decision to the appropriate court for
adjudication, during which proceedings the decision of the Governing Body shall
be stayed. Should the owner or occupant refuse or neglect to promptly comply
with the order of the Governing Body, the Governing Body shall proceed to cause
the abatement of the described public nuisance. Upon completion of the work by
the Municipality, a statement of the cost of such work shall be transmitted to
the Governing Body, which is authorized to bill the property owner or occupant,
or to levy the cost as a special assessment against the land. Such special
assessment shall be a lien on the real estate and shall be collected in the
manner provided for special assessments. (Ref. 18-1720 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 271,
4/27/77)
§ 4-308   NUISANCES; ADJOINING LAND OWNERS; INTERVENTION BEFORE TRIAL.
In cases of appeal from an action of the Governing Body condemning real
property as a nuisance or as dangerous under the police powers of the
Municipality, the owners of the adjoining property may intervene in the action
at any time before trial. (Ref. 19-710 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 400, 9/18/85)
Article 4. Sexual Predator Residency Restrictions
§ 4-401   SEXUAL PREDATORS RESIDENCY RESTRICTION; FINDINGS AND INTENT.
   (1)   The Nebraska Legislature has found that certain sex offenders present
a high risk to commit repeat offenses and has enabled municipalities to
restrict such persons’ place of residency as provided by the Sexual Predator
Residency Restriction Act.
   (2)   Sex offenders who prey on children and who are high risks to repeat
such acts present an extreme threat to public safety. The cost of sex offender
victimization to those children and to society at large, while incalculable, is
exorbitant.
   (3)   It is the intent of this article to serve the City’s compelling
interest to promote, protect and improve the health, safety and welfare of the
citizens of the City by creating certain areas around locations where children
regularly congregate in concentrated numbers where certain sexual predators
cannot reside.  (Ref. 29-4002 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 593, 6/4/08)
§ 4-402   SEXUAL PREDATOR RESIDENCY RESTRICTIONS; DEFINITIONS.
For purposes of this article:
"Child Care Facility" means a facility licensed pursuant to the Child Care
Licensing Act.
"Reside" means to sleep, live or dwell at a place, which may include more than
one location, and may be mobile or transitory.
"Residence" means a place where an individual sleeps, lives, or dwells, which
may include more than one location, and may be mobile or transitory.
"School" means public, private, denominational, or parochial school meets the
requirements for state accreditation or approval.
"Sex Offender" means an individual who has been convicted of a crime listed in
Section 29-4003 RS Neb., and who is required to register as a sex offender
pursuant to the Sex Offender Registration Act.
"Sexual predator" means an individual who is required to register under the Sex
Offender Registration Act, who has committed an aggravated offense as defined
in Section 29-4002.02 RS Neb. and who has victimized a person eighteen (18)
years of age or younger. (Ref. 29-4016 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 593, 6/4/08) (Amended
by Ord. No. 648., passed 11/1/17)
§ 4-403   SEXUAL PREDATOR RESIDENCY RESTRICTIONS’ PENALTIES; EXCEPTIONS.
(1)   Prohibited location of residence. It is unlawful for any sexual predator
to reside within five hundred feet from a school or child care facility.
   (2)   Measure distance. For purposes of determining the minimum distance
separation, the distance shall be measured by following a straight line from
the outer property line of the residence to the straight line from the outer
property line of the residence to the nearest outer boundary line of the child
care facility.
   (3)   Penalties. A person who violates this section shall be punished as
provided generally in the code.
   (4)   Exceptions. This article shall not apply to a sexual predator who:
      (a)   Resides within a prison or correctional or treatment facility
operated by the state of a political subdivision;
      (b)   Established a residence before July 1, 2006, and has not moved from
that residence; or
      (c)   Established a residence after July 1, 2006, and the school or child
care facility triggering the restriction was established after the initial date
of the sexual predator’s residence at the location. (Ref. 29-4017 RD Neb.)
(Ord. No. 593, 6/4/08)
Article 5. Penal Provisions
§ 4-501   VIOLATION; PENALTY.
Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with the enforcement of any of
the provisions of this Chapter, set forth at full length herein or incorporated
by reference, shall be deemed guilty of an offense, and upon conviction
thereof, shall be fined not less than seventy-five dollars ($75.00) nor more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. A new violation shall be
deemed to have been committed every twenty-four (24) hours of such failure to
comply. (Ref. 17-505 RS Neb.) (Amended by Ord. No. 538, 9/15/99)
§ 4-502   ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE.
   (1) Whenever a nuisance exists as defined in this Chapter, the Municipality
may proceed by a suit in equity to enjoin and abate the same, in the manner
provided by law.
   (2) Whenever, in any action, it is established that a nuisance exists, the
court shall together with the fine or penalty imposed, enter an order of
abatement as part of the judgement of the case. (Ref. 17-505, 18-1720 RS Neb.)
(Amended by Ord. No. 538, 9/15/99)
§ 4-503   VIOLATIONS; NATURE.
Each day's or parts of day's continuance of anything prohibited by this Article
shall be a separate offense hereunder. (Ref. 18-1720 RS Neb.)
Chapter 5
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Article 1. Definitions
§ 5-101   ALLEY.
The term "alley" shall mean the entire width between the property lines of
every way or place of whatever nature, when any part thereof is open to the use
of the public as a matter of right for vehicular traffic, when the entire width
between property lines of said way or place does not exceed twenty (20') feet.
§ 5-102   ALLEY ENTRANCE.
The term "alley entrance" shall mean the extension of the alley from the lot
line to the street curb line.
§ 5-103   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE.
The term "authorized emergency vehicle" shall mean vehicles of the Fire
Department and of the Police Department of the Municipality and ambulances.
(Ref. 39-602 (5) RS Neb.)
§ 5-104   CROSSWALKS.
The term "crosswalk" shall mean that portion of a roadway included within the
prolongation or connection of the lateral lines of sidewalks at intersections.
(Ref. 39-602 (13) RS Neb.)
§ 5-105   CURB.
The term "curb" shall mean the lateral boundaries of that portion of a street
designated for the use of vehicles whether marked by curb stones or not so
marked.
§ 5-106   DRIVER.
The term "driver" shall mean every person who drives or is in the actual
physical control of a vehicle. (Ref. 39-602 (59) RS Neb.)
§ 5-107   INTERSECTION OR STREET INTERSECTION.
The terms "intersection" or "street intersection" shall mean the space occupied
by two (2) streets at the point where they cross each other, bounded by the lot
lines extended and shall include the sidewalk space as well as the roadway.
(Ref. 39-602 (37) RS Neb.)
§ 5-108   MOTOR VEHICLES.
The term "motor vehicles" shall mean every vehicle which is self-propelled.
(Ref. 39-602 (53) RS Neb.)
§ 5-109   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNS.
The term "official traffic signs" shall mean all signs, markings, and devices,
other than signals, not inconsistent with this Chapter, placed or erected by
authority of the Governing Body for the purpose of directing, warning, or
regulating traffic. (Ref. 39-602 (105) RS Neb.)
§ 5-110   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNALS.
The term "official traffic signals" shall mean all signals, not inconsistent
with this section, placed or erected by authority of the Governing Body or a
public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of directing,
warning, or regulating traffic.
§ 5-111   AUTOMATIC TRAFFIC SIGNALS.
The term "automatic traffic signal" shall mean any signal electrically or
mechanically controlled by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and
proceed.
§ 5-112   PERSON.
The term "person" shall mean every natural person, firm, corporation, co-
partnership, or association. (Ref. 39-602 (67) RS Neb.)
§ 5-113   PRIVATE DRIVEWAY.
The term "private driveway" shall mean every road or driveway not open to the
use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel, including driveways into
gasoline filling stations and public garages. (Ref. 39-602 (71) RS Neb.)
§ 5-114   RIGHT-OF-WAY.
The term "right-of-way" shall mean the privilege of the immediate use of the
roadway.
§ 5-115   SIDEWALK SPACE.
The term "sidewalk space" shall mean that portion of a street between the curb
lines and the adjacent property lines.
§ 5-116   STOP.
The term "stop" shall mean to cause complete cessation of movement of a vehicle
which is occupied by at least one (1) person.
§ 5-117   STAND.
The term "stand" shall mean to cause complete cessation of movement of a
vehicle, whether occupied or not.
§ 5-118   PARK.
The term "park" shall mean to stand a vehicle whether occupied or not, upon a
street or alley, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while
actually engaged in loading or unloading, or in obedience to traffic
regulations or traffic signs or signals.
§ 5-119   TRAFFIC.
The term "traffic" shall mean pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, and
vehicles or other conveyances, either singly or together, while using any
street, alley, or public way for purposes of travel. (Ref. 39-602 (104) RS
Neb.)
§ 5-120   CONGESTED DISTRICT.
The term "congested district" shall mean and include the following portions of
streets and alleys in the Municipality:
All of Seventh (7th) Street the south side of "C" Street to the north side of
"H" Street; all of "D" Street from the west side of Eighth (8th) Street to the
east side of Sixth (6th) Street; all of "E" Street from the west side of Ninth
(9th) Street to the east side of Sixth (6th) Street; all of "F" Street from the
west side of Eighth (8th) Street to the east side of Sixth (6th) Street; all of
"G" Street from the west side of Eighth (8th) Street to the east side of Fifth
(5th) Street; all of "H" Street from the west side of Eighth (8th) Street to
the east side of Seventh (7th) Street; all of Sixth (6th) Street from the south
side of "C" Street to the north side of "G" Street; all of Eighth (8th) Street
the south side of "C" Street to the north side of "G" Street.
§ 5-121   ROADWAY.
The term "roadway" shall mean that portion of a street lying between the
lateral curb lines thereof.
§ 5-122   ARTERIAL STREET.
The term "arterial street" shall mean a street designated as such by resolution
of the Governing Body.
§ 5-123   TRUCK.
The term "truck" shall mean a motor vehicle equipped or used to transport
anything other than persons. (Ref. 39-602 (110) RS Neb.)
§ 5-124   VEHICLE.
The term "vehicle" shall mean every device in, upon, or by which any person or
property is or may be transported or drawn upon a street, and shall be deemed
to include wagons, trucks, horses whether led, driven or ridden, automobiles,
motorcycles, bicycles, tricycles, sleighs, steam or gasoline tractors, buses,
scooters, snowmobiles, and all other conveyances for persons or property except
railway trains running upon their own rails or tracks. (Ref. 39-602 (113) RS
Neb.)
Article 2. Municipal Traffic Regulations
§ 5-201   AUTOMATIC LIGHTS AND SIGNALS.
No vehicle shall turn at any intersection where an automatic signal system is
in operation except when such signal system is displaying a green light. No
vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction at any
intersection where an automatic signal system is in operation. (Ref. 39-609
through 39-611, 39-614 RS Neb.)
§ 5-202   AUTOMATIC SIGNAL SYSTEM.
At each intersection where an automatic signal system is in operation, all
vehicular and pedestrian traffic crossing such street intersection shall be
governed by such automatic signal system. The display of the red signal light
shall be a signal for traffic to stop outside of the street intersection. The
display of the yellow signal light shall announce that traffic be at attention
to stop when the red light is displayed, and the green signal light shall be a
signal for traffic to promptly move forward. It shall be unlawful for any
person to violate any such signal. (Ref. 39-609 through 39-611, 39-614 RS Neb.)
§ 5-203   OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC SIGNALS.
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to disobey the
instructions of any official traffic sign or signal unless otherwise directed
by a Police Officer. (Ref. 39-697 RS Neb.)
§ 5-204   ARTERIAL STREET; DESIGNATION.
The Governing Body of the Municipality may designate by resolution certain
streets or portions thereof as arterial streets. (Ref. 39-697 RS Neb.)
§ 5-205   ALLEYS.
The maximum speed limit of any vehicle operated in any alley in the
Municipality shall be ten (10) miles per hour. No person shall make a left hand
turn out of or into any alley within the congested district. (Ref. 39-697 RS
Neb.)
§ 5-206   STREET REPAIR.
The Superintendent of Streets for the Municipality, or his designated employee,
shall have the authority to close to traffic any street, alley, or portion
thereof for the purpose of repairing said street or alley. Repairs which
warrant the closing of the street or alley may extend to work on the sidewalk,
curb, or gutter as well as the street if, in the Superintendent's discretion,
the closing is necessary for the safety and convenience of the workers and the
traffic which would otherwise be using said street or alley. The time period of
the closing shall be determined by the Superintendent in his discretion. The
street, alley or portion thereof so closed to traffic shall be indicated by
substantial barricades, and by flares or warning lights which shall be kept
lighted at all times from a half hour after sunset to a half hour before
sunrise. No person, except those engaged in the construction thereon, shall
walk or drive a vehicle of any kind into the construction area until such times
as the barricades are removed. (Ref. 39-697 RS Neb.)
[Editor's Note: See §1-211 for provisions related to the Public Works
Superintendent.]
§ 5-207   TRUCK ROUTES.
The Governing Body may, by resolution, designate certain streets in the
Municipality that trucks shall travel upon, and it shall be unlawful for
persons operating such trucks to travel on other streets than those designated
for trucks, unless to pick up or deliver goods, wares, or merchandise, and in
that event, the operator of such truck shall return to such truck routes as
soon as possible in traveling through, or about the Municipality. The Governing
Body shall cause notices to be posted, or shall erect signs indicating the
streets so designated as truck routes. (Ref. 39-6,189 RS Neb.)
§ 5-208   TURNING; "U" TURNS.
No vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction, except
at a street intersection. (Ref. 39-651, 39-697 RS Neb.)
§ 5-209   TURNING; HAND SIGNALS.
A signal of intention to turn right or left shall be given continuously during
not less than the last fifty (50') feet traveled by the vehicle before turning.
The signals herein required shall be given either by means of the hand and arm,
or by a signal device of a type approved by the Department of Roads. The hand
and arm signals herein required shall be given from the left side of the
vehicle in the following manner: STOP or decreased speed, hand and arm extended
downward; LEFT TURN, hand and arm extended horizontally; RIGHT TURN, hand and
arm extended upward. (Ref. 39-652 through 39-654 RS Neb.)
§ 5-210   TURNING; GENERALLY.
Vehicles turning to the right into an intersecting street shall approach such
intersection in the lane of traffic nearest to the right hand side of the
highway and must turn the corner as near the right hand curb as possible to
keep between the curb to the right and the center of the intersection of the
two (2) streets. The driver of a vehicle intending to turn to the left shall
approach such center line of the highway, and in turning shall pass as near as
possible to the center of the intersection, passing as closely as practicable
to the right thereof before turning such vehicle to the left. For the purposes
of this section, the center of the intersection shall mean the meeting point of
the medial lines of the highways intersecting one another. (Ref. 39-650 RS
Neb.)
§ 5-211   TURNING; CAUTIOUS.
The operator of a vehicle shall, before stopping, turning, or changing the
course of such vehicle, see that there is sufficient space to make such
movement in safety. If any pedestrian might be affected by such movement, the
operator shall give a clearly audible signal by sounding the horn, and whenever
the operation of any other vehicle may be affected by such movement, he shall
give some unmistakable signal to the driver of all other vehicles of his
intention to make such movement. (Ref. 39-644, 39-652, 39-697 RS Neb.)
§ 5-212   RIGHT-OF-WAY; GENERALLY.
When two (2) vehicles approach, or enter an intersection at approximately the
same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right-of-way
to the vehicle on the right when the paths of such vehicles intersect and there
is danger of a collision, unless otherwise directed by a Municipal Policeman
stationed at the intersection. The driver of a vehicle intending to turn to the
left within an intersection, or into an alley, private road, or driveway shall
yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction
which is within the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an
immediate hazard. The driver of a vehicle on any street shall yield the right-
of-way to a pedestrian crossing such street within any clearly marked
crosswalk, or at any regular pedestrian crossing at the end of a block where
the movement of traffic is being regulated by traffic officers or traffic
direction devices. Every pedestrian crossing a street at any point other than a
pedestrian crossing, crosswalk, or intersection shall yield the right-of-way to
vehicles upon the street. The driver of a vehicle entering a Municipal street
from a private road, or drive shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles
approaching on such streets. The driver of a vehicle upon a street shall yield
the right-of-way to authorized emergency vehicles when the latter are operated
upon official business and the drivers thereof sound audible signal by bell,
siren, or whistle. (Ref. 39-635 through 39-643 RS Neb.)
§ 5-213   RIGHT-OF-WAY; OVERTAKING VEHICLES.
The driver of a vehicle about to be overtaken and passed by another vehicle
approaching from the rear shall give right-of-way in favor of the overtaking
vehicle. (Ref. 39-622 RS Neb.)
§ 5-214   RIGHT-OF-WAY; EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
Upon the approach of any authorized emergency vehicle, every vehicle within one
(1) block of the route of such emergency vehicle shall immediately stop, except
at the time they are on or crossing a street intersection, in which event, such
vehicle shall drive clear of the street intersection and then stop. Every
vehicle along the route of such emergency vehicle shall immediately move to a
position as near the right hand curb as possible and remain there until such
authorized emergency vehicle or vehicles have passed; provided, said vehicles
are operated on official business and the drivers thereof sound audible signal
by bell, siren or whistle. (Ref. 39-640 RS Neb.)
§ 5-215   POSITION OF VEHICLE ON HIGHWAY; GENERALLY.
Upon all highways of sufficient width, one-way streets excepted, the driver of
a vehicle shall drive the same on the right half of the roadway. In passing or
meeting other vehicles, drivers shall give each other at least one half (1/2)
of the main traveled portion of the roadway. (Ref. 39-620 RS Neb.)
§ 5-216   POSITION OF VEHICLE ON HIGHWAY; STREET CENTER LINE.
A vehicle shall not be driven to the left of the center line of the highway in
overtaking or passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction, unless
such left side is clearly visible and free from oncoming traffic for a
sufficient distance to permit such overtaking and passing to be made in safety.
(Ref. 39-625 RS Neb.)
§ 5-217   BACKING.
Before backing, ample warning shall be given and while backing, unceasing
vigilance must be exercised not to injure those behind. The driver of a parked
vehicle about to back shall give moving vehicles the right-of-way. (Ref. 39-
675, 39-697 RS Neb.)
§ 5-218   STARTING FROM CURB.
No vehicle standing alongside the curb of any street shall start from such curb
until the driver shall have given a signal which can be plainly seen from the
rear of such vehicle. Such signal shall take the form of a hand signal as
herein provided. (Ref. 39-697 RS Neb.)
§ 5-219   STOPS; MANDATORY.
All vehicles before crossing a sidewalk, emerging from a garage, alley, filling
station, or other place within the "congested district," shall come to a
complete stop, and after giving sufficient warning shall proceed slowly and
with extreme caution while crossing such sidewalk, or leaving such garage,
alley, filling station, or other place. The term "slowly" shall be construed to
mean such rate of speed as is reasonable and proper under the circumstances and
the condition of the street and traffic thereon. (Ref. 39-638 RS Neb.)
§ 5-220   STOPPING FOR SCHOOL BUSES.
Upon meeting or overtaking, from the front or rear, any school bus on which the
stop warning signal lights are flashing, the driver of a motor vehicle shall
reduce the speed of such vehicle to not more than twenty-five (25) miles per
hour, shall bring such vehicle to a complete stop when the school bus stop
signal arm is extended, and shall remain stopped until the stop sign signal arm
is retracted and the school bus resumes motion or until signaled by the bus
driver to proceed. (Ref. 60-680, 60-6,175 RS Neb.) (Amended by Ord. Nos. 571,
5/4/05; 616, 3/21/12)
§ 5-221   CROSSWALKS.
The Governing Body may, by resolution, establish and maintain, by appropriate
devices, markers, or lines upon the street, crosswalks, at intersections where
there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the street, and at such
other places as they may deem necessary. (Ref. 39-697 RS Neb.)
§ 5-222   SIGNS, SIGNALS.
The Governing Body may, by resolution, provide for the placing of stop signs,
or other signs, signals, standards, or mechanical devices in any street or
alley for the purpose of regulating, or prohibiting traffic thereon. Such
resolution shall describe the portion of the street or alley wherein traffic is
to be regulated or prohibited; the regulation or prohibition; the location
where such sign, signal, standard or mechanical device shall be placed; and the
hours when such regulation or prohibition shall be effective. It shall be
unlawful for any person to fail, neglect, or refuse to comply with such
regulation, or prohibition. (Ref. 39-609 through 39-611, 39-697 RS Neb.)
§ 5-223   STOP SIGNS.
Every person operating any vehicle shall, upon approaching any stop sign
erected in accordance with the resolution prescribed heretofore, cause such
vehicle to come to a complete stop with the front wheels of said vehicle
parallel with said stop sign. (Ref. 39-609 through 39-611, 39-697 RS Neb.)
§ 5-224   ARTERIAL STREET; ENTRANCE.
Every vehicle shall come to a complete stop before entering an arterial street.
This section shall not apply at an intersection where an automatic traffic
signal is in operation, in which case, the driver of said vehicle shall be
governed by the traffic signal. (Ref. 39-697 RS Neb.)
§ 5-225   CHILD PASSENGER RESTRAINT SYSTEM.
   (1)   Any person driving any motor vehicle which has or is required to have
seat safety belts, shall ensure that all children under the age of four (4)
being transported in such vehicle use a child restraint system, of a type which
meets Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard 213 as developed by the Highway
Safety Administration as of August 26, 1983, or use a seat safety belt for
children over age one (1). Provided, however, this section does not apply to
taxicabs, mopeds, motorcycles, and any other vehicle designated by the
manufacturer as a 1963 year model or earlier which is not equipped with a seat
safety belt.
   (2)   Whenever any physician licensed to practice medicine in Nebraska
determines through accepted medical procedures, that use of a child passenger
restraint system by a particular child would be harmful by reason of the
child's weight, physical condition or other medical reason, the provisions of
subsection 1 of this section shall be waived. The driver of any vehicle
transporting such a child shall carry on his or her person or in the vehicle a
signed written statement of the physician identifying the child and stating the
grounds for such waiver.
   (3)   The drivers of authorized emergency vehicles as defined in 39-602 RS
Neb., shall not be subject to the requirements of subsection 1 of this section
when operating such authorized emergency vehicles pursuant to their employment.
(Ref. 39-6,103.01 RS Neb.)(Ord. No. 401, 9/18/85)
§ 5-226   SIGNS, TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES, TRAFFIC SURVEILLANCE DEVICES;
DEFACING OR INTERFERING WITH.
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously deface, injure,
remove, obstruct, knock down or interfere with any official traffic sign or
signal, traffic control device, or traffic control surveillance device. (Ref.
39-619, 39-619.01 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 436, 11/15/89)
Article 3. Operator and Vehicle Qualifications
§ 5-301   VEHICLES; SIGNAL DEVICES.
Every motor vehicle while in use of the streets or alleys of the Municipality
shall be equipped with an efficient and audible signal device or horn;
provided, no vehicle, except authorized emergency vehicle, shall be equipped
with a siren.
§ 5-302   VEHICLE; MUFFLER.
Every motor vehicle operated within this Municipality shall be provided with a
muffler in good working order to prevent excessive or unusual noise or smoke.
It shall be unlawful to use a "muffler cut-out" on any motor vehicle upon any
streets; provided, the provisions of this section shall not apply to authorized
emergency vehicles. (Ref. 39-6,137 RS Neb.)
§ 5-303   VEHICLES; LUGS.
No person shall operate within the Municipality any vehicle with lugs, flanges
or ribs on its tires or wheels. This prohibition shall apply only to paved
roadways and crosswalks.
§ 5-304   LOADS; PROJECTING.
When any vehicle shall be loaded in such a manner that any portion of the load
extends more than four (4') feet beyond the rear of the bed or the body of such
vehicle, a red flag shall be carried by day, and red light after sunset at the
extreme rear end of such load. (Ref. 39-6,130 RS Neb.)
§ 5-305   LOADS; SPILLING.
No person shall, within the Municipality, permit the contents of any vehicle
driven by him to drop or drip upon any roadway within the Municipality. (Ref.
39-6,129, 39-6,137 RS Neb.)
Article 4. Parking
§ 5-401   PARKING; GENERALLY.
No person shall park any vehicle, or approach the curb with a vehicle, except
when headed in the direction of the traffic. Vehicles, when parked, shall stand
parallel with and adjacent to the curb or edge of the roadway, in such manner
as to have both right wheels within twelve (12") inches of the curb or edge of
the roadway, and so as to leave at least four (4') feet between the vehicle so
parked and any other parked vehicle. No person shall park a vehicle so as to
obstruct a private driveway or drive for any period of time. No person shall
park a vehicle, or permit it to stand, within fifteen (15') feet in either
direction from the entrance of any fire station. (Ref. 39-673, 39-697 RS Neb.)
§ 5-402   PARKING; ANGLE PARKING.
The Governing Body may, by resolution, designate any street, or portion
thereof, where vehicles shall be parked parallel with and adjacent to the curb
or at an angle so as to have both right wheels within six (6") inches of the
curb, or where vehicles shall be parked with the right front wheel of such
vehicle at the curb. Where stalls are designated either on the curb or pavement
in the congested district, vehicles shall be parked within such stalls. (Ref.
39-673, 39-697 RS Neb.)
§ 5-403   PARKING; OBSTRUCTING ALLEY.
No vehicle, while parked shall have any portion thereof projecting into any
alley entrance. (Ref. 39-697 RS Neb.)
§ 5-404   PARKING; ALLEYS.
No vehicle shall be parked in any alley, except for the purpose of loading or
unloading during the time necessary to load or unload, which shall not exceed
the maximum limit of one half (1/2) hour. Every vehicle while loading or
unloading in any alley shall be parked in such manner as will cause the least
obstruction possible to traffic in such alley. (Ref. 39-697 RS Neb.)
§ 5-405   UNLOADING; FREIGHT VEHICLES.
Vehicles of an over-all length of less than twenty (20') feet, including load,
while discharging freight may back to the curb, but shall occupy as little of
the street as possible. (Ref. 39-697 RS Neb.)
§ 5-406   PARKING; FIRE HYDRANTS.
No vehicle shall be parked or any horse left hitched within fifteen (15') feet
in either direction of any fire hydrant. The curb space within such area of
fifteen (15') feet in either direction of such fire hydrant shall be painted
red to indicate such prohibition. (Ref. 39-672 RS Neb.)
§ 5-407   PARKING; OBSTRUCTING TRAFFIC.
No person shall, except in case of an accident or emergency, stop within any
street intersection, alley entrance, or any such location as to obstruct any
street, crosswalk, or alley entrance. (Ref. 39-697 RS Neb.)
§ 5-408   PARKING; CURBS, PAINTED.
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to cause the curb space to be
painted and keep the same painted as in this article provided. No person, firm,
or corporation shall paint the curb of any street, or in any manner set aside,
or attempt to prevent the parking of vehicles in any street, or part thereof,
except at such places where the parking of vehicles is prohibited by the
provisions of this Article. The marking or designating of portions of streets
or alleys where the parking of vehicles is prohibited or limited shall be done
only by the Municipality through its proper officers, at the direction of the
Governing Body. (Ref. 39-697 RS Neb.)
§ 5-409   PARKING; DISPLAY OR REPAIR.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park upon any street, alley, or public
place within this Municipality any vehicle displayed for sale. No person shall
adjust or repair any automobile or motorcycle, or race the motor of same, while
standing on the public streets or alleys of this Municipality, excepting in
case of breakdown or other emergency requiring same. No person or employee
connected with a garage or repair shop shall use sidewalks, streets, or alleys
in the vicinity of such garage or shop for the purpose of working on
automobiles or vehicles of any description. (Ref. 39-697 RS Neb.)
§ 5-410   PARKING; TIME LIMIT.
The Governing Body may, by resolution, entirely prohibit, or fix a time limit
for, the parking and stopping of vehicles on any street, streets, or district
designated by such resolution, and the parking, or stopping, of any vehicle in
any such street, streets, or district, for a period of time longer than fixed
in such resolution shall constitute a violation of this Article. (Ref. 39-697
RS Neb.)
§ 5-411   PARKING; TIME LIMIT, MAXIMUM.
The parking of a motor vehicle on a public street for over twelve (12)
consecutive hours is unlawful. Forty-eight (48) hours after a vehicle shall be
deemed to be in violation of this section, such vehicle may be impounded by the
Chief of Police as an abandoned vehicle. Such abandoned vehicle will be
disposed of as provided by Chapter Six (6) of this Code. (Ref. 39-697 RS Neb.)
§ 5-412   PARKING; VENDORS.
No vehicle used for the purpose of vending merchandise, or other vehicle
commonly known as a peddler's car or wagon shall be allowed to stand on any
street longer than ten (10) minutes in any one (1) location.
§ 5-413   PARKING; COMMERCIAL VEHICLES; TRUCKS; TRAILERS; MOTOR HOMES.
1.   Areas designated for Angle Parking: It shall be unlawful for the owner or
operator of any commercial motor vehicle, truck or trailer, or motor home,
longer than eighteen feet (18') in overall length, including trailer, bed or
box, to park the same upon any roadway of the Municipality where the parking
has been designated to be angle parking. Such vehicle may be parked on a street
bearing angle parking to load or unload freight; provided, such loading and
unloading shall last no longer than twenty (20) minutes, and provided that said
parking does not obstruct the street. It shall be unlawful for the owner or
operator of a commercial vehicle, truck or trailer, regardless of length, to
park the same with its tailgate down extending beyond the body of the vehicle
in any area designated to be angle parking, except when such vehicle is backed
to the curb and in the process of being loaded or unloaded.
2.   Generally. It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a semi-
tractor-truck with trailer attached or unattached, any trailer unattached, any
other motor vehicle with trailer, bed, or box attached which exceeds nine feet
(9') in length, or in excess of the gross weight of six (6) tons, or any motor
home exceeding thirty feet (30') in length measured bumper to bumper, except
emergency vehicles, to park on the streets, alleys, public ways or portions
thereof, within the Municipality, except when being used for the purpose of
delivering or collecting freight, including goods, wares, merchandise or
materials to an adjacent property, and then only for a period of time no longer
than is necessary for the expeditious delivery or collecting of freight,
including goods, wares, merchandise or materials.
3.   Temporary Parking; Permit. In the event a commercial motor vehicle, truck
or trailer is being used within the Municipality in connection with building,
repair, service or moving operations, the owner or operator thereof may apply
to the Chief of Police for a temporary permit to park said commercial motor
vehicle, truck or trailer at a designated location for a period of time not to
exceed three (3) days; provided, that the commercial motor vehicle, truck or
trailer shall be removed immediately upon the completion of its use in
connection with the building, repair, service or moving operations or upon the
expiration of the permit, whichever shall first occur.
(Amended by Ord. No. 467, 9/16/92) 
§ 5-413.01   PARKING; NO PARKING ON NORTH SIDE OF "G" STREET BETWEEN 9TH AND
11TH STREETS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle at any
time on the north side of "G" Street between 9th and 11th Streets.
   (B)   The appropriate number of "No Parking" signs shall be placed in the
street right-of-way on the north side of "G" Street between 9th and 11th
Streets in conformance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Devices. (Ref. 60-
680, 60-6,121 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 604, 6/2/10)
§ 5-414   PARKING; OWNER'S RESPONSIBILITY.
The owner of any vehicle found to be in violation of this Article shall be
deemed liable and responsible for any such violation; provided, the actual
operator of such vehicle cannot be determined.
§ 5-415   PARKING; HANDICAPPED OR DISABLED PERSONS; DESIGNATION OF ONSTREET
PARKING SPACES AND ACCESS AISLES; DISPLAY OF PERMITS.
   (A)   The Governing Body may designate parking spaces, including access
aisles, for the exclusive use of (1) handicapped or disabled persons whose
motor vehicles display the distinguishing license plates issued to handicapped
or disabled persons pursuant to section 60-3,113 RS Neb., (2) handicapped or
disabled persons whose motor vehicles display a distinguishing license plate
issued to a handicapped or disabled person by another state, (3) such other
handicapped or disabled persons or temporarily handicapped or disabled persons,
as certified by the Municipality, whose motor vehicles display the permit
specified in section 18-1739 RS Neb., and (4) such other motor vehicles, as
certified by the Municipality, which display such permit. All such permits
shall be displayed by hanging the permit from the motor vehicle's rearview
mirror so as to be clearly visible through the front windshield. The permit
shall be displayed on the dashboard only when there is no rearview mirror.
   (B)   If the Governing Body so designates a parking space or access aisle,
it shall be indicated by posting aboveground and immediately adjacent to and
visible from each space or access aisle a sign as described in section18-1737
RS Neb.. In addition to such sign, the space or access aisle may also be
indicated by blue paint on the curb or edge of the paved portion of the street
adjacent to the space or access aisle. (Ref. 18-1736, RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 292,
12/7/77) (Amended by Ord. Nos. 325, 10/1/80; 389, 9/19/84; 443, 11/15/89; 496,
6/21/95)
[Editor's Note: Sections 5-415.01 through 5-415.08 were adopted by Ordinance
No. 496 which was passed on June 21, 1995]
§ 5-415.01   PARKING; HANDICAPPED OR DISABLED PERSONS; DESIGNATION OF OFFSTREET
PARKING STALLS, SPACES AND ACCESS AISLES.
   The Municipality and any person in lawful possession of any offstreet
parking facility may designate stalls or spaces, including access aisles, in
such facility owned or operated by the Municipality or person for the exclusive
use of (a) handicapped or disabled persons whose motor vehicles display the
distinguishing license plates issued to such individuals pursuant to section
60-3,113 RS Neb., (b) such other handicapped or disabled persons or temporarily
handicapped or disabled persons, as certified by the Municipality, whose motor
vehicles display the permit specified in section 18-1739 RS Neb., and (c) such
other motor vehicles, as certified by the Municipality, which display such
permit. Such designation shall be made by posting aboveground and immediately
adjacent to and visible from each stall or space, including access aisles, a
sign which is in conformance with the requirements in section 18-1737 RS Neb..
(Ref. 18-1737 RS Neb.)
§ 5-415.02 PARKING; HANDICAPPED OR DISABLED PERSONS; DEFINITIONS.
For purposes of this Article:
   (A)   ACCESS AISLE means a space adjacent to a handicapped parking space or
passenger loading zone which is constructed and designed in compliance with the
federal Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 and the federal rules and
regulations adopted and promulgated in response to the act.  (Ref.18-1736 RS
Neb.)
   (B)   (1)   HANDICAPPED OR DISABLED PERSON means any individual with a
severe visual or physical impairment which limits personal mobility and results
in an inability to travel unassisted more than 200 feet without the use of a
wheelchair, crutch, walker, or prosthetic, orthotic, or other assistant device,
any individual whose personal mobility is limited as a result of respiratory
problems, any individual who has a cardiac condition to the extent that his or
her functional limitations are classified in severity as being Class III or
Class IV, according to standards set by the American Heart Association, and any
individual who has permanently lost all or substantially all the use of one or
more limbs.
      (2)   TEMPORARILY HANDICAPPED OR DISABLED PERSON means any handicapped or
disabled person whose personal mobility is expected to be limited in such
manner for no longer than one year. (Ref. 18-1738 RS Neb.)
   (C)   HANDICAPPED PARKING INFRACTION means the violation of any section of
this Article regulating (1) the use of parking spaces, including access aisles,
designated for use by handicapped or disabled persons, (2) the unauthorized
possession, use, or display of handicapped or disabled parking permits, or (3)
the obstruction of any wheelchair ramps constructed or created in accordance
and in conformity with the federal Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990.
(Ref. 18-1741.01 RS Neb.)
§ 5-415.03 PARKING; HANDICAPPED OR DISABLED PERSONS; PERSONAL PERMIT; ISSUANCE;
RENEWAL.
   (A)   The Municipal Clerk may take an application, on a form provided by the
Department of Motor Vehicles, from a handicapped or disabled person or
temporarily handicapped or disabled person or his or her parent, legal
guardian, or foster parent for a permit which will entitle the holder thereof
or a person driving a motor vehicle for the purpose of transporting such holder
to park in those spaces or access aisles provided for by this Article when the
holder of the permit will enter or exit the motor vehicle while it is parked in
such spaces or access aisles. For purposes of this section, the handicapped or
disabled person or temporarily handicapped or disabled person shall be
considered the holder of the permit.
   (B)   A person applying for a permit or for the renewal of a permit shall
complete an application, shall provide proof of identity, and shall submit a
completed medical form containing the statutory criteria for qualification and
signed by a physician, physician assistant, or advanced practice registered
nurse certifying that the person who will be the holder meets the definition of
handicapped or disabled person or temporarily handicapped or disabled person.
No applicant shall be required to provide his or her social security number. In
the case of a temporarily handicapped or disabled person, the certifying
physician, physician assistant, or advanced practice registered nurse shall
indicate the estimated date of recovery or that the temporary handicap or
disability will continue for a period of six (6) months, whichever is less.
   (C)   A person may hold only one permit under this section and may hold
either a permit under this section or a permit under section 5-415.04 (Motor
Vehicle Permit; Issuance), but not both.
   (D)   A copy of the completed application form shall be given to each
applicant. The Municipal Clerk shall submit to the Department of Motor Vehicles
the name, address, and license number of all persons applying for a permit
pursuant to this section.
   (E)   An application for the renewal of a permit under this section may be
filed within thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the permit. The
existing permit shall be invalid upon receipt of the new permit. (Ref. 18-1738
RS Neb.)
   (F)   The Municipal Clerk shall not accept the application for a permit of
any person making application contrary to the provisions of section 18-1738.02
RS Neb. (Ref. 18-1738.02 RS Neb.)
§ 5-415.04   PARKING; HANDICAPPED OR DISABLED PERSONS; MOTOR VEHICLE PERMIT
ISSUANCE; RENEWAL.
   (A) The Municipal Clerk shall take an application from any person for a
motor vehicle permit which will entitle the holder thereof or a person driving
the motor vehicle for the purpose of transporting handicapped or disabled
persons or temporarily handicapped or disabled persons to park in those spaces
or access aisles provided for by this Article if the motor vehicle is used
primarily for the transportation of handicapped or disabled persons or
temporarily handicapped or disabled persons. Such parking permit shall be used
only when the motor vehicle for which it was issued is being used for the
transportation of a handicapped or disabled person or temporarily handicapped
or disabled person and such person will enter or exit the motor vehicle while
it is parked in such designated spaces or access aisles.
   (B)   A person applying for a permit or for the renewal of a permit pursuant
to this section shall apply for a permit for each motor vehicle used for the
transportation of handicapped or disabled persons or temporarily handicapped or
disabled persons, shall complete such forms as are provided to the Municipal
Clerk by the Department of Motor Vehicles, and shall demonstrate to the
Municipal Clerk that each such motor vehicle is used primarily for the
transportation of handicapped or disabled persons or temporarily handicapped or
disabled persons. A copy of the completed application form shall be given to
each applicant.
   (C)   No more than one such permit shall be issued for each motor vehicle. A
person may hold either a permit under this section or a permit under section
5-415.03 (Personal Permit; Issuance), but not both.
   (D)   An application for the renewal of a permit under this section may be
filed within thirty days prior to the expiration of the permit. The existing
permit shall be invalid upon receipt of the new permit.
   (E)   The Municipal Clerk shall submit to the Department of Motor Vehicles
the name, address, and license number of all persons applying for a permit
pursuant to this section. (Ref. 18-1738.01 RS Neb.)
   (F)   The Municipal Clerk shall not accept the application for a permit of
any person making application contrary to section 18-1738.02 RS Neb.  (Ref. 18-
1738.02 RS Neb.)
§ 5-415.05   PARKING; HANDICAPPED OR DISABLED PERSONS; PERMITS; PROHIBITED
ISSUANCE; DUPLICATE PERMITS.
   (A) No permit shall be issued to any person or for any motor vehicle if any
parking permit has been issued to such person or for such motor vehicle and
such permit has been suspended pursuant to section 5-415.07 (Permits
Nontransferable; Violations; Suspension). At the expiration of such suspension,
a permit may be renewed in the manner provided for renewal in this Article.
   (B)   A duplicate permit may be provided without cost if the original permit
is destroyed, lost, or stolen. Such duplicate permit shall be issued in the
same manner as the original permit, except that a newly completed medical form
need not be provided if a completed medical form submitted at the time of the
most recent application for a permit or its renewal is on file with the
Municipal Clerk or the Department of Motor Vehicles. A duplicate permit shall
be valid for the remainder of the period for which the original permit was
issued. (Ref. 18-1739 RS Neb.)
§ 5-415.06   PARKING; HANDICAPPED OR DISABLED PERSONS; PERMITS; PERIOD VALID;
RENEWAL.
   (A)   Permanently issued permits for handicapped or disabled parking
authorized by sections 18-1736 to 18-1741.07 RS Neb. issued prior to August 1,
2005, shall be valid for period ending on September 30 of the third year after
the date of issuance and shall expire on that date. Permanently issued permits
issued on or after August 1, 2005 shall be valid for a period ending on the
last day of the month of the applicant's birthday in the third year after
issuance and shall expire on that day.
   (B)   All permits authorized under sections 18-1736 to 18-1741.07 for
temporarily handicapped or disabled parking shall be issued for a period ending
not more than six (6) months after the date of issuance but may be renewed one
time for a period not to exceed six (6) months. For the renewal period, there
shall be submitted an additional application with proof of a handicap or
disability. (Ref. 18-1740 RS Neb.)
§ 5-415.07   PARKING; HANDICAPPED OR DISABLED PERSONS; PERMITS NONTRANSFERABLE;
VIOLATION; SUSPENSION.
   (A)   Permits issued under this Article shall not be transferable and shall
be used only by the party to whom issued or for the motor vehicle for which
issued and only for the purpose for which it is issued. No person shall alter
or reproduce in any manner a permit issued pursuant to this Article. No person
shall knowingly hold more than one permit or knowingly provide false
information on an application for a permit.
   (B)   No person who is not the holder of a handicapped or disabled parking
permit issued to him or her as a handicapped or disabled person shall display a
handicapped or disabled parking permit and park in a space or access aisle
designated for the exclusive use of a handicapped or disabled person.
   (C)   No person who is the holder of a handicapped or disabled parking
permit issued for the use of such person when transporting a handicapped or
disabled person shall display his or her handicapped or disabled parking permit
and park in a space or access aisle designated for the exclusive use of a
handicapped or disabled person unless a handicapped or disabled person is
actually in the vehicle displaying the permit at the time it is parked, has
left the vehicle while it was parked, and will return to the vehicle before it
leaves the designated space or access aisle.
   (D)   No person who is not the holder of a handicapped or disabled parking
permit issued for use when a vehicle is transporting a handicapped or disabled
person shall display a handicapped or disabled parking permit and park in a
space or access aisle designated for the exclusive use of a handicapped or
disabled person unless a handicapped or disabled person is actually in the
vehicle displaying the permit at the time it is parked, has left the vehicle
while it was parked, and will return to the vehicle before it leaves the
designated space or access aisle.
   (E)   Any violation of this section shall constitute a handicapped parking
infraction and shall be cause for suspension of such permit for a period of six
(6) months and imposition of the penalty provided for violation of this
Chapter. In addition, the trial court shall impose a fine of not more than two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) which may be waived by the court if, at the
time of sentencing, all handicapped parking permits issued to or in the
possession of the offender are returned to the court. At the expiration of such
six-month period, a suspended permit may be renewed in the manner provided for
renewal in this Article.  (Ref. 18-1741 RS Neb.)
§ 5-415.08   PARKING; HANDICAPPED OR DISABLED PERSONS; REMOVAL OF UNAUTHORIZED
VEHICLE; PENALTY.
   (A)   The owner or person in lawful possession of an offstreet parking
facility, after notifying the municipal police, and the Municipality, if it
provides onstreet parking or owns, operates, or provides an offstreet parking
facility, may cause the removal, from a stall or space, including access
aisles, designated exclusively for handicapped or disabled persons or
temporarily handicapped or disabled persons or motor vehicles for the
transportation of handicapped or disabled persons or temporarily handicapped or
disabled persons, of any vehicle not displaying the proper permit or the
distinguishing license plates specified in this Article if there is posted
aboveground and immediately adjacent to and visible from such stall or space,
including access aisles, a sign which clearly and conspicuously states the area
so designated as a tow-in zone.
   (B)   A person who parks a vehicle in any onstreet parking space or access
aisle which has been designated exclusively for handicapped or disabled persons
or temporarily handicapped or disabled persons or motor vehicles for the
transportation of handicapped or disabled persons or temporarily handicapped or
disabled persons, or in any so exclusively designated parking space or access
aisle in any offstreet parking facility, without properly displaying the proper
permit or when the handicapped or disabled person to whom or for whom, as the
case may be, the license plate or permit is issued will not enter or exit the
vehicle while it is parked in the designated space or access aisle shall be
guilty of a handicapped parking infraction and shall be subject to the
penalties and procedures set forth in section 39-6,112 RS Neb. The display on a
motor vehicle of a distinguishing license plate or permit issued to a
handicapped or disabled person by and under the duly constituted authority of
another state shall constitute a full and complete defense in any action for a
handicapped parking infraction. If the identity of the person who parked the
vehicle in violation of this section cannot be readily determined, the owner or
person in whose name the vehicle is registered shall be held prima facie
responsible for such violation and shall be guilty and subject to the penalties
and procedures described in this section.
   (C)   In the case of a privately owned offstreet parking facility, the
Municipality shall not require the owner or person in lawful possession of such
facility to inform the Municipality of a violation of this section prior to the
Municipality issuing the violator a handicapped parking infraction citation.
(Ref.18-1737 RS Neb.)
§ 5-416   PARKING; PRIVATE LOTS.
Any person parking a motor vehicle in a properly posted, restricted parking lot
without the consent of the owner or tenant authorized to give permission shall
be guilty of an infraction and the vehicle shall be subject to being towed away
at the request of such lot owner or tenant. Any person found guilty under this
section shall be subject to the penalties provided for infractions. If the
identity of the operator of a motor vehicle in violation of this section cannot
be determined, the owner or person in whose name such vehicle is registered
shall be held prima facie responsible for such infraction. When any law
enforcement officer observes or is advised that a motor vehicle may be in
violation of this section, he or she shall make a determination as to whether a
violation has in fact occurred and if so shall personally serve or attach to
such motor vehicle a citation directed to the owner or operator of such
vehicle, which shall set forth the nature of the violation. Any person who
refuses to sign the citation or otherwise comply with the command of the
citation shall be punished as provided by section 29-426 RS Neb.
   Signs designating a restricted parking lot shall be readily visible and
shall state the purpose or purposes for parking on the restricted parking lot,
state the hours for restricted parking, and state who to contact for
information regarding a towed vehicle. (Ref. 60-2401, 60-2402 RS Neb.) (Ord.
No. 339, 12/2/81)
§ 5-417   PARKING; REMOVAL OF ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLES.
Whenever any Police Officer shall find a vehicle standing upon a street or
alley in violation of any of the provisions of the Article, such individual may
remove or have such vehicle removed, or require the driver or other person in
charge of the vehicle to move such vehicle, to a position off the roadway of
such street or alley or from such street or alley.
    The owner or other person lawfully entitled to the possession of any
vehicle towed or stored shall be charged with the reasonable cost of towing and
storage fees. Any such towing or storage fee shall be a lien upon the vehicle
prior to all other claims. Any person towing or storing a vehicle shall be
entitled to retain possession of such vehicle until such charges are paid. The
lien provided for in this section shall not apply to the contents of any
vehicles. (Ref. 39-671, 39-697 RS Neb) (Ord. No. 390, 9/19/84) (Amended by Ord.
No. 425, 11/16/88)
§ 5-418   PARKING; CENTER PARKING ON 7TH STREET BETWEEN “D” STREET AND “G”
STREET; PARALLEL PARKING.
   (1)   Center parking on 7th street between “D” Street and “G” Street shall
be by parallel parking only.
   (2)   The City shall paint parallel parking stalls on 7th Street between “D”
Street and “G” Street prior to the effective date of this section.
(Ref. 60- 680, 60-6, 121 RS. Neb.) (Ord. 674, 8/16/23)
Article 5. Bicycles, Motorcycles and Mopeds
§ 5-501   BICYCLE; LICENSE.
Anyone wishing to operate a bicycle within the corporate limits shall make an
application to the Municipal Police on, or before, the thirty-first (31st) day
of December of each year. Said application shall contain such information as
the Chief of Police shall deem necessary and proper. A license shall then be
issued by the Municipal Police upon the payment of a fee of twenty-five (25¢)
cents to the Municipal Clerk and satisfactory completion of the inspection test
as hereinafter provided for. Said License shall then be attached to the frame
of the bicycle in a substantial manner. The removal of such tag, except by the
proper authorities, shall be unlawful. Should the license, so issued, be lost,
the bicycle shall be re-registered and a fee of twenty-five (25¢) cents shall
be charged for such re-registration. (Ref. 39-690, 39-697(h) RS Neb.)
§ 5-502   BICYCLE; OPERATION.
No person shall ride or propel a bicycle on a street or other public highway of
this Municipality with another person on the handlebars or in any position in
front of the operator.
   No bicycle shall be ridden faster than is reasonable and proper, but every
bicycle shall be operated with reasonable regard to the safety of the operator
and any other persons upon the streets and public highways.
   A bicycle is defined to be a vehicle within the meaning of this Chapter and
is therefore governed by all the Sections included in this Chapter.
   No bicycle shall be operated on any sidewalk in the congested district.
   No bicycle shall be permitted on any street or other public highway from one
half (1/2) hour after sunset and one half (1/2) hour before sunrise without a
headlight, visible under normal atmospheric conditions, from the front thereof
for not less than five hundred (500) feet indicating the approach or presence
of the bicycle, firmly attached to such bicycle, and properly lighted, or
without a yellow, or red light reflector attached to, and visible five hundred
(500) feet from the rear thereof. The said headlight shall give a clear, white
light.
   No person shall ride or propel a bicycle upon any street or other public
highway abreast of more than one other person riding or propelling a bicycle.
   Every person riding or propelling a bicycle upon any street or other public
highway shall observe all traffic rules and regulations applicable thereto, and
shall turn only at intersections, signal for all turns, ride at the right-hand
side of the street or highway, pass to the left when passing overtaken vehicles
and individuals that are slower moving, and shall pass vehicles to the right
when meeting.
   No person shall park a bicycle on any sidewalk unless a bicycle stand is
located on said sidewalk.
   Every bicycle operated upon the streets and public ways of the Municipality
shall be equipped with a brake adequate to control the movement thereof, and
adequate to stop said bicycle within reasonable limits. (Ref. 39-688, 39-690,
39-691 RS Neb.)
§ 5-503   BICYCLE INSPECTION.
The Chief of Police shall inspect all bicycles presented to him for
registration and shall refuse to issue a registration certificate for any
bicycle which fails to fulfill the mechanical requirements of the previous
section and any other mechanical requirements which the Chief of Police should
deem necessary.
§ 5-504   BICYCLE PARKING.
No person shall park a bicycle upon the roadway, except in stalls provided for
that purpose. Bicycles parked upon the sidewalk shall be parked within four
(4') feet of the curb. Bicycles parked in the congested district shall be
parked only in bicycle racks provided for such purpose. No bicycle shall be
parked on the sidewalk or in the street in front of any theater.
§ 5-505   UNREGISTERED BICYCLES.
It shall be unlawful for a person to operate any bicycle within the
Municipality which has not been duly licensed and registered.
§ 5-506   MUTILATION OF SERIAL NUMBERS.
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously remove,
destroy, mutilate, or alter the manufacturer's frame serial number or the
registration number plate of any bicycle registered with the Municipality.
§ 5-507   TITLE TRANSFER.
It shall be the duty of the person who sells or transfers ownership of any
registered bicycle to report, within five (5) days from the date of the sale or
transfer, such sale or transfer by returning to the Chief of Police the
registration certificate therefor, together with the registration number plate
and the name and address of the person to whom said bicycle was sold or
transferred. The holder of such registration certificate may have the Chief of
Police assign said certificate and number to another bicycle owned by the
holder without charge. The purchaser or transferee of such bicycle shall appear
to register said bicycle within five (5) days of the purchase or sale.
§ 5-508   SEIZURE OF UNREGISTERED BICYCLES.
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police of the Municipality to take
possession of any bicycle found by him which is not registered and upon which
is not displayed a license plate as herein required. Such bicycle shall be
returned to the owner only when the owner shall prove ownership and has
registered the bicycle with the Municipal Police. The Chief of Police shall
allow a period of thirty (30) days grace each year for registration and re-
registration.
§ 5-509   CLINGING TO MOTOR VEHICLES.
No person riding upon any bicycle or roller skates shall attach the same or
himself to any moving vehicle upon any roadway, and it shall be unlawful for
the driver of any vehicle to suffer or permit any person traveling upon any
bicycle or roller skates to cling to or attach himself or his bicycle, or
roller skates, to such vehicle so driven and operated by him. (Ref. 39-689 RS
Neb.)
§ 5-510   MOPEDS; DEFINED.
For the purposes of this Article, moped shall mean a bicycle with fully
operative pedals for propulsion by human power, an automatic transmission, and
a motor with a cylinder capacity not exceeding fifty (50cc) cubic centimeters,
which produces no more than two (2) brake horsepower and is capable of
propelling the bicycle at a maximum design speed of no more than thirty (30
m.p.h.) miles per hour on level ground. Mopeds, their owners, and their
operators, shall be subject to the Motor Vehicle Operator's License Act, but
shall be exempt from the requirements of the Motor Vehicle Certificate of Title
Act, the Motor Vehicle Registration Act, and the Motor Vehicle Safety
Responsibility Act. (Ref. 39-6,196 RS Neb.)(Ord. No. 310, 10/3/79)
§ 5-511   MOPEDS; OPERATOR'S LICENSE REQUIRED.
No person shall operate a moped upon the streets, alleys, or public highways of
the Municipality unless such person has a valid motor vehicle operator's
license or a valid school or learner's permit. (Ref. 39-6,197 RS Neb.)(Ord. No.
310, 10/3/79)
§ 5-512   MOPEDS; TRAFFIC REGULATIONS APPLICABLE.
Any person who rides a moped upon a roadway shall have all of the rights and
shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a motor
vehicle under Chapter 5 of this Code and Sections 39-601 to 39-6,122 R.R.S. of
Nebraska, 1943, and amendments thereto, except for those provisions of such
sections which by their nature can have no application. Such regulations
applicable to mopeds shall apply whenever a moped shall be operated upon any
street, alley, or public highway within the Municipality or upon any path set
aside by the Department of Roads or local authority for the use of mopeds.
Notwithstanding any established maximum speed limits in excess of twenty-five
(25 m.p.h.) miles per hour, no person shall operate any moped at a speed in
excess of thirty (30 m.p.h.) miles per hour. (Ref. 39-6,198 RS Neb.) (Ord. No.
310, 10/3/79)
§ 5-513   MOPEDS; OPERATION.
Any person who operates a moped shall ride only upon a permanent and regular
seat attached thereto, and shall not carry any other person nor shall any other
person ride on a moped unless such moped is designed by the manufacturer to
carry more than one (1) person.
   Any person shall ride a moped only while sitting astride the seat, facing
forward. Further, no person shall operate a moped while carrying any package,
bundle, or other article which prevents him or her from keeping both hands on
the handlebars. No operator shall carry any person, nor shall any person ride,
in a position that will interfere with the operation or control of the moped or
the view of the operator. No person who rides upon a moped shall attach him or
her self or the moped to any other vehicle on a roadway. (Ref. 39-6,199 RS
Neb.) (Ord. No. 310, 10/3/79)
§ 5-514   MOPEDS; USE OF TRAFFIC LANES.
A moped shall be entitled to full use of a traffic lane of any street or
highway with an authorized speed limit of forty-five (45 m.p.h.) miles per hour
or less and no vehicle shall be operated in such a manner as to deprive any
moped of the full use of such lane. This section shall not apply to mopeds or
motorcycles operated two (2) abreast in a single lane. No person shall operate
a moped between lanes of traffic or between adjacent lines or rows of vehicles.
Mopeds shall not be operated more than two (2) abreast in a single lane. Any
person who operates a moped on a roadway with an authorized speed limit of more
than forty-five (45 m.p.h.) miles per hour shall ride as near to the right side
of the roadway as practicable, and shall not ride more than single file. (Ref.
39-6,200 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 310, 10/3/79)
§ 5-515   MOPEDS; EQUIPMENT.
Any moped which carries a passenger shall be equipped with footrests for such
passenger. No person shall operate any moped with handlebars more than fifteen
(15") inches above the mounting point of the handlebars. (Ref. 39-6,203 RS
Neb.) (Ord. No. 310, 10/3/79)
§ 5-516   ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES; UTILITY-TYPE VEHICLES; OPERATION; RESTRICTIONS.
   (1)    For purposes of this section:
      (a)   ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE means any motorized off-highway vehicle which:
         1.   Is fifty (50) inches or less in width;
         2.   Has a dry weight of nine hundred (900) pounds or less;
         3.   Travels on three (3) or more low pressure tires;
         4.   Is designed for operator use only with no passengers or is
specifically designed by the original manufacturer for the operator and one (1)
passenger;
         5.   Has a seat or saddle designed to be straddled by the operator;
and
         6.   Has handlebars or any other steering assembly for steering
control.
      (b)   UTILITY-TYPE VEHICLE means any motorized off-highway vehicle which:
         1.   Is not less than forty-eight (48) inches nor more than seventy-
four (74) inches in width;
         2.   Is not more than one hundred thirty-five (135) inches, including
the bumper, in length;
         3.   Has a dry weight of not less than nine hundred (900) pounds or
more than two thousand (2,000) pounds;
         4.   Travels on four (4) or more low-pressure tires; and
         5.   Is equipped with a steering wheel and bench or bucket-type
seating designed for at least two people to sit side-by-side. UTILITY-TYPE
VEHICLE does not include golf carts or low-speed vehicles.
      (c)   STREET or HIGHWAY means the entire width between the boundary
limits of any street, road, avenue, boulevard, or way which is publicly
maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes
of vehicular travel.
   (2)   An all-terrain vehicle or utility-type vehicle may be operated on the
streets and highways within the corporate limits so long as the operator and
all-terrain vehicle or utility-type vehicle comply with the provisions of this
section.
   (3)   An all-terrain vehicle or utility-type vehicle may be operated only
between the hours of sunrise and sunset and shall not be operated at a speed in
excess of thirty (30) miles per hour. When operating an all-terrain vehicle as
authorized in subsection (2) of this section, the headlight and taillight of
the vehicle shall be on and the vehicle shall be equipped with a bicycle safety
flag which extends not less than five (5) feet above the ground attached to the
rear of such vehicle. The bicycle safety flag shall be triangular in shape with
an area of not less than thirty (30) square inches and shall be day-glow in
color.
   (4)   Any person operating an all-terrain vehicle or a utility-type vehicle
as authorized in subsection (2) of this section shall have:
      (a)   Obtained the age of eighteen (18) and have a valid Class O
operator's license;
      (b)   Liability insurance coverage for the all-terrain vehicle or
utility-type vehicle while operating the all-terrain vehicle or utility-type
vehicle on a street or highway. The person operating the all-terrain vehicle
shall provide proof of such insurance coverage to any peace officer requesting
such proof within five (5) days of such a request; and
      (c)   Obtained a permit from the Wymore Police Department or city office.
Application for said permit shall be on a form provided by the Wymore Police
Department/city, and a permit fee of five dollars ($5.00) shall accompany the
completed permit application form.
   (5)   All terrain vehicles or utility-type vehicles may be operated without
complying with subsections (2), (3), and (4) of this section on streets and
highways in parades which have been authorized by the State of Nebraska or any
department, board, commission, or political subdivision of the state.
   (6)   An all-terrain vehicle or utility-type vehicle shall not be operated
on any controlled-access highway with more than two marked traffic lanes, and
the crossing of any controlled-access highway with more than two marked traffic
lanes shall not be permitted. Subsections (2) through (4) and (6) of this
section authorize and apply to operation of an all-terrain vehicle or a
utility-type vehicle only on a street or highway other than a controlled-access
highway with more than two marked traffic lanes.
   (7)   Subject to subsection (6) of this section, the crossing of a street or
highway shall be permitted by an all-terrain vehicle or utility-type vehicle
without complying with subsections (2) through (4) of this section only if:
      (a)   The crossing is made at an angle approximately ninety (90) degrees
to the direction of the street or highway and at a place where no obstruction
prevents a quick and safe crossing;
      (b)   The vehicle is brought to a complete stop before crossing the
shoulder or roadway of the street or highway;
      (c)   The operator yields the right-of-way to all oncoming traffic that
constitutes an immediate potential hazard;
      (d)   In crossing a divided highway, the crossing is made only at an
intersection of such highway with another highway; and
      (e)   Both the headlight and the taillight of the vehicle are on when the
crossing is made. (Ref. 17-505, 60-624, 60-680, 60-6,279, 60-6,355, 60-6,356 RS
Neb.) (Ord. No. 597, 5/20/09) (Amended by Ord. Nos. 610, 6/15/11; 664, 7/21/21;
678, 7/3/24)
§ 5-517   GOLF CAR VEHICLES; OPERATION; RESTRICTIONS.
   (1)   For purposes of this section:
      (a)   GOLF CAR VEHICLE means a vehicle that has at least four (4) wheels,
has a maximum level ground speed of less that twenty (20) miles per hour, has a
maximum payload capacity of one thousand two hundred (1,200) pounds, has a
maximum gross vehicle weight of two thousand five hundred (2,500) pounds, has a
maximum passenger capacity of not more than four (4) persons, and is designed
and manufactured for operation on a golf course for sporting and recreational
purposes, and is not being operated within the boundaries of a golf course.
      (b)   ROAD means a public way for the purpose of vehicular travel,
including the entire area within the right-of-way; and
      (c)   STREET means a public way for the purpose of vehicular travel in
the Municipality and includes the entire area within the right-of-way.
   (2)   A golf car vehicle may be operated only between sunrise and sunset and
only on streets with a posted speed limit of thirty-five (35) miles per hour or
less. A golf car vehicle shall not be operated at a speed in excess of twenty
(20) miles per hour. When operating a golf car vehicle as authorized in this
section, the golf car vehicle shall be equipped with a bicycle safety flag
which extends not less than five (5) feet above the ground attached to the rear
of such vehicle. The bicycle safety flag shall be triangular in shape with an
area of not less than thirty (30) square inches and shall be day-glow in color.
   (3)   Any person operating an golf car vehicle as authorized in subsection
(2) of this section shall have:
      (a)   A valid Class O operator's license;
      (b)   Liability insurance coverage for the golf car vehicle while
operating the golf car vehicle on a road or street. The person operating the
golf car vehicle shall provide proof of such insurance coverage to any peace
officer requesting such proof within five (5) days of such a request; and
      (c)   Obtained a permit from the Wymore Police Department or city office.
Application for said permit shall be on a form provided by the Wymore Police
Department/city, and a permit fee of five dollars ($5.00) shall accompany the
completed permit application form.
   (4)   Golf car vehicles may be operated without complying with subsections
(2) and (3) of this section on roads and streets in parades which have been
authorized by the State of Nebraska or any department, board, commission, or
political subdivision of the state.
   (5)   A golf car vehicle shall not be operated at any time on any state or
federal highway but may be operated upon such a highway in order to cross a
portion of the highway system which intersects a street as directed in
subsection (6) of this section.
   (6)   The crossing of a highway shall be permitted by a golf car vehicle
only if:
      (a)   The crossing is made at an angle approximately ninety (90) degrees
to the direction of the highway and at a place where no obstruction prevents a
quick and safe crossing;
      (b)   The vehicle is brought to a complete stop before crossing the
shoulder or roadway of the highway;
      (c)   The operator yields the right-of-way to all oncoming traffic that
constitutes an immediate potential hazard;
      (d)   In crossing a divided highway, the crossing is made only at an
intersection of such highway with a street or road, as applicable. (Ref. 17-
505, 60-622.01, 60-680, 60-6,381 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 640, 9/21/16) (Amended by
Ord. No. 678, 7/3/24)
Article 6. Prohibitions and Enforcement
§ 5-601   PASSING; INTERSECTIONS.
The driver of a vehicle shall not overtake and pass another vehicle proceeding
in the same direction, while traversing a street intersection, if such passing
requires such overtaking vehicle to drive to the left of the center of the
street. (Ref. 39-625 RS Neb.)
§ 5-602   PASSING; HINDRANCE.
The driver of a vehicle about to be overtaken and passed by another vehicle
shall not increase the speed of his vehicle until completely passed by the
overtaking vehicle. (Ref. 39-622 RS Neb.)
§ 5-603   FOLLOWING; DISTANCE.
The operator of a vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than is
reasonable and prudent having due regard for the speed of the vehicles, and the
traffic and condition of the street. (Ref. 39-629 RS Neb.)
§ 5-604   SLOW MOVING VEHICLES.
Slow moving vehicles or large or heavily loaded vehicles shall keep as near the
curb as possible when traveling on the roadways in the Municipality.
§ 5-605   FOLLOWING; FIRE APPARATUS.
The driver of any vehicle shall not follow any fire apparatus traveling in
response to a fire alarm closer than five hundred (500) feet, or drive into, or
park such vehicle within the block where fire apparatus has stopped in answer
to a fire alarm. (Ref. 39-681 RS Neb.)
§ 5-606   FUNERAL PROCESSIONS.
No vehicle, except police vehicles, fire department vehicles, when responding
to emergency calls or orders in their several departments, ambulances
responding to emergency calls, or vehicles carrying United States mails shall
be driven through a funeral procession or cortege except with the permission of
a police officer.
§ 5-607    GLASS; POINTED OBJECTS.
No person shall throw, cast, lay, or place upon any street any thorns, nails,
tacks, glass, bottles, window glass, or other articles made of, or containing,
glass, and in case of an accident causing the breaking of any glass upon any
street, the owner or person in charge of such glass, or the person responsible
for such breakage, shall at once remove, or cause the same to be removed, from
the street. (Ref. 39-683 RS Neb.)
§ 5-608    SIGNS; DEFACING OR INTERFERING WITH.
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully deface, injure, remove,
obstruct or interfere with any official traffic sign or signal. (Ref. 39-619,
39-714.04 RS Neb.)
§ 5-609    SIGNS; UNAUTHORIZED DISPLAY.
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or display upon, or in view of
any street, any unofficial sign, signal, or device which purports to be, is an
imitation of, or resembles an official traffic sign or signal which attempts to
direct the movement of traffic, or which hides from view, or interferes with
the effectiveness of any official sign or signal. Every such prohibited sign,
signal, or device is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and any police
officer is hereby empowered to remove the same, or cause it to be removed,
without notice. (Ref. 39-618 RS Neb.)
§ 5-610    CROWDING; FRONT SEAT.
No person shall drive a motor vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there is in
the front seat such a number of persons, exceeding three (3), as to obstruct
the view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle or to interfere
with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of such vehicle. (Ref. 39-
677 RS Neb.)(Amended by Ord. No. 283, 4/27/77)
§ 5-611   RIDING; OUTSIDE VEHICLE.
No person shall permit any other person to ride on the running board, hood,
top, or fenders of any motor vehicle. Nor shall any person ride on the running
board, hood, top, or fenders of any motor vehicle.
§ 5-612   UNUSUAL EMISSION OF NOISE.
It shall be unlawful for any operator of a vehicle to operate that vehicle or
equip that vehicle in such a manner as to cause disturbing or unusually loud
noise to emit therefrom.
§ 5-613   QUIET ZONES; UNNECESSARY NOISE.
All streets, or portions thereof, lying within three hundred (300) feet of any
hospital, nursing home, or school, and which have been declared to be "quiet
zones" by the Governing Body shall be respected as such by all drivers, and no
driver of any vehicle shall within such zones, make any unnecessary noise or
sound the horn, or other warning device, of such vehicle except in an
emergency. It shall be unlawful for any person in any part of said Municipality
to make, or cause to be made, any unnecessary noise with any signal device, or
to use the same except as a road signal.
§ 5-614   SPEED LIMITS.
No person shall operate a motor vehicle on any street, alley, or other place
within the corporate limits at a rate of speed greater than twenty-five (25)
miles per hour unless a greater rate of speed is specifically permitted by
ordinance; provided, the Governing Body may designate specific streets, or
portions thereof, upon which the speed limit shall be greater or lesser than
twenty-five (25) miles per hour. Should the Governing Body determine to
establish such speed zones, signs, legible from the roadway, shall be posted at
regular intervals throughout such speed zone indicating the maximum speed limit
in that zone. (Ref. 39-662, 39-663 RS Neb.)
§ 5-614.01   SPEED LIMITS; PORTION OF FIRST STREET.
   No person shall operate a motor vehicle on First Street beginning at the
south corporate limits and extending north to a point three hundred (300) feet
north of the north end of the Indian Creek bridge at a rate of speed greater
than forty-five (45) miles per hour. The Municipality shall place speed limit
signs on that portion of First Street in accordance with the Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices. (Ref. 17-505 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 633, 2/5/14)
§ 5-614.02   SPEED LIMITS; PORTIONS OF U.S. HIGHWAY 77.
   (1)   The following maximum speed limits are hereby established on the
following described portions of U.S. Highway 77:
      (a)   Sixty (60) miles per hour beginning at the point where the south
corporate limits line intersects U.S. Highway 77 and continuing south on U.S.
Highway 77 along the portion of said Highway which runs adjacent to the
corporate limits.
      (b)   Forty-five (45) miles per hour beginning at the point where the
north corporate limits line intersects U.S. Highway 77 and continuing north on
U.S. Highway 77 to "M" Street.
      (c)   Sixty (60) miles per hour on U.S. Highway 77 from "M" Street and
continuing north on U.S. Highway 77 along the portion of said Highway which
runs adjacent to the corporate limits and ending at the Bill's Creek bridge.
   (2)   The Municipality shall place speed limit signs on those portions of
U.S. Highway 77 in accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices unless said speed limit signs are already in existence. (Ref. 17-505 RS
Neb.) (Ord. No. 634, 3/5/14)
§ 5-614.03 SPEED LIMITS; "D" STREET.
No person shall operate a motor vehicle on "D" Street between 6th Street and
22nd Street at a rate of speed greater than twenty-five (25) miles per hour.
The Municipality shall place speed limit signs on that portion of "D" Street in
accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. (Ref. 17-505 RS
Neb.) (Ord. No. 642, 12/7/2016)
§ 5-615   SPEED, NEAR SCHOOLS.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, when passing premises on
which school buildings are located, and which are used for school purposes,
during school recess, or while children are going to, or leaving school during
the opening or closing hours to drive such vehicle at a rate of speed in excess
of fifteen (15) miles per hour past such premises, and such driver shall stop
at all stop signs located at, or near, such school premises. (Ref. 39-663 RS
Neb.)
§ 5-616    DRUNKEN DRIVING; PENALTY.
(Repealed by Ord. No. 361, 10/6/82)
§ 5-617    RECKLESS DRIVING.
Any person who drives a motor vehicle in such a manner as to indicate an
indifferent or wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property shall be
deemed to be guilty of reckless driving, and as such shall be punished by a
fine of not more than one hundred ($100.00) dollars. (Ref. 39-669.01, 39-
669.02, 39-669.26 RS Neb.)
§ 5-617.01   CARELESS OR NEGLIGENT DRIVING.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, use, operate, park or stop a
motor vehicle in such a careless or negligent manner as to endanger persons or
property or to endanger or interfere with the lawful traffic or use of the
streets and a person guilty of violating this section shall be punished by a
fine of not more than one hundred ($100.00) dollars. (Ord. No. 248, 1/3/73)
§ 5-618   ACCIDENT; DRIVER'S DUTY.
The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident upon a public highway,
private road, or private drive, resulting in injury or death to any person
shall:
1.   Immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of the accident.
2.   Give his name, address, and the registration number of his vehicle, and
exhibit his operator's, or chauffeur's license, to the person struck, or the
driver, or occupants, of any vehicle collided with.
3.   Render to any person injured in such accident reasonable assistance,
including the carrying of such person to a physician or surgeon for medical or
surgical treatment if it is apparent that such treatment is necessary, or is
requested by the injured person.
   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident, whether upon the public
highway, private road, or private drive, resulting in damage to property shall:
1.   Immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of the accident.
2.   Give his name, address, and the registration number of his vehicle, and
exhibit his operator's, or chauffeur's license to the owner of the property
struck, or the driver, or occupants of any other vehicle involved in the
collision.
(Ref. 39-6,104.01, 39-6,104.02 RS Neb.)
§ 5-619   ACCIDENT REPORT.
The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury or death
to any person or property damage to an apparent extent of two hundred fifty
($250.00) dollars or more, shall, within ten (10) days after said accident,
make a report of such accident to the Municipal Police Department. If the
driver of any vehicle involved in such an accident is incapacitated due to such
accident, it shall be the duty of any other participant in the accident, who is
not incapacitated, to make such report. (Ref. 39-6,104.04 RS Neb.)
§ 5-620   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES; EXEMPTION.
The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to an authorized emergency
vehicle, as herein defined, when such vehicle is being operated in response to
a bona fide emergency; provided, nothing in this section shall protect the
operator from the consequence of a reckless disregard to the safety of others
in his method of operating said vehicle.
§ 5-621   EMERGENCY REGULATIONS.
The Chief of Police is hereby empowered to make and enforce temporary traffic
regulations to cover emergencies. (Ref. 60-435 RS Neb.)
§ 5-622   POLICE; ENFORCEMENT.
The Municipal Police are hereby authorized, empowered, and ordered to exercise
all powers, and duties, with relation to the management of street traffic and
to direct, control, stop, restrict, regulate, and, when necessary, temporarily
divert, or exclude, in the interest of public safety, health, and convenience
the movement of pedestrian, animal, and vehicular traffic of every kind in
streets, parks, and on bridges. The driver of any vehicle shall stop upon the
signal of any police officer. (Ref. 39-6,192 RS Neb.)
§ 5-623   POLICE; REFUSAL TO OBEY.
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse, or fail to comply with, any
lawful order, signal, or direction of a police officer. (Ref. 39-697 RS Neb.)
§ 5-624   POLICE; TRAFFIC OFFICERS.
The Governing Body or the Municipal Police may at any time detail officers, to
be known as "traffic officers," at street intersections. All traffic officers
shall be vested with the authority to regulate and control traffic at the
intersections to which they are assigned. It shall be their duty to direct the
movement of traffic and prevent congestion and accidents. It shall be unlawful
for any person to violate any order, or signal, of any such traffic officer
notwithstanding the directive of a stop sign, or signal device, which may have
been placed at any such intersection. (Ref. 39-669.21, 39-697, 39-6,192 RS
Neb.)
§ 5-625   RADAR DEVICE; PROHIBITED.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or possess any radar
transmission device while operating a motor vehicle on any road, street,
highway, or interstate highway in this Municipality; except that this section
shall not apply to any such device which has been lawfully licensed by the
Federal Communications Commission or is being used by law enforcement officials
in their official duties.
   For purposes of this section unless the context otherwise requires:
(1)   Radar transmission device shall mean any mechanism designed to interfere
with the reception of radio microwaves in the electromagnetic spectrum, which
microwaves, commonly referred to as radar, are employed by law enforcement
officials to measure the speed of motor vehicles;
(2)   Possession shall mean to have a device defined above in a motor vehicle
if such device is not:
(a)   Disconnected from all power sources and
(b)   In the rear trunk, which shall include the spare tire compartment, or any
other compartment which is not accessible to the driver or any other person in
the vehicle while such vehicle is in operation. If no such compartment exists
in a vehicle, then such device must be disconnected from all power sources and
be placed in a position not readily accessible to the driver or any other
person in the vehicle; and
(3)   Transceiver shall mean an apparatus contained in a single housing,
functioning alternately as a radio transmitter and receiver.
(Ref. 39-6,205 through 39-6,207 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 355, 9/15/82)
Article 7. Snow Emergency Routes
[Article 8 was adopted in its entirety by Ordinance No. 428, passed on January
18, 1989]
§ 5-701   PARKING PROHIBITED AT CERTAIN TIMES.
The mayor and city council may, by resolution, designate streets or portions of
streets as snow emergency routes, and when streets are designated as such, the
City Street Department shall place snow emergency route signs on the designated
streets. A designation of any street, avenue, road, highway, or portion thereof
as a emergency route shall in no way affect any previous designation of that
street, avenue, road or highway for any other purpose.
§ 5-702   DECLARATION OF EMERGENCY; PROHIBITION OF PARKING.
Whenever the Street Superintendent of the Street Department, or his designated
representative, shall find, on the basis of falling snow, sleet or freezing
rain, on the basis of an official forecast by the U. S. Weather Bureau, of
snow, sleet, or freezing rain, or that other weather conditions will make it
necessary that motor vehicle traffic be expedited and that parking on city snow
emergency routes be prohibited or restricted for snow plowing and other
purposes, the Street Superintendent or his designated representative, may place
into effect a parking prohibition on all emergency routes, or designated parts
of such routes, by declaring that emergency condition exists. In such
declaration of emergency conditions, the Street Superintendent or his
designated representative shall state the time that the emergency shall be in
effect and from the time so designated, all parking of vehicles on snow
emergency routes, or designated parts of such routes, shall be prohibited.
While the prohibition is in effect, no person shall park or allow to remain
parked any vehicle on any portion of a snow emergency route so designated. Once
in effect, the parking prohibition imposed under this Article shall remain in
effect until terminated, in whole or in part by declaration of the Street
Superintendent or his designated representative. However, nothing in this
Article shall be construed to permit parking at any time or place where it is
forbidden by any other provision of law.
§ 5-703   OPERATION OF MOTOR VEHICLES.
Whenever an emergency has been declared, no person operating a motor vehicle on
a snow emergency route shall allow such vehicle to become stalled or stuck.
Whenever a motor vehicle becomes stalled for any reason, whether or not in
violation of this Article, on any snow emergency route on which there is a
parking prohibition in effect, the person operating such vehicle shall take
immediate action to have the vehicle towed or pushed off the snow emergency
route. No person shall abandon or leave his vehicle any snow emergency route
except for securing assistance to immediately remove the vehicle.
§ 5-704   EMERGENCY DECLARATION BY STREET SUPERINTENDENT.
The Street Superintendent of the Street Department or his designated
representative shall cause each declaration of a snow emergency to be publicly
announced by means of broadcast from broadcasting stations with a normal
operating range covering the City, and he may cause such declaration to be
further announced in newspapers of general circulation when feasible. Each
announcement shall describe the action taken, including the time it became or
will become effective, and shall specify the streets or areas affected. The
Street Superintendent or his designated representative shall make or cause to
be make a record of each time and date when any declaration is announced.
   Whenever the Street Superintendent or his designated representative shall
find that some or all of the conditions which gave rise to a parking
prohibition placed in effect pursuant to the provisions of this Article no
longer exist, he may declare the prohibition terminated, in whole or in part,
effective immediately upon announcement or at a later specified time.
§ 5-705   PROVISIONS TEMPORARILY EFFECTIVE TO TAKE PRECEDENCE.
Any provisions of this Article which becomes effective by declaration of the
Street Superintendent or his designated representative upon the occurrence of a
snow emergency, while temporarily in effect, take precedence over other
conflicting provisions of law normally in effect, except that it shall not take
precedence over provisions of this Code relating to traffic accidents,
emergency travel of authorized emergency vehicles, or emergency traffic
directions by a police officer.
§ 5-706   REMOVAL OF STALLED OR PARKED VEHICLES.
Members of the Police Department are hereby authorized to remove or have
removed a vehicle from a street to another place or location on a street or to
a lot, garage, storage yard, or other similar facility designated by the Police
Department when:
1.   The vehicle is parked on a snow emergency route on which a parking
prohibition is in effect;
2.   The vehicle is stalled on a snow emergency route on which there is a
parking prohibition in effect and the person who is operating said vehicle does
not appear to be removing it in accordance with the provisions of this Article;
3.   The vehicle is parked on a street in violation of any parking prohibition
or provision of law contained in this Article and is interfering or about to
interfere with snow removal operations.
   Such vehicle removal shall be made pursuant to, and be governed by, the
provisions of this Article and Article 9 of this Chapter, relating to
impoundment of vehicles.
Article 8. Impoundment of Vehicles
[Article 8 was adopted in its entirety by Ordinance No. 428 passed on January
18, 1989
§ 5-801   Impoundment of Vehicles; AUTHORIZED.
Any vehicles which shall remain standing or parked upon any public street,
avenue, way, alley or other public or private place, may be removed by or upon
order of the chief of police, and place in storage in a privately operated
garage or other place designated by or maintained by the city, under the
following circumstances:
(1)    When any vehicle is found upon a street, avenue, alley, way or public
place and a report has been previously made that such vehicle has been stolen
or complain has been filed and a warrant issued thereon, charging that such
vehicle has been stolen or converted in violation of law;
(2)    When any police officer of the city has reasonable grounds to believe
that any such vehicle has been abandoned;
(3)    When a police officer arrests any person driving or in control of a
vehicle for an alleged offense, and when the one arrested is the sole occupant
or the owner of such vehicle and is immediately placed in custody;
(4)    When a vehicle is so disabled that its normal operation is impossible or
impractical and the persons in charge of such vehicle are incapacitated by
reason of physical injury or other causes to such an extent as to be unable to
provide for its removal or custody, or cannot be found or are not in the
immediate vicinity of such vehicle;
(5)    When any vehicle is left standing or parked on any street in a manner
that impedes or interferes with the orderly flow of traffic;
(6)    When any vehicle is left standing or parked unattended in violation of
any applicable provision of this Code, state law or city ordinance, rule or
regulation.
§ 5-802   Impoundment of Vehicles; LEAVING DISABLED VEHICLE; NOTICE TO CITY.
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave unattended upon any street of the
city any disabled motor vehicle, which is not capable of being moved on its own
power, without first giving notice thereof to the city within thirty (30)
minutes after such vehicle is left. It shall then be the duty of the chief of
police to cause such disabled vehicle to be removed and stored or parked in
such place as may be provided therefor. In such case the owner of such vehicle
shall pay the cost of such removal or storage before he is permitted to regain
possession of the same.
§ 5-803   Impoundment of Vehicles; NOTICE TO OWNER.
Upon the impoundment of any vehicle under the provisions of this division, the
police department shall endeavor to ascertain the ownership of such vehicle and
notify the owner of such impoundment. Such notice may be sent to the last known
address of such owner by certified or registered mail, and shall request such
owner to pay all costs of such impoundment and redeem such vehicle within
thirty (30) days from the date of such notice.
§ 5-804   Impoundment of Vehicles; FEES.
Before any vehicle which has been impounded under the provisions of this
division may be redeemed, the owner thereof shall first pay the fees levied
therefor by the mayor and council from time to time, any reasonable towing
charge, in addition to any fines and costs which may be assessed for the
violation of any provision of this Code, state law or city ordinance, rule or
regulation.
§ 5-805   Impoundment of Vehicles; SALE OF UNREDEEMED VEHICLES.
If the owner of any vehicle impounded under the provision of this division does
not redeem such vehicle within thirty (30) days after notice of impoundment has
been mailed to him, or if the owner of such vehicle cannot be ascertained, the
police department shall advertise the vehicle so impounded once in a newspaper
published in the city at least ten (10) days prior to the sale, stating that
such vehicle shall be sold at public auction at a designated time and place.
§ 5-806   Impoundment of Vehicles; DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS OF SALE.
If any vehicle is sold under the provisions of this division, the proceeds of
such sale shall be applied first to the cost of impoundment, storage and sale
thereof, and the balance shall be deposited in the general fund of the city.
Article 9. Nonmoving Traffic Violations Bureau
[Editor's Note: Article 9 was adopted in its entirety by Ordinance No. 444,
passed February 21, 1990]
§ 5-901   NONMOVING TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU; ESTABLISHED.
For the purposes provided in this division, there is hereby established a
nonmoving traffic violations bureau, hereinafter referred to as the Bureau. The
operation of the Bureau shall be the duty of the City Clerk.
§ 5-902   NONMOVING TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU; DUTIES; COLLECTION AND
ACCOUNTING.
The Bureau shall collect and account for all monies paid in accordance with the
provisions of this division, issue receipts therefor and keep records of all
violators, showing the names, and the e of violation and date of disposition.
It shall be the duty of the City Treasurer to credit to the City such amounts
as shall be collected for the payment of administrative costs. The balance of
money collected shall be disbursed by the City Treasurer as provided by law.
§ 5-903   NONMOVING TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU; ISSUANCE, PROCESSING OF TICKETS.
Whenever a police officer of the City shall observe any motor vehicle in
violation of a motor vehicle parking ordinance, or a duly established parking
regulation of the City, or stopped or parked in such a manner as to interfere
with the lawful use of the street, or stopped or parked in violation of our
snow emergency routes ordinance, or parked in violation of any other ordinance
of the City, it shall be his duty to attach to such motor vehicle an official
police tag or notice which shall be directed to the owner or operator of such
vehicle and shall set forth the nature of the violation. A copy of such tag or
notice charging violation of such ordinance or regulation shall be processed
originally through the Bureau.
§ 5-904   NONMOVING TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU; WAIVER OF ARRAIGNMENT; PAYMENT
OF FINES AND COSTS FOR PARKING VIOLATIONS.
Any person accused of a violation of a motor vehicle parking ordinance, or a
duly established parking regulations of the City, or stopped or parked in such
a manner to interfere with the lawful use of the street, or stopped or parked
in violation of the city snow emergency routes ordinance or in violation of any
other city ordinance regarding a nonmoving violation of a city ordinance, may
appear before the Bureau and waive arraignment and right to a hearing and enter
a plea of guilty by payment to the City Treasurer and those complaints
involving a violation of Chapter 5, Article 4, the sum of five ($5.00) dollars
if payment is received within five (5) days after issuance of the official
police tag or notice as herein described or the sum of ten ($10.00) dollars if
payment is not received within five (5) days as aforesaid but is received
within fifteen (15) days after the issuance; in those complaints involving the
parking or stopping of a motor vehicle in such a manner as to interfere with
the lawful use of the street, the sum of five ($5.00) dollars if payment is
received by the City within five (5) days after the issuance of the official
tag or notice as herein described or the sum of ten ($10.00) dollars if payment
is not received after five (5) days as aforesaid, but is received within
fifteen (15) days after the issuance; in those complaints involving the parking
or stopping of a motor vehicle in violation of the city snow emergency routes
ordinance the sum of ten ($10.00) if payment is received by the City within
five (5) days after the issuance of the official tag or notice as herein
described or the sum of fifteen ($15.00) dollars if payment is not received
after fifteen (15) days after issuance. In each instance of such waiver of
arraignment and right to a hearing and entry of a plea of guilty, the person
charged in the complaint, in addition to the amount specified above,
administrative costs of five ($5.00) dollars.
§ 5-905   NONMOVING TRAFFIC VIOLATION BUREAU; MAILING NOTICE OF COMPLAINT.
If a person accused of a violation does not appear before the Violations Bureau
within seven (7) days after the date of the issuance of the official tag or
notice herein, a letter shall be mailed to the last known address of the
registered owner of the vehicle found to be in violation of the ordinance or
regulations, setting forth the date and the nature of the alleged offense, the
disposition that can be made of the matter by appearing in the Bureau within
fifteen (15) days of the issuance of the official tag or notice and that upon
the expiration of the fifteen (15) day period the opportunity to appear before
the Bureau to waive arraignment and right to a hearing as aforesaid will cease
to exist.
§ 5-906   NONMOVING TRAFFIC VIOLATION BUREAU; FAILURE TO APPEAR.
Whenever any person fails to appear within fifteen (15) days after the issuance
of the official police tag or notice herein referred to a complaint shall be
filed in the county court for the offense or offenses charged.
Article 10. Penal Provision
§ 5-1001   VIOLATION; PENALTY.
   Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with the enforcement of any
of the provisions of this Chapter, set forth at full length herein or
incorporated by reference, shall be deemed guilty of an offense, and upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00)
for each offense. A new violation shall be deemed to have been committed every
twenty-four (24) hours of such failure to comply. (Ref. 17-505 RS Neb.)
(Amended by Ord. No. 538, 9/15/99)
Chapter 6
POLICE REGULATIONS
Article 1. Dogs
§ 6-101   DOGS; LICENSE.
Any person who shall own, keep, or harbor a dog over the age of three (3)
months within the Municipality shall within thirty (30) days after the
acquisition of the said dog acquire a license for each such dog annually by or
before the 1st day of May of each year. The possessor of any dog brought into
or harbored within the corporate limits subsequent to May 1st of any year shall
license such dog within thirty (30) days of bringing such dog within the
corporate limits. Licenses shall be issued by the Municipal Clerk . Said
license shall not be transferable to any other dog. The owner, keeper or
harborer shall state at the time the application is made and upon printed forms
provided for such purpose, his or her name and address, and the name, breed,
color, and sex of each dog owned, kept or harbored by him or her. A certificate
that the dog has had a rabies shot, effective for the ensuing year of the
license, shall be presented when the license is applied for and no license or
tag shall be issued until the certificate is shown. (Ref. 17-526, 54-603, 71-
4412 RS Neb.) (Amended by Ord. No. 605, 7/7/10)
§ 6-102   DOGS; LICENSE TAGS.
Upon presentation of the appropriate certificate evidencing rabies vaccination,
the Chief of Police shall issue to the owner, keeper/6r harborer of a dog a
license certificate and a metallic tag for each dog so licensed. The metallic
tags shall be properly attached to the collar or harness of all dogs so
licensed and shall entitle the owner to keep or harbor said dog until the 30th
day of April following such licensing. In the event that a license tag is lost
and upon satisfactory evidence that the original plate or tag was issued in
accordance with the provisions herein, the Chief of Police shall issue a
duplicate or new tag for the balance of the year for which the license tag was
issued. It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to issue tags of a suitable
design that are different in appearance each year. (Ref. 17-526, 54-603 RS
Neb.) (Amended by Ord. No. 605, 7/7/10)
§ 6-103   DOGS; OWNER DEFINED.
Any person who shall harbor or permit any dog to be for ten (10) days or more
in or about his or her house, store, or enclosure, or to remain to be fed,
shall be deemed the owner and possessor of such dog and shall be deemed to be
liable for all penalties herein prescribed. (Ref. 54-606, 71-4401 RS Neb.)
§ 6-104   DOGS; PROCLAMATION.
It shall be the duty of the Governing Body whenever in its opinion the danger
to the public safety from rabid dogs is great or imminent, to issue a
proclamation ordering all persons owning, keeping, or harboring any dog to
muzzle the same, or to confine it for a period of not less than thirty (30)
days or more than ninety (90) days from the date of such proclamation, or until
such danger is passed. The dogs may be harbored by any good and sufficient
means in a house, garage, or yard on the premise wherein the said owner may
reside. Upon issuing the proclamation it shall be the duty of all persons
owning, keeping, or harboring any dog to confine the same as herein provided.
(Ref. 17-526 RS Neb.)
§ 6-105   DOGS; UNLICENSED.
All dogs found within the Municipality without a collar or harness with the
metal tag affixed or upon which a kennel tax has not been paid as aforesaid,
are hereby declared a public nuisance. Dogs found running at large shall be
killed or impounded by the Municipal Police in the Municipal Dog Shelter. (Ref.
17-526, 71-4408 RS Neb.)
§ 6-106   DOGS; VICIOUS.
It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, or harbor any dog of a
dangerous or ferocious disposition that habitually snaps or manifests a
disposition to bite. Proof that a dog on more than one (1) occasion has bitten
a person shall establish the fact that the dog is vicious. If any vicious or
dangerous dog is otherwise held, confined, or allowed to run at large, the
Municipal Police shall have the authority to put the dog to death.
§ 6-107   DOGS; LEASH REQUIRED.
No dog, whether licensed or not, shall be allowed to run free within the
Municipality unless said dog is penned, tied or on a leash. Any dog not penned,
tied or leashed shall be deemed to be running at large.
§ 6-108   DOGS; FEMALE IN SEASON.
It is hereby declared unlawful for the owner, keeper, or harborer of a female
dog to permit her to run at large within the Municipality while in season. Any
such female dog found running at large in violation of this Section shall be
declared to be a public nuisance and as such may be impounded or killed
according to the provisions herein. (Ref. 17-526 RS Neb.)
§ 6-109   DOGS; FIGHTING.
It shall be unlawful for any person, by agreement or otherwise, to set dogs to
fighting, or by any gesture or word to encourage the same to fight. (Ref. 17-
526 RS Neb.)
§ 6-110   DOGS; IMPOUNDING.
It shall be the duty of the Municipal Police to capture, secure, and remove in
a humane manner to the Beatrice Humane Society impoundment facility any dog
violating any provision of this Article. The dogs so impounded shall be treated
in a humane manner and shall be provided with a sufficient supply of food and
fresh water each day. Each impounded dog shall be kept and maintained at the
Beatrice Humane Society for a period of not less than five (5) days after
public notice unless reclaimed by the owner. Notice of impoundment of all dogs,
including any significant marks or identifications, shall be posted at the
office of the Municipal Clerk within twenty-four (24) hours after impoundment
as public notification of such impoundment. Any dog may be reclaimed by its
owner during the period of impoundment by payment to the Beatrice Humane
Society of all impoundment fees, daily board fees, vaccination fees, and any
veterinarian fees as established by the Beatrice Humane Society. The owner
shall be required to comply with the licensing and rabies vaccination
requirements within seventy-two (72) hours after release. If the dog is not
claimed at the end of the required waiting period after public notice has been
given, the Beatrice Humane Society may dispose of the dog in accordance with
the applicable rules and regulations of the Beatrice Humane Society pertaining
to the same, provided that, if in the judgment of the Beatrice Humane Society,
a suitable home can be found for any such dog, said dog shall be turned over to
that person and the new owner shall be required to pay all fees owed to the
Beatrice Humane Society. The Beatrice Humane Society shall acquire legal title
to any unlicensed dog impounded at it's facility for a period longer than the
required waiting period after giving public notice. All dogs shall be
euthanatized and disposed in a summary and humane manner unless a suitable home
can be found for said dog. (Ref. 17-548, 71-4408 RS Neb.) (Amended by Ord. Nos.
293, 12/7/77; 340, 12/2/81; 651, 5/16/18)
§ 6-111   DOGS; LEGAL DESTRUCTION.
Any person who owns, harbors, or in any way sustains a dog that he wishes to be
destroyed may place the same in the Animal Shelter to be destroyed and disposed
of according to the provisions herein. (Ref. 17-526 RS Neb.)
§ 6-112   DANGEROUS DOGS; DEFINITIONS.
Animal Control Authority shall mean an entity authorized to enforce the animal
control laws of a municipality.
Animal Control Officer shall mean any individual employed, appointed, or
authorized by an animal control authority for the purpose of aiding in the
enforcement of this act or any other law or ordinance relating to the licensing
of animals, control of animals, or seizure and impoundment of animals and shall
include any state or local law enforcement or other employee whose duties in
whole or in part include assignments that involve the seizure and impoundment
of any animal.
Dangerous Dog shall mean any dog that, according to the records of an animal
control authority:
   a.   Has killed or inflicted severe injury on a human being of public or
private property;
   b.   Has killed a domestic animal without provocation while the dog was off
the owner's property; or
   c.   Has been previously determined to be a potentially dangerous dog by an
animal control authority and the owner has received notice of such
determination and such dog again aggressively bites, attacks, or endangers the
safety of humans or domestic animals. A dog shall not be defined as a dangerous
dog if the threat, any injury that is not a severe injury, or the damage was
sustained by a person who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass as
defined in section 20-203, 28-520, or 28-521 or any other tort upon the
property of the owner of the dog, who was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting
the dog, who has, in the past, been observed or reported to have tormented,
abused, or assaulted the dog, or who was committing or attempting to commit a
crime.
Domestic Animal shall mean a cat, a dog, or livestock.
Owner shall mean any person, firm, corporation, organization, political
subdivision, or department possessing, harboring, keeping, or having control or
custody of a dog.
Potentially Dangerous Dog shall mean:
   a.   Any dog that when unprovoked;
      1.   Inflicts a non-severe injury on a human or injures a domestic animal
either on public or private property; or
      2.   Chases or approaches a person upon streets, sidewalks, or any public
grounds in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack; or
   b.   Any specific dog with a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to
attack when unprovoked, to cause injury, or to threaten the safety of humans or
domestic animals.
Severe Injury shall mean any physical injury that results in disfiguring
lacerations requiring multiple sutures or cosmetic surgery or one or more
broken bones or that creates a potential danger to the life or health of the
victim. (Ref. 54-617 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 442, 11/15/89)
§ 6-113   DANGEROUS DOGS; RESTRAINED.
No owner of a dangerous dog shall permit the dog to go beyond the property of
the owner unless the dog is restrained securely by a chain or leash. (Ref. 54-
618 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 442, 11/15/89)
§ 6-114   DANGEROUS DOGS; CONFINED.
While unattended on the owner's property, a dangerous dog shall be securely
confined, in a humane manner, indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen
or structure suitably designed to prevent the entry or young children and to
prevent the dog from escaping. The pen or structure shall have secure sides and
a secure top. If the pen or structure has no bottom secured to the sides, the
sides shall be embedded into the ground. The pen or structure shall also
protect the dog from the elements. The owner of a dangerous dog shall post a
warning sign on the property where the dog is kept that is clearly visible and
that informs persons that a dangerous dog is on the property. (Ref. 54-619 RS
Neb.) (Ord. No. 442, 11/15/89)
§ 6-115   DANGEROUS DOGS; FAILURE TO COMPLY.
Any dangerous dog may be immediately confiscated by an animal control officer
if the owner is in violation of this article. The owner shall be responsible
for the reasonable costs incurred by the animal control authority for the care
of a dangerous dog confiscated by an animal control officer or for the
destruction of any dangerous dog if the action by the animal control authority
is pursuant to law and if the owner violated this article.
   In addition to any other penalty, a court may order the animal control
authority to dispose of a dangerous dog in an expeditious and humane manner.
(Ref. 54-620 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 442, 11/15/89)
§ 6-116   DANGEROUS DOGS; ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to restrict or prohibit any
governing body of the municipality from establishing and enforcing laws or
ordinances at least as stringent as the provisions of this article. (Ref. 54-
624 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 442, 11/15/89)
§ 6-117   DOGS; PUBLIC NUISANCE.
It shall be unlawful for any person owning, keeping or harboring a dog to fail
to exercise proper care and control of such dog or to allow it to become a
public nuisance. A public nuisance is defined as any animal that:
   (1)   Attacks passerby or passing vehicles;
   (2)   Attacks other animals while at large;
   (3)   Is repeatedly at large;
   (4)   Damages Property;
   (5)   Barks, wholes or howls in a continuous or frequent manner disturbing
the comfort or repose of the residents of any residential neighborhood.
(Ord. No. 457, 10/2/91)
Article 2. Animals and Fowls
§ 6-201   ANIMALS; RUNNING AT LARGE.
It shall be unlawful for the owner, keeper, or harborer of any animal, or any
person having the charge, custody, or control thereof, to permit a horse, mule,
cow, sheep, goat, swine, or other animal to be driven or run at large on any of
the public ways and property, or upon the property of another. None of the
above mentioned animals shall be allowed to be kept or harbored on public or
private property within the corporate limits of the Municipality in districts
zoned R-I Residential Single Family, R-2 Residential Single and Multifamily, R-
3 Residential Mobile Home/Single and Multifamily, C-l General Commercial, C-
2 Highway Commercial, and I Industrial. (Ref. 17-547 RS Neb) (Amended by Ord.
No. 630, 2/19/14)
§ 6-202   ANIMALS; CRUELTY; TERMS DEFINED.
   (1)   It shall be unlawful for a person to abandon, cruelly mistreat or
cruelly neglect an animal.
   (2)   For purposes of this section:
      (a)   ABANDON.
To leave any animal for any length of time without making effective provision
for its food, water, or other care as is reasonably necessary for the animal's
health.
      (b)   ANIMAL.
Any vertebrate member of the animal kingdom. The terms does not include an
uncaptured wild creature.
      (c)   CRUELLY MISTREAT.
To knowingly and intentionally kill, maim, disfigure, torture, beat, mutilate,
burn, scald or otherwise inflict harm upon any animal.
      (d)   CRUELLY NEGLECT.
To fail to provide any animal in one's care, whether as owner or custodian,
with food, water, or other care as is reasonably necessary for the animal's
health.
   (3)   Any person who violates this section shall be liable for all expenses
incurred by the Municipality in conjunction with the care, impoundment or
disposition of an animal. (Ref. 17-505, 28-1008, 28-1009, 28-1011 RS Neb.)
(Amended by Ord. No. 548, 6/6/01)
§ 6-203   ANIMALS; ENCLOSURES.
All pens, cages, sheds, yards, or any other area or enclosure for the
confinement or animals and fowls not specifically barred within the corporate
limits shall be kept in a clean and orderly manner so as not to become a menace
or nuisance to the neighborhood in which the said enclosure is located.
§ 6-204   FOWLS; RUNNING AT LARGE.
(1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to allow poultry, chickens, turkeys,
ducks, geese, or any other fowls to run at large on any of the public ways and
property, or upon the property of another. None of the above mentioned fowls
shall be allowed to be kept or harbored on public or private property within
the corporate limits of the Municipality in districts zoned C-l General
Commercial, C-2 Highway Commercial, and I Industrial.
   (2)   A property owner or tenant in possession of property is allowed to
have up to a total of eight poultry, chickens, turkeys, ducks, geese, or any
other fowls on a parcel of real property within the corporate limits in
districts zoned R-l Residential Single Family, R-2 Residential Single and
Multifamily, and R-3 Residential Mobile Home/Single and Multifamily. All said
poultry or fowls shall be kept in an enclosure to prevent them from running at
large, and the enclosures shall be kept in a condition so as not to constitute
a nuisance to neighbors. (Ref. 17-505, 17-526, 54-603 RS Neb.) (Amended by Ord.
Nos. 630, 2/19/14; 661, 9/16/20)
§ 6-205   STOCK YARDS.
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, keep, or maintain any stock yard
for the purpose of keeping or feeding meat cattle, sheep, or swine therein
within the Municipality except on a permit being issued by the Mayor, with the
advice and consent of the Council. It shall also be unlawful for any person to
keep or feed, cause to be kept or fed, or procure any person to keep or feed
any meat cattle, sheep, or swine in any such stock yard except upon a permit
being issued by the Mayor, by and with the advice and consent of the Council.
Provided, however, the provisions of this Chapter shall not be construed to
apply to the stock yard of any railroad company which is used solely for the
temporary retention and loading of stock for shipment. A stock yard within the
meaning of the Chapter is defined to be a pen, shed, or other enclosure, in
which are kept or fed ten (10) head or more of meat cattle, swine, or sheep.
Person as used in this Section shall mean any firm, company, corporation,
person, or persons.
§ 6-206   PITTING ANIMALS; DEFINITIONS.
Bearbaiting shall mean the pitting of any animal against a bear. Cockfighting
shall mean the pitting of a fowl against another fowl. Dogfighting shall mean
the pitting of a dog against another dog. Pitting shall mean bringing animals
together in combat. (Ref. 28-101 RS Neb.) (Amended by Ord. No. 423, 11/16/88)
§ 6-207   PITTING ANIMALS; PROHIBITED.
No person shall knowingly promote, engage in, or be employed at dogfighting,
cockfighting, bearbaiting, or pitting an animal against another. Nor shall any
person knowingly receive money for the admission of another person to a place
kept for such purpose. Nor shall any person knowingly own, use, train, sell, or
possess an animal for the purpose of animal pitting. Nor shall any person
knowingly permit any act as described in this section to occur on any premises
owned or controlled by him or her. (Ref. 28-101 RS Neb.) (Amended by Ord. No.
423, 11/16/88)
§ 6-208   PITTING ANIMALS; SPECTATORS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall knowingly and willingly be present at and witness as a
spectator dogfighting, cockfighting, bearbaiting, or the pitting of an animal
against another as prohibited in section 6-207. (Ref. 28-101 RS Neb.) (Amended
by Ord. No. 423, 11/16/88)
Article 3. Miscellaneous Misdemeanors
[Editor's Note: This entire Article was amended by Ordinance No. 335, 12/2/81]
§ 6-301    MISDEMEANORS; DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
(Repealed by Ord. No. 529, 7/15/98)
§ 6-302    MISDEMEANORS; THEFT.
The terms and definitions applied in this Section shall be in conformance with
Section 28-509 RS Neb. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
A.   Take or exercise control over movable property of another with the intent
to deprive him there of; or
B.   Transfer immovable property of another or any interest therein with the
intent to benefit himself or another not entitled thereto; or
C.   Fail to return leased or rented movable property to the lessor after the
expiration of a written lease or written rental agreement, if done with intent
to deprive, and is such lessee has been mailed notice by certified mail that
such lease or rental agreement has expired and he has failed within ten (10)
days after such notice to return such property; or
D.   Obtain the property of another by deception, as defined by Section 28-512
RS Neb; or
E.   Obtain the property of another by threatening to:
1.   Inflict bodily injury on anyone or commit any other criminal offense; or
2.   Accuse anyone of a criminal offense; or
3.   Expose any secret tending to subject any person to hatred, contempt or
ridicule, or to impair his credit or business repute; or
4.   Take or withhold action as an official, or cause an official to take or
withhold action; or
5.   Bring about or continue a strike, boycott, or other collective unofficial
action, if the property is not demanded or received for the benefit of the
group in whose interest the actor purports to act; or
6.   Testify or provide information or withhold testimony or information with
respect to an other's claim or defense.
   It is an affirmative defense to prosecution based on subdivision 2, 3, or 4
of the above subsection, that the property obtained by threat of accusation,
exposure, lawsuit or other invocation of official action was honestly claimed
as restitution or indemnification for harm done in the circumstances to which
such accusation, exposure, lawsuit or other official action relates, or as
compensation for property or lawful services; or
F.   Come into control of property of another that he knows to have been lost,
mislaid, or delivered under a mistake as to the nature or amount of the
property or the identity of the recipient if, with intent to deprive the owner
thereof, he fails to take reasonable measures to restore the property to a
person entitled to have it; or
G.   Obtain services which he knows are available only for compensation, by
deception or threat, or by false token or other means to avoid payment for the
service; or
H.   Have control over the disposition of services of others, to which he is
not entitled, and diverts such services to his own benefit or to the benefit of
another not entitled thereto; or
I.   Make, possess, sell, give, transfer, offer for sale or advertise for sale
any device, instrument, apparatus or equipment designed or which can be used to
obtain telecommunications service fraudulently or to conceal from any supplier
or telecommunications service or from any lawful authority the existence or
place of origin or of destination of any telecommunication; or
J.   Receive, retain or dispose of movable property to another knowing that it
has been stolen, or believing that it has been stolen, unless the property is
received, retained or disposed with intention to restore it to the owner;
Provided that the value of the thing involved is under three hundred ($300.00)
dollars. (Ref. 28-509 thru 28-515, 28-517 RS Neb) (Class 1 or 2)
§ 6-303    MISDEMEANORS; CRIMINAL MISCHIEF.
It shall be unlawful for any person to damage property of another intentionally
or recklessly; intentionally or recklessly tamper with property of another so
as to endanger person or property; or intentionally or maliciously cause
another to suffer pecuniary loss by deception or threat. A person commits
criminal mischief regardless of the amount of pecuniary loss caused by the
person's actions. (Ref. 28-519 RS Neb.) (Amended by Ord. No. 525, 4/1/98)
§ 6-304   MISDEMEANORS; CRIMINAL TRESPASS.
It shall be unlawful for any person, knowing that he is not licensed or
privileged to do so, to:
   (A)   Enter or secretly remain in any building or occupied structure, or any
separately secured or occupied portion thereof; or
   (B)   Enter or remain in any place as to which notice against trespass is
given by:
      (1)   Actual communication to the actor; or
      (2)   Posting in a manner prescribed by law or reasonably likely to come
to the attention of intruders; or
      (3)   Fencing or other enclosure manifestly designed to exclude
intruders. (Ref. 28-520, 28-521 RS Neb.) (Class 1, 2 or 3)
§ 6-305   MISDEMEANORS; IMPERSONATING A PEACE OFFICER.
It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely pretend to be a peace officer
and perform any act in that pretended capacity. (Ref. 28-610 RS Neb.) (Class 1)
§ 6-306   MISDEMEANORS; PROSTITUTION.
It shall be unlawful for any person to perform, offer or agree to perform any
act of sexual penetration, as defined in Subdivision (5) of Section 28-318 RS
Neb., with any person not his or her spouse in exchange for money or other
thing of value. (Ref. 28-801 RS Neb.) (Class 5 - citation in lieu of arrest)  
(Amended by Ord. No. 402, 9/18/85)
§ 6-307   MISDEMEANORS; KEEPING A PLACE OF PROS- TITUTION.
Any person who has or exercises control over the use of any place which offers
seclusion or shelter for the practice of prostitution and who knowingly grants
or permits the use of such place for the purpose of prostitution commits the
offense of keeping a place of prostitution. (Ref. 28-804 RS Neb.) (Class 1)
§ 6-308   MISDEMEANORS; PUBLIC INDECENCY; ABATEMENT.
   (1)   It is the intent of the City to prohibit the exploitation of human
nudity for the purpose of advertising, selling or otherwise promoting the
economic interests of any type of business enterprise. It is also the intent of
the City to further the government's interest in avoiding the harmful secondary
effects of this activity, such as prostitution, sexual assaults, criminal
activity, degradation of women, and other activities which break down family
structure. This prohibition is not intended to extend to any expression of
opinion or the performance of a bona fide play, ballet, or drama protected by
the First Amendment to the United States Constitution or by Article I, § 5 of
the Constitution of the State of Nebraska.
   (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally expose his or her
genitals, pubic area, breasts or buttocks while employed in providing any
service, product or entertainment in any business or commercial establishment.
It shall also be unlawful for anyone to aid, abet, assist or direct another
person to intentionally expose his or her genitals, pubic area, breasts or
buttocks while employed in providing any service, product, or entertainment in
any business or commercial establishment.
   (3)   Any activities in violation of this Section shall be deemed to be a
nuisance and may be abated and suppressed by injunctive or other equitable
relief as allowed by law. (Ref. 17-505 RS Neb.) (Amended by Ord. No. 565, 7/7/
04)
§ 6-309   MISDEMEANORS; RESISTING ARREST, WITHOUT THE USE OF A DEADLY OR
DANGEROUS WEAPON.
It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally prevent or attempt to
prevent a peace officer, acting under color of his official authority, from
effecting an arrest on said person or on another, by:
   (A)   Using or threatening to use physical force or violence against the
peace officer of another; or
   (B)   Using any other means which creates a substantial risk of causing
physical injury to the peace officer or another; or
   (C)   Employing means which require substantial force to overcome resistance
to effecting the arrest;
Provided, that this Section shall apply only to those actions taken to resist
arrest without the use of a deadly or dangerous weapon.
   It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this Section if the peace
officer involved was out of uniform and did not identify himself as a peace
officer by showing his credentials to the person whose arrest is attempted.
(Ref. 28-904 RS Neb.) (Class 1)
§ 6-310   MISDEMEANORS; OPERATION OF A MOTOR VEHICLE TO AVOID ARREST.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle to flee in
such vehicle in an effort to avoid arrest or citation for the violation of any
law of the State of Nebraska constituting a misdemeanor, infraction, traffic
infraction, or any Municipal ordinance, except nonmoving traffic violations.
(Ref. 28-905(1)(3) RS Neb.) (Class 3)
§ 6-311   MISDEMEANORS; PROMOTING GAMBLING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to:
   (A)   Engage in bookmaking; or
   (B)   Receive money in connection with any unlawful gambling scheme; or
   (C)   Knowingly participate in any unlawful gambling as a player by placing
a bet. (Ref. 28-1101 thru 28-1104 RS Neb.) (Class 1, 2, or 4)
§ 6-312   MISDEMEANORS; POSSESSION OF A GAMBLING DEVICE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, sell, transport, place,
possess or conduct or negotiate any transaction affecting or designed to affect
ownership, custody, or use of any gambling device, knowing that it shall be
used in the advancement of unlawful gambling activity. (Ref. 28-1107 RS Neb.)
(Class 2)
§ 6-313   MISDEMEANORS; DISTURBING THE PEACE.
   Any person who shall intentionally disturb the peace and quiet of any
person, family or neighborhood commits the offense of disturbing the peace.
(Ref. 17-505 RS Neb.) (Amended by Ord. Nos. 427, 12/21/88; 606, 9/15/10)
§ 6-314   MISDEMEANORS; MAINTAINING A NUISANCE.
   (1) It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, keep up or continue and
maintain any nuisance to the injury of any part of the citizens of the
Municipality.
   (2) The court, in case of conviction of such offense, shall order every such
nuisance to be abated or removed. (Ref. 17-505, 18-1720, 28-1321 RS Neb.)
(Amended by Ord. No. 538, 9/15/99)
§ 6-315   MISDEMEANORS; PROHIBITED FENCES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, or cause to be erected, and
maintain any barbed wire or electric fence within the corporate limits, where
such fence abuts a public sidewalk, street or alley. (Ref. 18-1720, 28-1321,
39-705 RS Neb.) (Class 3)
§ 6-316   MISDEMEANORS; BOARD FENCES.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the Municipality to erect or cause
to be erected any fence made of boards so placed that there is no space between
the boards and which is of greater height than six (6') feet. Upon realization
of a violation of this Section, the Chief of Police shall issue a written
notice to the owner of such fence to remove it within ten (10) days of service
of the notice. Upon failure to remove within the allowed time, the Police Chief
shall cause the fence to be removed and the costs thereof charged against the
property as a special assessment. (Amended by Ord. No. 406, 5/21/86)
§ 6-317   MISDEMEANORS; POSTED ADVERTISEMENTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to wrongfully and maliciously tear,
deface, remove, or cover up the posted advertisement or bill of any person,
firm, or corporation when said bill or advertisement is rightfully and lawfully
posted, and the same remains of value.
§ 6-318   MISDEMEANORS; WEEDS, LITTER, STAGNANT WATER.
   (1) Lots or pieces of ground within the Municipality shall be drained or
filled so as to prevent stagnant water or any other nuisance accumulating
thereon.
   (2) The owner or occupant of any lot or piece of ground within the
Municipality shall keep the lot or piece of ground and the adjoining street
right-of-ways and alleys free of any growth of twelve inches (12”) or more in
height of weeds, grasses, or worthless vegetation.
   (3) The throwing, depositing, or accumulation of litter on any lot or piece
of ground within the Municipality is prohibited; provided, that grass, leaves,
and worthless vegetation may be used as a ground mulch or in a compost pile.
   (4) It is hereby declared to be a nuisance to permit or maintain any growth
of twelve inches (12") or more in height of weeds, grasses, or worthless
vegetation or to litter or cause litter to be deposited or remain thereon
except in proper receptacles.
   (5) Any owner or occupant of a lot or piece of ground shall, upon conviction
of violating this section, be guilty of an offense.
   (6) Notice to abate and remove such nuisance shall be given to each owner or
owner's duly authorized agent and to the occupant, if any, by personal service
or certified mail. If notice by personal service or certified is unsuccessful,
notice shall be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in
the City or by conspicuously posting the notice on the lot or ground upon which
the nuisance is to be abated and removed. Within five (5) days after receipt of
such notice or publication or posting, whichever is applicable, if the owner or
occupant of the lot or piece of ground does not request a hearing with the
Municipality or fails to comply with the order to abate and remove the
nuisance, the Municipality may have such work done. The costs and expenses of
any such work shall be paid by the owner. If unpaid for two (2) months after
such work is done, the Municipality may either:
      (a)   Levy and assess the costs and expenses of the work upon the lot or
piece of ground so benefited in the same manner as other special taxes for
improvements are levied and assessed or
      (b)   Recover in a civil action the costs and expenses of the work upon
the lot or piece of ground and the adjoining street right-of-ways and alleys.
   (7) For purposes of this section:
      (a) Litter shall include, but not be limited to: (i) Trash, rubbish,
refuse, garbage, paper, rags, and ashes; (ii) Wood, plaster, cement, brick, or
stone building rubble; (iii) Grass, leaves, and worthless vegetation; (iv)
Offal and dead animals; and (v) Any machine or machines, vehicle or vehicles,
or parts of a machine or vehicle which have lost their identity, character,
utility, or serviceability as such through deterioration, dismantling, or the
ravages of time, are inoperative or unable to perform their intended functions,
or are cast off, discarded, or thrown away or left as waste, wreckage, or junk;
and
   (b) Weeds shall include, but not be limited to, bindweed (convolvulus
arvensis), puncture vine (tribulus terrestris), leafy spurge (euphorbia esula),
Canada thistle (cirsium arvense), perennial peppergrass (lepidium draba),
Russian knapweed (centaurea picris), Johnson grass (sorghum halepense), nodding
or musk thistle, quack grass (agropyron repens), perennial sow thistle (sonchus
arvensis), horse nettle (solanum carolinense), bull thistle (cirsium
lanceolatum), buckthorn (rhamnus sp.) (tourn), hemp plant (canabis sativa), and
ragweed (ambrosiaceae). (Ref. 17-563, 18-1720 RS Neb.)  (Amended by Ord. Nos.
531, 8/19/98; 569, 7/21/04)
§ 6-319   MISDEMEANORS; DISEASED OR DYING TREES.
   All trees of the species and varieties of elm, zelkova, and planera that are
in a diseased, dying, or dead condition or that may serve as a breeding place
for the European Elm Bark Beetle, Scolytus Multistriatus, or other disease
carrying insects are hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall be
removed from the private property on which they are located upon notice by the
Municipal Police. For the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this
Section, the Municipal Police shall have the authority to enter on private
property to inspect the trees thereon. In the event that the trees are diseased
or dead, notice shall be given to the owner of the property by mail or personal
service and such notice shall allow the said owner ten (10) days to remove and
burn the said tree or trees. In the event that the owner is a non-resident,
notice shall be made by publication in a newspaper of general circulation, or
by mail if the name and address is known. The person charged with the removal
and burning may enter into an agreement with the Municipality that such work be
accomplished by the Municipality and the expense and interest shall be declared
to be a lien upon such property from the time the same becomes due until paid.
If the owner fails, neglects, or refuses to enter into such an agreement, or to
remove the trees, the Municipal Police may enter upon the property and proceed
to direct the removal and burning of the trees and the cost thereof shall be
chargeable to the property owner. If the owner fails to reimburse the
Municipality after being properly billed, the costs shall be assessed against
the property and certified by the Municipal Clerk to the County Treasurer to be
collected in the manner prescribed by law. In the event the property owner is a
non-resident of the county in which the property lies, the Municipality shall,
before levying any special assessment against that property, send a copy of any
notice required by law to be published by means of certified mail, return
receipt requested to the last known address of the non-resident property owner.
The last known address shall be that address listed on the current tax rolls at
the time such required notice was first published. Failure to remove and burn
the said trees shall be deemed to be a misdemeanor. (Ref. 17-563.01, 18-1720,
28-1321 RS Neb.) (Class 3)
§ 6-320   MISDEMEANORS; RADIO INTERFERENCE.
Any person operating, or causing to be operated, any motor, sign, or other
electrical apparatus that is connected with the light and power system shall
equip the apparatus with proper filtering attachments to eliminate
interference; Provided, that the provisions herein shall not apply to the use
of necessary medical equipment or apparatus where electrical interference
cannot be reasonably and safely eliminated. Any person who so operates, or
causes to be operated, any such electrical apparatus that interferes habitually
with radio and television reception shall be deemed to be guilty of a
misdemeanor. (Ref. 18-1720, 28-1321 RS Neb.) (Class 3)
§ 6-321   MISDEMEANORS; DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, except an officer of the law in the
discharge of his official duty, to fire or discharge any gun, pistol, or other
fowling piece within the Municipality; Provided, nothing herein shall be
construed to apply to officially sanctioned public celebrations if the persons
so discharging firearms have written permission from the Governing Body.
   The Governing Body may allow the discharge of weapons in as regularly
established shooting gallery. (Ref. 17-556 RS Neb.) (Class 5) (Amended by Ord.
No. 458, 10/2/91)
§ 6-322   MISDEMEANORS; SLINGSHOTS, AIR GUNS, BB GUNS.
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a slingshot, air gun, BB gun,
or the like loaded with rock or other dangerous missiles at any time or under
any circumstances within the Municipality. (Ref. 17-556 RS Neb.) (Class 5)
§ 6-322.01   MISDEMEANORS; POSSESSION OF WEAPONS ON CITY-OWNED PROPERTY.
   (1)   No person shall possess on public property owned by the City any
pistol, revolver, shotgun, rifle, bow and arrow, crossbow, slingshot, or any
other air, gas, manually operated or spring-operated gun, weapon, apparatus or
instrument designed or intended to be used for the purpose of throwing or
projecting missiles of any kind by any means whatsoever, whether the instrument
is called by any name set forth above or by any other name. For the purposes of
this section, PUBLIC PROPERTY shall mean any land or building owned by the
City, whether within or without the corporate limits, but shall not include
highways, streets and alleys within the corporate limits.
   (2)   The provisions of subsection (1) shall not apply to:
      (a)   The sale of weapons identified therein at public auction or sale in
the Community Center by an individual holding a valid federal firearms license
after reasonable advance notice has been given to the Police Department as to
the weapons to be sold;
      (b)   Areas in certain parks and park facilities designated and approved
by the Chief of Police for individuals participating in various organized
sporting activities or programs officially sanctioned by the sponsoring
organization; and
      (c)   Law enforcement officers acting in the course of their duty. (Ord.
No. 550, 10/3/01)
§ 6-323   MISDEMEANORS; INJURY TO TREES.
It shall be unlawful for any person to purposely or carelessly, and without
lawful authority, cut down, carry away, injure, break down, or destroy any
fruit, ornamental, shade or other tree or trees standing or growing on any land
belonging to another person or persons or on any public land in the corporate
limits. Any public service company desiring to trim or cut down any tree,
except on property owned and controlled by them, shall make an application to
the Governing Body to do so, and the written permit of the Governing Body in
accordance with their decision to allow such an action shall constitute the
only lawful authority on the part of the company to do so. (Ref. 17-555, 18-
806, 28-519 RS Neb.) (Class 2 or 3)
§ 6-324   MISDEMEANORS; DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in conduct or behavior which
disturb the peace and good order of the Municipality by clamor or noise,
intoxication, drunkenness, fighting, using of obscene or profane language in
the streets or other public places, or is otherwise indecent or disorderly
conduct or lewd or lascivious behavior. (Ref. 17-129, 17-556 RS Neb.) (Class 5)
§ 6-325   MISDEMEANORS; CURFEW.
It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years to ride
in or operate any vehicle in or upon any street, alley, or other public place,
or to loiter, wander, stroll, loaf, or play in or upon any of the streets,
alleys, or other public places between the hours of eleven (11:00) o'clock P.M.
of any day and six (6:00) o'clock A.M. of the following day while school is in
session unless accompanied by a parent, guardian or other adult person having
the care, custody or control of said minor, or the minor is engaged in lawful
employment or is on an emergency errand; Provided, when an activity of the kind
normally attended by minors under eighteen (18) years terminates after, or less
than one (1) hour prior to eleven (11:00) o'clock P.M., the curfew shall
commence one (1) hour after the termination of such activity.
§ 6-326   MISDEMEANORS; LOITERING AND VAGRANTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter on the streets, in the park,
on the sidewalk, or on any other public ways and property at unreasonable
hours, and those persons who are unable to give a good and satisfactory reason
why they should be there, including all vagrants and persons found without
means of support or some legitimate business, shall be deemed to be guilty of
loitering.  (Ref. 17-556 RS Neb.)
§ 6-327   MISDEMEANORS; ABANDONED AND JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (1)   For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall
apply:
      (a)   Motor Vehicles. A machine propelled by power other than human power
designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners or slides
and transport persons or property or pull machinery and shall include, but not
be limited to, automobiles, trucks, trailers, motorcycles, tractors and wagons.
      (b)   Junked Motor Vehicle. A motor vehicle on which the engine, wheels,
or other parts have been removed, altered, damaged or otherwise so treated or
allowed to deteriorate so that the motor vehicle is incapable of being driven
under its own power. A motor vehicle which does not have an unexpired license
plate or plates affixed thereto shall be presumed to be a junked motor vehicle,
provided that such presumption may be rebutted.
      (c)   Abandoned Motor Vehicle. A motor vehicle which has been left
unattended:
         1.   With no number plates or "in transit" stickers issued pursuant to
the Motor Vehicle Registration Act affixed thereto, for more than six (6) hours
on any public property; or,
         2.   For more than twenty-four (24) hours on any public property,
except a portion thereof on which parking is legally permitted; or,
         3.   For more than forty-eight (48) hours, after the parking of such
vehicle shall become illegal, if left on a portion of a public property on
which parking is legally permitted; or,
         4.   For more than seven (7) days on private property if left
initially without permission of the owner, or after permission of the owner
shall be terminated.
      (d)   Public Property. Any public right-of-way, street, highway, alley,
park, or other state, county or municipally owned property.
      (e)   Private Property. Any privately-owned property which is not
included within the definition of public property.
   (2)   Abandoned Motor Vehicles Prohibited. No person shall abandon any motor
vehicle on public property within the corporate limits of the Municipality, and
no person shall leave any motor vehicle on public property within the corporate
limits of the Municipality for such time and under such circumstances as to
cause such vehicle reasonably to appear to have been abandoned.
   (3)   Junked Motor Vehicles Prohibited. No person shall park, store, leave
or permit the parking, storing or leaving of any junked motor vehicle upon any
private property within the City for a period of time in excess of thirty (30)
days.
   (4)   Exception for Enclosures. Nothing in this section shall be construed
to prohibit any person from storing up to two (2) junked motor vehicles upon
private property when enclosed within a building, screened from the public view
by trees or shrubbery.
   (5)   Exception for Business. Nothing in this section shall be construed to
apply to any motor vehicle held in connection with and stored on the premises
of a lawful auto repair shop or auto body repair shop operating in an
appropriate commercial or industrial zoning district.
   (6)   Junked Motor Vehicles on Public Property. No person shall leave any
junked motor vehicle on public property within the corporate limits of the
Municipality in excess of forty-eight (48) hours.
   (7)   Impoundment Authorized. The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to
remove or have removed any vehicle left on any public property within the
corporate limits of the Municipality which reasonably appears to be in
violation of this section or is lost, stolen, or unclaimed. Such vehicle shall
be impounded until lawfully claimed or disposed of in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
   (8)   Disposition of Impounded Vehicles. The title to any motor vehicle so
abandoned which has no number plates of the current year affixed and is of a
wholesale value, taking into consideration the condition of such vehicle, of
one hundred ($100.00) dollars or less, shall immediately vest in the
Municipality. In the event the motor vehicle is licensed for the current year
or is of a wholesale value of over one hundred ($100.00) dollars, the Municipal
Police shall make a reasonable effort to contact the owner of the said motor
vehicle by sending a notice to the registered owner, if known; by sending an
inquiry to the county it is registered in, if the owner is unknown; or by
contacting the Director of the Nebraska Department of Motor Vehicles, if the
motor vehicle is without license plates and the owner is unknown. If notified
by the Director of the Nebraska Department of Motor Vehicles that a lien or
mortgage exists on said motor vehicle, notice shall also be sent to the lien
holder or mortgagee. Any person claiming such vehicle shall be required to pay
the cost of removal and storage of such vehicle. If the owner, lienholder or
mortgagee, is known and does not claim the automobile within five (5) days
after the date when the notice was mailed, or upon receiving word from the
Director of the Nebraska Department of Motor Vehicles that the owner is
unknown, title will immediately vest in the Municipality and the motor vehicle
may be sold. Any proceeds from the sale of the motor vehicle less any expenses
incurred by the Municipality in such removal, storage and sale shall be held
without interest in a separate account for the benefit of the owner of such
vehicle for a period of two (2) years. If not claimed within such period of
time, the proceeds shall then be paid into the General Fund.
   (9)   Penalty. Any person who abandons a motor vehicle, or any person who
has a junked motor vehicle as hereinbefore defined and in violation of this
section, shall be deemed to be guilty of an offense. (Ref. 17-505, 69-1901
through 69-1911 RS Neb.) (Amended by Ord. Nos. 404, 3/5/86; 546, 5/2/01; 583,
6/21/06)
§ 6-328   MISDEMEANORS; GASOLINE CONTAINERS.
   Every person within this State retailing gasoline, benzine, kerosene or
other high explosives of that nature in less than carload lots shall deliver
the same to the purchases in barrels, casks, packages or cans painted
vermillion red, and having the word gasoline, benzine, kerosene or whatever
name such explosive is known by plainly printed thereon in English. Also, every
person within this State purchasing the previously named explosives for his own
use shall procure and keep the same only in barrels, casks, packages or cans
painted and stamped as required above. (Ref. 66-103 thru 66-107 RS Neb) (Class
3)
§ 6-329   MISDEMEANORS; UNAUTHORIZED USE OF A PROPELLED VEHICLE.
It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally exert unauthorized control
over another's propelled vehicle by operating the same without the owner's
consent. Propelled vehicle shall mean and include an automobile, airplane,
motorcycle, motorboat, or other motor-propelled vehicle. It shall be an
affirmative defense to a prosecution under this Section that the defendant
reasonably believed that the owner would have authorized the use had he known
of it. (Ref. 28-516 RS Neb.) (Class 1 or 2)
§ 6-330   MISDEMEANORS; CONSUMER FIREWORKS; SALE; DISCHARGE.
   (1)   Except as provided in subsection (2), it shall be unlawful for any
person to ignite or caused to be exploded fireworks of any description
whatsoever, except consumer fireworks.
      (a)   Consumer fireworks means any of the following devices that (i) meet
the requirements set forth in 16 C.F.R. parts 1500 and 1507, as such
regulations existed on January 1, 2010, and (ii) are tested and approved by a
nationally recognized testing facility or by the State Fire Marshal:
         1.   Any small firework device designed to produce visible effects by
combustion and which is required to comply with the construction, chemical
composition, and labeling regulations of the United States Consumer Product
Safety Commission set forth in 16 C.F.R., as such regulations existed on
January 1, 2010;
         2.   Any small device designed to produce audible effects such as a
whistling device;
         3.   Any ground device or firecracker containing fifty (50) milligrams
or less of explosive composition; or
         4.   Any aerial device containing one hundred thirty (130) milligrams
or less of explosive composition.
      (b)    Class C explosives as classified by the United States Department
of Transportation shall be considered consumer fireworks.
      (c)   Consumer fireworks do not include: (i) Rockets that are mounted on
a stick or wire and project into the air when ignited, with or without report;
(ii) Wire sparklers, except that silver and gold sparklers are deemed to be
consumer fireworks until January 1, 2014; (iii) Nighttime parachutes; (iv)
Fireworks that are shot into the air and after coming to the ground cause
automatic ignition due to sufficient temperature; (v) Firecrackers that contain
more than fifty (50) milligrams of explosive composition; and (vi) Fireworks
that have been tested by the State Fire Marshal as a response to complaints and
have been deemed to be unsafe.
   (2)   This section shall not apply to any fireworks to be used for purpose
of public exhibitions or display under the authorization of the Governing Body
or to fireworks furnished for agricultural purpose pursuant to written
authorization from the State Fire Marshal.
   (3)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, hold for sale, or offer
for sale as a retailer any fireworks within the corporate limits of the
Municipality unless such person has first obtained a license from the State of
Nebraska. Consumer fireworks may be sold at retail only between June 27 and
July 5 of each year.
   (4)   Consumer fireworks may be discharged only between June 27 and July 6
of each year. It shall be unlawful to discharge consumer fireworks between the
hours of 12:00 midnight and 8:00 a.m. (Ref. 17-505, 17-556, 28-1241 RS Neb.)
(Amended by Ord. Nos. 527, 6/3/98; 611, 8/3/11)
§ 6-331   FIREWORKS; THROWING FIRECRACKERS.
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw any firecracker, or any object
which explodes upon contact with another object; from or into a motor vehicle;
onto any street, highway, or sidewalk; at or near any person; into any
building; or into or at any group of persons. (Ref. 17-556, 28-1242 RS Neb.)
§ 6-332   MISDEMEANORS; SHOPLIFTING.
A person commits the crime of theft by shoplifting when he or she, with the
intent of appropriating merchandise to his or her own use without paying for
the same or to deprive the owner of possession of such property or its retail
value, in whole or in part, does any of the following:
(a)   Conceals or takes possession of the goods or merchandise of any store or
retail establishment;
(b)   Alters the price tag or other price marking on goods or merchandise of
any store or retail establishment;
(c)   Transfers the goods or merchandise of any store or retail establishment
from one container to another;
(d)   Interchanges the label or price tag from one item of merchandise with a
label or price tag from another item of merchandise; or
(e)   Causes the cash register or other sales recording device to reflect less
than the retail price of the merchandise.
   In any prosecution for theft by shoplifting, in order to allow the owner of
owners of shoplifted property the use of such property pending criminal
prosecutions, photographs of the shoplifted property may be accepted as prima
facie evidence as to the identity of the property. Such photograph shall be
accompanied by a written statement containing the following:
(a)   A description of the property;
(b)   The name of the owner or owners of the property;
(c)   The time, date, and location where the shoplifting occurred;
(d)   The time and date the photograph was taken;
(e)   The name of the photographer; and
(f)   Verification by the arresting officer.
   Prior to allowing the use of shoplifted property as provided in this
Section, legal counsel for the alleged shoplifter shall have a reasonable
opportunity to inspect and appraise the property and may file a motion for
retention of the property, which motion shall be granted if there is any
reasonable basis for believing that the photographs and accompanying affidavit
may be misleading. (Ref. 28-514 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 356, 9/15/82)
§ 6-333   MISDEMEANORS; FALSE REPORTING.
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
A.   Furnish information he or she knows to be false to any peace officer or
other official with the intent to instigate an investigation or an alleged
criminal matter or impede the investigation of an actual criminal matter; or
B.   Furnish information he or she knows to be false alleging the existence of
an emergency in which human life or property are in jeopardy to any hospital,
ambulance company, or other person or governmental agency which deals with
emergencies involving danger to life or property; or
C.   Furnish any information, or cause such information to be furnished or
conveyed by electric, electronic, telephonic, or mechanical means, knowing the
same to be false concerning the need for assistance of a Fire Department or any
personnel or equipment of such Department; or
D.   Furnish any information he or she knows to be false concerning the
location of any explosive in any building or other property to any person.
(Ref. 28-907 RS Neb.) (Class 1) (Ord. No. 357, 9/15/82)
§ 6-334   MISDEMEANORS; LITTERING.
(1) Any person who deposits, throws, discards, or otherwise disposes of any
litter on any public or private property or in any waters commits the offense
of littering unless:
(a)   Such property is an area designated by law for the disposal of such
material and such person is authorized by the proper public authority to so use
such property; or
(b)   The litter is placed in a receptacle or container installed on such
property for such purpose.
   (2)   The word litter as used in this section shall mean all waste material
susceptible of being dropped, deposited, discarded or otherwise disposed of by
any person upon any property in the state but does not include wastes of
primary processes of farming or manufacturing. Waste material as used in this
section shall mean any material appearing in a place or in a context not
associated with that material's function or origin.
   (3)   Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped, or dumped from any
motor vehicle or watercraft in violation of this section, the operator of such
motor vehicle or watercraft commits the offense of littering.  (Ref. 28-523 RS
Neb.) (Ord. No. 493, 3/15/95)
§ 6-335 OFFENSES; ILLEGAL DUMPING; MUNICIPAL BURN SITE; FINE.
   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person not a resident of the Municipality
to dispose of or dump any waste whatsoever at the Municipal Burn Site. It shall
be unlawful for any contractor to dispose of or dump any waste from a non-
resident property at the Municipal Burn Site.
   (2)   It shall be unlawful for any resident of the Municipality to dispose
of or dump at the Municipal Burn Site any solid wastes other than grass
clippings, leaves, brush, trees, and concrete rubble. A separate area of the
Municipal Burn Site shall be set aside for the disposal of concrete rubble.
   (3)   Any person convicted of violating this section shall be fined not less
than seventy-five dollars ($75.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00). (Ref. 17-505 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 658, 11/20/19)
2020 S-18
Article 4. Penal Provision
§ 6-401 VIOLATION; PENALTY.
   Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with the enforcement of any
of the provisions of this Chapter, set forth at full length herein or
incorporated by reference, shall be deemed guilty of an offense, and upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than seventy-five dollars ($75.00)
nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. A new violation
shall be deemed to have been committed every twenty-four (24) hours of such
failure to comply. (Ref. 17-505 RS Neb.) (Amended by Ord. No. 538, 9/15/99)
§ 6-402   ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE.
   (1) Whenever a nuisance exists as defined in this Chapter, the Municipality
may proceed by a suit in equity to enjoin and abate the same, in the manner
provided by law.
   (2) Whenever, in any action, it is established that a nuisance exists, the
court shall together with the fine or penalty imposed, enter an order of
abatement as part of the judgement of the case. (Ref. 17-505, 18-1720 RS Neb.)
(Ord. No. 538, 9/15/99)
Chapter 7
FIRE REGULATIONS
Article 1. Fires
§ 7-101   FIRES; PRESERVATION OF PROPERTY.
The Fire Chief, or any officer in charge of the Fire Department, shall have the
authority and power to cause the removal of property whenever it shall become
necessary for the preservation of more valuable property, the protection of
human life, or to prevent the spreading of fire to adjoining property. The Fire
Chief may direct the Municipal Firemen to remove any building, structure, or
fence for the purpose of checking the progress of any fire. The Fire Chief
shall have the authority to blow up, or cause to be blown up, with explosives
any building or structure during the progress of a fire for the purpose of
checking the progress of the same.
§ 7-102   FIRES; EQUIPMENT.
It shall be unlawful for any person except the Fire Chief and the members of
the Municipal Fire Department to molest, destroy, handle or in any other way to
interfere with the use and storage of any of the fire trucks and other
apparatus belonging to the Municipality, the Municipal Fire Department, or the
Wymore Rural Fire Protection District. Except in the case of fires and rescue
calls, the members of the Municipal Fire Department shall not interfere with
the storage of or use any of the fire equipment and other apparatus without
prior authorization of the Fire Chief. (Ref. 28-519 RS Neb.) (Amended by Ord.
No. 557A, 3/19/03)
§ 7-103   FIRES; INTERFERENCE.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to hinder or obstruct the
Municipal Fire Chief or the members of the Fire Department in the performance
of their duty. (Ref. 28-908 RS Neb.)
§ 7-104   FIRES; OBSTRUCTION.
It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct the use of a fire hydrant, or
have or place any material within fifteen (15') feet of the said hydrant. Any
vehicle or material found as an obstruction may be immediately removed by the
Fire Chief or any member of the Fire Department, at the risk, cost, and expense
of the owner or claimant. (Ref. 39-672 RS Neb.)
§ 7-105   FIRES; ASSISTANCE.
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse, after the command of the Fire
Chief or Assistant Fire Chief, to aid in extinguishing a fire or to assist in
the removal and protection of property. (Ref. 28-908 RS Neb.)
§ 7-106   FIRES; DRIVING OVER HOSE.
It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of the Fire Chief or
Assistant Fire Chief, to drive any vehicle over unprotected hose of the Fire
Department. (Ref. 39-682 RS Neb.)
§ 7-107   FIRES; FALSE ALARM.
It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally and without good and
reasonable cause raise any false alarm of fire. (Ref. 28-907, 35-520 RS Neb.)
Article 2. Fire Prevention
§ 7-201   FIRE PREVENTION; LIFE SAFETY CODE.
Incorporated by reference into this Code are the standards recommended by the
National Fire Protection Association, known as the Life Safety Code, 1971
Edition. This Code shall have the same force and effect as if set out verbatim
herein. Three (3) copies of the Life Safety Code are on file with the Municipal
Clerk and shall be available for public inspection at any reasonable time.
(Ref. 18-132, 19-902, 19-922, 81-502 RS Neb.
§ 7-202   FIRE PREVENTION; FIRE PREVENTION CODE.
The rules and regulations promulgated by the office of the State Fire Marshal
of the State of Nebraska relating to fire prevention are incorporated by
reference into this Code and made a part of this Article as though spread at
large herein together with all subsequent amendments thereto. Three (3) copies
of the Fire Prevention Code shall be on file with the Municipal Clerk and shall
be available for public inspection at any reasonable time. (Ref. 18-132, 19-
902, 19-922, 81-502 RS Neb.)
§ 7-203   FIRE PREVENTION; FIRE CODE ENFORCEMENT.
It shall be the duty of all Municipal officials to enforce the incorporated
fire code provisions and all infractions shall be immediately brought to the
attention of the Fire Chief.
§ 7-204   FIRE PREVENTION; LAWFUL ENTRY.
It shall be the duty of the owner, lessee, or occupant of any building or
structure, except the interiors of private dwellings, to allow the Bureau of
Fire Prevention to inspect, or cause to be inspected, as often as necessary the
said structure for the purpose of ascertaining and enumerating all conditions
therein that are likely to cause fire, or any other violations of the
provisions of the Municipal ordinances affecting the hazard of fire. Such
inspection shall take place at least two (2) times every year within the fire
limits, and at least once a year throughout the rest of the Municipality.
Whenever there shall be found in any building or upon any premise, combustible
or explosive matter or dangerous accumulations of waste so situated as to
endanger property or to interfere with the operation of the Fire Department or
the egress of the occupants in case of fire, the Bureau shall order the same
removed or remedied.
§ 7-205   FIRE PREVENTION; VIOLATION NOTICE.
It shall be the duty of the owner, lessee, or occupant of any building or
structure that was lawfully inspected as hereinbefore prescribed, and who
receives written or verbal notice of a violation of any of the provisions of
the Municipal ordinances to correct the condition that violates the said
ordinance or ordinances within five (5) days from the date of receipt of such
notice.
§ 7-206   FIRE PREVENTION; SCHOOL DRILLS.
It shall be the duty of the officials and teachers of all the schools in the
Municipality to cooperate with the Municipal Fire Department in conducting fire
drills in such number and at such times as the Fire Chief shall prescribe;
provided, that at least one (1) fire drill shall be held each month. All doors
and exits leading to the outside of the school shall be kept unlocked during
school hours.
§ 7-207   FIRE PREVENTION; FIRE LIMITS DEFINED.
The following described territory in the Municipality shall be and constitute
the fire limits:
The East Half (E/2) of Block Twenty-six (26) of Wymore's Addition; The West
Half (W/2) of Block Fifteen (15), and all of Blocks Twenty (20), Twenty-one
(21), Twenty-eight (28) , Twenty-nine (29), and Thirty (30) of the Original
Town, City of Wymore, Gage County, Nebraska, as shown on the recorded plat
thereof.
(Ref. 17-550 RS Neb.)(Ord. No. 298, 4/19/78)(Amended by Ord. No. 472, 4/7/93)
§ 7-208   FIRE PREVENTION; FIRE LIMITS BUILDING PERMIT.
Prior to the moving of any building in the fire limits, application must be
made to the Governing Body. Such application shall be issued by the Municipal
Clerk and shall require such information as the Governing Body deems necessary
to determine whether or not to grant a building permit. Such permit shall be
issued only upon a three-fourths (3/4) vote of the Mayor and Governing Body.
Before the issuance of said permit, the agent or owner of the structure shall
provide the Municipality with a good and sufficient bond conditioned to save
said Municipality harmless from any liability occasioned by such removal and
secure the payment of a penalty of ten ($10.00) dollars per day for each day
such building is allowed to remain on its temporary site after the completions
of another structure on the site. (Ref. 17-550 RS Neb.)
§ 7-209   FIRE PREVENTION; FIRE LIMITS MATERIALS.
Within the aforesaid fire limits, no structure shall be built, altered, moved,
or enlarged unless such structure will be enclosed with such incombustible
materials as will satisfy the Fire Chief that the said structure will be
reasonably fireproof. (Ref. 17-550 RS Neb.)
§ 7-210   FIRE PREVENTION; PERMITTED REPAIRS.
It shall be unlawful for any person to repair, alter, or add to any building in
the fire limits where the repair is less than fifty (50%) percent of the
building unless the said person shall first submit an application to make such
repairs, alterations, or to add to any building and shall state on the
application that the material used will be non-combustible and approved by the
Fire Chief. Repairs in the form of patching and other minor repairs shall not
require a permit. In the event that the repairs, alteration, or addition is to
cost or involve more than fifty (50%) percent of the building, the owner shall
be required to apply for a new building permit which shall state that the
building, when completed, shall be fireproof and made of non-combustible
materials. (Ref. 17-550 RS Neb.)
§ 7-211   FIRE PREVENTION; IRONCLADS PROHIBITED.
All buildings, sheds, and structures known as ironclads which are constructed
of wood and covered with sheet iron or tin attached to the frame shall be
considered and deemed to be constructed of combustible materials. Any future
construction of an ironclad building shall hereafter be prohibited. (Ref. 17-
550 RS Neb.)
§ 7-212   FIRE PREVENTION; REMOVAL REQUIRE.
In the event that any wooden or combustible building or structure, or any non-
combustible building which, in the judgment of the Mayor, is damaged to the
extent of fifty (50%) percent or more of its value, exclusive of the
foundation, it shall not be repaired or rebuilt, and shall be declared
condemned by the Mayor and Council; provided, that if the owner of such
structure should disagree with the Mayor and Council on their determination, he
may file a petition with the Council requesting the appointment of an
arbitrator. The arbitrator shall then determine the extent and amount of damage
to the structure. Petitioner shall file with the petition the sum of fifteen
($15.00) dollars which shall be in full for all costs of such arbitration. The
Governing Body and the Petitioner shall each select one arbitrator and the
selected arbitrators shall select the third. All arbitrators shall be bona fide
residents of the Municipality. The request for arbitration shall be made within
five (5) days of the notice of condemnation. (Ref. 17-550 RS Neb.)
§ 7-213   ARBITRATORS; OATH.
The arbitrators thus selected shall subscribe to an oath before an officer
authorized to administer oaths, that they will make a thorough examination of
the premise damaged and make a true and just report as to the amount of such
damage. Such report shall be signed by at least two (2) of the arbitrators.
§ 7-214   CONDEMNATION; WHEN REMOVED.
Within ten (10) days of the receipt of condemnation notice by the owner, the
structure so condemned shall be removed at the owner's expense. If, at the end
of ten (10) days, the structure remains, the Chief of Police will cause the
same to be removed at the expense of the owner.
§ 7-215   FIRE PREVENTION; UNSAFE BUILDING.
If the Chief of the Fire Department should determine that any building or
structure within the Municipality is unsafe and constitutes a fire hazard, he
shall report the same to the Governing Body. The Fire Chief shall also give
notice to the owner or agent of the owner of the structure stating the
particular defects which make the building unsafe. If the owner shall have
failed to put the building in safe condition within five (5) days after the
issuance of such notice, said owner will be deemed to be in violation of this
Chapter.
§ 7-216   FIRE PREVENTION; LUMBER YARDS.
It shall be unlawful for any person to locate, establish, or maintain any
lumber yard or place for the piling, storing, keeping, or selling any lumber,
or to keep any lime, lath, shingles, hay, straw, or other combustible materials
on any lot or parcel of ground within said fire limits, unless the same is
securely kept in a building constructed of brick, stone, concrete, or other
incombustible material; provided, the foregoing shall not apply to lumber yards
now built and in use. (Ref. 17-549 RS Neb.)
§ 7-217   FIRE PREVENTION; PETROLEUM GAS.
Any person desiring to store or keep in their possession liquefied petroleum
gas shall place the containers below ground. Outside the Fire Limits said
containers may be placed above the ground if located outside of buildings on
nonflammable docks or platforms completely surrounded by dikes, and no such
container shall at any time be stored within a building of any kind. Above
ground storage may take place only on ground contiguous to a railroad right-of-
way, or at other locations outside the Fire Limits upon special permission from
the Governing Body. This section does not apply to combustible fuels stored in
containers of not more than five (5) gallons. Underground storage within the
Fire Limits shall utilize containers which do not exceed five thousand (5,000)
gallons. (Ref. 17-549 RS Neb.)
§ 7-218   FIRE PREVENTION; PROHIBITED STOVES.
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or allow to be burned crank case
drainings, or to burn oil or other flammable substance in a home-made stove.
(Ref. 17-549 RS Neb.)
§ 7-219   FIRE PREVENTION; FIRE PROHIBITED.
It shall be unlawful for any person to set out a fire on the pavement, or near
any curb, now built or hereafter to be built, within the Municipality.
§ 7-220   FIRE PREVENTION; FIRES REGULATED.
It shall be lawful to build or set out certain fires; provided, that the person
building such fires shall have the substance to be burned in a fireproof trash
burner or incinerator with a metal fireproof screen of not more than one (1")
inch mesh, and located at least twenty (20') feet from any building. The
incinerator shall be built in such a way as to not permit the escape of burning
paper or other substance. If any person shall require a fire in the course of
his trade as a blacksmith or mechanic, such fire shall be built and maintained
in the manner prescribed by the Fire Chief. All fires shall be built after
seven (7:00) o'clock A.M. and completely extinguished by eight (8:00) o'clock
P.M., except the aforesaid fires used in the course of a trade which shall be
allowed during such hours as the Fire Chief shall prescribe. It shall be
unlawful for any person to set fire to, burn, or cause to be burned any
garbage, animal matter, or vegetable matter. The burning of straw, hay, leaves,
or brush in the open air is hereby permitted and allowed; provided, that the
person setting out the same request permission and receive an open burning
permit in writing, signed by the local Fire Chief, on a form provided by the
State Fire Marshal; and provided further, that any such burning shall be done
while the said fire is attended by the person setting out the same at all
times, and further provided that the said fire shall be located at least twenty
(20') feet from any building. (Ref. 17-549, 17-556, 81-520.01 RS Neb.) (Amended
by Ord. No. 358, 9/15/82)
§ 7-221   FIRE PREVENTION; ENGINES.
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, use or operate a stationary steam
engine, diesel engine or any other type of stationary engine within the
corporate limits of this Municipality without first having made application in
writing, approved by the Chief of the Fire Department, and received a permit in
writing from the Mayor and Council to do so; provided, that no permit will be
granted hereunder unless said Council is satisfied that any interference and
annoyance to other businesses caused by the operation of such engine have been
avoided by satisfactory methods and that the issuance of said permit will not
increase the fire hazard or endanger the public convenience and public safety.
§ 7-222   FIRE PREVENTION; CHIMNEYS.
It is hereby declared unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation within the
corporate limits of this Municipality to enter, or cause to be entered any
stovepipe into an outlet other than a brick chimney constructed with what is
known as flue lining, well burnt clay or terra cotta pipe, except in cases of
chimneys heretofore constructed, or shall any person run a stovepipe through
any partition, floor, or roof, except through a ventilator in said partition,
floor, or roof. All chimneys, hereafter constructed, shall be lined
continuously on the inside from the bottom of the flue or from the throat of
the fireplace, if the flue starts from the latter, and shall be carried up
continuously to the extreme height of the flue. The ends of all lining pipes
shall be made to fit close together; the pipe shall be built in as the flue or
flues are carried up and shall extend at least six (6") inches above the cap of
the chimney. Each flue shall be enclosed on all sides with not less than four
(4") inches of solid brickwork properly banded together, and the withes or
brickwork between the lines flues of the inside of the chimney shall be four
(4") inches in thickness. All chimneys, flues and fireplaces shall be kept at
all times clean and free from accumulation of soot, ashes and cinders, and in
good and proper repair, and no metal flues or stovepipes shall pass through any
wooden partition, ceiling, floor or roof of any house or building.
§ 7-223   FIRE PREVENTION; OPEN BURNING BAN, WAIVER.
There shall be a statewide open burning ban on all bonfires, outdoor rubbish
fires, and fires for the purpose of clearing land. The Fire Chief of the
Municipal Fire Department or his or her designee may waive an open burning ban
issued under this section for an area under his or her jurisdiction by issuing
an open burning permit to a person requesting permission to conduct open
burning. Said permit issued by the Fire Chief shall be in writing, signed by
the Fire Chief, and on a form provided by the State Fire Marshal.
   The Municipal Fire Chief or his or her designee may waive the open burning
ban in his or her district when conditions are acceptable to the Chief. Anyone
burning in such district when the open burning ban has been waived must notify
the Fire Department of his or her intention to burn.  (Ref 81-520.01 RS Neb.)
(Ord. No. 326, 10/1/80) (Amended by Ord. No. 359, 9/15/82)
Article 3. Explosives
§ 7-301   EXPLOSIVES; BLASTING PERMITS.
Any person wishing to discharge high explosives within the Municipality must
secure a permit from the Governing Body and shall discharge such explosives in
conformance with their direction and under their supervision, and in no case
shall any person perform blasting operations unless operating under the direct
supervision of a person in possession of a valid user's permit issued by the
Nebraska State Patrol. (Ref. 17-556, 28-1229 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 437, 11/15/89)
Article 4. Penal Provision
§ 7-401   VIOLATION; PENALTY.
Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with the enforcement of any of
the provisions of this Chapter, set forth at full length herein or incorporated
by reference, shall be deemed guilty of an offense, and upon conviction
thereof, shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each
offense. A new violation shall be deemed to have been committed every twenty-
four (24) hours of such failure to comply. (Ref. 17-505 RS Neb.) (Amended by
Ord. No. 538, 9/15/99)
§ 7-402   ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE.
   (1) Whenever a nuisance exists as defined in this Chapter, the Municipality
may proceed by a suit in equity to enjoin and abate the same, in the manner
provided by law.
   (2) Whenever, in any action, it is established that a nuisance exists, the
court shall together with the fine or penalty imposed, enter an order of
abatement as part of the judgement of the case. (Ref. 17-505, 18-1720 RS Neb.)
(Ord. No. 538, 9/15/99)
Chapter 8
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
Article 1. Municipal Property
§ 8-101   MUNICIPAL PROPERTY; OBSTRUCTIONS.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place in or upon any street, alley, or
sidewalk any substance or thing obstructing or encroaching upon such street,
alley, or sidewalk, or to injure, break, or destroy any sidewalk or crossing,
or to dig, excavate or remove from any street, alley, or any public grounds any
earth or sod, or to obstruct the same in any manner whatever, without first
procuring from the Governing Body express authority therefor, which authority
shall be entered in the proceedings of the Governing Body; Provided, that this
Section shall not be construed to prohibit or prevent a reasonable use of so
much of said sidewalks adjoining business lots by the owners or occupants
thereof, as may be necessary to display their goods, wares, or merchandise, but
not exceeding a space of three (3) feet wide on the inner side of said
sidewalk. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Section shall be
required to remove anything so deposited or to fill up any excavation made in
or upon any street, sidewalk, gutter, or alley when notified in writing by the
Superintendent of Streets to do so, and upon failure of such person to make
such removal or fill up such excavation within six (6) hours after notice has
been served upon him, the Superintendent shall have the same done. He is hereby
authorized to enter upon any premise and all expenses incurred in said removal
or filling up shall be borne by the party so violating the provisions of this
Section.
In case of the failure or refusal of such person to pay such expenses to the
Municipality on demand, the same, including the expenses of the Superintendent
for the said removal or filling up, and costs of suit, shall be recovered in an
action in the name of the Municipality.
§ 8-102   MUNICIPAL PROPERTY; MARKING.
It is hereby declared unlawful for any person to paint, print, or post or in
any manner place upon any sidewalk, crossing, or crosswalk or other way or
passage for the use of pedestrians or upon pavement in any street or alley any
placard, sign, advertisement, display bill, letter, or kindred matter of any
kind or description, except by and with the consent of the Governing Body.
§ 8-103   MUNICIPAL PROPERTY; UNLAWFUL CUTTING.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cut into any paving, curb, or sidewalk
for any purpose whatsoever, without first having obtained a written permit
therefor. Before any person shall obtain such permit, that person shall inform
the Superintendent of Streets of the place where such cutting is to be done and
it shall be the Superintendent's duty to make an inspection of the place of
construction before the same is cut. When cutting into any paving, it shall be
the duty of the party so cutting to make the same in such a way and in the
manner, and under such rules and regulations as may be prescribed by the
Superintendent of Streets. When the applicant is ready to close the excavation,
he shall inform the Superintendent who shall inspect the materials used and the
work done in closing said opening. It shall be discretionary with the Governing
Body to do said work and charge the cost thereof to the party who obtained the
permit or the Governing Body may consent to the same being done by the party
holding the permit. Before any permit is issued by the Governing Body, the
applicant for such permit shall deposit with the Municipal Treasurer a sum set
by resolution of the Governing Body for each square foot of paving, curb, or
sidewalk to be cut. Such deposit shall be retained by the Municipality for the
purpose of replacing said pavement, curb, or sidewalk in case said work is done
by the Municipality. In case the Municipality elects to require the applicant
to replace said paving, curb, or sidewalk, the deposit shall be retained by the
Municipality until the work is completed to the satisfaction of the
Superintendent of Streets. In addition to making the deposit above set forth,
the applicant, before any permit is issued, shall execute a bond to the
Municipality to be approved by the Governing Body in a sum set by resolution of
the Governing Body, conditioned as follows:
1.   That said applicant will, if requested by the Municipality promptly
replace and repair each and every place cut into any pavement, curb, or
sidewalk, under such rules as may be prescribed by the Superintendent of
Streets, in as good condition as before the same was cut.
2.   That said applicant will promptly compensate the Municipality for all work
done by the Municipality in replacing or repairing any places cut in pavement,
curb, or sidewalk by said applicant.
3.   That said applicant will obey all laws of the Municipality in doing such
work and will save the Municipality harmless from any damages which may occur
as a result of either cutting or repairing pavement, curb or sidewalk.
§ 8-104   MUNICIPAL PROPERTY; TREES.
(1)   Definitions. The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation
and enforcement of this section:
   (a)   Street Trees: Street trees are trees, shrubs, bushes and all other
woody vegetation that are planted in the street right-of-way, which is defined
as the land lying between the edge of the traveled portion of any highway,
street or road and the adjacent property line abutting the platted street.
   (b)   Park Trees: Park trees are trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody
vegetation in public parks and all areas owned by the City, or to which the
public has free access as a park.
   (c)   Private Trees: Private trees are trees, shrubs, bushes and all other
woody vegetation on private property. The care, trimming, pruning or removal of
private trees shall be the sole responsibility of the owner of the private
property.
(2)   Street Trees; Limitations. Only ornamental trees that do not exceed
fourteen feet (14') in height are allowed to be planted in the street right-of-
way, and shall not be planted any closer than thirty feet (30') apart. No
street tree shall be planted any closer than two feet (2') from any sidewalk,
curb or curb line, and no street tree shall be planted closer than thirty-five
feet (35') from any street corner, measured from the point of the nearest
intersecting curbs or curblines. No street tree shall be planted closer than
ten feet (10') from any fire hydrant.
(3)   Street Trees; Private Trees; Utilities. No private or street trees shall
be planted under or within ten (10) lateral feet of any overhead utility wire,
or over or within five (5) lateral feet of any underground electric line, water
line, or sewer line or any other utility line.
(4)   Municipal Property; Trees; Duty of Property Owner.
   (a)   Streets. It shall be the duty of the owner, agent, or tenant in
possession of real estate within the corporate limits of the City abutting a
street right-of-way to keep all private trees and street trees trimmed or
pruned in a manner that they will not interfere with public travel on any
highway, street, road or alley. Any part of a tree, shrub, or bush projecting
over a highway, street, road or alley that: (i) hangs or protrudes less than
fourteen feet (14') above a highway, street, road or alley; (ii) interferes
with the visibility of any traffic control device or sign; or (iii) obstructs
the light from any street, is declared to be hazardous and to interfere with
the use of the highway, street, road or alley.
   (b)   Sidewalks. It shall be the duty of the owner, agent, or tenant in
possession of real estate within the corporate limits of the City abutting a
street right-of-way to keep all private trees and street trees trimmed or
pruned in a manner that they will not interfere with pedestrians using a public
sidewalk. Any part of a private tree or street tree projecting over a sidewalk
less than eight feet (8') above the sidewalk level is declared to be hazardous
and to interfere with the use of the sidewalk.
   (c)   Removal of Private or Street Trees. It shall be the duty of the owner,
agent, or tenant in possession of real estate within the corporate limits of
the City, abutting a street right-of-way, to remove all private trees and
street trees that are in a diseased and dying condition, or are declared to be
hazardous by the City.
   (d)   Failure to Trim or Remove. If the owner, agent, or tenant in
possession of real estate within the corporate limits of the City abutting a
street right-of-way fails to trim or remove a private tree, it shall be the
duty of the owner, agent, or tenant in possession of real estate within the
corporate limits of the City, abutting a street right-of-way, to keep all
private trees, and street trees within the street right-of-way trimmed or
pruned in a manner that they will not interfere with public travel on any
highway, street, road or alley or a street tree when required under this
section, the City may serve notice on said owner, agent, or tenant in
possession requiring such action to be taken within fourteen (14) days. If such
action is not taken within that time, the City may perform the required action
and bill the costs against the owner, agent or tenant in possession, and such
costs shall be a lien against the real estate. The City may record a written
lien against the real estate with the Gage County Register of Deeds.
(Amended by Ord. Nos. 476, 7/4/93; 656, 9/18/19)
§ 8-105   MUNICIPAL PROPERTY; WEEDS.
All owners or occupants of any parcel of land in the Municipality are required
to keep all weeds, growing thereon or along the sidewalk space adjacent
thereto, cut close to the ground and free and clear of all weeds, rubbish, or
other obstructions. Every such owner may improve the same as a lawn, with
grass, ornamental shrubbery, and flowers. It shall be unlawful for any person
to injure or deface any sidewalk space so planted or cultivated. It is hereby
made the duty of the Superintendent of Streets to view and inspect any and all
lots and parcels of land within the Municipality, at least one (1) time in each
month during the growing season, and if he shall find any violation of this
section he shall notify the owner thereof to immediately comply with this
section. In the event that the owner of the parcel of land is a nonresident or
cannot be found, the notice may be given to any person having the care,
custody, or control thereof. In the event that no person can be found within
the Municipality to whom notice can be given, it shall be the duty of the
Superintendent of streets to post a copy of the said notice on the premise. In
case either personal or posted notice is not complied with within five (5)
days, the Superintendent of Streets shall trim all branches and cut all weeds
thereon, and shall report the cost thereof in writing to the Governing Body and
the said bill shall be audited and paid by the Municipality and the amount
thereof may be recovered by proper action in the name of the Municipality, or
shall be assessed against the said property and levied and collected as are
other taxes of the Municipality.
§ 8-106   MUNICIPAL PROPERTY; BILLBOARDS.
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or maintain any billboard or
similar structure upon any of the public ways and property. It shall be
unlawful for any person to erect a billboard or similar structure on private
property if it will in any manner prevent the free use of all the streets,
sidewalks, or alleys, or would obstruct the view of or from any resident in the
Municipality. Before any person shall be allowed to erect a billboard or sign
along any street, avenue, or alley, or adjacent thereof, he shall secure a
permit from the Governing Body to erect the said billboard or sign, and the
billboard shall be built under the supervision of the Superintendent of
Streets. Whenever any billboard, for any reason, becomes a nuisance or a menace
to the free use of any sidewalk or that part of the streets, avenues, or alleys
set aside for the use of pedestrians, it shall be the duty of the Governing
Body to declare it a nuisance and cause the person owning the same to remove
it, and upon his refusal or neglect to comply with the said order within the
period of three (3) days, it shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to cause
the same to be removed, and such expense of removing the billboard shall be
charged to the owners thereof, and collected in the manner of any other debt or
liability owed to the Municipality.
§ 8-107   MUNICIPAL PROPERTY; UTILITY APPURTENANCES.
Poles, wires, gas mains, pipe lines, and other appurtenances of public service
companies shall be located over, upon, or under the public ways and property
only after written application shall have been made to the Superintendent of
Streets and permission in writing shall have been given by the Municipal Clerk
pursuant to a valid agreement with that public service company entered into by
the Governing Body. Public service companies granted right-of-way for the
erection of poles, conduits, gas mains, pipe lines, wires, and all
appurtenances thereto shall at all times, when requested by the Governing Body,
erect, locate, or relocate their pipes, poles, wires, mains, and other
appurtenances to such places and in such manner as may be designated by the
Governing Body. All such removals or relocations by the companies shall be done
at their own expense when requested to do so by the Governing Body. Whenever it
becomes necessary for the Municipality to use the ground where the poles,
wires, mains, pipe lines, and other appurtenances are located, or whenever
reasonable means of ingress or egress to private or public property, or the
public safety and convenience requires relocation, the Governing Body shall so
order by resolution and the Superintendent of Streets shall notify the said
company or companies, or their agents within the Municipality, and the said
companies shall, within twenty-four (24) hours after receiving such notice
cause said removal and relocation. The Governing Body shall designate a place
as close as possible where the poles, wires, mains, pipe lines, or other
appurtenances may be reset or replaced. All removals and relocations shall be
made to places where the said appurtenances will not interfere with any public
utility, building, or the travel across or upon the public ways and property.
When permitted, the poles, lines, wires, mains, and other appurtenances shall
be confined as much as possible to the alleys in the Municipality.
§ 8-108   MUNICIPAL PROPERTY; PERMITTED OBSTRUCTIONS.
Persons engaged in the erection, construction, reconstruction, wrecking, or
repairing of any building, or the construction, or repair, of a sidewalk along
any street, may occupy the public street space with such building material and
equipment as long as is necessary if such persons shall make application to and
receive a permit in writing from the Municipal Clerk, with the consent of the
Superintendent of Streets, to do so; provided, no permit for the occupancy of
the sidewalk space, and more than one-third (1/3) of the roadway of the public
space adjacent to the real estate on which said building is to be constructed,
erected, reconstructed, wrecked, or repaired shall be granted; and provided
further, a suitable passageway for pedestrians shall be maintained within the
public space included in the permit which shall be protected and lighted in the
manner required by the Superintendent of Streets.
§ 8-109   MUNICIPAL PROPERTY; SIGNS AND CANOPIES.
No person, firm, or corporation shall erect, or maintain, any sign, signboard,
poster, or rigid canopy over any street, sidewalk, alley, or on other public
property without having first obtained a permit therefor; provided, that
nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the owner of any building from
constructing a substantial awning or marquee of noncombustible material
supported without posts over the sidewalk space if located flush with the outer
edge thereof and if a building permit shall have first been secured for the
construction of the same. Permits for signs, canopies, posters, and signboards
shall be issued by the Municipal Clerk, subject to the approval of the
Superintendent of Streets. Applicants shall file in the office of the Clerk a
written application giving full information as to size, weight, and character
of the sign or awning and the distance it will project outside the lot line,
together with the method of securing and fastening the same. The Clerk shall
then refer the application to the Superintendent of Streets who, upon giving
his approval, shall refer the application to the Governing Body. All awnings
shall be elevated at least six and one-half feet at their lowest part from the
top of the public sidewalk and shall not project over the sidewalk to exceed
three-fourths of the width thereof. All signs and canopies extending over any
public sidewalk, street, alley, or other public place must be securely fastened
and constructed so that there will be no danger of the same being dislodged by
ordinary winds, or falling from other causes. No sign or canopy shall be
erected or maintained which extends over any public sidewalk, street, alley, or
other public place in such a location as to obstruct the view of any traffic
light, sign, or signal. All signs and awnings shall be periodically inspected
under the direction of the Superintendent of Streets, and if it appears that
any said sign or awning is unsecure or unsafe, the Superintendent shall order,
in writing or otherwise, the property owner or person in charge of the property
to make it safe. Upon the written order of the Governing Body, any person
owning or occupying the premise where such a sign, canopy, poster, or signboard
is located, shall cause the same to be removed within the time limit specified
on such notice.
§ 8-110   MUNICIPAL PROPERTY; REMOVAL OF UNLAWFUL SIGNS AND CANOPIES.
Every sign or canopy erected or maintained in conflict with the provisions of
this Article is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall be removed by
the Superintendent of Streets or any Police Officer by order of said
Superintendent of Streets at the expense of the owner of the building, or his
agent or tenant, to which said sign is attached or at the expense of either of
them, after notice in writing to them or either of them to remove such sign,
shall have been given. All commercial signs where the owner or lessee have
moved or is out of business, and any such signs which has become dead or
valueless for advertising purposes are hereby declared to be public nuisances
and shall be removed as hereinbefore provided.
§ 8-111   MUNICIPAL PROPERTY; SALE AND CONVEYANCE.
Except as provided in this section, the power of the Municipality to convey any
real and personal property owned by it, including land used for park purposes
and public squares, except real property used in the operation of public
utilities, shall be exercised by resolution, directing the sale at public
auction or by sealed bid of such real and personal property and the manner and
terms thereof, except that such real and personal property shall not be sold at
public auction or by sealed bid when:
(a)   Such property is being sold in compliance with the requirements of
federal or state grants or programs;
(b)   Such property is being conveyed to another public agency, or;
(c)   Such property consists of streets and alleys.
The Governing Body of the Municipality may establish a minimum price for such
real and personal property at which bidding shall begin or shall serve as a
minimum for a sealed bid.
   After the passage of the resolution directing the sale, notice of all
proposed sales of real and personal property described above and the terms
thereof, shall be published once each week for three (3) consecutive weeks in a
legal newspaper published in or of general circulation in the Municipality;
provided, if a remonstrance against such sale, signed by legal electors thereof
equal in number to thirty percent (30%) of the electors of the Municipality
voting at the last regular Municipal election held therein, be filed with the
Governing Body of such Municipality, within thirty (30) days after the third
(3rd) publication of the notice, such property shall not then, nor within one
(1) year thereafter, be sold; and provided further, that real estate now owned
or hereafter owned by the Municipality may be conveyed without consideration to
the State of Nebraska or to the Nebraska Armory Board for state armory sites
or, if acquired for state armory sites, such property shall be conveyed
strictly in accordance with the conditions of sections 18-1001 to 18-1006 RS
Neb.
   Following (a) passage of the resolution directing a sale, (b) publishing of
the notice of the proposed sale, and (c) passing of the thirty-day right of
remonstrance period, the property shall then be sold. Such sale shall be
confirmed by passage of an ordinance stating the name of the purchaser and
terms of the sale. The Municipal Clerk shall upon passage of such ordinance
certify the name of the purchaser to the Register of Deeds of the county in
which the property is located.
   This section shall not apply to the sale of personal property if the
authorizing resolution directs the sale of an item or items of personal
property the total fair market value of which is less than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00). Following the passage of the resolution directing the sale of such
property, notice of such sale shall be posted in a prominent place within the
Municipality for a period of not less than seven (7) days prior to the sale of
such property. Such notice shall give a general description of the property
offered for sale and state the terms and conditions of sale. Confirmation of
the sale by passage of an ordinance may be required. (Ref. 17-503 RS Neb.)
(Ord. No. 341, 12/2/81) (Amended by Ord. No. 360, 9/15/82)
§ 8-112   MUNICIPAL PROPERTY; ACQUISITION OF PROPERTY; CONSTRUCTION, ELECTIONS
WHEN REQUIRED.
The Municipality is authorized and empowered to (1) purchase, (2) accept by
gift or devise, (3) purchase real estate upon which to erect, and (4) erect a
building or buildings for an auditorium, fire station, Municipal building, or
community house for housing Municipal enterprises and social and recreation
purposes, and other public buildings, and maintain, manage, and operate the
same for the benefit of the inhabitants of the Municipality.
   Except as provided below, any such purchase can be made or building erected,
the question shall be submitted to the electors of such City or Village at a
General Municipal Election or at an election duly called for that purpose, or
as set forth in section 17-954 RS Neb., and be adopted by a majority of the
electors voting on such questions.
   If the funds to be used to finance the purchase or construction of a
building under this section are available other than through a bond issue,
notice of the proposed purchase or construction shall be published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Municipality and no election shall be
required to approve such purchase or construction unless a remonstrance against
such purchase or construction, signed by electors of the Municipality equal in
number to fifteen percent (15%) of the electors of the Municipality voting at
the last regular Municipal Election held therein, is filed with the Governing
Body within thirty (30) days of the publication of such notice. If a
remonstrance with the necessary number of qualified signatures is timely filed,
the question shall be submitted to the voters of the Municipality at a General
Municipal Election or a Special Election duly called for that purpose. If such
purchase or construction is not approved, the property involved shall not then,
nor within one (1) year thereafter, be purchased or constructed. (Ref. 17-953
RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 342, 12/2/81)
Article 2. Sidewalks
§ 8-201   Sidewalk Space; Defined.
The term "sidewalk space," as used herein, shall mean that portion of a street
between curb lines and adjacent property lines.
§ 8-202   Sidewalks; Beneath.
No person shall be allowed to keep, or use, the space beneath the sidewalk
lying between lot line and curb line unless a permit therefor shall have been
obtained from the Governing Body. Before any permit shall be granted, the
applicant for said permit shall submit plans and specifications of any present,
or proposed, construction to the Governing Body. Should such plans, or
specifications, be disapproved, no permit shall be granted therefor. All
permits hereafter granted shall continue only upon the condition that the party
receiving the same shall build, maintain, and keep in repair a sidewalk over
such space used, or constructed to be used, and pay all damages that may be
sustained by any person by reason of such use, or by reason of said sidewalk
being defective, or in a dangerous condition. No permit shall be granted for
vaults, cellars, or area ways under the sidewalks, that shall be of greater
width measured from the lot line than three-fourths of the distance from the
lot line to the curb line. As a condition precedent to the issuance, or
continuance, of any permit for the use of any space underneath the Municipal
sidewalks as herein contemplated, the Governing Body may require applicant to
furnish a bond to the Municipality as obligee for the benefit of any person, or
persons, who may suffer any damage, or damages, by reason of such use. The bond
shall be in such sum as the Governing Body, in their discretion, may designate.
§ 8-203   Sidewalks; Dangerous Stairway.
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, or maintain, any stairway,
open cellarway, open basement way, or open entrance thereto in, or adjacent to,
any sidewalk, pavement, or street, and any such entrance is hereby declared to
be a public nuisance except as hereinafter specifically allowed; Provided, all
existing stairways, open cellarways, open basement ways, or open entrances
thereto in said sidewalks, pavements, or streets if the same are not more than
thirty-six (36) inches wide, may be permitted to remain from and after the
passage, approval, and publication of this Code if said person owning, or
using, said opening in the sidewalk, or street, shall satisfy the
Superintendent of Streets that the same is properly protected by a balustrade,
or coping of durable material.
§ 8-204   Sidewalks; Dangerous Stairway Permit.
It shall be unlawful. for any person to construct or maintain any cellar way,
door, window, or entrance to any basement without having obtained a permit from
the Governing Body to do so, and such window or entrance shall be next to the
lot line and shall not be of a greater width than thirty-six (36) inches nor
extend more than thirty-six (36) inches from the lot line. All such windows or
entrances shall be securely guarded by iron railings or gratings. Area ways for
the purpose of admitting light and air to basements shall not be of greater
width than thirty-six (36) inches, shall not extend more than thirty-six (36)
inches from the lot line, shall be protected and covered by strong iron
gratings, the bars of which shall not be more than one ( 1) inch apart, and so
constructed that the same may be walked upon with safety, and of sufficient
strength to sustain any weight that would come upon the sidewalk at that point,
or shall be protected by iron railings as provided in case of cellar ways. Such
area ways shall not be put in without first obtaining a permit therefor from
the Governing Body. All hatchways or openings of any sort through sidewalks
shall be provided with a strong covering with a rough surface to prevent
accidents, and the entire construction thereof shall be under the supervision
and direction of and subject to the approval of the Superintendent of Streets.
§ 8-205   SIDEWALKS; CELLAR WALLS.
All cellars, area ways, or vaults extending under any sidewalks, in front of or
adjacent to any building, shall be securely walled on all sides and said walls
shall not be less than twelve (12) inches in thickness, and shall be securely
arched over or covered in such manner as to amply support the kind of sidewalk
prescribed by the Governing Body to protect the public from damages or danger
in the use of the same.
§ 8-206   SIDEWALKS; UNSAFE RAILING.
When in the judgment of the Governing Body any railing, grating, hatchway, or
opening through any sidewalk shall become unsafe or unsecure, the same shall be
condemned by the Governing Body and ordered to be repaired, replaced, or
rebuilt, and the Superintendent of Streets shall notify the owner, agent, or
occupant of the premise abutting such sidewalk, railing, or grating that the
same has been condemned as unsafe and unsecure by the Governing Body and by
them ordered repaired, replaced, or rebuilt, either by personal service or by
publication for ten (10) days in some newspaper printed and published and of
general circulation in the Municipality. Immediately after notice has been
given, the owner, agent, or occupant shall put up guards and danger signals to
protect and warn the public against such danger, and within ten (10) days
thereafter shall repair, replace, or rebuild such railing, grating, hatchway,
or opening. All work shall be done under the supervision and subject to the
approval of the Superintendent of Streets.
§ 8-207   SIDEWALKS; GUARDS REQUIRED.
When any building shall be partially or totally destroyed by fire or otherwise,
leaving an open cellar, excavation or area way, or leaving the roof or walls
thereof in a condition dangerous to the public, the same shall be condemned by
the Governing Body, and the necessary guards and repairs ordered by them. The
Superintendent of Streets shall notify the owner, agent, or occupant of the
premise containing or abutting such premise of the condemnation and order,
either by personal service or by publication for ten (10) days in some
newspaper printed and published and of general circulation in the Municipality,
and immediately after such notice has been given, the owner, agent, or occupant
shall put up temporary guards and danger signals to protect and warn the public
against the danger, and within three (3) days thereafter shall put up permanent
guards. All work shall be done under the supervision and subject to the
approval of the Superintendent of Streets. If the owner, agent, or occupant of
the premise containing or abutting such cellar, excavation, area way, or
dangerous walls or roof, shall neglect or refuse to repair, replace, or rebuild
such railing, grating, hatchway or opening, or neglect or refuse to put up the
temporary or permanent guards, within the time permitted the Governing Body may
cause the same to be done, and shall assess all cost thereof, including the
cost of notice, against the parcels of land containing or abutting such cellar,
excavation, area way, walls, or roof. The assessment shall be made in the
manner provided by law for making special assessments for sidewalks; Provided,
that the doing of such work by the Municipality shall not exempt the owner,
agent, or occupant of such premise from the penalties hereinafter prescribed.
§ 8-208   SIDEWALKS; OVERHANGING BRANCHES.
The owner, or occupant, of any lot, piece, or parcel of ground abutting, or
adjacent to, any sidewalk over which there extends the branches of trees shall
at all times keep the branches, or limbs thereof, trimmed to the height of at
least eight (8) feet above the surface of said walk. Whenever the limbs, or
branches, of any tree, or trees, extend over sidewalks contrary to the
provisions herein so as to interfere with the lighting of the street from
street lights, or with the convenience of the public using said sidewalk the
Governing Body at any regular, or special meeting shall pass a resolution
ordering the owner, or occupant, to cut, or remove, said obstructions within
five (5) days after having received a copy thereof from the Superintendent of
Streets stating that the Municipality will remove said branches and charge the
costs thereof to the owner, or occupant, as a special assessment for
improvements as herein provided, if said resolution is not complied with.
(Ref. 17-557.01 RS Neb.)
§ 8-209   SIDEWALKS; KEPT CLEAN.
It shall be unlawful for the occupant of any lot or lots or the owner of any
vacant lot or lots within the corporate limits to allow snow, sleet, mud, ice,
or other substance to accumulate on the sidewalks or to permit any snow, sleet,
mud, ice or other substance to remain upon said sidewalk. All sidewalks within
the business district shall be cleaned within five (5) hours after the
cessation of a storm, unless the storm or fall of snow shall have taken place
during the night, in which case the sidewalk shall be cleaned before eight-
thirty (8:30) o'clock A.M. the following day; provided, sidewalks within the
residential areas of the Municipality shall be cleaned within twenty-four (24)
hours after the cessation of the storm. (Ref. 17-557 RS Neb.) (Amended by Ord.
No. 523, 11/19/97)
§ 8-210   SIDEWALKS; MAINTENANCE.
(Repealed 2004)
§ 8-211   SIDEWALKS; SHRUBS.
All shrubbery, except trees planted and maintained, shall be trimmed so they
will not exceed three (3) feet in height. It is hereby made the duty of the
owner or occupant of any premise to cut and trim all shrubbery growing thereon.
In the event that the shrubbery grows to a greater height than that allowed by
this Section, the Governing Body, at any regular or special meeting, shall pass
a resolution ordering the owner or occupant, to cut or remove said obstructions
within five (5) days after having received a copy thereof from the
Superintendent of Streets stating that the Municipality will cut or remove said
shrubbery and charge the costs thereof to the owner or occupant as a special
assessment.
§ 8-212   SIDEWALKS; REPAIR.
(A) The Mayor and City Council may construct and repair sidewalks, or cause the
construction and repair of sidewalks in such manner as the Mayor and City
Council deems necessary and assess the expense thereof on the property in front
of which such construction or repairs are made, after having given notice:
      (1)   By publication in one issue of a legal newspaper of general
circulation in the Municipality; and
      (2)   By either causing a written notice to be served upon the occupant
in possession of the property involved or to be posted upon such premises ten
days prior to the commencement of such repair or construction. (Ref. 17-522 RS
Neb.)
   (B)   The notice shall:
      (1)   State that the Governing Body has ordered repair of the sidewalk;
      (2)   Contain the Municipality's estimate of the cost of the repair;
      (3)   Notify the property owner that he or she may, within ten (10) days
after the date of publication of the notice, notify the Municipality that he or
she will repair the sidewalk within thirty (30) days after such date of
publication;
      (4)   Notify the property owner that if he or she fails to so notify the
Municipality within the ten (10) days or, having so notified the municipality,
fails to repair the sidewalk within the thirty (30) days, the Municipality will
cause the sidewalk to be repaired and the expense thereof to be assessed
against the property.
   (C)   (1)   Before the Municipality imposes any special assessments for
sidewalk repair, a copy of the notice that is required to be published shall be
mailed to the last-known address of all nonresident property owners as shown on
the current tax rolls at the time such notice is first published. (Ref. 13-310
RS Neb.)
      (2)   The Municipal Clerk shall mail the notice by certified mail with
return receipt requested. (Ref. 13-312 RS Neb.)
      (3)   For purposes of this division, NONRESIDENT PROPERTY OWNER means any
person or corporation whose residence and mailing address as shown on the
current tax rolls is outside the boundaries of the county in which the property
subject to assessment is located and who is a record owner of the property.
(Ref. 13-314 RS Neb.)
   (D)   All sidewalks shall be repaired in conformity with such plans and
specifications as may be approved by the Governing Body.
   (E)   Assessments made under this section shall be made and assessed in the
manner provided in section 17-524 RS Neb.
§ 8-213   SIDEWALKS; NEW SIDEWALKS.
Whenever the Governing Body shall deem it necessary that a new sidewalk shall
be constructed in front of any lot or piece of ground in a place where there is
no sidewalk, the Superintendent of Streets shall notify in writing the owner of
such lot or piece of ground of the work or improvement to be done, and such
owner so notified shall be allowed thirty (30) days from the service of said
notice in which to construct the same. Said notice shall be given by delivering
the same to the owner in person or by leaving it at his usual place of
residence. If he is a non-resident, publication of said notice one (1) time in
a legal newspaper published in and of general circulation in the Municipality
shall be deemed sufficient. Said notice shall notify such owner of the passage
of said resolution and that he will have thirty (30) days from and after the
service of notice, or from the day of publication in the event of notice being
given in that manner, within which to construct said sidewalk, or cause the
same to be done. In the event that the owner fails or refuses to construct the
new sidewalk, the Municipality will cause said sidewalk to be constructed and
the cost will be levied and assessed thereafter by the Governing Body as a
special tax against said premise.
§ 8-214   SIDEWALKS; CONSTRUCTION BY OWNER.
Any person desiring to construct, or cause to be constructed, any sidewalk or
curbing shall do so only as herein provided. It shall be unlawful for any
person to construct any sidewalk or curbing without first having obtained a
permit and survey.
   Application for said permit shall be made in writing, filed in the office of
the Municipal Clerk, and shall give a description of the lot or piece of land
along which it is desired to construct said sidewalk or curbing. The Clerk
shall thereupon deliver said application to the Superintendent of Streets, and
after his written recommendation has been endorsed upon the said application,
the Clerk shall issue the permit unless good cause shall appear why the permit
should be denied; Provided, that if it is desired to construct said curbing or
sidewalk at other than the regularly prescribed location, grade, or elevation,
or said curbing is of other than the regularly prescribed type of construction,
the Superintendent shall submit said application to the Governing Body who
shall determine whether the permit shall be granted or denied. When a permit is
granted for constructing curbing or sidewalk, the Superintendent or a special
engineer employed by the Municipality, shall make a survey of said curbing or
sidewalk, and it shall be unlawful for any person to construct or cause to be
constructed such curbing or sidewalk at any other location, grade or elevation
than so designated. All sidewalks and curbs shall be built and constructed on
the established grade or elevation. Said survey shall be made and stakes set by
the Superintendent after being directed to do so. The fees of the
Superintendent of Streets shall be paid by the Municipality, but if the person
obtaining the permit and survey fails or neglects to construct this curbing or
sidewalk within sixty (60) days thereafter, said applicant shall be liable to
the Municipality for the expense of said survey at a rate set by resolution of
the Governing Body which shall be included in any special assessment and
considered as a special benefit.
§ 8-215   SIDEWALKS; DEFECTS.
It shall be the duty of all Policemen to take note of all defects in sidewalks,
and when in disrepair, report the same to the Superintendent of Streets for
appropriate action according to law.
§ 8-216    SIDEWALKS; CONSTRUCTION BIDS.
Whenever the Municipality shall construct, widen, replace, or reconstruct any
sidewalk, notice prepared by the Municipal Attorney, specifying the work to be
done and calling for bids for doing such work and supplying the necessary
materials and labor shall be published in at least one (1) issue of a legal
newspaper of general circulation in the Municipality; provided, bids so invited
shall be filed in the office of the Municipal Clerk within ten (10) days after
the date of publication. Bids shall be opened at the next regular or special
meeting of the Governing Body, and the Governing Body shall then award the work
to the lowest responsible bidder. Upon approval of the work, the Governing Body
may require the contractor to accept payment in certificates issued to him by
the Municipal Clerk entitling him to all assessments or special taxes, against
such real estate whenever such assessments or special taxes, shall be collected
together with the interest or penalty collected thereon. Each certificate shall
give the legal description of the lot, lots, or parcel of ground against which
the assessments or special taxes are assessed. Such certificate or certificates
may be assigned and transferred, entitling the holder to the same rights as if
held by the original contractor. The County Treasurer shall pay over to such
contractor or other holder of the certificate or certificates all assessments
or special taxes against such real estate, together with the interest and
penalty thereon, at any time upon presentation of such certificate or
certificates after said assessments or special taxes against such real estate
together with interest or penalty thereon shall have been collected.
§ 8-217   SIDEWALKS; CONSTRUCTION BY PETITION.
If the owners of the record title representing more than sixty (60%) percent of
the front footage of the directly abutting property, subject to assessment for
sidewalk improvements, petition the Governing Body to make the same, the
Governing Body shall proceed in all things as though such construction had been
ordered by it. Upon the petition of any freeholder who is an abutting owner in
fee simple of property subject to assessment for sidewalk improvements, the
Governing Body may order permanent sidewalks built in accordance with this
Article upon the freeholder making, executing, and delivering to the
Municipality an agreement to the effect that the petitioning freeholder will
pay the engineering service fee and all other incidental construction costs
until paid shall be a perpetual lien upon the real estate along which the
freeholder desires such sidewalk to be constructed and that the petitioner
gives and grants to the Municipality the right to assess and levy the costs of
such construction against the freeholder's real estate abutting the sidewalk
improvement and promises to pay such costs with interest. The total cost of
such improvement shall be levied, allocated, financed, and specially assessed
as provided by law. In the event the property owner is a non-resident of the
County in which the property lies, the Municipality shall, before levying any
special assessment against that property, send a copy of any notice required by
law to be published by means of certified mail, return receipt requested to the
last known address of the non-resident property owner. The last known address
shall be that address listed on the current tax rolls at the time such required
notice was first published. (Amended by Ord. No. 311, 10/3/79)
§ 8-218   SIDEWALKS; CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS.
All sidewalks shall be constructed of such materials and in conformity with
such specifications as are adopted by the Governing Body. The Superintendent of
Streets may reject the use of materials that do not comply with such
requirements and specifications, or any material that is lacking in quality. It
shall be unlawful to construct any sidewalks from any material so rejected.
Such specifications shall precisely provide for: Width, slope, distance from
lot lines, forms, grading, subbase, base, wearing surface, expansion joints,
and other general conditions. All crosswalks shall be built and maintained of
the same material and built in the same general manner as sidewalks, but of
such width as the Superintendent of Streets shall in each case determine and of
such elevation as to allow free drainage of the surface water in its usual and
natural course.
Article 3. Streets
[Editor's Note: See §1-211 for provisions related to the Public Works
Superintendent.]
§ 8-301   STREETS; NAMES AND NUMBERS.
The Governing Body may at any time, by ordinance, rename any street, or provide
a name for any new street. Buildings used for residence, or business, purposes
and located along such streets shall retain such numbers. It shall be the duty
of the Superintendent of Streets, upon the erection of any new building, or
buildings, to assign the proper numbers to said building, or buildings, and
give notice to the owner, or owners, and occupant, or occupants, of the same.
The following plan shall be followed in all such numbering or naming:
1.   Seventh Street and "G" Street shall constitute base lines from which the
numbering of buildings fronting or situated on streets extending from said
lines on either side shall commence, the odd numbers on one (1) side and the
even numbers on the other side of each street progressing alternately from side
to side.
2.   All those portions of any and all streets intersecting Seventh Street and
lying east of said Seventh Street shall hereafter be known and designated by
the prefix "east" and those which lie west of said street, by the prefix "west"
to the names of said streets, respectively, the odd numbers being placed on the
buildings situated on the south side and the even numbers on buildings on the
north side of said street.
3.   All those portions of any and all streets intersecting "G" Street which
lie north of said "G" Street shall hereafter be known and designated by the
prefix "north," and those which lie south of said street by the prefix "south"
to the names of said streets, respectively, the odd numbers being placed on the
buildings situated on the west side and the even numbers on buildings situated
on the east side of said streets.
4.   The numbering shall commence on each street with the number of 100 at the
base lines mentioned in paragraph (1) of this Section and progress successively
through the first (1st) block; then commencing on the second (2nd) block with
the number two hundred (200), the third (3rd) block with the number three
hundred (300), and so on for the entire length of each street, commencing each
block with even hundreds.
5.   Each block shall be divided in the numbering so that there shall be one
number allowed, so far as practicable, for every twenty-five (25) feet of
ground fronting on the several streets.
   The figure of every number shall not be smaller than two and one-half inches
in length with each figure being clearly legible and placed in a conspicuous
position on the front side of every building and dwelling. The Superintendent
of Streets shall erect at each intersection a sign with letters not smaller
than three (3) inches in height with the names of the respective streets
thereon.
§ 8-302   STREETS; DRIVING STAKES.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any peg, or stake of any kind,
into the pavement in any street, or alley, without first procuring the written
consent of the Municipal Superintendent of Streets.
§ 8-303   STREETS; REMOVING MARKERS.
It shall be unlawful for any person to break, remove, or destroy any stone or
stake, marking any street, block, lot, or public ground without the written
consent of the Superintendent of Streets.
§ 8-304   STREETS; EAVE AND GUTTER SPOUTS.
It is hereby declared unlawful for any person to erect, or maintain any
dwelling house, or business building, within the limits of the Municipality
where the said dwelling, or building, abuts on any sidewalk, or street, without
providing proper guttering and eave spouts to receive the waste waters that
collect on the said sidewalks and streets. All eave spouts erected on any
dwelling house, or business building, shall be constructed to drain into the
alleys, or shall be buried beneath the sidewalks, and drain into the streets
where it is found to be impossible to drain said eave spouts into the alley.
§ 8-305   STREETS; HEAVY EQUIPMENT.
It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person, or persons, to move, or operate,
heavy equipment across any curb, gutter, bridge, culvert, sidewalk, crosswalk,
or crossing, on any unpaved street without first having protected such curb,
gutter, bridge, culvert, sidewalks, crosswalk, or crossing, with heavy plank
sufficient in strength to warrant against the breaking, or damaging, of such
curb, gutter, bridge, culvert, sidewalk, crosswalk, or crossing. Hereafter, it
shall be unlawful to run, drive, move, operate, or convey over, or across, any
paved street a vehicle, machine, or implement, with sharp discs, or sharp
wheels, that bear upon said pavement; with wheels having cutting edges; with
wheels having lugs, or any protruding parts, or bolts thereon that extend
beyond a plain tire so as to cut, mark, mar, indent, or otherwise injure, or
damage, any pavement, gutter, or curb; Provided, where heavy vehicles,
structures, and machines move along paved, or unpaved, streets the Municipal
Police are hereby authorized and empowered to choose the route over which the
moving of such vehicles, structures, or machines will be permitted and allowed.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to apply to pneumatic tires with
metal, or metal-type, studs not exceeding five-sixteenths of an inch in
diameter inclusive of the stud-casting with an average protrusion beyond the
tread surface of not more than seven sixty-fourths of an inch between October
1, and April 15; Provided, that school buses and emergency vehicles shall be
permitted to use metal, or metal-type, studs all year; it shall be permissible
to use farm machinery with tires having protuberances which will not injure the
streets; and it shall be permissible to use tire chains of reasonable
proportions upon any vehicle when required for safety because of snow, ice, or
other condition tending to cause a vehicle to slide, or skid. (Ref. 39-771 RS
Neb.)
§ 8-306   STREETS; SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.
To defray the cost and expenses of all street improvements authorized by law,
the Governing Body shall have the power and authority to levy and collect
special taxes and assessments upon the lots and pieces of ground adjacent to,
and abutting upon, the streets, alleys, or sidewalks in whole, or in part,
opened, widened, curbed and guttered, graded, paved, repaired, graveled,
macadamized, parked, extended, constructed, or otherwise improved, or repaired,
or which may be specially benefitted by any such improvement. The Governing
Body shall review all such special assessments made, and levies herein provided
shall be made by the Governing Body at any meeting by a resolution fixing the
costs of construction, or repair, or such work along the lot, or parcel of
land, adjacent thereto as a special assessment thereon which shall be charged
against said property by a vote of the Governing Body. Said vote shall be by
"yeas" and "nays" and shall be published in a legal newspaper of general
circulation in the Municipality at least ten (10) days before the meeting shall
be held, or in lieu thereof, personal service may be had upon the persons
owning, or occupying, property to be assessed. Such assessments shall be known
as "special assessments for improvements" and with the cost of notice, shall be
levied and collected as a special tax in addition to the taxes for general
revenue purposes, subject to the same penalties and collected in the same
manner as all other Municipal taxes. Any special assessment shall be certified
to the County Clerk. (Ref. 17-511, 17-524 RS Neb.)
§ 8-307   STREETS; OPENING, WIDENING, IMPROVING OR VACATING.
(A) (1) The City shall have power to open, widen, or otherwise improve or
vacate any street, avenue, alley, or lane within the limits of the City and
also to create, open, and improve any new street, avenue, alley, or lane. All
damages sustained by the citizens of the City, or by the owners of the property
therein, shall be ascertained in that manner as shall be provided by ordinance.
      (2)   Whenever any street or alley is vacated, the same shall revert to
the owners of the abutting real estate, one-half on each side thereof, and
become a part of that property, unless the City reserves title in the ordinance
vacating such street or alley. If title is retained by the City, such property
may be sold, conveyed, exchanged, or leased upon such terms and conditions as
shall be deemed in the best interests of the City.
      (3)   When a portion of a street, avenue, alley, or lane is vacated only
on one side of the center thereof, the title to the land shall vest in the
owner of the abutting property and become a part of that property, unless the
City reserves title in the ordinance vacating such street or alley. If title is
retained by the City, such property may be sold, conveyed, exchanged, or leased
upon such terms and conditions as shall be deemed in the best interests of the
City.
      (4)   When the City vacates all or any portion of a street, avenue,
alley, or lane, the City shall, within thirty (30) days after the effective
date of the vacation, file a certified copy of the vacating ordinance with the
Register of Deeds for the county in which the vacated property is located to be
indexed against all affected lots.
      (5)   The title to property vacated pursuant to this section shall be
subject to the following:
         (a)   There is reserved to the City the right to maintain, operate,
repair, and renew public utilities existing at the time title to the property
is vacated there; and
         (b)   There is reserved to the City, any public utilities, and any
cable television systems the right to maintain, repair, renew, and operate
water mains, gas mains, pole lines, conduits, electrical transmission lines,
sound and signal transmission lines, and other similar services and equipment
and appurtenances, including lateral connections or branch lines, on, or below
the surface of the ground that are existing as valid easements at the time
title to the property is vacated for the purposes of serving the general public
or the abutting properties and to enter upon the premises to accomplish such
purposes at any and all reasonable times. (Ref. 17-558 RS Neb.)
   (B)   The City shall have power to create, open, widen, or extend any
street, avenue, alley, off-street parking area, or other public way, or annul,
vacate, or discontinue the same. (Ref. 17-559 RS Neb.)
§ 8-308   STREETS; CURB CONSTRUCTION.
All owners of real estate abutting upon any unpaved street in the Municipality
are hereby authorized, and given permission to build and erect curbing along
and upon the curb line of the street adjoining their respective properties.
Such curbing shall be located, built, and erected under the supervision of the
Superintendent of Streets. The quality of all materials and the workmanship
under this Article shall be first class in every respect and subject to the
approval of the Superintendent of Streets. All specifications shall be
prescribed by the Superintendent of Streets as approved by the Governing Body.
§ 8-309 STREETS; DAMAGE.
No person shall drive, draw, or back any vehicle upon or against any pavement,
curb, gutter, or sidewalk, within any street or alley in such a manner as to
crack, break, or otherwise injure or deface such pavement, curb, curb and
gutter, or sidewalk, and no person shall throw or drop upon any pavement, curb,
curb and gutter, or sidewalk any thing or substance in such a manner as to
crack, break, injure, or deface such pavement, curb, curb and gutter, or
sidewalk.
§ 8-310 STREETS; IMPROVEMENT OF STREETS ON CORPORATE LIMITS.
The Mayor and Council shall have the power to improve any street or part
thereof which divides the Municipal corporate area and the area adjoining the
Municipality. When creating an improvement district including land adjacent to
the Municipality, the Council shall have power to assess, to the extent of
special benefits, the costs of such improvements upon the properties found
especially benefited thereby. (Ref. 17-509 RS Neb.)(Ord. No. 312, 10/3/79)
§ 8-311 STREETS; PETITION FOR IMPROVEMENTS.
Whenever a petition signed by the owners of record title representing more than
sixty (60%) percent of the front footage of the property directly abutting upon
the street, streets, alley, alleys, public way, or the public grounds proposed
to be improved, shall be presented and filed with the Municipal Clerk,
petitioning therefor, the Governing Body shall by ordinance create a paving,
graveling, or other improvement district or districts, and shall cause such
work to be done or such improvement to be made, and shall contract therefor,
and shall levy assessments on the lots and parcels of land abutting on or
adjacent to such street, streets, alley, or alleys, especially benefited
thereby in such district in proporation to such benefits, to pay the cost of
such improvement. The Governing Body shall have the discretion to deny the
formation of the proposed district when the area has not previously been
improved with a water system, sewer system, and grading of streets. If the
Governing Body should deny a requested improvement district formation, it shall
state the grounds for such denial in a written letter to interested parties.
(Ref. 17-510 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 313, 10/3/79)(Amended by Ord. No. 370, 9/21/83)
§ 8-312 STREETS; IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS, OBJECTIONS.
Whenever the Governing Body shall deem it necessary to make any improvements
allowed by statute, the Governing Body shall by ordinance create a paving,
graveling, or other improvement district or districts, and after the passage,
approval, and publication or posting of such ordinance, shall publish notice of
the creation of any such district or districts for six (6) days in a legal
newspaper of the Municipality, if a daily newspaper, or for two (2) consecutive
weeks, if the same be a weekly newspaper. If the owners of the record title
representing more than fifty (50%) percent of the front footage of the property
directly abutting on the street, streets, alley, or alleys to be improved,
shall file with the Municipal Clerk within twenty (20) days after the first
publication of said notice, written objections to the creation of such district
or districts, said improvements shall not be made as provided in said
ordinance; but said ordinance shall be repealed. If said objections are not
filed against the district in the time and manner aforesaid, the Governing Body
shall forthwith cause such work to be done or such improvement to be made, and
shall contract therefor, and shall levy assessments on the lots and parcels of
land abutting on or adjacent to such street, streets, alley or alleys
especially benefited thereby in such district in proportion to such benefits,
to pay the cost of such improvement. (Ref. 17-511 RS Neb.)(Ord. No. 313, 10/3/
79)
§ 8-313 STREETS; IMPROVEMENT OF MAIN THOROUGHFARES.
The Mayor and City Council shall have the power by a three-fourths (3/4) vote
of the Governing Body, to create by ordinance a paving, graveling or other
improvement district and to order such work done upon any federal or state
highway in the Municipality or upon a street or route, designated by the Mayor
and City Council as a main thoroughfare that connects, on both ends, to either
a federal or state highway or a county road. The Governing Body shall contract
therefor and shall have the power to assess, to the extent of special benefits,
the costs of such improvements upon the properties found especially benefited
thereby. (Ref. 17-512 RS Neb.)(Ord. No. 327, 10/1/80)
§ 8-314   STREETS; DEFERRAL FROM SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.
Whenever the Governing Body of a Municipality creates a paving district which
includes land adjacent to the Municipality which is within an agricultural use
zone and is used exclusively for agricultural use, the owners of record title
of such adjacent land may apply for a deferral from special assessments. For
purposes of this section, the terms agricultural use and agricultural use zone
shall have the meaning specified in section 77-1343 Reissue Revised Statutes of
Nebraska 1943.
      Any owner of record title eligible for the deferral granted by this
section shall, to secure such assessment, make application to the Governing
Body of the Municipality within ninety (90) days after creation of the paving
district. Any owner of record title who makes application for the deferral
provided by this section shall notify the County Register of Deeds of such
application in writing prior to approval by the Governing Body. The Governing
Body shall approve the application of any owner of record title upon
determination that the property (a) is within an agricultural use zone and is
used exclusively for agricultural use, and (b) the owner has met the
requirements of this section.
      The deferral provided for in this section shall be terminated upon any of
the following events:
1. Notification by the owner of record title to the Governing Body to remove
such deferral;
2. Sale or transfer to a new owner who does not make a new application within
sixty (60) days of the sale or transfer, except as provided in subdivision 3 of
this section.
3. Transfer by reason of death of a former owner to a new owner who does not
make application within one hundred twenty-five (125) days of the transfer;
4. The land is no longer being used as agricultural land; or
5. Change of zoning to other than an agricultural zone.
      Whenever property which has received a deferral pursuant to this section
becomes disqualified for such deferral, the owner of record title of such
property shall pay to the Municipality an amount equal to:
A. The total amount of special assessments which would have been assessed
against such property, to the extent of special benefits, had such deferral not
been granted; and
B. Interest upon the special assessments not paid each year at the rate of six
(6%) percent from the dates at which such assessments would have been payable
if no deferral had been granted.
      In cases where the deferral provided by this section is terminated as a
result of a sale or transfer described in subdivision 2 or 3 of this section
the lien for assessments and interest shall attach as of the day preceding such
sale or transfer. (Ref. 19-2428 through 19-2431 RS Neb.)(Ord. No. 371, 9/21/83)
§ 8-315   STREETS; DRIVEWAY APPROACHES.
The Superintendent of Streets may require the owner of property served by a
driveway approach constructed or maintained upon the street right-of-way to
repair or replace any such driveway approach which is cracked, broken, or
otherwise deteriorated to the extent that it is causing or is likely to cause
damage to or interfere with any street structure including pavement or
sidewalks.
   The Municipal Clerk shall give the property owner notice by registered
letter or certified mail, directed to the last-known address of such owner or
the agent of such owner, directing the repair or replacement of such driveway
approach. If within thirty (30) days of mailing such notice the property owner
fails or neglects to cause such repairs or replacements to be made, the
Superintendent of Streets may cause such work to be done and assess the cost
upon the property served by such approach. (Ref. 18-1748 RS Neb.) (Ord. No.
391, 9/19/84)
Article 4. Penal Provision
§ 8-401   VIOLATION; PENALTY.
   Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with the enforcement of any
of the provisions of this Chapter, set forth at full length herein or
incorporated by reference, shall be deemed guilty of an offense, and upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00)
for each offense, A new violation shall be deemed to have been committed every
twenty-four (24) hours of such failure to comply. (Ref. 17-505 RS Neb.)
(Amended by Ord. No. 538, 9/15/99)
Chapter 9
BUILDING REGULATIONS
Article 1. General Provisions
§ 9-101   BUILDING INSPECTOR; POWER AND AUTHORITY.
The Building Inspector shall be the Municipal official who shall have the duty
of enforcing all building and housing regulations as herein prescribed. He
shall inspect all buildings repaired, altered, built, or moved in the
Municipality as often as necessary to insure compliance with all Municipal
ordinances. He shall have the power and authority to order all work stopped on
any construction, alteration, or relocation which violates any provisions
prescribed herein. He shall issue permission to continue any construction,
alteration, or relocation when he is satisfied that no provision will be
violated. If the stop order is an oral one, it shall be followed by a written
stop order within one (1) hour. Such written order may be served by any
Municipal Policeman. The Superintendent of the Water and Light Department shall
act as the Building Inspector for the Municipality.
§ 9-102   BUILDING INSPECTOR; RIGHT OF ENTRY.
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to allow the Building Inspector
entry into any building or structure where the work of construction,
alteration, repair, or relocation is taking place for the purpose of making
official inspections at any reasonable hour.
§ 9-103   BUILDING INSPECTOR; APPEAL FROM DECISION.
In the event it is claimed that the true intent and meaning of this Chapter has
been wrongly interpreted by the Building Inspector; that the time allowed for
compliance with any order of the Building Inspector is too short; or that
conditions peculiar to a particular building make it unreasonably difficult to
meet the literal requirements prescribed by this Chapter and the Building
Inspector, the owner, his agent, or the occupant may file a notice of appeal
within ten (10) days after the decision or order of the Building Inspector has
been made. The Governing Body shall at any regular or special meeting after the
filing of said petition, sit and act as the Municipal Board of Appeals and
shall have the power and authority, when appealed to, to modify the decision or
order of the Building Inspector. Such a decision shall be final, subject only
to any remedy which the aggrieved person may have at law or equity.
Applications for review shall be in writing and shall state the reasons why the
variance should be made. A variance shall be granted only where it is evident
that reasonable safety and sanitation is assured and may include conditions not
generally specified by this Code to achieve that end. A copy of any variance so
granted shall be sent to both the Building Inspector and the applicant.
§ 9-104   BUILDING PERMITS; DUPLICATE TO COUNTY ASSESSOR.
Whenever a building permit is issued for the erection, alteration or repair, of
any building within the Municipality's jurisdiction, and the improvement is one
thousand ($1,000.00) dollars or more, a duplicate of such permit shall be
issued to the County Assessor. (Ref. 18-1743 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 316, 10/3/79)
[Editor's Note: Section 9-104 is Section 11-805 of Chapter 11, Article 8 of
Ordinance 297]
Article 2. Structures Defined
§ 9-201   DEFINITIONS; APARTMENT.
The term "apartment" as used in this Code shall mean and include a room or
suite of rooms which is occupied, or which is intended to be occupied by one
(1) family for living and sleeping purposes.
§ 9-202   DEFINITIONS; APARTMENT HOUSE.
The term "apartment house" as used in this Code shall mean and include any
building or portion thereof which is designated, built, rented, hired out to be
occupied, or which is occupied as the home or residence of two (2) or more
families living independently of each other and doing their own cooking.
§ 9-203    DEFINITIONS; ALTERATION.
The term "alteration" as used in this Code shall mean and include any change,
addition, or modification in construction.
§ 9-204    DEFINITIONS; APPROVED.
The term "approved" as used in this Code, as applied to materials and types of
construction, refers to approval by the Building Inspector as the result of
investigation and tests conducted by him, or by reason of accepted principles
or tests by technical or scientific authorities.
§ 9-205    DEFINITIONS; ATTIC.
The term "attic" as used in this Code, shall mean and include any story,
situated wholly or partially in the roof and built for storage purposes and
shall not be considered to be habitable as herein defined.
§ 9-206    DEFINITIONS; BASEMENT.
The term "basement" as used in this Code, shall mean and include that portion
of the building partly underground and having at least half of its clear height
below the average grade of the adjoining ground.
§ 9-207    DEFINITIONS; BUILDING.
The term "building" as used in this Code, shall mean any structure built for
business or storage purposes.
§ 9-208    DEFINITIONS; DWELLING.
The term "dwelling" as used in this Code, shall mean and include any structure
or portion thereof which is not an apartment house or hotel and which is used
for human habitation.
§ 9-209    DEFINITIONS; DWELLING UNIT.
The term "dwelling unit" as used in this Code, shall mean and include any room
or group of rooms located within a dwelling and forming a single habitable unit
with living, sleeping, cooking, and eating facilities.
§ 9-210    DEFINITIONS; OCCUPANT.
The term "occupant" as used in this Code, shall mean and include the person
living, sleeping, eating in, or in possession of a dwelling unit, dwelling, or
building.
§ 9-211    DEFINITIONS; OWNER.
The term "owner" as used in this Code, shall mean and include the holder of
legal or equitable title in the premise, whether alone or jointly with others,
and whether in possession or not, or any person having charge of any dwelling,
dwelling unit, or building as the agent of the owner as executor,
administrator, trustee, or guardian of the estate of the owner.
§ 9-212    DEFINITIONS; PERSON.
The term "person" as used in this Code, shall mean and include any individual,
firm, corporation, association, partnership, or trust.
§ 9-213   DEFINITIONS; PLUMBING.
The term "plumbing" as used in this Code, shall mean and include all of the
following supplied facilities and equipment: gas pipes, gasburning equipment,
water pipes, garbage disposal units, waste pipes, water closets, sinks,
dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, clothes-washing machines,
catch basins, drains, vents, and any other fixture together with all
connections to water, sewer, or gas lines.
§ 9-214   DEFINITIONS; REPAIR.
The term "repair" as used in this Code, shall mean and include the
reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing building for the purpose
of its maintenance. The term "repair" shall not apply to any change in
construction.
§ 9-215   DEFINITIONS; SUPPLIED.
The term "supplied" as used in this Code, shall mean paid for, furnished,
provided by, or under the control of the owner.
§ 9-216   DEFINITIONS; TEMPORARY HOUSING.
The term "temporary housing" as used in this Code shall mean and include a
tent, trailer, or other structure used for human shelter which is designed to
be transportable and which is not attached to the ground by a permanent and
substantial foundation.
Article 3. Building Code
§ 9-301   BUILDING CODE; ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
To provide certain minimum standards, provisions, and requirements for safe and
stable design, methods of construction, and uses of materials in buildings
hereafter erected, constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired, relocated, and
converted, the Uniform Building Code, 1994 Edition, published by the
International Conference of Building Officials and printed in book or pamphlet
form is hereby incorporated by reference in addition to all amended editions as
though printed in full herein insofar as said code does not conflict with the
statutes of the State of Nebraska. One (1) copy of the Building Code is on file
at the office of the Municipal Clerk and is available for public inspection
during office hours. The provisions of the Building Code shall be controlling
throughout the Municipality and throughout its zoning jurisdiction.  (Ref. 17-
1001, 18-132, 19-902, 19-922, 71-6406 RS Neb.) (Amended by Ord. Nos. 453, 6/19/
91; 519, 5/21/97)
Article 4. Housing Code
§ 9.401   HOUSING CODE: ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
To provide certain minimum standards, provisions, and requirements for safe and
stable design, methods of construction, and uses of materials in houses
hereafter erected, constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired, relocated, and
converted, the Uniform Housing Code, 1971, Edition, Copyright International
Conference of Building Officials, printed in book or pamphlet form, is hereby
incorporated by reference in addition to all amended editions as though printed
in full herein. All prior ordinances in conflict herewith shall be and are
hereby repealed. Three (3) copies of the Housing Code are on file at the office
of the Municipal Clerk and are available for public inspection at any
reasonable tlme. (Ref. 18-132, 18-2146 RS Neb.)
Article 5. Plumbing Code
§ 9.501   PLUMBING QODE: ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
To provide certain minimum standards, provisions, and requirements for safe and
stable installation, methods of connection, and uses of materials In the
installation of plumbing and heating, the American Standard National Plumbing
Code, published ln book or pamphlet form by the American Standard National
Plumbing Code, in addition to all amended editions as though printed In full
herein. All prior ordinances in conflict herewith shall be and are hereby
repealed. Three (3) copies of the Plumbing Code are on flle at the office of
the Municipal Clerk and are avallable at any reasonable time. (Ref. 18-132 RS
Neb.)
§ 9-502   PLUMBING CODE; PROHIBITION OF LEAD PIPES. SOLDER, AND FLUX.
Any pipe, solders or flux used in the installation or repair of any residential
or non-residential facility which is connected to the public water supply
system shall be lead free.
For purposes of this Section, lead free shall mean:
1)   Solders and flux - not more than two-tenths (.2%) percent lead, and
2)   Pipe and pipe fittings - not more than eight (8%) percent lead.
(Ref. 71-5301 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 421, 5/4/88)
Article 6. Electrical Code
§ 9-601   ELECTRICAL CODE; ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
To provide certain minimum standards, provisions, and requirements for safe and
fire proof installation, methods of connection, and uses of materials in the
installation of electrical wiring and appliances shall be as found in The
National Electrical Code, as recommended by the National Fire Protection
Association and published by the National Board of Fire Underwriters, printed
in book or pamphlet form, in addition to all amended editions as though printed
in full herein. All prior ordinances in conflict herewith shall be and are
hereby repealed. Three (3) copies of the Electrical Code are on file at the
office of the Municipal Clerk and are available for public inspection at any
reasonable time. (Ref. 18-132 RS Neb.)
Article 7. Trailer Regulations
§ 9-701   TRAILERS; TERMS DEFINED.
Park. The term "park" as used in this Code shall mean and include the locating
of a trailer on any plot of ground for storage or living purposes.
Camp. The term "camp" as used in this Code shall mean and include any tract of
land upon which are located two (2) or more trailers or other temporary
enclosures used for living purposes whether a charge is made or not.
Trailer. The term "trailer" as used in this Code shall mean and include any
vehicle commonly designated as such and constructed to permit occupancy for
sleeping, advertising, or business purposes, and so designed that it is or may
be mounted on wheels and used as a conveyance on the public ways.
§ 9-702   TRAILERS; UNLAWFUL.
It shall hereafter be unlawful for the owner, lessee, or occupant of any
private property not designated and licensed as a public camp to park or permit
the owner or occupant of any trailer or temporary enclosure used for living,
business, or advertising purposes to locate the same on private property for
more than twenty-four (24) hours, unless such house trailer shall have a supply
of pure water and be properly connected to the City sewer system, or, if not
located upon a street where sewer service is available, then it shall be
connected to a private septic tank of approved design. When such trailer shall
have been located as above specified for more than ten (10) days, such trailer
shall be deemed a "dwelling" and subject to all the rules and regulations
pertaining thereto.
Article 8. Unsafe Buildings
§ 9-801   UNSAFE BUILDINGS; PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY.
(1) It is the purpose of this Article to provide a just, equitable and
practicable method, to be cumulative with and in addition to any other remedy
provided by the Building Code or otherwise available by law, whereby building
or structures which from any cause endanger the life, limb, health, morals,
property, safety or welfare of the general public or their occupants may be
required to be repaired, vacated or demolished.
   (2) The provisions of this Article shall apply to all unsafe buildings, as
herein defined, which are now in existence or which may hereafter become unsafe
within the corporate limits and the Municipality's zoning jurisdiction.  (Ref.
18-1720, 18-1722, 18-1722.01 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 528, 7/1/98)
§ 9-802   UNSAFE BUILDINGS; ADMINISTRATION.
The Building Official is hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of this
Article. The Building Official shall have the power to render interpretations
of the Article in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such
interpretations shall be in conformity with the intent and purpose of this
Article. (Ref. 18-1720, 18-1722, 18-1722.01 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 528, 7/1/98)
§ 9-803   UNSAFE BUILDINGS; INSPECTIONS.
The Building Official and Fire Chief are hereby authorized to make such
inspections and take such actions as may be required to enforce the provisions
of this Article. (Ref. 18-1720, 18-1722, 18-1722.01 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 528, 7/
1/98)
§ 9-804   UNSAFE BUILDINGS; RIGHT OF ENTRY.
When it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this
Article, or when the Building Official or the Building Official's authorized
representative has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a building
or upon a premises a condition which is contrary to or in violation of this
Article which makes the building or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous,
the Building Official may enter the building or premises at reasonable times to
inspect or to perform the duties imposed by this Article, provided that if such
building or premises be occupied that credentials be presented to the occupant
and entry requested. If such building or premises is unoccupied, the Building
Official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other
person having charge and control of the building or premises and request entry.
If entry is refused, the Building Official shall have recourse to the remedies
provided by law to secure entry.  (Ref. 18-1720, 18-1722, 18-1722.01 RS Neb.)
(Ord. No. 528, 7/1/98)
§ 9-805   UNSAFE BUILDINGS; PUBLIC NUISANCES; ABATEMENT.
All buildings or portions thereof which are determined after inspection by the
Building Official to be unsafe, dangerous or hazardous as defined in this
Article are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by
repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal in accordance with the procedure
specified in this Article. (Ref. 18-1720, 18-1722, 18-1722.01 RS Neb.) (Ord.
No. 528, 7/1/98)
§ 9-806   UNSAFE BUILDINGS; VIOLATION.
It shall be unlawful to maintain or permit the existence of any unsafe building
in the Municipality and it shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant, or person
in custody or control of any unsafe building to permit the same to remain in an
unsafe condition or to occupy such building or structure or permit it to be
occupied while it is in an unsafe condition. (Ref. 17-505, 18-1720, 18-1722,
18-1722.01 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 528, 7/1/98)
§ 9-807   UNSAFE BUILDINGS; BOARD OF APPEALS.
(1) In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determination
made by the Building Official relative to the application and interpretation of
this Article, there shall be and is hereby created a Board of Appeals. The City
Council shall serve as the Board of Appeals.
   (2)   Appeals to the Board shall be processed in accordance with the
provisions of this Article.
   (3)   The Board of Appeals shall have no authority relative to
interpretation of the administrative provisions of this Article nor shall the
Board be empowered to waive requirements of this Article. (Ref. 18-1720, 18-
1722, 18-1722.01 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 528, 7/1/98)  (Amended by Ord. No. 530, 8/
5/98)
§ 9-808   UNSAFE BUILDINGS; DEFINITIONS, GENERAL.
(1) For the purpose of this Article, certain terms, phrases, words and their
derivatives shall be construed as specified in either this Article or as
specified in the Building Code. Where terms are not defined, they shall have
their ordinary accepted meanings within the context with which they are used.
Words used in the singular include the plural and the plural the singular.
Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine and the feminine the
masculine.
   (2)   Building Code shall mean the Uniform Building Code, 1994 Edition,
promulgated by the International Conference of Building Officials, as adopted
by the Municipality.
   (3)   Unsafe building shall mean any building or structure deemed to be
unsafe under the provisions of section 9-809 of this Article. (Ref. 18-1720,
18-1722, 18-1722.01 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 528, 7/1/98)
§ 9-809   UNSAFE BUILDINGS; DEFINED.
For the purpose of this Article, any building or structure which has any or all
of the conditions or defects hereinafter described shall be deemed to be an
unsafe building, provided that such conditions or defects exist to the extent
that the life, health, property or safety of the public or its occupants are
endangered.
   (1)   Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit
is not of sufficient width or size or is not so arranged as to provide safe and
adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic.
   (2)   Whenever the walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway or
other means of exit is so warped, worn, loose, torn or otherwise unsafe as to
not provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic.
   (3)   Whenever the stress in any materials, member or portion thereof, due
to all dead and live loads, is more than one and one half times the working
stress or stresses allowed in the Building Code for new buildings or similar
structure, purpose or location.
   (4)   Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by fire, earthquake,
wind, flood or by any other cause, to such an extent that the structural
strength or stability thereof is materially less than it was before such
catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements of the Building Code for
new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location.
   (5)   Whenever any portion of member or appurtenance thereof is likely to
fail, or to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure
persons or damage property.
   (6)   Whenever any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance or
ornamentation on the exterior thereof is not of sufficient strength or
stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to be
capable of resisting a wind pressure of one half of that specified in the
Building Code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location
without exceeding the work stresses permitted in the Building Code for such
buildings.
   (7)   Whenever any portion thereof has wracked, warped, buckled or settled
to such an extent that walls or other structural portions have materially less
resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required in the case of similar new
construction.
   (8)   Whenever the building or structure, or any portion thereof, because of
(a) dilapidation, deterioration or decay; (b) faulty construction; (c) the
removal, movement or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the
purpose of supporting such building; (d) the deterioration, decay or inadequacy
of its foundation; or (e) any other cause, is likely to partially or completely
collapse.
   (9)   Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure, or any portion
thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose which it is being used.
   (10)   Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural members
list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the
center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one third of the base.
   (11)   Whenever the building or structure, exclusive of the foundation,
shows 33 percent or more damage or deterioration of its supporting member or
members, or 50 percent damage or deterioration of its nonsupporting members,
enclosing or outside walls or coverings.
   (12)   Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind,
earthquake or flood, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to become
(a) an attractive nuisance to children, (b) a harbor for vagrants, criminals or
immoral persons; or as to (c) enable persons to resort thereto for the purpose
of committing unlawful or immoral acts.
   (13)   Whenever any building or structure has been constructed, exists or is
maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable
to such building or structure provided by the building regulations of the
Municipality, as specified in the Building Code, or of any law or ordinance of
the Municipality relating to the condition, location or structure of buildings.
   (14)   Whenever any building or structure which, whether or not erected in
accordance with all applicable laws and ordinances, has in any nonsupporting
part, member or portion less than 50 percent, or in any supporting part, member
or portion less than 66 percent of the (a) strength, (b) fire-resisting
qualities or characteristics required by law in the case of a newly constructed
building of like area, height and occupancy in the same location.
   (15)   Whenever a building or structure, used or intended to be used for
dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay,
damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, air or sanitation
facilities, or otherwise, is determined by the Building Official to be
unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such a condition that is likely to
cause sickness or disease.
   (16)   Whenever any building or structure, because of obsolescence,
dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits, lack of
sufficient fire-resistive construction, faulty electric wiring, gas connections
or heating apparatus, or other cause, is determined by the Fire Marshal to be a
fire hazard.
   (17)   Whenever any building or structure is in such a condition as to
constitute a public nuisance known to the common law or in equity
jurisprudence.
   (18)   Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on a site
after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure or whenever
any building or structure is abandoned for a period in excess of six months so
as to constitute such building or portion thereof an attractive nuisance or
hazard to the public. (Ref. 18-1720, 18-1722, 18-1722.01 RS Neb.) (Ord. No.
528, 7/1/98)
§ 9-810   UNSAFE BUILDINGS; COMMENCEMENT OF PROCEEDINGS.
When the Building Official has inspected or caused to be inspected any building
and has found and determined that such building is an unsafe building, the
Building Official shall commence proceedings to cause the repair, vacation or
demolition of the building.  (Ref. 18-1720, 18-1722, 18-1722.01 RS Neb.) (Ord.
No. 528, 7/1/98)
§ 9-811   UNSAFE BUILDINGS; NOTICE AND ORDER.
The Building Official shall issue a notice and order directed to the record
owner of the building. The notice and order shall contain:
   (1)   The street address and a legal description sufficient for
identification of the premises upon which the building is located.
   (2)   A statement that the Building Official has found the building to be
unsafe with a brief and concise description of the conditions found to render
the building unsafe under the provisions of section 9-809 of this Article.
   (3)   A statement of the action required to be taken as determined by the
Building Official.
   (a)   If the Building Official has determined that the building or structure
must be repaired, the order shall require that all required permits be secured
therefor and the work physically commenced within such time, not to exceed 90
days from the date of the order, and completed within such time as the Building
Official shall determine is reasonable under all of the circumstances.
   (b)   If the Building Official has determined that the building or structure
must be vacated, the order shall require that the building or structure shall
be vacated within a time certain from the date of the order as determined by
the Building Official to be reasonable.
   (c)   If the Building Official has determined that the building or structure
must be demolished, the order shall require that the building be vacated within
such time as the Building Official shall determine reasonable, not to exceed 60
days from the date of the order; that all required permits be secured therefor
within 60 days from the date of the order; and that demolition be completed
within such time as the Building Official shall determine is reasonable.
   (4)   Statements advising that if any required repair or demolition work
(without vacation also being required) is not commenced within the time
specified, the Building Official (a) will order the building vacated and posted
to prevent further occupancy until the work is completed, and (b) may proceed
to cause the work to be done and charge the costs thereof against the property
or its owner.
   (5)   Statements advising (a) that any person having any record title or
legal interest in the building may appeal from the notice and order or any
action of the Building Official to the Board of Appeals, provided the appeal is
made in writing as provided in this Article and filed with the Building
Official within 30 days from the date of service of such notice and order; and
(b) that failure to appeal will constitute a waiver of all right to an
administrative hearing and determination of the matter.  (Ref. 18-1720, 18-
1722, 18-1722.01 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 528, 7/1/98)
§ 9-812   UNSAFE BUILDINGS; SERVICE OF NOTICE AND ORDER.
The notice and order, any amended or supplemental notice and order, shall be
served upon the record owner and posted on the property; and one copy thereof
shall be served on each of the following if known to the Building Official or
disclosed from official public records; the holder of any mortgage or deed of
trust or other lien or encumbrance of record; the owner or holder of any lease
of record; and the holder of any other estate or legal interest of record in or
to the building on the land on which it is located. The failure of the Building
Official to serve any person required to be served shall not invalidate any
proceedings hereunder as to any other person duly served or relieve any such
person from any duty or obligation imposed by the provisions of this Article.
(Ref. 18-1720, 18-1722, 18-1722.01 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 528, 7/1/98)
§ 9-813   UNSAFE BUILDINGS; METHOD OF SERVICE.
   Service of the notice and order shall be made upon all persons entitled
thereto either personally or by mailing a copy of such notice and order by
certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to each such person
at their address as it appears on the last equalized assessment roll of the
County or as known to the Building Official. If no address of any such person
so appears or is known to the Building Official, then a copy of the notice and
order shall be so mailed, addressed to such person, at the address of the
building involved in the proceedings. The failure of any such person to receive
such notice shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this
Article. Service by certified mail in the manner herein provided shall be
effective on the date of mailing. (Ref. 18-1720, 18-1722, 18-1722.01 RS Neb.)
(Ord. No. 528, 7/1/98)
§ 9-814   UNSAFE BUILDINGS; RECORDATION OF NOTICE AND ORDER.
If compliance is not had with the order within thirty (30) days after the date
the notice and order is served upon the owner or owners, and no appeal has been
properly and timely filed, the Building Official shall file in the office of
the Gage County Register of Deeds a certificate describing the property and
certifying (a) that the building is an unsafe building, and (b) that the owner
has been so notified. The notice and order shall be filed with the certificate
of the Building Official. Whenever the corrections ordered shall thereafter
have been completed or the building demolished so that it no longer exists as
an unsafe building on the property described in the certificate, the Building
Official shall file a new certificate with the Gage County Register of Deeds
certifying that the building has been demolished or all required corrections
have been made so that the building is no longer unsafe, whichever is
appropriate. (Ref. 18-1720, 18-1722, 18-1722.01 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 528, 7/1/98)
(Amended by Ord. No. 547, 6/6/01)
§ 9-815   UNSAFE BUILDINGS; REPAIR, VACATION AND DEMOLITION.
The following standards shall be followed by the Building Official, and by the
Board of Appeals if an appeal is taken, in ordering the repair, vacation or
demolition of any dangerous building or structure:
   (1)   Any building declared an unsafe building under this Article shall be
made to comply with one of the following:
      (a)   The building shall be repaired in accordance with the current
building code;
      (b)   The building shall be demolished at the option of the building
owner; or
      (c)   If the building does not constitute an immediate danger to the
life, limb, property or safety of the public, it may be vacated, secured and
maintained against entry.
   (2)   If the building or structure is in such condition as to make it
immediately dangerous to the life, limb, property or safety of the public or
its occupants, it shall be ordered to be vacated. (Ref. 18-1720, 18-1722, 18-
1722.01 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 528, 7/1/98)
§ 9-816   UNSAFE BUILDINGS; NOTICE TO VACATE.
Every notice to vacate shall, in addition to being served as provided in
section 9-813, be posted at or upon each exit of the building and shall be in
substantially the following form:
DO NOT ENTER
UNSAFE TO OCCUPY
It is an offense to occupy this building, or to remove or deface this notice.
Building Official
City of Wymore
(Ref. 18-1720, 18-1722, 18-1722.01 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 528, 7/1/98)
§ 9-817   UNSAFE BUILDINGS; NOTICE TO VACATE; COMPLIANCE.
Whenever such notice is posted, the Building Official shall include a
notification thereof in the notice and order issued under section 9-811,
reciting the emergency and specifying the conditions which necessitate the
posting. No person shall remain in or enter any building which has been so
posted, except that entry may be made to repair, demolish or remove such
building under permit. No person shall remove or deface any such notice after
it is posted until the required repairs, demolition or removal have been
completed and a certificate of occupancy issued pursuant to the provisions of
the Building Code. (Ref. 18-1720, 18-1722, 18-1722.01 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 528,
7/1/98)
§ 9-818   UNSAFE BUILDINGS; APPEAL; FORM OF REQUEST.
(1) Any person entitled to service under section 9-812 may appeal from any
notice and order or any action of the Building Official under this Article by
filing at the office of the Municipal Clerk a written appeal containing:
   (a)   The names of all appellants participating in the appeal and a
description of the property which is the subject of the notice and order.
   (b)   A brief statement setting forth the legal interest of each of the
appellants in the building or the land involved in the notice and order.
   (c)   A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the specific
order or action protested, together with any material facts claimed to support
the contentions of the appellant.
   (d)   A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the relief
sought and the reasons why it is claimed the protested order or action should
be reversed, modified or otherwise set aside.
   (e)   The signatures of all parties named as appellants and their official
mailing addresses.
   (2)   The appeal shall be filed within 30 days from the date of the service
of such order or action of the Building Official; provided, however, that if
the building or structure is in such condition as to make it immediately unsafe
to the life, limb, property or safety of the public or adjacent property, is
ordered vacated and is posted in accordance with section 9-816, such appeal
shall be filed within 10 days from the date of service of the notice and order
of the Building Official. (Ref. 18-1720, 18-1722, 18-1722.01 RS Neb.) (Ord. No.
528, 7/1/98)
§ 9-819   UNSAFE BUILDINGS; APPEAL; NOTICE OF HEARING.
As soon as practicable after receiving the written appeal, the Board of Appeals
shall fix a date, time and place for the hearing of the appeal by the Board.
Such date shall not be less than 10 days nor more than 30 days from the date
the appeal was filed with the Municipal Clerk. Written notice of the time and
place of the hearing shall be given at least 10 days prior to the date of the
hearing to each appellant by the Municipal Clerk by first class mail, postage
prepaid at the address shown on the appeal. (Ref. 18-1720, 18-1722, 18-1722.01
RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 528, 7/1/98)
§ 9-820   UNSAFE BUILDINGS; EFFECT OF FAILURE TO APPEAL.
Failure of any person to file an appeal in accordance with the provisions of
section 9-818 shall constitute a waiver of the right to an administrative
hearing and adjudication of the notice and order or any portion thereof. (Ref.
18-1720, 18-1722, 18-1722.01 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 528, 7/1/98)
§ 9-821   UNSAFE BUILDINGS; SCOPE OF HEARING ON APPEAL.
Only those matters or issues specifically raised by the appellant shall be
considered in the hearing of the appeal. (Ref. 18-1720, 18-1722, 18-1722.01 RS
Neb.) (Ord. No. 528, 7/1/98)
§ 9-822   UNSAFE BUILDINGS; STAYING OF ORDER UNDER APPEAL.
Except for vacation orders made pursuant to section 9-816, enforcement of any
notice and order of the Building Official issued under this Article shall be
stayed during the pendency of an appeal therefrom which is properly and timely
filed. (Ref. 18-1720, 18-1722, 18-1722.01 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 528, 7/1/98)
§ 9-823   UNSAFE BUILDINGS; CONDUCT OF HEARINGS; GENERAL PROVISIONS.
(1) Hearing Examiners. The Board of Appeals may appoint one or more hearing
examiners or designate one or more of its members to serve as hearing examiners
to conduct the hearings. The examiner hearing the case shall exercise all
powers relating to the conduct of hearings until it is submitted to the Board
for decision.
   (2)   Record. A record of the entire proceedings shall be made by tape
recording or by any other means of permanent recording determined to be
appropriate by the Board. A transcript of the proceedings shall be made
available to all parties upon request and upon payment of a fee prescribed
therefor. Such fees may be established by the Board, but shall not in no event
be greater than the cost involved.
   (3)   Continuances. The Board may grant continuances for good cause shown;
however, when a hearing examiner has been assigned to such hearing, no
continuances may be granted except by the examiner for good cause shown so long
as the matter remains before the examiner.
   (4)   Oaths and Certificates. In any proceedings under this Article, the
Board, any Board member, or the hearing examiner has the power to administer
oaths and affirmations and to certify official acts.
   (5)   Reasonable Dispatch. The Board and its representatives shall proceed
with reasonable dispatch to conclude any matter before it. Due regard shall be
shown for the convenience and necessity of any parties or their
representatives. (Ref. 18-1720, 18-1722, 18-1722.01 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 528, 7/
1/98)
§ 9-824   UNSAFE BUILDINGS; FORM OF NOTICE OF HEARING.
The notice to the appellant shall be substantially in the following form, but
may include other information:
   "You are hereby notified that a hearing will be held before (the Board of
Appeals or name of hearing examiner) at _________________ on the _______ day of
_______________ 19____, at the hour ___________, upon the notice and order
served upon you. You may be present at the hearing. You may be, but need not be
represented by counsel. You may present any relevant evidence and will be given
the opportunity to cross-examine all witnesses testifying against you."
(Ref. 18-1720, 18-1722, 18-1722.01 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 528, 7/1/98)
§ 9-825   UNSAFE BUILDINGS; CONDUCT OF HEARING; EVIDENCE.
(1) Rules. Hearings need not be conducted according to the technical rules
relating to evidence and witnesses.
   (2)   Oral Evidence. Oral evidence shall be taken only on oath or
affirmation.
   (3)   Hearsay Evidence. Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of
supplementing or explaining any direct evidence, but shall not be sufficient
itself to support a finding unless it would be admissible over the objection in
civil actions in courts of competent jurisdiction in this State.
   (4)    Admissibility of Evidence. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if
it is the type of evidence on which responsible persons are accustomed to rely
in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common
law or statutory rule which might make improper the admission of such evidence
over objection in civil actions in courts of competent jurisdiction in this
State.
   (5)    Exclusion of Evidence. Irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence
shall be excluded. (Ref. 18-1720, 18-1722, 18-1722.01 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 528,
7/1/98)
§ 9-826   UNSAFE BUILDINGS; CONDUCT OF HEARINGS; RIGHTS OF PARTIES.
Each party shall have these rights, among others:
   (1)   To call and examine witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues of
the hearing;
   (2)   To introduce documentary and physical evidence;
   (3)   To cross-examine opposing witnesses on any matter relevant to the
issues of the hearing;
   (4)   To impeach any witness regardless of which party first called the
witness to testify;
   (5)   To rebut the evidence; and
   (6)   To be represented by counsel; provided, however, the Municipality
shall not be obligated to provide counsel to any party. (Ref. 18-1720, 18-1722,
18-1722.01 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 528, 7/1/98)
§ 9-827   UNSAFE BUILDINGS; INSPECTION OF PREMISES.
The Board of Appeals or the hearing examiner may inspect any building or
premises involved in the appeal during the course of the hearing, provided that
(1) notice of such inspection shall be given to the parties before the
inspection is made, (2) the parties are given an opportunity to be present
during the inspection, and (3) the Board or hearing examiner shall state for
the record upon completion of the inspection the materials facts observed and
the conclusions drawn therefrom. Each party then shall have a right to rebut or
explain the matters so stated by the Board or hearing examiner. (Ref. 18-1720,
18-1722, 18-1722.01 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 528, 7/1/98)
§ 9-828   UNSAFE BUILDINGS; APPEAL; DECISION OF BOARD.
(1) If a contested case is heard by a hearing examiner alone, the examiner
shall within 30 days submit a written report to the Board of Appeals. Such
report shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered and state the
examiner's findings, conclusions and recommendations. The report also shall
contain a proposed decision in such form that it may be adopted by the Board as
its decision in the case. The Board may adopt or reject the proposed decision
in its entirety, or may modify the proposed decision.
   (2)   The decision shall be in writing and shall contain findings of fact, a
determination of the issues presented, and the requirements to be complied
with. A copy of the decision shall be delivered to the appellant personally or
sent by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested.
   (3)   The effective date of the decision shall be as stated therein. (Ref.
18-1720, 18-1722, 18-1722.01 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 528, 7/1/98)
§ 9-829   UNSAFE BUILDINGS; ENFORCEMENT; VIOLATION.
After any order of the Building Official or the Board of Appeals made pursuant
to this Article shall have become final, no person to whom any such order is
directed shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey any such order. Any such person
who fails to comply with any such order shall be guilty of an offense. (Ref.
17-505, 18-1720, 18-1722, 18-1722.01 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 528, 7/1/98)
§ 9-830   UNSAFE BUILDINGS; FAILURE TO OBEY ORDER.
If, after any order of the Building Official or Board of Appeals made pursuant
to this Article has become final, the person to whom such order is directed
shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey such order, the Governing Body may (1)
cause such person to be prosecuted under section 9-829, or (2) institute any
appropriate action to abate such building as a public nuisance. (Ref. 18-1720,
18-1722, 18-1722.01 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 528, 7/1/98)
§ 9-831   UNSAFE BUILDINGS; FAILURE TO COMMENCE WORK.
(1) Whenever the required repair or demolition is not commenced within 30 days
after any final notice and order issued under this Article becomes effective,
the Building Official shall cause the building described in such notice and
order to be vacated by posting at each entrance thereto a notice reading:
UNSAFE BUILDING
DO NOT OCCUPY
It is an offense to occupy this building, or to remove or deface this notice.
Building Official
City of Wymore
   (2)   No person shall occupy any building which has been posted as specified
in this section. No person shall remove or deface any such notice so posted
until the repairs, demolition or removal ordered by the Building Official have
been completed and a certificate of occupancy issued pursuant to provisions of
the Building Code.
   (3)   If the owner of the building or structure fails, neglects, or refuses
to comply with the order to repair, demolish or remove the building or
structure, the Municipality may proceed with the work specified in the order to
the property owner. A statement of the cost of such work shall be transmitted
to the Governing Body. The Governing Body may:
   (a)   Levy the cost as a special assessment against the lot or real estate
upon which the building or structure is located. Such special assessment shall
be a lien on the real estate and shall be collected in the manner provided for
special assessments; or
   (b)   Collect the cost from the owner of the building or structure and
enforce the collection by civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ref. 18-1720, 18-1722, 18-1722.01 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 528, 7/1/98)
§ 9-832   UNSAFE BUILDINGS; STATEMENT OF COSTS; HEARING; OBJECTIONS.
(1) Upon receipt of the statement of costs, the Governing Body shall fix a
time, date and place for a hearing on such statement and any protests or
objections thereto. Notice of the hearing shall be served by certified mail,
postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to the owner of the
property. Such notice shall be given at least 10 days prior to the date set for
the hearing and shall specify the day, hour and place when the Governing Body
will hear and pass upon the statement of costs, together with any objections or
protests which may be filed by any person interested in or affected by the
proposed charge.
   (2)   The Governing Body may make such revision, correction or modification
in the statement of costs as it may deem just. The decision of the Governing
Body on the statement of costs, and on all protests and objections, shall be
final and conclusive. (Ref. 18-1720, 18-1722, 18-1722.01 RS Neb.) (Ord. No.
528, 7/1/98)
Article 9. Penal Provision
§ 9-901   VIOLATION; PENALTY.
   Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with the enforcement of any
of the provisions of this Chapter, set forth at full length herein or
incorporated by reference, shall be deemed guilty of an offense, and upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than seventy-five dollars ($75.00)
nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. A new violation
shall be deemed to have been committed every twenty-four (24) hours of such
failure to comply. (Ref. 17-505 RS Neb.) (Amended by Ord. No. 538, 9/15/99)
§ 9-902   ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE.
   (1) Whenever a nuisance exists as defined in this Chapter, the Municipality
may proceed by a suit in equity to enjoin and abate the same, in the manner
provided by law.
   (2) Whenever, in any action, it is established that a nuisance exists, the
court shall together with the fine or penalty imposed, enter an order of
abatement as part of the judgement of the case. (Ref. 17-505, 18-1720 RS Neb.)
(Ord. No. 538, 9/15/99)
Chapter 10
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Article 1. Sales and Advertising
§ 10-101   PEDDLERS AND HAWKERS; REGULATION.
To prevent the sale of fraudulent, dangerous, and unhealthful goods and
services, and to protect the public by maintaining records of the products sold
and the persons and companies responsible for such sales, all peddlers, and
hawkers shall, before doing business within the Municipality, make application
for, and be issued a license. Application for a license shall be made to the
Municipal Clerk upon blank forms supplied by the Municipality, and shall
contain all the necessary information, and documents required for the
protection of the residents of the Municipality. Any person or persons granted
a peddler and hawker license shall be subject to any fees, occupation taxes,
and other rules and regulations which the Governing Body deems appropriate for
the purposes stated herein. Any license so granted shall be subject to
revocation for good and sufficient cause by the Municipal Police. (Ref. 17-134,
17-525 RS Neb.)
§ 10-102   HANDBILLS; PROHIBITION.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to give or hand to any other
person or persons passing through or upon the streets, alleys, or sidewalks any
handbills, dodgers, advertising matter, or loose material. It shall be unlawful
for any person to scatter, or throw, any handbills, dodgers, or other
advertising matter on any public grounds. No person or persons may place or
post any handbilo, dodger, advertising papers, or advertising devices on any
automobiles, trees, or fences standing upon the streets, alleys, or public
grounds, and such practices are hereby declared to be a nuisance. (Ref. 17-140
RS Neb.)
Article 2. Amusements
§ 10-201    BILLIARDS HALLS, POOL HALLS, AND BOWLING; REGULATION.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, to own, maintain, or operate
any billiard hall, pool hall, or bowling alley for profit without having first
obtained a license from the Municipality. Any person desiring a license to
operate, maintain, or own said places of amusement shall file a written
application with the Municipal Clerk upon a blank application form supplied by
the Municipality. Said application form shall require such information and
documents, or copies thereof, as the Governing Body deems necessary to
determine whether to grant or reject the application. Said application shall be
accompanied by a statement signed by the owner of the building wherein said
amusement is to be located setting forth that the applicant is a person of good
moral character. Upon the determination that the granting of the license would
be beneficial to the Municipality, the Governing Body shall immediately direct
the Municipal Clerk to issue the license to the applicant upon the payment of a
fee set by resolution of the Governing Body. Said license shall be subject to
revocation at any time for good and sufficient cause by the Governing Body upon
the issuance of proper notice and a hearing if the licensee should make such a
request. Any person or persons so licensed shall be subject to any bond, fees,
or other rules and regulations as may be set by resolution of the Governing
Body for the benefit of the Municipality. (Ref. 17-120, 17-524 RS Neb.)
§ 10-202    BILLIARD HALLS, POOL HALLS, AND BOWLING; MINORS.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons operating any bowling alley to
allow any minor under the age of fifteen (15) to play any game of bowling, or
loiter on the premise. It shall be unlawful to permit any minor under the age
of eighteen (18) years to be, remain, or play on any pool or billiard table.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator, of a billiard hall, pool
hall, and bowling alley to allow or permit any disturbance of the peace,
fighting, gambling, drinking of alcoholic beverages, drunkenness, use of
profanity, obscene books and pictures.
§ 10-203    BILLIARD HALLS, POOL HALLS AND BOWLING; HOURS.
It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator, of a billiard hall, pool hall
or amusements to open or make available for public use said places of amusement
between the hours of twelve (12:00) o'clock Midnight and seven (7:00) o'clock
A.M. on any day of the week except Sunday when the said bowling alley shall not
be open or available to the public from twelve (12:00) o'clock Midnight until
twelve (12:00) o'clock Noon. (Ref. 17-120 RS Neb.)
§ 10-204    BILLIARD HALLS, POOL HALLS, AND BOWLING; LICENSE REVOCATION.
Any person licensed under the provisions of this Article and convicted of a
violation of any of the provisions thereof may have his license revoked by the
Governing Body after a hearing of which the accused shall have due notice. The
record of such conviction shall be sufficient evidence to support a revocation
and cancellation of such license.
§ 10-205    PUBLIC DANCE; DEFINED.
The term "public dance" as used herein shall include any dance, rock-festival,
masquerade, or ball given or conducted for which a fee, contribution, or
collection for purposes of admission is charged; provided, the term public
dance shall not be construed to include dances, music festivals, masquerades,
or balls to which admission is limited strictly to persons expressly invited by
the person, organization, or society giving or holding such dance, masquerade,
or ball and which is not given or conducted designedly for profit or gain to
such person, organization or society giving or conducting the same; and
provided further, that the provisions herein shall not apply to any dance
conducted under the supervision and direction of the Governing Body of any
college or school district within the Municipality.
§ 10-206    PUBLIC DANCE; PATRONS.
It shall be unlawful for any sponsor or manager of a public dance to permit any
person or persons to enter and participate in the said public dance if the
sponsor or manager has reason to believe that the said patron is in an
intoxicated or disorderly state, or intends to solicit and engage in
prostitution. (Ref. 17-134, RS Neb.)
§ 10-207    PUBLIC DANCE; HOURS.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to manage, sponsor, or
participate in a public dance on Sunday. (Ref. 28-940 RS Neb.)
§ 10-208    BINGO; REGULATION.
Games of bingo shall be conducted within the Municipality in accordance with
all laws of the Municipality and the State of Nebraska if the said game of
bingo is played for or involves profit or gain. Any association duly licensed
by the State of Nebraska to conduct the game of bingo shall obtain a written
permit from the Governing Body before commencing operation of said game.
Application shall be made to the Municipal Clerk for such permit. Said
application form shall contain such information and documents or copies thereof
as the Governing Body deems necessary to determine whether to grant or reject
the application. Upon the determination that granting the application would be
proper, the Governing Body shall immediately direct the Municipal Clerk to
issue the said license to the applicant upon the payment of an annual permit
fee of ten ($10.00) dollars. Said license shall be subject to revocation at any
time for good cause. Any person or persons, so licensed, shall be subject to
any other fees, rules, and regulations which the Governing Body may designate.
All permits so issued will automatically expire on September thirtieth (30th),
following its issuance or renewal. The fee for each renewal unless otherwise
prescribed shall be in the sum of ten ($10.00) dollars. Said fee shall be
credited to the General Fund. The permit shall be on display at any place where
a game of bingo is conducted. (Ref. 9-166 RS Neb.)(Amended by Ord. No. 392, 9/
19/84)
§ 10-209    BINGO; TAX.
A tax of four (4%) per cent of the gross receipts of each licensed association
deriving revenue from the game of bingo is hereby imposed and levied against
each such association and payable on or before the thirtieth (30th) day of the
immediately succeeding calendar quarter to the Municipal Treasurer. Such tax
shall be credited to the Municipal General Fund, and shall be used to pay for
the cost of regulation and enforcement of this Article. (Ref. 9-165, 9-168 RS
Neb.) (Amended by Ord. No. 372, 9/21/83)
§ 10-210   BINGO; QUARTERLY REPORT.
Each association conducting the game of bingo shall submit a written quarterly
report to the Municipal Clerk covering the preceding calendar quarter on or
before the tenth (10th) day of the immediately succeeding calendar quarter. The
report shall include a detailed financial statement of each separate session of
bingo conducted by the said association and shall be prepared on a form
prescribed by the Director of the Department of Agriculture and Inspection of
the State of Nebraska.
§ 10-211   BINGO; INCORPORATED REGULATION.
All applicable State statutes as they now exist or may hereafter be amended
shall be, and will constitute, a part of this Article as if repeated verbatim
herein, and violation of any State statute will be a distinct and separate
offense against the Municipality as well as against the State. Violators
thereof shall be separately prosecuted by the Municipality for each of such
offenses, and if convicted, shall be deemed to be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ref. 9-101 through 9-123 RS Neb.)
§ 10-212   LOTTERY; SALES OUTLET LOCATIONS; APPROVAL REQUIRED; QUALIFICATION
STANDARDS.
   (1)   The lottery operator whom the Governing Body contracts to conduct its
lottery shall not operate the lottery at a sales outlet location other than the
location of the lottery operator without prior approval of the sales outlet
location by the Governing Body. The Governing Body shall approve or disapprove
each sales outlet location and individual, sole proprietorship, partnership,
limited liability company, or corporation which desires to conduct the lottery
at its sales outlet location solely on the basis of the qualification standards
prescribed in subsection (2) of this section.
   (2)   Any individual, sole proprietorship, partnership, limited liability
company, or corporation which seeks to have its location approved as an
authorized sales outlet location shall:
      (a)   Not have been convicted of, forfeited bond upon a charge of, or
pleaded guilty to forgery, larceny, extortion, conspiracy to defraud, willful
failure to make required payments or reports to a governmental agency at any
level, filing false reports with any such agency, or any similar offense or
offenses or any crime, whether felony or misdemeanor, involving gambling
activity or moral turpitude;
      (b)   Not have had a gaming license revoked or canceled under the
Nebraska Bingo Act, the Nebraska Pickle Card Lottery Act, the Nebraska Lottery
and Raffle Act, or the Nebraska County and City Lottery Act; and
      (c)   Be fit, willing, and able to properly provide the service proposed
in conformance with all provisions and requirements of the Nebraska County and
City Lottery Act and the rules and regulations adopted and promulgated pursuant
to the act.
   (3)   If the person seeking to have its location approved as an authorized
sales outlet location is a partnership, limited liability company, or
corporation, the qualification standards shall apply to every partner of such
partnership, every member of such limited liability company, every officer of
such corporation, and stockholder owning more than ten (10) percent of the
stock of such corporation.
   (4)   The Governing Body shall notify the Department of Revenue of all
approved lottery locations within thirty (30) days of approval.
(Ref. 9-642.01 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 559, 9/17/03)
§ 10-213   LOTTERY; PARTICIPATION; RESTRICTIONS.
   (1)   No person under nineteen (19) years of age shall play or participate
in any way in the lottery established and conducted by the Governing Body.
   (2)   No owner or officer of the lottery operator whom the Governing Body
contracts to conduct its lottery, or owner or officer of an authorized sales
outlet location shall play the lottery established and conducted by the
Governing Body. No employee or agent of the lottery operator or sales outlet
location shall play the lottery established and conducted by the Governing Body
for which he or she performs work during such time as he or she is actually
working at lottery or on duty.
   (3)   Nothing shall prohibit any member of the Governing Body, a municipal
official, or the immediate family of such member or official, from playing the
lottery established and conducted by the Governing Body; provided that such
person in nineteen (19) years of age or older.
   (4)   For purposes of this section, IMMEDIATE FAMILY means a person who is
related to the member or official by blood, marriage, or adoption and resides
in the same household of the member or official, or a person who is claimed to
by the member or official or spouse of the member or official as a dependent
for federal income tax purposes. (Ref. 9-646 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 560, 9/17/03)
(Amended by Ord. No. 603, 5/19/10)
Article 3. Alcoholic Beverages
§ 10-301   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; DEFINITIONS.
All words and phrases herein used are to have the definitions applied thereto,
as defined in the Liquor Control Act of the State of Nebraska. (Ref. 53-103 RS
Neb.)
§ 10-302   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; HOURS OF SALE.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any licensed person or persons or their agents to
sell any alcoholic beverages within the Municipality except during the hours
provided herein:
   HOURS OF SALE
Alcoholic Liquors (except beer and wine)
   Secular Days
      Off Sale      6:00 A.M. to 1:00 A.M.
      On Sale      6:00 A.M. to 2:00 A.M.
   Sundays
      Off Sale         12:00 Noon to 1:00 A.M.      
      On Sale   12:00 Noon to 2:00 A.M.
Beer and Wine
   Secular Days
      Off Sale      6:00 A.M. to 1:00 A.M.
      On Sale      6:00 A.M. to 2:00 A.M.
   Sundays
      Off Sale   6:00 A.M. to 1:00 A.M.
      On Sale   6:00 A.M. to 2:00 A.M.
   (2)   No person or persons shall consume any alcoholic beverages on licensed
premises for a period of time longer than fifteen (15) minutes after the time
fixed herein for stopping the sale of alcoholic beverages on the said premises.
For the purposes of this Section, "on sale" shall be defined as alcoholic
beverages sold by the drink for consumption on the premises of the licensed
establishment; "off sale" shall be defined as alcoholic beverages sold at
retail in the original container for consumption off the premises of the
licensed establishment.
   (3)   Nothing in this Section shall be construed to prohibit licensed
premises from being open for other business on days and hours during which the
sale or dispensing of alcoholic beverages is prohibited by this Section. (Ref.
53-179 RS Neb.) (Amended by Ord. Nos. 294, 12/7/77; 315, 10/3/79; 343, 12/2/81;
373, 9/21/83; 591, 2/20/08; 602, 6/2/10)
§ 10-303   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; LICENSE LIMITATION.
(Repealed by Ord. No. 518, 5/7/97)
§ 10-304   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; PUBLIC CONSUMPTION.
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume alcoholic liquors within the
Municipality on the public streets, alleys, parking areas, roads or highways,
or inside vehicles while upon the upon the public streets, alleys, parking
areas, roads or highways; or upon property owned by the State or any
governmental subdivision thereof, unless authorized by the governing bodies
having jurisdiction over such properties. No person shall consume any alcoholic
liquor, except beer, upon any premise within which only beer is sold at retail.
It shall be unlawful for the owner, proprietor, or manager of any place of
business knowingly to permit any person to consume alcoholic liquors in said
place of business; provided, that nothing herein contained shall be construed
to prohibit persons purchasing alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises
from consuming alcoholic liquor on such premises.  (Amended by Ord. No. 405, 5/
21/86)
§ 10-305   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; REMOVAL OF INTOXICATED PERSONS FROM PUBLIC OR
QUASI-PUBLIC PROPERTY.
Any law enforcement officer with the power to arrest for traffic violations may
take a person who is intoxicated and in the judgment of the officer dangerous
to himself, herself, or others, or who is otherwise incapacitated, from any
public or quasi-public property. An officer removing an intoxicated person from
public or quasi-public property shall make a reasonable effort to take such
intoxicated person to his or her home or to place such person in any hospital,
clinic, alcoholism center, or with a medical doctor as may be necessary to
preserve life or to prevent injury. Such effort at placement shall be deemed
reasonable if the officer contacts those facilities or doctor which have
previously represented a willingness to accept and treat such individuals and
which regularly do accept such individuals. If such efforts are unsuccessful or
are not feasible, the officer may then place such intoxicated person in civil
protective custody, except that civil protective custody shall be used only as
long as is necessary to preserve life or to prevent injury, and under no
circumstances longer than twenty-four (24) hours. The placement of such person
in civil protective custody shall be recorded at the facility or jail at which
he or she is delivered and communicated to his or her family or next of kin, if
they can be located, or to such person designated by the person taken into
civil protective custody.
   The law enforcement officer who acts in compliance with this Section shall
be deemed to be acting in the course of his or her official duty and shall not
be criminally or civilly liable for such actions. The taking of an individual
into civil protective custody under this Section shall not be considered an
arrest. No entry or other record shall be made to indicate that the person has
been arrested or charged with a crime.
   For purposes of this Section, public property shall mean any public right-
of-way, street, highway, alley, park, or other state, county, or municipally-
owned property.
   For the purposes of this Section, quasi-public property shall mean and
include private or publicly-owned property utilized for proprietary or business
uses which invites patronage by the public or which invites public ingress and
egress. (Ref. 53-1,121 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 314, 10/3/79) (Amended by Ord. No.
344, 12/2/81)
§ 10-306   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; LICENSE REVOCATION, SUSPENSION.
A retail license to sell alcoholic liquors within the City of Wymore, Nebraska,
which the Governing Body is legally empowered to revoke, may be either revoked
or suspended by the Governing Body whenever it shall find, after notice and
hearing as provided by law, that the holder of any such license has violated
any of the provisions of this Section.
   It shall be cause for suspension or revocation of any liquor license if
licensee, his manager or agent, shall allow any live person to appear, or have
reasonable cause to believe that any live person shall appear, on any licensed
premises in a state of nudity, to provide entertainment, to provide service, to
act as hostess, manager or owner, or to serve as an employee in any capacity.
   For the purpose of this Section, the term "nudity" shall mean the showing of
the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks or the human female
breast, including the nipple or any portion of the breast below the nipple with
less than a full opaque covering.
   It shall be cause for suspension or revocation of any liquor license if
licensee, his manager or agent, shall allow any film or movie or television or
video taped presentation, or have reasonable cause to believe that any film or
movie or television or video taped presentation shall be shown on any licensed
premises, which film, movie, television or taped presentation shall show nude
male or female genitals, public area or buttocks of the human female breast
including the nipple or any portions of the breast below the nipple with less
than a full opaque covering. (Ord. No. 333, 5/28/81)
§ 10-307    ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; LICENSEE REQUIREMENTS.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to own an establishment that
sells at retail any alcoholic beverages unless said person is a resident of the
county in which the premise is located; a person of good character and
reputation; a citizen of the United States; a person who has never been
convicted of a felony or any Class I misdemeanor pursuant to Chapter 28,
Article 3, 4, 7, 8, 10, 11, or 12 Reissue Revised Statutes of Nebraska, 1943,
or any similar offense under a prior criminal statute or in another state; a
person who has never had a liquor license revoked for cause; a person whose
premises, for which a license is sought, meets standards for fire safety as
established by the State Fire Marshal; or a person who has not acquired a
beneficial interest in more than two (2) alcoholic beverage retail
establishments since March 4, 1963; provided, the beneficial interest
requirement in this Section shall not apply to a person applying for an
additional license for use in connection with the operation of a hotel
containing at least twenty-five (25) sleeping rooms, or where the request is
limited to on premises sale of beer only in a restaurant. (Ref. 53-124.03, 53-
125 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 374, 9/21/83)
§ 10-308   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; LIQUOR APPLICATION; MUNICIPAL EXAMINATION.
(1) Any person or persons desiring to obtain a license to sell alcoholic
liquors at retail shall file with the Liquor Control Commission. Upon receipt
from the Commission of the notice and copy of the application as provided in
section 53-131, RS Neb., the Governing Body shall fix a time and place at which
a hearing will be held, and at which time the Governing Body shall receive
evidence, under oath, either orally, or in writing, from the applicant and any
other person concerning the propriety of the issuance of such license. Such
hearing shall be held not more than forty-five (45) days after the receipt of
notice from the Commission. The Governing Body may examine, or cause to be
examined, under oath, any applicant; examine, or cause to be examined, the
books and records of any applicant; to hear testimony, and to take proof for
its information in the performance of its duties. For purposes of obtaining any
of the information desired, the Governing Body may authorize its agent, the
Municipal Clerk or the Municipal Attorney, to act on its behalf.
   (2) Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in a
legal newspaper in, or of general circulation in, the Municipality one (1) time
not less than seven (7), nor more than fourteen (14), days before the time of
the hearing. Such notice shall include, but not be limited to, a statement that
all persons desiring to give evidence before the local Governing Body in
support of or in protest against the issuance of such license may do so at the
time of the hearing.
   (3) The Governing Body shall, after the hearing provided in subsection (1),
approve or deny the application within forty-five (45) days of receipt of such
application from the Commission, and shall cause to be spread at large in the
minute record of its proceedings a resolution approving or denying such
application. The Municipal Clerk shall thereupon mail or deliver to the
Commission a copy of the resolution within ten (10) days of the decision to
approve or deny the application.
   (4) Any resolution denying an application rendered by the Governing Body
shall be in writing or stated in the record and shall be accompanied by
findings. The findings shall consist of concise statements of the conclusions
upon each contested issue. The appli cant shall be notified of the decision in
person or by mail. (Ref. 53-131, 53-132, 53-134 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 374, 9/21/
83) (Amended by Ord. Nos. 393, 9/19/84; 438, 11/15/89; 500, 7/5/95)
§ 10-309    ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; LIQUOR LICENSE RENEWAL.
Retail or bottle club licenses issued by the Commission and outstanding may be
automatically renewed in the absence of a request by the Governing Body to
require the said licensee to issue an application for renewal. Any licensed
retail or bottle club establishment located in an area which is annexed to the
Municipality shall file a formal application for a license, and while such
application is pending, the licensee shall be authorized to continue all
license privileges pursuant to this Article until the original license expires,
is canceled, or revoked. If such license expires within sixty (60) days
following the annexation date of such area, the license may be renewed by order
of the Commission for not more than one (1) year. The Municipal Clerk, upon
notice from the Commission, between January tenth (10th) and January thirtieth
(30th) of each year, shall cause to be published in a legal newspaper in, or of
general circulation in the Municipality, one (1) time, a notice in the form
prescribed by law of the right of automatic renewal of each retail liquor and
beer license within the Municipality; provided, Class C license renewal notices
shall be published between the dates of July tenth (10th) and July thirtieth
(30th) of each year. The Municipal Clerk shall then file with the Commission
proof of publication of said notice on or before February tenth (10th) of each
year or August tenth (10th) of each year for Class C licenses. Upon the
conclusion of any hearing required by this Section, the Governing Body may
request a licensee to submit an application. (Ref. 53-135, 53-135.01 RS Neb.)
(Ord. No. 374, 9/21/83)
§ 10-310    ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; MUNICIPAL POWERS AND DUTIES.
The Governing Body is authorized to regulate by ordinance not inconsistent with
the provisions of the Nebraska Liquor Control Act, the business of all retail
and bottle club licensees carried on within the corporate limits. The Governing
Body shall further have the power and duties in respect to licensed retailers
of alcoholic beverages to cancel or revoke for cause retail or bottle club
licenses to sell or dispense alcoholic liquors issued to persons for premises
within its jurisdiction subject to the right of appeal to the Commission; to
enter or to authorize any law enforcement officer to enter at any time upon any
premise licensed by the State of Nebraska to determine whether any of the
provisions of the Municipal laws, or the laws of the State of Nebraska, are
being violated; to receive signed complaints from any citizens within its
jurisdiction that any of the Municipal laws, or laws of the State of Nebraska,
are being violated, and to act upon such complaints in the manner herein
provided; to cancel or revoke on its own motion any license if, upon the same
notice and hearing as provided in Section 10-308, it determines that the
licensee has violated any of the provisions of the Nebraska Liquor Control Act
or any valid and subsisting ordinance or regulation duly enacted relating to
alcoholic liquors; and to collect for the benefit of the State of Nebraska and
the Municipality all license fees and occupation taxes as prescribed by law.
(Ref. 53-134 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 374, 9/21/83)
§ 10-311   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; CATERING LICENSE.
(1) The holder of a Class C, Class D, or Class I license issued under
subdivision (5) of section 53-124 RS Neb., or a brewpub license, may obtain an
annual catering license as prescribed in this section. Any such licensee
desiring to obtain a catering license shall file an application with the Liquor
Control Commission.
   (2) Upon receipt from the Commission of the notice and copy of the
application as provided in section 53-124.12 RS Neb., the Govern ing Body shall
fix a time and place at which a hearing will be held and at which time the
Governing Body shall receive evidence, under oath, either orally, or in
writing, from the applicant and any other person concerning the propriety of
the issuance of such license. Such hearing shall be held not more than forty-
five (45) days after the receipt of the notice from the Commission. The
Governing Body may examine, or cause to be examined, under oath, any applicant;
examine, or cause to be examined, the books and records of any such applicant,
to hear testimony, and to take proof for its information in the performance of
its duties. For purposes of obtaining any of the information desired, the
Governing Body may authorize its agent, the Municipal Clerk or the Municipal
Attorney, to act on its behalf.
   (3) Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in a
legal newspaper in, or of general circulation in, the Municipality one (1) time
not less than seven (7), nor more than fourteen (14), days before the time of
the hearing. Such notice shall include, but not be limited to, a statement that
all persons desiring to give evidence before the Governing Body in support of
or in protest against the issuance of such license may do so at the time of the
hearing.
   (4) The Governing Body shall, after the hearing provided in subsection (2),
approve or deny the application within forty-five (45) days of receipt of such
application from the Commission, and shall cause to be spread at large in the
minute record of its proceedings a resolution approving or denying such
application. The Municipal Clerk shall thereupon mail or deliver to the
Commission a copy of the decision to approve or deny the application.
   (5) Any resolution denying an application rendered by the Governing Body
shall be in writing or state in the record and shall be accompanied by
findings. The findings shall consist of concise statements of the conclusions
upon each contested issue. The appli cant shall be notified of the decision in
person or by mail.
   (6) The Governing Body with respect to catering licensees within its
corporate limits may cancel a catering license for cause for the remainder of
the period for which such license is issued. Any person whose catering license
is canceled may appeal to the District Court. (Ref. 53-124.12 RS Neb.)  (Ord.
No. 426, 11/16/88) (Amended by Ord. No. 497, 6/21/95)
§ 10-312   LIQUOR APPLICATIONS; RETAIL LICENSING STANDARDS; BINDING
RECOMMENDATIONS.
Local governing bodies shall only have authority to approve applications and
deny licenses pursuant to the Nebraska Liquor Control Act. The Governing Body
shall only consider the following licensing standards and criteria at the
hearing and an evaluation of any applicant for a retail alcoholic liquor
license, for the upgrading of a license to sell alcoholic liquor, or for the
expansion or change in location of the premises, and for the purpose of
formulating a recommendation from the Governing Body to the Nebraska Liquor
Control Commission in accordance with the Nebraska Liquor Control Act:
a.    The adequacy of existing law enforcement resources and services in the
area;
b.    The recommendation of the Police Department or any other law enforcement
agency;
c.    Existing motor vehicle and pedestrian traffic flow in the vicinity of the
proposed licensed premises, potential traffic and parking problems, and the
proximity and availability of on-street and off-street parking;
d.    Zoning restrictions and the local governing body's zoning and land-use
policies;
e.    Sanitation or sanitary conditions on or about the proposed licensed
premises;
f.   The existence of a citizen's protest and similar evidence in support of or
in opposition to the application;
g.    The existing population and projected growth within the jurisdiction of
the local governing body and within the area to be served;
h.   The existing liquor licenses, the class of each such license, and the
distance and times of travel between establishments that issued such licenses;
i.   Whether the proposed license would be compatible with the neighborhood or
community where the proposed premises are located;
j.   Whether the type of business or activity proposed to be operated or
presently operated in conjunction with the proposed license is and will be
consistent with the public interest as declared in section 53-101.01;
k.   Whether the applicant can ensure that all alcoholic beverages, including
beer and wine, will be handled by persons in accordance with section 53-102;
l.   Whether the applicant has taken every precaution to protect against the
possibility of shoplifting of alcoholic liquor, which alcoholic liquor shall be
displayed and kept in and sold from an area which is reasonably secured;
m.   Whether the applicant is fit, willing, and able to properly provide the
service proposed in conformance with all provisions and requirements of and
rules and regulations adopted and promulgated pursuant to the act;
n.   Whether the applicant has demonstrated that the type of management and
control exercised over the licensed premises will be sufficient to ensure that
the licensee can conform to all the provisions and requirements of and rules
and regulations adopted and promulgated pursuant to the act;
o.   The background information of the applicant established by information
contained in the public records of the Commission and investigations conducted
by law enforcement agencies;
p.   Past evidence of discrimination involving the applicant as evidenced by
findings of fact before any administrative board or agency of the local
governing body, any other governmental board or agency of the local governing
body, any other governmental unit, or any court of law;
q.   Whether the applicant or the applicant's representatives suppressed any
fact or provided any inaccurate information to the commission or local
governing body or the employees of the commission in regard to the license
application or liquor investigations. The applicant shall be required to
cooperate in providing a full disclosure to the investigating agents of the
local governing body;
r.   Proximity of and impact on schools, hospitals, libraries, parks, and
public institutions;
s.   Whether activities proposed to be conducted on the licensed premises or in
adjacent related outdoor areas will create unreasonable noise or disturbance;
and
t.   Compliance with state laws, liquor rules and regulations, and municipal
ordinances and regulations and whether or not the applicant has ever forfeited
bond to appear in court to answer charges of having committed a felony or
charges of having violated any law or ordinance enacted in the interest of good
morals and decency or has been convicted of violating or has forfeited bond to
appear in court and answer charges for violating any law or ordinance relating
to alcoholic liquor.
It shall be the applicant's duty to produce evidence pertaining to the
designated criteria prescribed in this subsection. The burden of proof and
persuasion shall be on the party filing the application. When applicable for
purposes of this section, "applicant" shall be synonymous with "license." (Ref.
53-134 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 407, 6/4/86) (Amended by Ord. No. 441, 11/15/89)
§ 10-313   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; LIQUOR APPLI CATION; NOTICE; PROCEDURE.
A.    Notice. Notice of a hearing held pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. Section 53-
134 shall be given to the applicant by the Municipal Clerk and shall contain
the date, time, and location of the hearing. Two (2) or more proceedings which
are legally or factually related may be heard and considered together unless
any party thereto makes a showing sufficient to satisfy the Governing Body that
prejudice would result there from.
B.    Procedure. Hearings will be informal and conducted by the Municipal
Attorney. The intent is an inquiry into the facts, not an adversarial action.
Each witness may present their testimony in narrative fashion or by question
and answer.
   The Governing Body or the applicant may order the hearing to be recorded by
the Clerk, at the expense of the applicant(s).
      The Governing Body may admit and give probative effect to evidence which
possesses probative value commonly accepted by reasonably prudent individuals.
The Municipal Attorney may limit testimony where it appears incompetent,
irrelevant, or unduly repetitious. If there is opposition to any application
and such opposition desires the opportunity to present arguments and to cross-
examine the applicant and any witnesses in favor of such application, they
shall choose a spokesperson to perform such function who shall notify the
Municipal Attorney of his/her representation prior to the start of the hearing.
      The order of the proceeding is as follows:
1.    Exhibits will be marked in advance by the Clerk and presented to the
Municipal Attorney during the presentation;
2.    Presentation of evidence, witnesses, and arguments by applicant;
3.    Testimony of any other citizens in favor of such proposed license;
4.    Examination of applicant, witnesses or citizens by Municipal Attorney,
Governing Body, or duly appointed agent;
5.    Cross-examination of applicant, witnesses or citizens by spokesperson for
opposition, if any;
6.   Presentation of evidence and witnesses by opposition;
7.   Testimony of any other citizens in opposition to such proposed license.
8.   Presentation of evidence by Municipality and law enforcement personnel;
9.    Cross-examination by applicant;
10.   Rebuttal evidence by both parties, and by Municipality administration and
agent;
11.   Summation by applicant and opposition spokesperson, if any.
   In all cases, the burden of proof and persuasion shall be on the party
filing the application.
   Any member of the Governing Body and the Municipal Attorney may question any
witness, call witnesses, or request information.
   All witnesses shall be sworn.
   The Governing Body may make further inquiry and investigation following the
hearing.
   The Governing Body or the applicant may order the hearing to be recorded by
the Clerk, at the expense of the applicant(s).
(Ref. 53-134 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 439, 11/15/89)
Article 4. Business Enterprises
§ 10-401 PLUMBERS; LICENSE REGISTRATION; REQUIRED.
   (1) Except as otherwise provided in sections 10-401 through 10-403.02, no
person shall engage in the business of plumbing within the corporate limits of
the Municipality or install any piping, fixtures or other apparatus for
supplying water nor to install any plumbing fixtures, drainage, vents and water
distribution systems unless he or she has registered his or her license with
the Municipal Clerk.
   (2) It shall be unlawful for any person to perform any plumbing work not
authorized by the license issued to him or her within the corporate limits of
the Municipality; provided, however, that the requirements of this section
shall not apply to employees of the Public Works Department acting within the
scope of their employment.
   (3) For the purposes of sections 10-401 through 10-403.02, “license” shall
mean a master plumber's license, a journeyman plumber's license, an apprentice
plumber's license, a master drainlayer's license, a journeyman drainlayer's
license, an apprentice drainlayer's license, a water conditioning contractor's
license, or a water conditioning installer's license. (Ref. 17-505 RS Neb.)
(Amended by Ord. No. 535, 5/5/99)
§ 10-402   PLUMBERS; LICENSE REGISTRATION; APPLICATION.
   Application for registration of a license shall be made in writing to the
Municipal Clerk upon forms provided by the Municipality. Such form shall show
the name and address of the applicant, the type of license issued to the
applicant, the license expiration date, the licensing entity, the business
location of the applicant, and such other information as may be required by the
Municipality. A photocopy of the license sought to be registered shall be
attached to each license registration application. (Ref. 17-505 RS Neb.)
(Amended by Ord. No. 535, 5/5/99)
§ 10-403   PLUMBERS; LICENSE REGISTRATION; EXCEPTIONS.
   (1) Nothing contained in sections 10-401 through 10-403.02 shall be
construed as requiring the owner of real estate to register a license when
personally installing plumbing in a single-family dwelling or a unit in a
multiple-family dwelling owned and occupied by him or her.
   (2) Nothing contained in section 10-401 through 10-403.02 shall be construed
as requiring an employee working for a single employer as part of such
employer's staff and not holding himself or herself out to the public for hire
to register a license while acting within the scope of his or her employment.
(Ref. 17-505 RS Neb.) (Amended by Ord. No. 535, 5/5/99)
§ 10-403.01   PLUMBERS; LICENSE REGISTRATION; FEE.
   Each applicant desiring to register a license pursuant to sections 10-401
through 10-403.02 shall pay to the Municipal Clerk at the time of making his or
her application a fee in the amount of ten dollars ($10.00) to cover the costs
of processing the application. (Ref. 17-505 RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 535, 5/5/99)
§ 10-403.02   PLUMBERS; LICENSE REGISTRATION; TERM; RENEWAL.
   (1) All registrations approved pursuant to sections 10-401 through 10-403.02
shall expire on December 31st of the year of registration.
   (2) Registrations may be renewed by the same process as provided in section
10-402 and upon payment of a renewal fee of ten dollars ($10.00). (Ref. 17-505
RS Neb.) (Ord. No. 535, 5/5/99)
§ 10-404   ELECTRICIANS; REGULATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of installing
electric wiring or apparatus within any building in the Municipality without
first obtaining from the Municipal Clerk a master electricians license or job
permit if the applicant holds a State license. Application for a master
electrician's license or job permit shall be an writing upon forms furnished by
the Municipal Clerk and shall require such information and documents, or copies
thereof, as the Governing Body deems necessary to ascertain the propriety of
granting the said license. Upon the satisfaction of the Municipal Clerk and the
Governing Body of the applicant's competence, the Governing Body shall direct
the Municipal Clerk to grant the license or permit after the payment of a fee
set by resolution of the Governing Body. All licensees whether licensed by the
State or Municipality shall be subject to any occupation taxes, bond
requirements, and other rules and regulations which the Governing Body may
determine to be beneficial to the Municipality; Provided, State licenses shall
not be subject to any Municipal regulations pertaining to workman
qualifications. Any license issued by the Municipality may be revoked at any
time by the Governing Body.
§ 10-405   ELECTRICIANS; APPLICATION AND RENEWAL.
   Application for a license shall be made to the Municipal Clerk on forms
furnished by him. Before any initial license is issued by the Municipal Clerk,
the applicant shall pay a license fee set by resolution of the Governing Body
which shall continue it in force to January first (1st) after the date on which
it is granted, unless sooner revoked. The Clerk shall forthwith issue and
deliver to said applicant an electrician's license after he is satisfied that
all requirements as prescribed by the Governing Body have been fulfilled.
Licenses at the time of their expiration, may be renewed by the Clerk, upon
payment of a renewal license fee set by resolution of the Governing Body;
Provided, that the same is paid on or before April first (1st). Otherwise, a
new license must be obtained, and the fee for new licenses paid. No license
issued hereunder shall be transferable. The Clerk shall make and keep a record
of all licenses issued, lapsed, or revoked.
§ 10-406   ELECTRICIANS; EMPLOYEES.
   Where the applicant for an electrician's license is an electrical
contractor, the applicant shall specify the names of all individuals qualified
as electricians, who, as employees of such applicant, will install electric
apparatus for the applicant under the authority of such license. The names of
said electricians shall be shown on said license; Provided, the inclusion of
the name of any individual on the license shall not be construed as authority
for such individual to install or to supervise the installation of any electric
apparatus otherwise than as an employee of said licensee. If the applicant
shall employ other or additional electricians he shall notify the Clerk who
shall insert the names of said employees on the license of the applicant.
§ 10-407   ELECTRICIANS; FEES.
   All fees collected shall be credited to the General Fund.
§ 10-408   ELECTRICIANS; LICENSE REVOCATION.
   Every electrician's license may be revoked after the reasonable notice and
hearing by the Governing Body whenever any licensee or holder of any permit
fails, neglects, or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this Code.
This penalty shall be cumulative and in addition to the penalties prescribed
for the violation of the provisions of this Code. When the license of any
electrician shall have been revoked by the Governing Body, notice in writing of
said revocation shall forthwith be furnished by the Clerk to the Electrical
Inspector and a copy thereof shall be filed among the records of the Electrical
Inspector and also in the office of said Clerk. After an electrician's license
has been revoked, no new license shall be issued to the person, firm, or
corporation whose license has been so revoked, except by order of the Governing
Body upon recommendation of the Electrical Inspector.
§ 10-409   BUILDING MOVING; REGULATION.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to move or dismantle
any building or structure within the Municipality without a written permit to
do so. Application may be made to the Mayor, and shall include the location of
the building to be moved, the proposed route, the proposed time, the equipment
to be used, and such other information as the Governing Body may require. The
application shall be accompanied by a certificate issued by the County
Treasurer to the effect that all the provisions regulating the moving of
buildings have been complied with on the part of the owner of the real estate
upon which the said building is presently located. The Mayor, with the advice
and consent of the Council may then issue the permit with his signature and the
signature of the Municipal Clerk thereon. A good and sufficient surety bond in
a sum set by resolution of the Governing Body and by some responsible surety
company or two (2) sureties who are resident freeholders shall be required
before any permit shall be issued. The permit shall prescribe the time of
removal and the route to be followed. It shall be unlawful for the licensee to
digress from such specifications without the written consent of the Mayor. The
Mayor shall refer the said permit to the Superintendent of Light and Water, who
shall arrange the relocation or removal or related work of wires and pipe as to
permit the passage of any buildings being lawfully moved and shall replace,
repair and restore or arrange to be restored, any which may have been removed
or damaged. The Superintendent shall, at the time when such work is completed,
make out a statement of account in duplicate against the licensee in the amount
of the actual cost and expense suffered by the Municipality or any other person
by reason of the removal. One (I) copy of said statement of account shall be
given to the licensee and one (1) copy shall be retained by the Superintendent.
In the event it will be necessary for any licensed building mover to interfere
with the telephone or telegraph poles and wires, or a gas line, the company or
companies owning, using, or operating the said poles, wires or line shall upon
proper notice by the licensee of at least fifteen (15) hours, be present and
assist by disconnecting the said poles, wires, or line relative to the building
moving operation. All expense of the said disconnection, removal, or related
work shall be paid within five (5) days by the licensee unless such
disconnection or work is furnished on different terms as provided in the said
company's franchise.
§ 10-410   BUILDING MOVING; DAMAGE.
It shall be unlawful for any licensee to make any openings or excavations in
any street pavement, or to set any stakes therein, and it is hereby made the
duty of every such licensee to move said building in a careful and safe manner,
and according to instructions from the Superintendent of Streets, and with the
least possible injury to public or private property. For every such injnry or
damage, he shall be liable on his bond. The Superintendent of the Water and
Light Department's estimate of any damage done to Municipal property, except to
utility wire and pipe, by any licensee, shall be final and conclusive upon such
licensee unless appeal is taken to the Governing Body within ten (10) days.
§ 10-411   RAILROAD COMPANIES; SAFE CROSSINGS.
It shall be the duty of every railroad company doing business in, or traveling
through, the Municipality to keep in a suitable, and safe condition the
crossings and right-of-way in the Municipality. If any such crossing shall at
any time fall into disrepair and become unsafe, or inconvenient for public
travel, the Governing Body may, by resolution, call upon the said company to
make whatever repairs that they may deem necessary to correct the dangerous
condition. Notice of the said resolution shall be served upon the local agent
of the said company by the Superintendent of Streets. In the event that the
railroad shall fail, or neglect to repair, and correct the said condition as
aforesaid within fifteen (15) days, neglect for each twenty-four (24) hours
thereafter shall be deemed, and is hereby made a separate, and distinct offense
against the provisions herein. (Ref 17-143,17-144 RS Neb.)
§ 10-412   RAILROAD COMPANIES; OBSTRUCTING TRAFFIC.
It shall be unlawful for any railroad company, its employees, agents, or
servants operating a railroad through the Municipality to obstruct traffic on
any public street, except in the event of an emergency, for a longer period at
one time than five (5) minutes. (Ref. 17-552 RS Neb.)
§ 10-413   TRAILER PARK; DEFINITIONS.
The term "Trailer Park", within the meaning of this Article, shall be and apply
to any plot of land, with or without buildings, privately or municipally owned,
which is used for camping or lodging purposes, whether free of charge or by
payment of a fee, and shall specifically include any plot of ground where house
trailers or like vehicles are parked for a period of time exceeding twenty-four
(24) hours.
   The term "House Trailer" shall be defined to be any vehicle used as sleeping
or living quarters mounted on wheels and propelled either by its own power or
by other means, or which is so designed that it can readily be mounted on such
wheels.
§ 10-414   TRAILER PARK; LICENSE.
It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, operate, or maintain a
Trailer Park within the corporate limits unless such person shall first procure
and keep in full force a license therefor as herein provided. Application for
such license shall be made in writing to the Board of Health, and filed with
the Municipal Clerk, and must include a complete copy of the plan of the
proposed Park showing:
1.   Extent and area to be used for camp purposes.
2.   Proposed roads and driveways.
3.   Proposed location or site for trailers.
4.   Maximum number of trailers which the Park will accommodate.
5.   Dimensions and number of units.
6.   Location of all proposed sanitary conveniences, laundry buildings, and
slop sinks.
7.   Proposed method of sewage disposal, or removal.
8.   Plan for water supply.
9.   Plan for electric lighting.
10.   Typical plan for proposed toilet, washrooms, and laundry, together with a
fee set by resolution of the Governing Body to cover the cost of inspection and
the issuing of said license.
Each licensed Trailer Park shall pay thereafter a fee set by resolution of the
Governing Body each year to cover the cost of inspection which shall be made by
the Board of Health. It shall be the duty of the Board of Health to determine
whether said proposed Park will meet the requirements of this Code and to
approve of such application or reject the same. If they approve, the license
shall thereupon be issued by the Clerk. Such license may be revoked at any time
by the Governing Body if they find that the Trailer Park does not comply with
the provisions of this Code, by setting a time and place for hearing on said
matter and notifying the owner thereof, by registered mail, at least five (5)
days in advance of said hearing, at which hearing the permit holder shall have
the right to appear in person or by counsel, and to introduce such evidence as
he may desire, provided, proprietors of already existing Parks need not furnish
said plat, but shall comply with all other requirements of this Section.
§ 10-415   TRAILER PARK; REGULATIONS.
Each Trailer Park shall comply with each of the following requirements:
1.   It shall provide a space of not less than eight hundred, seventy-five
(875) square feet for each house trailer, each corner of said space to be
clearly defined by markers.
2.   No trailer house shall be located within five (5) feet from an adjacent
property line, nor within twenty (20) feet from any Municipal street, nor
within ten (10) feet from any other structure, nor within five (5) feet of any
Park driveway.
3.   All trailers shall be arranged in rows abutting or facing the Park
driveway.
4.   If such Trailer Parks are equipped with tourist cabins, the construction
of said tourist cabins shall comply in all respects with the Municipal building
regulations.
5.   No tourist cabin shall be constructed unless of sufficient size that the
sleeping room therein shall provide not less than five hundred (500) cubic feet
of air space to each person accommodated thereby.
6.   All Trailer Parks shall be provided with an adequate supply of pure
drinking water. The use of dipping vessel or common drinking cup is prohibited,
and wherever possible, sanitary drinking fountains shall be installed.
7.   All tourist cabins hereafter constructed shall be equipped with suitable
toilet facilities and bathing accommodations.
8.   Any trailer park where each cabin is not equipped with toilet and bathing
facilities, or which is used for parking house trailers or for camping purposes
shall provide separate service buildings for each sex, located not less than
ten (10) feet apart, in which shall be installed water closets, each separated
from any other water closet by suitable partitions, in the ratio of one (1)
water closet for every ten (10) females or less, and one (1) water closet for
every fifteen (15) males or less in addition to one (1) urinal for every
fifteen (15) males or less; a shower bath or tub for each ten (10) persons or
each sex, enclosed in suitable structures to insure privacy; one (1) lavatory
or wash basin for each ten (10) persons of each sex; adequate and sanitary
facilities for washing clothing shall be provided and such lavatory, bathing
and laundering facilities shall be connected to an abundant supply of hot water
at all times, such accommodations to be based on the total camp capacity
according to the accepted plans, and shall be computed on the basis of a
minimum of three (3) persons to each trailer, with the sexes being considered
equal in number.
9.   Such service buildings shall be kept properly screened and ventilated,
free from obscene writing and marking, and the floors therein shall be of
cement, tile, or similar material, properly drained, and shall be washed and
scoured daily, and the walls and partitions, therein shall be impervious to
moisture.
10.   All facilities of such service buildings and all other toilet and bathing
facilities shall be connected with the Municipal Sewerage System.
11.   A garbage can of an approved type shall be furnished with each trailer
parking space or cabin, and the camp shall provide a sufficient number of
incinerators for burning of all combustible rubbish and for the collection and
disposal of all waste and garbage.
12.   All showers, sinks, or toilets in trailers, when in use, must be
connected to the Municipal Sewerage System through approved sewer connections.
13.   Each Trailer Park shall be equipped with not less than one (1) fire
extinguisher for each five (5) cabins or trailer houses or camping sites.
14.   All Trailer Parks shall be located upon well drained ground, and the
permise of each establishment shall, at all times, be kept in a clean and safe
condition.
15.   Suitable driveways of either hard surface or gravel construction, not
less than twenty (20) feet in width, shall be so maintained as to be easily
accessible to all units.
16.   The Park shall be properly and adequately lighted at all times, so that
the yard thereof will be safe for the occupants and visitors.
17.   Tents of any nature, kind or description shall in no case be rented or
leased by the owner, agent, or lessee of any Park to the general public for
over-night accommodation, and the occupants of any tent privately owned shall
be limited to an overnight stay of twenty-four (24) hours in any such tent
encamped in the Municipality.
18.   No stable or other shelter for animals shall be maintained within one
hundred (100) feet of any living quarters, nor within one hundred (100) feet of
any kitchen or mess room therein. No drainage from any stable or such shelter
shall be permitted to empty directly into any spring, lake, reservoir, stream,
or other water course forming a part of a public or private water supply.
§ 10-416   TRAILER PARK; GUEST REGISTER REQUIRED.
It shall be the duty of the manager of a Trailer Park to keep a record of all
guests, noting their name and address, date of arrival, number, and description
of automobile or other vehicle, and date of departure. Such record shall be
available for inspection by tlie Police Department at any time, and shall not
be destroyed within twelve (12) months of the date of registration.
§ 10-417   TRAILER PARK; BUSINESS PROHIBITED.
No occupant except the proprietor of a Trailer Park shall use the space
allocated to him or her for commercial purpose of any nature, kind, or
description whatsoever.
Article 5. Franchises
§ 10-501   FRANCHISE; NATURAL GAS.
The Governing Body has granted to the Black Hills/Nebraska Gas Utility Company,
LLC d/b/a Black Hills Energy, a natural gas franchise and the authority to
construct, maintain, operate and extend a natural gas distribution plant and
system within the Municipality. Actual details of the agreement, and the
present gas rates, charges, and fees as well as the franchise fees are
available at the Municipal Clerk's office. (Ref. 17-528.02 RS Neb.) (Amended by
Ord. Nos. 631, 1/15/14; 632, 1/15/14)
§ 10-502   FRANCHISE; TELEPHONE.
The Governing Body has granted to the Lincoln Telephone and Telegraph Company,
Inc. the authority to maintain, and operate a telephone system within the
Municipality. Actual details of the agreement, and the present telephone rates,
charges, and fees are available at the Municipal Clerk's office.
§ 10-503   FRANCHISE; CABLE TELEVISION.
    (1) The Governing Body has granted to Galaxy Telecom, L.P. the authority to
construct, operate, and maintain a community antenna television system in the
Municipality. Actual details of the agreement and the charges, rates, and fees
are available at the Municipal Clerk's office.
   (2)   The request of Galaxy Cable, Inc. d/b/a Galaxy Cablevision to renew
the cable television franchise dated December 21, 1981 and amended by Transfer
Ordinance No. 502 dated December 1, 1995 and to change the expiration date
thereof to December 1, 2015 is hereby granted. (Ord. No. 345, 12/21/81)
(Amended by Ord. Nos. 502, 12/1/95; 566, 7/7/04)
Article 6. Occupation Taxes
§ 10-601   OCCUPATION TAX; AMOUNTS.
   (1) For the purpose of raising revenue, an occupational tax is hereby levied
on the following businesses:
Telephone companies, per year   $100.00
Tobacco retailers, per year   $5.00
Fire Insurance companies, per year   $5.00
   (2) The five dollar ($5.00) occupation tax levied on tobacco retailers shall
be in addition to the ten dollar ($10.00) license fee required by section 28-
1423 RS Neb. (Ref. 17-525, 35-106 RS Neb.) (Amended by Ord. Nos. 451, 1/2/91;
534, 4/21/99)
§ 10-602   OCCUPATION TAX; FIRE INSURANCE COMPANIES.
For the use, support, and maintenance of the Municipal Fire Department all
revenue realized from the occupation tax on Fire Insurance Companies shall be
appropriated to the Special Occupation Tax Fund for the Benefit of the
Volunteer Fire Department of the City of Wymore, Nebraska. The Municipal
Treasurer shall pay over the proceeds of said tax from time to time to the
Volunteer Fire Department upon proper claim duly filed by the Chief of the Fire
Department and allowed by the Governing Body. (Ref. 35-106 RS Neb.)
§ 10-603   OCCUPATION TAX; COLLECTION DATE.
   All occupation taxes shall be due, and payable on the first (1st) day of May
of each year, except in the event that the tax is levied daily, and upon the
payment thereof by any person or persons to the Municipal Clerk, the Municipal
Clerk shall give a receipt, properly dated, and specifying the person paying
the tax, and the amount paid. The revenue collected shall then be immediately
deposited into the General Fund by the Municipal Treasurer. The Municipal
Treasurer shall keep an accurate account of all revenue turned over to him or
her. All forms and receipts herein mentioned shall be issued in duplicate. One
copy shall then be kept by each party in the transaction. (Amended by Ord. Nos.
286, 4/24/77; 534, 4/21/99)
§ 10-604   OCCUPATION TAX; CERTIFICATES.
(Repealed by Ord. No. 534, 4/21/99)
§ 10-605   OCCUPATION TAX; FAILURE TO PAY.
    Upon the failure of any person to pay any tax levied when the demand is
made by the Municipal Treasurer, the Treasurer is required immediately to
collect the same by distress or sale of the personal property of any such
person in the manner provided for levy and sale on execution issued by the
Police Magistrate. This section shall be sufficient authority to the Treasurer
for making the distress and sale and the Treasurer shall be entitled to such
fees out of the property distrained and sold, for making the distress and sale,
as constables receive for making levy and sale under execution. The costs
created by reason of the distress and sale shall be paid out of the property
levied upon in addition to the amount due on the occupation.
   Whenever the Treasurer shall deem himself unable to collect any tax levied,
if the same is due and payable, he shall so report the same to the Municipal
Attorney with authority and instruction to proceed to suit in the name of the
Municipality to collect the amount due. The remedies hereby prescribed are not
to be exclusive of any other right of action, but merely cumulative.
Article 7. Fair Housing
[Editor's Note: This Article was originally adopted by Ordinance No. 329, 11/5/
80; Amended in its entirety by Ordinance No. 468, 11/18/92]
§ 10-701   FAIR HOUSING; PURPOSE.
The purpose of this Article is to promote the general welfare of the residents
of Wymore, Nebraska, by endorsing the provisions of the Nebraska Fair Housing
Act, sections 20-301 through 20-344, RS Neb., to the effect that there shall be
no discrimination in the City of Wymore, Nebraska, in the acquisition,
ownership, possession or enjoyment of housing in accordance with Article I,
section 25, of the Constitution of the State of Nebraska.
§ 10-702   FAIR HOUSING; DEFINITIONS.
As used in this Article unless the context otherwise requires:
1.   Aggrieved person shall include any person who: (a) claims to have been
injured by a discriminatory housing practice, or (b) believes that he or she
will be injured by a discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur;
2.   Commission shall mean the Nebraska Equal Opportunity Commission;
3.   DWELLING shall mean any building, structure, or portion thereof which is
occupied as or designed or intended for occupancy as a residence for one or
more families and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the
construction or location thereon of any such building, structure, or portion
thereof;
4.   familial status shall mean one or more minors being domiciled with: (a) a
parent or another person having legal custody of such individual; or (b) the
designee of a parent or other person having legal custody, with written
permission of the parent or other person;
5.   handicap shall mean, with respect to a person: (a) a physical or mental
impairment, excluding the current illegal use of or addiction to a controlled
substance as defined in section 28-401 RS Neb., which substantially limits one
or more of such person's major life activities, (b) a record of having such an
impairment, or (c) being regarded as having such an impairment;
6.   person shall include one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships,
associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies,
joint-stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees
in bankruptcy, receivers, and fiduciaries;
7.   rent shall include lease, sublease, let, and otherwise grant for
consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant; and
8.   restrictive covenant shall mean any specification limiting the transfer,
rental, or lease of any housing because of race, creed, religion, color,
national origin, sex, handicap, familial status, or ancestry.
§ 10-703   FAIR HOUSING; UNLAWFUL ACTS.
Except as exempted by section 10-707, it shall be unlawful to:
(1)   Refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, refuse to
negotiate for the sale or rental of or otherwise make unavailable or deny,
refuse to show, or refuse to receive and transmit an offer for a dwelling to
any person because of race, color, religion, national origin, familial status,
or sex;
(2)   Discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges
of sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision of services or facilities
in connection therewith because of race, color, religion, national origin,
familial status, or sex;
(3)   Make, print, publish, or cause to be made, printed, or published any
notice, statement, or advertisement with respect to the sale or rental of a
dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation, or discrimination based on
race, color, religion, national origin, handicap, familial status, or sex or an
intention to make any such preference, limitation, or discrimination;
(4)   Represent to any person because of race, color, religion, national
origin, handicap, familial status, or sex that any dwelling is not available
for inspection, sale, or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available;
(5)   Cause to be made any written or oral inquiry or record concerning the
race, color, religion, national origin, handicap, familial status, or sex of a
person seeking to purchase, rent, or lease any housing;
(6)   Include in any transfer, sale, rental, or lease of housing any
restrictive covenants or honor or exercise or attempt to honor or exercise any
restrictive covenant pertaining to housing;
(7)   Discharge or demote an employee or agent or discriminate in the
compensation of such employee or agent because of such employee's compliance
with this Article or the Nebraska Fair Housing Act; and
(8)   Induce or attempt to induce, for profit, any person to sell or rent any
dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the
neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color, religion,
national origin, handicap, familial status, or sex.
   The protections afforded against discrimination on the basis of familial
status shall apply to any person who is pregnant or is in the process of
securing legal custody of any minor.
§ 10-704   FAIR HOUSING; HANDICAPPED PERSON; DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES
PROHIBITED; DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
(1)   Except as exempted by section 10-707, it shall be unlawful to:
(a)   Discriminate in the sale or rental of or otherwise make unavailable or
deny a dwelling to any buyer or renter because of a handicap of:
(i)   The buyer or renter;
(ii)   Any person associated with the buyer or renter; or
(iii)   A person residing in or intending to reside in the dwelling after it is
so sold, rented, or made available; or
(b)   Discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges
of sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision of services or facilities
in connection with a dwelling because of a handicap of:
(i)   Such person;
(ii)   Any person associated with such person; or
(iii)   A person residing in or intending to reside in the dwelling after it is
so sold, rented, or made available.
(2)   For purposes of this section, discrimination shall include:
(a)   A refusal to permit, at the expense of the handicapped person reasonable
modifications of existing premises occupied or to be occupied by the person if
the modifications may be necessary to afford the person full enjoyment of the
premises, except that in the case of rental, the landlord may, when it is
reasonable to do so, condition permission for a modification on the renter
agreeing to restore the interior of the premises to the condition that existed
before the modification, reasonable wear and tear excepted;
(b)   A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies,
practices, or services when such accommodations may be necessary to afford the
handicapped person equal opportunity to use or enjoy a dwelling; and
(c)   In connection with the design and construction of covered multifamily
dwellings for first occupancy after September 1, 1991, a failure to design and
construct the dwellings in such a manner that:
(i)   The public use and common use portions of the dwelling are readily
accessible to and usable by handicapped persons;
(ii)   All the doors designed to allow passage into and within all premises
within the dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow passage by handicapped
persons in wheelchairs; and
(iii)   All premises within the dwellings contain the following features of
adaptive design:
(A)   An accessible route into and through the dwelling;
(B)   Light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats, and other environmental
controls in accessible locations;
(C)   Reinforcements in bathroom walls to allow later installation of grab
bars; and
(D)   Kitchens and bathrooms such that a handicapped person in a wheelchair can
maneuver about the space.
(3)   Compliance with the appropriate requirements of the American National
Standards Institute standard for buildings and facilities providing
accessibility and usability for physically handicapped people, ANSI A117.1,
shall satisfy the requirements of subdivision (2)(c)(iii) of this section.
(4)   For purposes of this section, covered multifamily dwellings shall mean:
(a)   Buildings consisting of four or more units if such buildings have one or
more elevators; and
(b)   Ground floor units in other buildings consisting of four or more units.
(5)   Nothing in this section shall require that a dwelling be made available
to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the health
or safety of other individuals or whose tenancy would result in substantial
physical damage to the property of others.
§ 10-705   FAIR HOUSING; TRANSACTION RELATED TO RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE;
DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES PROHIBITED.
(1)   It shall be unlawful for any person or other entity whose business
includes engaging in transactions related to residential real estate to
discriminate against any person in making available such a transaction because
of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
(2)   For purposes of this section, transaction related to residential real
estate shall mean any of the following:
(a)   The making or purchasing of loans or providing other financial
assistance:
(i)   For purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or maintaining a
dwelling; or
(ii)   Secured by residential real estate; or
(b)   The selling, brokering, or appraising of residential real property.
(3)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit a person engaged in the business
of furnishing appraisals of real property from taking into consideration
factors other than race, color, religion, national origin, handicap, familial
status, or sex.
§ 10-706   FAIR HOUSING; MULTIPLE LISTING SERVICE; OTHER SERVICE;
DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES PROHIBITED.
It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or
participation in any multiple listing service, real estate brokers
organization, or other service, organization or facility relating to the
business of selling or renting dwellings or to discriminate against any person
in the terms or conditions of such access, membership, or participation on
account of race, color, religion, national origin, handicap, familial status,
or sex.
§ 10-707   FAIR HOUSING; RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATION, PRIVATE HOME; PRIVATE CLUB, OR
HOUSING FOR OLDER PERSONS; RESTRICTING USE NOT PROHIBITED.
(1)   Nothing in this Article shall prohibit a religious organization,
association, or society or any nonprofit institution or organization operated,
supervised, or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization,
association, or society from limiting the sale, rental, or occupancy of a
dwelling which it owns or operates for other than commercial purposes to
persons of the same religion or from
giving preferences to such persons unless membership in such religion is
restricted on account of race, color, national origin, handicap, familial
status, or sex.
(2)   Nothing in this Article shall prohibit a private club not in fact open to
the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes provides
lodgings which it owns or operates for other than commercial purposes, from
limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodging to its members or from giving
preference to its members.
(3)   Nothing in this Article shall prohibit or limit the right of any person
or his or her authorized representative to refuse to rent a room or rooms in
his or her own home for any reason or for no reason or to change tenants in his
or her own home as often as desired, except that this exception shall not apply
to any person who makes available for rental or occupancy more than four
sleeping rooms to a person or family within his or her home.
(4)   Nothing in this Article regarding familial status shall apply with
respect to housing for older persons. For purposes of this subsection, housing
for older persons shall mean housing:
(a)   Provided under any state program that the commission determines is
specifically designed and operated to assist elderly persons or defined in the
program;
(b)   Intended for and solely occupied by persons sixty-two (62) years of age
or older; or
(c)   Intended and operated for occupancy by at least one person fifty-five
(55) years of age or older per unit.
§ 10-708   FAIR HOUSING; INFORMATION.
The Municipal Clerk upon request shall make available to an aggrieved person,
or any other person, information regarding the Nebraska Fair Housing Act and
the Nebraska Equal Opportunity Commission without cost to such individual.
(Ref. 20-301 through 20-322 RS Neb.)
Article 8. Sales and Use Tax
§ 10-801   SALES AND USE TAX; ADOPTED; ADMINISTRATION.
(1) There is hereby adopted a sales and use tax to be effective on and after
April 1, 1997, of one percent (1%) upon the same transactions within the
corporate limits of the City of Wymore, Gage County, Nebraska, on which the
State of Nebraska is authorized to impose a tax pursuant to the provisions of
the Nebraska Revenue Act of 1967, Neb. Rev. Stat. sec. 77-2701 et seq., as
amended from time to time.
   (2) The administration of the sales and use tax imposed by this section, the
making of returns for the ascertainment and assessment, the provisions for tax
claims and remedies, the laws governing consumption of sales, collection, and
the disposition and distribution of the taxes so imposed and collected shall be
as provided in Neb. Rev. Stat. sec. 77-2701 et seq., and including Neb. Rev.
Stat. sec 77-27,142 et seq., said latter statutes being known as the Local
Option Revenue act. (Ord. No. 514, 12/4/96)
Article 9. Penal Provision
§ 10-901   VIOLATION; PENALTY.
   Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with the enforcement of any
of the provisions of this Chapter, set forth at full length herein or
incorporated by reference, shall be deemed guilty of an offense, and upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00)
for each offense. A new violation shall be deemed to have been committed every
twenty-four (24) hours of such failure to comply. (Ref. 17-505 RS Neb.)
(Amended by Ord. No. 538, 9/15/99)
Chapter 11
MUNICIPAL PLANNING
Article 1. Zoning Regulations
§ 11-101   ZONING REGULATIONS; ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.
For the purpose of setting minimum standards to promote the public health,
safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity, and general welfare of the
community of Wymore, Nebraska, and to lessen congestion in the streets; to
secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; to provide adequate light
and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of
population; and to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water,
sewage, schools, parks, and other public improvements, the Zoning Regulations
of the City of Wymore, Nebraska, presented and prepared by the City of Wymore
are hereby adopted. The Zoning Regulations are hereby incorporated by reference
in this section as if set out in full. One (1) copy of the Zoning Regulations
shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk and available for public
inspection during regular office hours. (Ref. 18-132, 19-922 RS Neb.) (Ord. No.
552, 2/6/02)
§ 11-102   ZONING REGULATIONS; OFFICIAL ZONING MAP; ADOPTION; INCORPORATED BY
REFERENCE.
   The City of Wymore, Nebraska, and certain properties within and up to one
(1) mile in all directions of its corporate limits, except those areas that
fall within the corporate limits of the City of Blue Springs, Nebraska, are
hereby divided into zones, or districts, as shown on the Official Zoning Map
which, together with all explanatory material and documentation, is hereby
adopted by reference, declared to be part of the Zoning Regulations of the City
of Wymore, Nebraska, and further declared to part of this Article. The Official
Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor, attested by the
City Clerk and bearing the Seal of the City under the following words:
   "This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map referred to in
Section 4.3 of Ordinance No. 552 of the City of Wymore, Nebraska, adopted
February 6, 2002. The Official Zoning Map of the area within the corporate
limits and the planning jurisdiction area adjacent and one mile beyond the
corporate limits of the City of Wymore, Nebraska, together with all changes,
amendments or additions thereto, shall be maintained in office of the City
Clerk and available for public inspection during regular office hours."
(Ord. No. 552, 2/6/02)
Article 2. Subdivision Regulations
§ 11-201   SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS; ADOPTION; INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE.
For the purpose of providing for harmonious development of the Municipality and
its environs; for the integration of new subdivision streets with other
existing or planned streets or with other features of the Comprehensive Plan;
for adequate open spaces for traffic, recreation, light, and air; for the
distribution of population and traffic in a manner which will tend to create
condition favorable to health, safety, convenience, or prosperity; to insure
conformance of subdivision plans with capital improvement programs of the
Municipality; and to secure equitable handling of all subdivision plans by
providing uniform procedures and standards for observance by subdividers, the
Planning Commission, and the Governing Body, the Subdivision Regulations for
the City of Wymore, Nebraska, as prepared by the City of Wymore, are hereby
adopted. The Subdivision Regulations are hereby incorporated by reference in
this section as if set out in full. One (1) copy of the Subdivision Regulations
shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk and available for public
inspection during regular office hours. (Ref. 18-132, 19-922 RS Neb.) (Ord. No.
553, 2/6/02)
§ 11-202   STREETS AND ALLEYS.
(Repealed by Ord. No. 553, 2/6/02)
§ 11-203 through 11-276 RESERVED.
§ 11-277 through 11-279   GROUP HOMES.
(Repealed by Ord. No. 553, 2/6/02)
Article 3. Flood Plain Management
[Editor's Note: Article 3 was adopted in its entirety by Ordinance No. 403,
passed on January 15, 1986 and was amended by Ordinance No. 430, passed on May
3, 1989,]
§ 11-301   FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT; ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL.
   The Building Inspector hereby has these added responsibilities and is
authorized and directed to enforce all of the provisions of this Article and
all other Ordinances of the City of Wymore, Nebraska, now in force or hereafter
adopted, related to zoning, subdivision or building codes.
§ 11-302   FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT; ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL; APPOINTMENT.
   The Building Inspector shall be appointed to these additional
responsibilities by resolution of the Governing Body and his/her appointment
shall continue during good behavior and satisfactory service. During temporary
absence or disability of the Building Inspector, the Governing Body of the City
shall designate an acting enforcement official.
§ 11-303   FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT; MAP.
The Governing Body of the City of Wymore, Nebraska. hereby designates the
current Flood Hazard Boundary Map/Flood Insurance Rate Map, and amendments, as
the official map to be used in determining those areas of special flood hazard.
§ 11-304   FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT; PERMITS REQUIRED.
   No person, firm or corporation shall erect, construct, enlarge or improve
any building or structure in the City or cause the same to be done without
first obtaining a separate development permit for each building or structure.
   (a)   Within Zone(s) A on the official map, separate development permits are
required for all new construction, substantial improvements and other
developments, including the placement of manufactured homes.
   (b)   Application for Flood Plain Development Permit within Zone(s) A. To
obtain a permit within Zone(s) A, the applicant shall first file an application
therefor in writing on a form furnished for the purpose. Every such application
shall:
      1. Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for which
application is made.
      2. Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by lot,
block, tract and house and street address. or similar description that will
readily identify and definitely locate the proposed building or work.
      3. Indicate the use or occupancy for which the proposed work is intended.
      4. Be accompanied by plans and specifications for proposed construction.
      5. Be signed by the permittee or his/her authorized agent who may be
required to submit evidence to indicate such authority.
      6. Be accompanied by elevations (in relation to mean sea level) of the
lowest floor (including basement) or in the case of floodproofed non-
residential structures, the elevation to which it has been floodproofed;
documentation or certification of such elevations will be maintained by the
Building Inspector.
      7. Give such other information as reasonably may be required by the
Building Inspector.
§ 11-305   FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT; PERMITS.
The Building Inspector shall review all development permit applications to
determine if the site of the proposed development is reasonably safe from
flooding and that all necessary permits have been received as required by
Federal or State Law.
§ 11-306   FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT; PERMIT REVIEW.
   The Building Inspector, in reviewing all applications for new construction,
substantial improvements, prefabricated buildings, placement of manufactured
homes and other developments) (as defined in Section 11-302 of this Article)
will:
   (a)   Obtain, review and reasonably utilize, if available any regulatory
flood elevation data from Federal. State or other sources, until such other
data is provided by the Federal Insurance Administration in a Flood Insurance
Study; and require within areas designated as Zone A on the official map that
the following performance standards be met:
      1.   Residential Construction - New construction or substantial
improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including
basement, elevated one (1') foot above the base flood elevation.
      2. Non-residential Construction - New construction or substantial
improvement of any commercial. industrial or other non-residential structure
shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated one (1') foot
above the level of the base flood elevation or, together with attendant utility
and sanitary facilities, be flood proofed so that below such a level the
structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water and with structural components having the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered
professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this
subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the local
enforcement official.
      3. Require for all new construction and substantial improvements that
fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding shall
be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting
this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: A minimum of two
openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every
square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom
of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be
equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided
that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
   (b)   Require the use of construction materials and utility equipment that
are resistant to flood damage.
   (c)   Require the use of construction methods and practices that will
minimize flood damage.
   (d)   Require that new structures be designed (or modified) and adequately
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure
resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
bouyancy.
   (e)   New structures be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation,
plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are
designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
   (f)   Assure that all manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Manufactured homes must be anchored
in accordance with State laws, local building codes and FEMA guidelines. In the
event that over-the-top frame ties or ground anchors are used, the following
specific requirements (or their equivalent) shall be met:
      1. Over-the-top ties be provided at each of the four (4) corners of the
manufactured home with two (2) additional ties per side at the intermediate
locations and manufactured homes less than fifty (50') feet long requiring one
(1) additional tie per side.
      2. Frame ties be provided at each corner of the home with five (5)
additional ties per side at intermediate points and manufactured homes less
than fifty (50') feet long requiring four (4) additional ties per side.
      3. All components of the anchoring system be capable of carrying a force
of 4800 pounds.
      4. Any additions to manufactured homes be similarly anchored.
   (g)   Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within Zones AI-30,
AFi. and AE on the community's FIRM be elevated on a permanent foundation such
that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is one foot above the base flood
elevation; and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system
in accordance with the provisions of section 11-306(f).
§ 11-307   FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT; FINDINGS OF FACT.
   The Governing Body of the City shall review all subdivi-sion applications
and other proposed new developments, including manufactured home parks or
subdivisions, and and shall make finding of the fact and assure that:
   (a)   All such proposed developments are consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage.
   (b)   Subdivision proposals and other proposed new development (including
proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions) greater than five (5)
acres or fifty (50') foot lots, whichever is lesser, include within such
proposals regulatory flood elevation data in areas designated Zone A.
   (c)    Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
   (d)   All public utilities and facilities are located so as to minimize or
eliminate flood damage.
§ 11-308   FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT; NEW WATER AND SEWER, ETC.
   New and replacement water and sewer systems shall be constructed to
eliminate or minimize infiltration by, or discharge into floodwaters. Moreover,
on-site waste disposal systems will be designed to avoid impairment or
contamination during flooding.
§ 11-309   FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMIENT; COOPERATION AND NOTIFICATION.
   The Governing Body of the City will insure that the flood carrying capacity
within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. The
City will notify, in rtverfne situations, adjacent communities and the State
Coordinating Office prior to any alterations or relocation of a watercourse,
and submit copies of such notifications to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency. Moreover, the City will work with appropriate State and Federal
Agencies in every way possible in complying with the National Flood Insurance
Program in accordance with the National Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973.
§ 11-310   FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT; PRECEDENCE OF ARTICLE.
   This Article shall take precedence over conflicting Ordinances or parts of
Ordinances The Governing Body of the City of Wymore may, from time to time,
amend this Article to reflect any and all changes in the National Flood
Disaster Protection Act of 1973. The regulations of this Article are in
compliance with the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations as published
in Title 44 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
§ 11-311   FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT; DEFINITIONS.
   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this Article
shall be interpreted so as to give them the same meaning as they have in common
usage and so as to give this Article its most reasonable application.
   AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.
The land within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of
flooding in any given year. This land is identified as Zone A on the official
map.
   DEVELOPMENT.
Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not
limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading,
paving, excavation or drilling operations.
   FLOOD.
A temporary rise in stream's flow or stage that results in water overflowing
its banks and inundating areas adjacent to the channel or an unusual and rapid
accumulation or runoff or surface waters from any source.
   FLOODPROOFING.
Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or
adjustments to structures, including utility and sanitary facilities, which
would preclude the entry of water. Structural components shall have the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of
buoyancy.
   LOWEST FLOOR.
The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An
unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles,
building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not
considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built
as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design
requirements of this Article.
   MANUFACTURED HOME.
A structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is built on a
permanent chassis and designed for use with or without a permanent foundation
when connected to the required utilities. For flood plain management purposes
the term MANUFACTURED HOME also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and
other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days.
For insurance purposes the term does not include park trailers, travel
trailers, or other similar vehicles.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK (SUBDIVISION). A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION.
The water surface elevation of the 100-year flood.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION.
[For other than the new construction or substantial improvements under the
Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348)], includes substantial
improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the
actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement, or other
improvement as within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the
pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling nor does it include the
installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include the installation
on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied
as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
   STRUCTURE.
A walled and roofed structure, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is
principally above the ground, including but without limitation to buildings,
factories, sheds, cabins, mobile homes and other similar uses.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.
Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of which
equals or exceeds fifty (50%) percent of the market value of the structure
either (a) before the improvement is started, or (b) if the structure has been
damaged and is being restored as before the damage occurred. For the purposes
of this definition SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT is considered to occur when the
first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the
building commences whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include any alteration
to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, building or safety
codes or regulations as well as structures listed in National or State
Registers of Historic Places.
   100-YEAR FLOOD.
The condition of flooding having a one (1%) per cent chance of annual
occurrence.
Article 4. Penal Provision
§ 11-401   VIOLATION; PENALTY.
Any person, whether as owner, proprietor, or as the agent, attorney, or
representative of any owner or proprietor of land who shall plat, or subdivide
any tract of land within the corporate limits of the Municipality, or
adjoining, and contiguous to the same, except as herein authorized, or who
shall sell, transfer, deed or convey, contract, or agree to sell, transfer, or
offer for sale any lot, or piece of ground in any addition, or subdivision of
three (3) or more parts within said corporate limits, or adjoining and
contiguous thereto, without having first obtained the acceptance, and approval
of the plat, or map thereof by the Governing Body, and any person who shall
violate, or who shall fail, neglect, or refuse to comply with any of the
provisions hereinbefore, as not existing, or as hereafter amended, shall upon
conviction, be fined in any sum not exceeding one hundred ($100.00) dollars.
 
