CITY CODE
of
BELGRADE, MONTANA
2009
Code current through:
Ord. 2025-8, passed 10-6-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-833-226-3439 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
         This code of the City of Belgrade, as supplemented, contains
ordinances up to and including ordinance 2025-8, passed 10-6-2025. Ordinances
of the City adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code
to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the
City office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the code
has been amended, superseded or repealed.
                     American Legal Publishing
                     Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not affect the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 2009-2
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE BELGRADE CITY CODE FOR THE CITY OF BELGRADE, MONTANA
   WHEREAS, the city council of the city of Belgrade has determined that it
would be in the best interest of the city of Belgrade to adopt the Belgrade
city code of the city of Belgrade, Montana prepared by Sterling Codifiers as
the official code of the city of Belgrade, and
   WHEREAS, such codification has been completed;
   BE IT ORDAINED by the city council of the city of Belgrade, Montana, as
follows:
   Section 1: From and after the effective date of passage of this ordinance,
the Belgrade city code of the city of Belgrade, Montana prepared by Sterling
Codifiers, Inc., containing the compilation of all ordinances of a general
nature together with the changes made to said ordinances, under the direction
of the governing body of the city, shall be accepted in all courts without
question as the official code and law of the city as enacted by the city
council.
   Section 2: There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification,
the loose-leaf type of binding together with the continuous supplement service,
provided by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a
general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding or deleting provisions
of the official Belgrade city code is identified by the proper catchline and is
inserted in the proper place in each of the official copies, one copy of which
shall be maintained in the office of the city clerk, certified as to
correctness and available for inspection at any and all times that said office
is regularly open.
   Section 3: All ordinances of a general nature included in this official
Belgrade city code shall be considered as a continuation of said ordinance
provision and the fact that some provisions have been deliberately eliminated
by the governing body shall not serve to cause any interruption in the
continuous effectiveness of ordinances included in said official Belgrade city
code. All ordinances of a special nature, such as tax levy ordinances, bond
ordinances, franchises, vacating ordinances and annexation ordinances shall
continue in full force and effect unless specifically repealed or amended by a
provision of the Belgrade city code. Such ordinances are not intended to be
included in the official Belgrade city code.
   Section 4: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such code, or
to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such
code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be
misrepresented thereby.
   Section 5: All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, are,
to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
   Section 6: This ordinance and the Belgrade city code adopted by the same
shall be in full force and effect thirty (30) days from and after its passage
on second reading as provided by law.
   Passed by the city council of the city of Belgrade, Montana, at regular
session thereof held on the 4th day of May, 2009.
          /s/    
         Russell C. Nelson, Mayor
ATTEST:
/s/      
Marilyn Foltz, Director of Finance
   Passed, adopted and approved by the city of Belgrade, Montana, on second
reading at a regular session held on the 2nd day of June, 2009.
          /s/    
         Russell C. Nelson, Mayor
ATTEST:
/s/      
Marilyn Foltz, Director of Finance
CITY CHARTER
Effective Date
July 1, 1987
(Revised August 22, 1994 and October 5, 2004)
PREAMBLE
WE, THE PEOPLE OF THE CITY OF BELGRADE, MONTANA, in accordance with article XI,
section 5, of the constitution of the state of Montana, in order to modernize
our form of local government, increase its efficiency and to provide for local
self-determination, do hereby adopt this charter.
ARTICLE I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 1.01 Powers Of The City
The city of Belgrade shall have all the powers not prohibited by the
constitution of the United States, the laws of Montana, or this charter.
Section 1.02 Interpretation Of Powers
The powers and authority of the city of Belgrade shall be liberally construed.
Every reasonable doubt as to the existence of a power shall be resolved in
favor of the existence of that power or authority.
Section 1.03 Charter Supremacy
As provided by article XI, section 5, of the constitution of the state of
Montana, provisions herein establishing executive, legislative and
administrative structure and organization are superior to state law.
Section 1.04 Intergovernmental Cooperation
As provided by article X, section 7, of the constitution of the state of
Montana, the city of Belgrade, unless prohibited by law or this charter, may:
   A.   Cooperate in the exercise of any function, power, or responsibility
with,
   B.   Share the services of any officer or facilities with,
   C.   Transfer or delegate any function, power, responsibility, or duty of
any officer to one or more other local government units, school districts, the
state of Montana, or the United States.
Section 1.05 Taxation Authority
   A.   All limits concerning property tax mill levies imposed by state law on
general government municipalities shall apply to the city of Belgrade.
   B.   There shall be no new kinds of taxes levied without an affirmative vote
of a majority of the electors voting on the question at a special election
called for the purpose or at a general election in which the question may be
referred to the people. Taxes allowed under any ordinance or resolution
existing at the effective date of this charter are not to be considered new
kinds of taxes.
   C.   The city council shall make no changes in any ordinance or resolution
of the city of Belgrade regarding license fees, user fees, permit fees, or
utility charges without a prior public hearing on the matter.
   D.   State code is in effect until self-government powers supersede the
state code.
Section 1.06 Oath Of Office
   A.   Before beginning the duties of office, all elected city officials shall
take and subscribe to the following oath of office: "I do solemnly swear (or
affirm) that I will support, protect and defend the constitution of the United
States, the constitution of the state of Montana, the charter of the city of
Belgrade and that I will discharge the duties of my office with fidelity, so
help me God."
   B.   The oath of office shall be sworn by the city judge. (Amended Ord. 94-
8, 8-22-1994)
ARTICLE II
CITY COUNCIL AND MAYOR
Section 2.01 Composition, Election, Qualifications, Compensation, Removal,
Filling Of Vacancies
   A.   There shall be a city council of six members, three of which shall be
elected every two years.
   B.   Two council members shall be elected from each of three wards which are
of substantially equal population. Nominees for council from each ward must
reside in that ward and be a qualified voter of the city of Belgrade.
   C.   Members of the council shall be elected for terms of four years on a
nonpartisan basis.
   D.   The mayor shall receive $50.00 and the city council members shall
receive $50.00 for regularly scheduled meeting attended. Said salary shall be
paid quarterly for attendance at regularly scheduled meetings in the preceding
quarter. As provided by ordinance or resolution, the mayor and council members
shall receive their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance
of their duties of office, or the council may establish per diem and mileage
allowances in lieu of such expenses. (Amended Ord. 2004-4, 4-5-2004)
   E.   The office of a council member shall become vacant upon his/her death,
resignation or removal from office in any manner authorized by law, or
forfeiture of his/her office:
      1.   A council member shall forfeit his/her office if he/she:
         a.   Loses his/her eligibility for election to his/her seat;
         b.   Violates any expressed prohibition in this charter;
         c.   Is convicted of a crime of moral turpitude including but not
limited to: deliberate homicide, felony assault, kidnapping, intimidation,
sexual assault, sexual intercourse without consent, deviate sexual conduct,
incest, prostitution or promotion of prostitution, bigamy, endangering the
welfare of children or unlawful transactions with children, sexual abuse of
children, criminal mischief, burglary, criminal trespass to property or
vehicles, theft of any nature, robbery, unlawful uses of property, defrauding
creditors, deceptive practices of any nature, forgery, bribery, threats and
other improper influence in official and political matters, perjury and other
falsification of official matters, tampering or falsification of evidence or
public records or information, official misconduct, sale of dangerous drugs or
possession with intent to sell, production or manufacture of dangerous drugs.
(Ord. 94-10, 8-22-1994)
         d.   Without council approval, fails to attend three consecutive
regularly scheduled council meetings.
   F.   A mayor shall be elected every two years, at large, on a nonpartisan
basis.
      1.   Nominees for the office of mayor shall reside in Belgrade and shall
be a qualified voter of the city of Belgrade.
Section 2.02 Powers And Duties Of The Council
   A.   The city council shall be the legislative and policy determining body
of the city of Belgrade. Except as otherwise provided by this charter, the
council shall provide for the exercise of all powers of the city of Belgrade
and for performance of all duties and obligations imposed upon the city by law.
   B.   The council shall appoint and remove the city manager by majority vote
of the whole number of the council.
   C.   The council shall provide for an independent annual audit of all city
accounts and may provide for such more frequent audits as it deems necessary.
If the state makes such an audit, the council may accept it as satisfying the
requirements of this section.
   D.   The council shall adopt by ordinance or resolution and maintain an
administrative code and a personnel system a provided in article IV.
   E.   The council may make investigations into the affairs of the city and
the conduct of any city department, office, or agency, and for this purpose may
subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony and require the production
of evidence.
   F.   In the event of a vacancy, the council shall, within 60 days by
majority vote of the remaining members, appoint a person eligible to hold a
council seat to fill the vacancy until the next regular city election at which
time the remainder of the term shall be filled as required by law.
   G.   The council shall be the judge of the qualifications of its members and
of the grounds of forfeiture of their office, as provided for in article II
section 2.01 of this charter, and for that purpose shall have the power to
subpoena witnesses, administer oaths and require the production of evidence. A
member charged with conduct constituting grounds for forfeiture of his or her
office shall be entitled to a public hearing on demand and notice of such
hearing shall be published in a manner consistent with state law.
   H.   A quorum of the council shall consist of 50% of the council members
plus one.
Section 2.03 Powers And Duties Of The Mayor
   A.   The mayor shall preside at meetings of the council, shall be recognized
as the head of the city government for all ceremonial purposes and public
statements, or may delegate this duty, and by the governor for the purpose of
military law. The mayor shall vote in the case of tie votes on the council.
   B.   The mayor shall appoint, with the consent of the council, all members
of boards and committees.
   C.   The council shall elect from among its members a deputy mayor who shall
act as mayor during the absence or disability of the mayor, and who shall
retain his or her power to vote.
   D.   In the event of vacancy in the mayor's office, the council, by majority
vote, shall fill the vacancy within 60 days, with a qualified voter, until the
next regular city election.
Section 2.04 Restrictions Of The Mayor And Council
   A.   Except where authorized by law, the mayor or any council person shall
not hold any other city office or employment with the city. (Ord. 87-1, 3-16-
1987)
   B.   Neither the mayor, the council, or council members shall in any manner
dictate the appointment or removal of any city administrative officers or
employees whom the manager or any of his/her subordinates are empowered to
appoint.
   C.   Except for the purpose of inquiries and investigations under section
2.02, article II, the council or its members shall deal with city officers and
employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the manager
solely through the manager, and neither the council nor its members shall give
orders to any such officer or employee, either publicly or privately.
Section 2.05 Council Procedure, Public Participation
   A.   Council procedure shall be prescribed under state law.
   B.   The council shall meet at least once per month in regular session.
   C.   The council shall determine its own rules and order of business and
shall provide for the keeping of the minutes of its proceedings.
   D.   All meetings shall be open to the public except in such circumstances
as prescribed by state law.
   E.   All documents and records of the council shall be public records and
shall be made available for examining or copying.
ARTICLE III
CITY MANAGER
Section 3.01 Appointment And Removal, Qualifications, Compensation
   A.   The city manager shall be appointed by the council for an indefinite
term on the basis of merit only. The council shall fix his or her compensation.
   B.   The council may remove the city manager from office at any regularly
scheduled or special meeting.
Section 3.02 Acting City Manager
By letter filed with the mayor, the manager shall designate, subject to council
approval, a qualified city administrative officer to exercise the powers and
perform the duties of a manager during the manager's absence or disability.
During such absence or disability, the council may revoke such designation at
any time and appoint another officer of the city to serve until the manager
shall return or his or her disability shall cease.
Section 3.03 Duties Of The City Manager
   A.   The city manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the city.
He or she shall be responsible to the council for the administration of all
city affairs.
   B.   The city manager shall:
      1.   Direct, supervise and administer all departments, agencies and
offices of the local government unit except as otherwise provided by this
charter, law, ordinance, or resolution.
      2.   Carry out policies established by the council.
      3.   Prepare council agendas.
      4.   Report to the council and recommend measures on the affairs and
financial condition of the local government as the council may require.
      5.   Execute bonds, notes, contracts and written obligations of the
council, subject to the approval of the council.
      6.   Attend council meetings and may take part in the discussion, but may
not vote.
      7.   Prepare and present the budget to the council for approval and
execute the budget adopted by the council.
      8.   Appoint, suspend, supervise and remove all employees of the city
except as otherwise provided by law, ordinance, or resolution. Employees
appointed by the manager and his subordinates shall be administratively
responsible to the manager.
      9.   Submit recommended changes in the administrative code or the
personnel system to the council.
   C.   The city manager shall not delegate any of the duties and
responsibilities in this section without the consent of the council.
ARTICLE IV
ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS
Section 4.01 General
   A.   The council may establish city departments, offices, or agencies in
addition to those created by this charter and may prescribe the functions of
all departments, offices, or agencies.
   B.   All departments, offices, or agencies under the direction and
supervision of the manager shall be administered by an officer appointed by and
subject to the direction and supervision of the manager. With the consent of
the council, the manager may serve as head of one or more such departments,
offices, or agencies, or may appoint one person as the head of two or more of
them.
Section 4.02 Legal Officer
There shall be a legal officer of the city, appointed by the manager, and
approved by the council, who shall serve as chief legal advisor to the council,
the manager and all city departments, offices and agencies, shall represent the
city in all legal proceedings and shall perform all other duties as prescribed
by ordinance or resolution.
Section 4.03 City Administrative Code
The administrative code shall provide the complete plan of organization and
structure of the city government and shall include:
   A.   The departmental organization of the government, the nature and scope
of each department, and all required rules and procedures for department
operation.
   B.   Comprehensive budget procedures for the government.
   C.   Procedures regarding boards, commissions, or any other government
activity.
Section 4.04 Personnel System
The council shall adopt a personnel system which shall include a salary
schedule, provisions for vacation, sick leave, insurance and other benefits for
all persons in accordance with provisions of this charter, procedures for
employees to have an opportunity to be heard upon their request pending
discharge, suspension, or any designated disciplinary action and shall provide
for such procedures as necessary for an efficient personnel system.
ARTICLE V
NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS, INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM
Section 5.01 Elected Officials
The procedure for the nomination and election of all elected city officials
shall be prescribed by law for nonpartisan elections. The procedure for recall
for all elected city officials shall be as provided by state law.
Section 5.02 Initiative And Referendum
The procedure for initiative and referendum shall be as provided by state law.
Section 5.03 Reapportionment Of Wards
It shall be the responsibility of the council after each decennial census to
equalize ward boundaries as to approximate equal population, as provided by
state law.
Section 5.04 Redistricting
Ward boundaries may be changed by ordinance or resolution, provided that any
such revised ward boundaries must comply with the population standards
prescribed in this charter. In the event of a judicial challenge to the
ordinance or resolution, the burden of proving compliance shall rest upon the
city.
ARTICLE VI
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Section 6.01 Amendment Of Charter
This charter may be amended only as prescribed by state statute.
Section 6.02 Effective Date
This charter shall become effective on July 1, 1987.
Section 6.03 Separability
If any section in this charter is held invalid, the other provisions of this
charter shall not be affected thereby. If any application of this charter, or
any part of its provisions, to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the
application of the charter and its provisions to other persons or circumstances
shall not be affected thereby.
ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
ARTICLE I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
The city adopted a manager/mayor/council form of government with self-
government powers effective July 1, 1987. This charter mandated that an
administrative code be adopted. The following administrative code shall serve
as a complete plan of the organization and structure of the government with all
required rules and procedures for the city's operation.
1.01. Effective Date
This administrative code shall take effect thirty (30) days after final
passage.
1.02. Severability
If any portion of this administrative code is held invalid, the remaining
provisions of this administrative code shall not be affected thereby. If the
application of this administrative code, or any part of its provisions, to any
persons or circumstances is held invalid, the application of the administrative
code and its provisions to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected
thereby.
ARTICLE II
ADMINISTRATIVE STRUCTURE
The charter of the city requires a distinct separation between the legislative
and administrative functions of government. The legislative and policy making
function is provided by an elected mayor and six (6) elected members of the
city council. The administrative function consists of a manager as the chief
executive officer of the city and departments. Noncompensated boards serve in
advisory, administrative, and regulatory capacities.
2.01. Legislative
   A.   Mayor:
      1.   Qualifications And Term Of Office: The mayor must reside within the
corporate limits of the city and must be a qualified voter within the city. The
mayor shall be elected every two (2) years at large and on a nonpartisan basis.
      2.   Duties: The mayor shall preside at all meetings of the council and
vote only in case of a tie. He/she shall appoint all members of boards and
commissions with the consent of the council. The mayor shall be recognized as
head of city government for all ceremonial purposes and public statements, or
may delegate this duty.
      3.   Compensation: The mayor shall receive fifty dollars ($50.00) for
each regularly scheduled meeting attended. Said salary shall be paid quarterly
for attendance at regularly scheduled meetings in the preceding quarter. The
mayor shall be reimbursed for actual and necessary expenses incurred in the
performance of his/her duties. The mayor may receive per diem and mileage
allowances as established for state officials in lieu of such expenses.
      4.   Vacancy: In the event a vacancy shall exist in the office of the
mayor, the council, by majority vote, shall fill the vacancy within sixty (60)
days with a qualified voter, until the next regular city election.
      5.   Absences: A mayor shall forfeit his/her office if he/she loses
eligibility of election, violates any expressed provision of the charter, is
convicted of a felony, or fails to attend three (3) consecutive regularly
scheduled city council meetings without council approval. Approval may be
obtained by contacting the city office, the manager, or a council person prior
to the meeting.
   B.   City Council:
      1.   Number, Qualifications, And Term Of Office: There shall be a city
council of six (6) members. Two (2) members shall be elected from each of three
(3) wards within the city. To qualify for a position on the city council, the
individual must reside within the ward they represent and be a qualified voter
of the city of Belgrade. Members of the council shall be elected to four (4)
year terms on a nonpartisan basis.
      2.   Duties: The council shall be the legislative and policy determining
body of the city of Belgrade. The council shall provide for the exercise of all
powers of the city and for the performance of all duties and obligations
imposed on the city by law. In addition, the council shall appoint and remove
the city manager by majority vote. The council shall provide for an independent
annual audit of the city's accounts, or additional audits as may be deemed
necessary. The council shall adopt an administrative code. The council may make
investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any city
department, office, or agency, and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses,
administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence.
      3.   Compensation: The council shall receive fifty dollars ($50.00) for
each regularly scheduled meeting attended. Said salary shall be paid quarterly
for attendance at regularly scheduled meetings in the preceding quarter. The
council members may receive their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the
performance of their duties of office, or may receive per diem and mileage in
lieu of such expenses.
      4.   Deputy Mayor: The city council shall, at their first meeting in
January each year, elect a deputy mayor from its members to preside at city
council meetings in the absence of the mayor. The deputy mayor may vote on all
issues brought before the council.
      5.   Vacancy: In the event of a vacancy, the council shall, within sixty
(60) days, by majority vote of the remaining members, appoint a person eligible
to hold a council seat, to serve until the next regularly scheduled election,
at which time the remainder of the term shall be filled as required by law.
      6.   Absences: A council member shall forfeit his/her office if he/she
losses eligibility of election, violates any expressed provision of the
charter, is convicted of a felony, or fails to attend three consecutive
regularly scheduled city council meetings without council approval.
      7.   Nepotism: Public law regarding nepotism shall apply to council
members.
   C.   Council Meetings:
      1.   Regular Meetings: The regular scheduled meetings of the city council
will be held on the first and third Mondays of every month at seven o'clock (7:
00) P.M. Meetings shall be held in the city council chambers, 91 East Central,
unless previously scheduled and advertised to be held in an alternate location.
If the Monday is a legal holiday, the meeting shall be held the following
Tuesday.
      2.   Special Meetings: The mayor, any two (2) members of the council, or
the city manager may call a special meeting of the city council by providing at
least twelve (12) hours' notice, in writing, and personally serving notice to
every member of the council, or leaving notice at his/her usual place of
residence.
      3.   Public Hearings: Public hearings shall be conducted at regular or
special meetings of the council. The purpose of the hearing is to give the
public the opportunity to participate prior to final decisions. The hearing
should provide for written and oral presentation of testimony. All testimony,
including letters and petitions, shall be entered into the minutes of the
meeting. The hearing may be adjourned to the next day or a future date. The
public shall be informed of such hearings by advertisement in a newspaper of
general circulation and by posting of such notices.
   D.   Agenda:
      1.   Content: The city manager is responsible for determining the content
of the council agenda. The mayor or members of the council may submit items for
the agenda to the manager or director of finance on or before twelve o'clock
(12:00) noon on Wednesday prior to the meeting. Members of the public wishing
to have items on the agenda must submit the request to the manager on or before
twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on Wednesday prior to the meeting.
      2.   Format: The council agenda will maintain the format as indicated on
attached exhibit A.
      3.   Meeting Notice And Agenda Distribution: The agenda will be
electronically or physically delivered to the mayor, city council, and
department heads on or before five o’clock (5:00) P.M., Friday before regular
meetings. The public may obtain agendas at the office of the director of
finance.
   E.   Conduct Of Meeting: At the designated time, the mayor shall call the
meeting to order. If a quorum is present, the meeting shall proceed following
the format outlined in the agenda. If a quorum is not present, the mayor shall
order a recess for fifteen (15) minutes to attempt to secure a quorum. If no
quorum exists after the recess, the mayor shall adjourn the meeting.
   F.   Participation At Meetings: City employees and the public at large are
entitled to express themselves at any council meeting except as provided by
law. Participation, however, shall be limited to the times provided for
discussion of individual items on the discussion agenda, and only prior to any
vote taken on the item of discussion. The public has an opportunity to address
the council concerning areas not included on the discussion agenda during the
public forum sections of the agenda.
   G.   Executive Session: The council may hold executive sessions that are not
open to the public only in accordance with state law. Action on any matter
shall be taken in open session and recorded in the minutes.
   H.   Minutes: Appropriate minutes of all meetings, required to be open to
the public, shall be kept and be made available for public inspection. The
minutes shall include the date, time and place of the meeting, a list of the
council members as well as citizens in attendance. Also included shall be the
substance of all items proposed, discussed, or decided and a record of any
votes taken. Discussion and voting on resolutions and ordinances shall be
included in the minutes, however, the resolution and/or ordinance shall be
maintained separately. (Ord. 2023-4, 3-20-2023)
2.02. Administrative
   A.   Manager:
      1.   Appointment And Removal: The city council shall appoint the manager
for an indefinite term, based on merit, only by majority vote. The council, by
majority vote of its members, may remove the manager at any regularly scheduled
council meeting.
      2.   Compensation: The council shall set the salary and benefits of the
manager.
      3.   Duties: The city manager is the chief administrative officer of the
city of Belgrade. He/she is responsible to the council for the administration
of all city affairs. The city manager shall:
         a.   Direct and administer all city departments, agencies, and offices
except as provided by charter, law, ordinance, or resolution.
         b.   Carry out policies established by the council.
         c.   Prepare council agendas.
         d.   Report and recommend measures on the affairs and financial
condition of the city as required by the council.
         e.   Execute bonds, notes, contracts, and written obligations of the
council, subject to the approval of the council.
         f.   Attend council meetings and participate in the discussion, but
may not vote.
         g.   Prepare and present the budget to the council and execute the
budget adopted by the council.
         h.   Appoint, suspend, temporarily transfer if necessary, supervise
and remove all employees of the city except as provided by law, ordinance or
resolution. Employees appointed by the manager and his/her subordinates shall
be administratively responsible to the manager.
         i.   Submit recommended changes to the administrative code and the
personnel system to the council.
         j.   The city manager may not delegate any of the duties or
responsibilities without consent of the council.
2.03. Departments
The following departments shall be under the supervision of the manager:
finance, police, public works, library, city-county planning, city or municipal
court, and city attorney, and such other departments as may be established.
Each department shall have a supervisor, appointed by the manager on the basis
of training and qualifications. Department supervisors shall serve at the
pleasure of the manager.
   A.   Finance Department:
      1.   Responsibilities: The finance department shall be responsible for
the administration of the following:
         a.   Assist the manager in the preparation of the budget.
         b.   All activities of the government pertaining to the receipt,
expenditure, accounting, investment, custody, and control of all funds and
assets of the city except those activities expressly charged by law or
ordinance to another department.
         c.   Maintain all records of the city including minutes of all council
meetings.
         d.   Coordinate all utility billing and collection procedures.
         e.   Coordinate with county election office for all city elections.
         f.   Administer any grants received by the city.
      2.   Supervisor: The director of finance shall be responsible for
supervision of the finance department.
   B.   Department Of Public Works:
      1.   Responsibilities: The department of public works shall be
responsible for the following:
         a.   Planning, construction and maintenance of streets, curbs, gutters
and storm drainage.
         b.   Installation and maintenance of traffic control devices.
         c.   Development and maintenance of water supply system.
         d.   Sewage collection and disposition.
         e.   Maintenance of public rights of way.
         f.   Maintenance of city buildings and property.
         g.   Construction and maintenance of public parks and recreation
facilities.
         h.   Enforcement of building codes adopted by the city.
      2.   Supervisor: The public works director will be responsible for
supervision of the public works department.
   C.   Police Department:
      1.   Responsibilities: The police department shall be responsible for the
following:
         a.   Law enforcement services including, but not limited to the arrest
and subsequent bringing before the appropriate court all persons charged with
the violation of the law or ordinance.
         b.   Provide protective patrol of the city.
         c.   Initiate criminal investigations.
         d.   Perform traffic control.
         e.   Transport prisoners to jail facilities.
         f.   Serve legal processes of court including warrants and subpoenas.
      2.   Supervisor: The chief of police shall be responsible for supervision
of the police department.
   D.   Library:
      1.   Responsibilities: The library shall be responsible for the
following:
         a.   Administration of all library services including, but not limited
to the purchase of books and periodicals.
         b.   Cataloging all library materials, maintaining a system to provide
services to the Belgrade community.
         c.   Maintenance of facilities, equipment, books, and periodicals.
      2.   Supervisor: The Director of Library Services shall be responsible
for the supervision of the library.
   E.   City-County Planning:
      1.   Responsibilities: The city-county planning department shall be
responsible for the following:
         a.   Enforcement of the zoning ordinance within the zoning
jurisdiction.
         b.   Subdivision review within the city and the city-county planning
area.
         c.   Recommending changes in the zoning code and/or growth policy to
the city council.
         d.   Preparation of grant applications for the city.
      2.   Supervisor: The Director of Community Development will be
responsible for supervision of the city-county planning department.
   F.   Municipal Court:
      1.   Established:
         a.   There is established in the City of Belgrade a municipal court to
be known as the “Municipal Court of the City of Belgrade of the State of
Montana”. The time of such establishment shall be April 1, 2023. This section
is adopted pursuant to the provisions of Montana Code Annotated sections 3-6-
101 et seq.
         b.   There shall be one elected municipal court judge elected pursuant
to the provisions of Montana Code Annotated section 3-6-201. The judge shall
hold office for a term of four (4) years and until a successor is elected and
qualified.
         c.   The salary of the municipal court judge shall be set by
resolution of the city council. Each year as part of its annual city budget the
city council shall set the salary of the municipal court judge and provide for
other necessary expenses that may be incurred in the performance of official
duties.
      2.   Assessment Of Municipal Court Administrative Fees:
      Municipal Court shall assess an administrative fee of twenty five dollars
($25.00) as part of the disposition of all citations and complaints, criminal,
traffic and parking citation appeals for which there is a conviction or plea of
guilty entered in addition to the regular fines, surcharges and fees at the
time the defendant pleads or is convicted of any charges. The amount of the
administrative fee may be amended by resolution of the city council.
      The Municipal Court shall assess a time pay fee on all time payment
contracts allowed the defendant for payment of fines, costs and charges in
Municipal Court on an installment basis in the amount of twenty five dollars
($25.00) for each time pay contract. The amount of time pay fee may be amended
by resolution of the city council.
      The Municipal Court Judge may waive the time pay fee in cases where the
judge determines it is an undue financial burden on the defendant to pay the
fee. Fee waivers granted by the judge shall be noted in official court records.
      Fees and fines collected by Municipal Court must be deposited in
accordance with state law.
      3.   Administrative Fees And Charges Assessed Prior To The Effective Date
Of Ordinance 2023-1:
      Administrative fees and charges assessed by Belgrade City Court prior to
the effective date of the ordinance enacting this subsection H (Ordinance 2023-
1) are affirmed and deemed to be assessed pursuant to this chapter.
      Fees and fines collected by Municipal Court must be deposited in
accordance with the state law.
      4.   Municipal Court Clerk Position Established:
      Pursuant to Montana Code Annotated section 3-6-301, the position of
municipal court clerk is established within the municipal court. The municipal
court clerk shall assist the municipal court judge in the recording and signing
of court proceedings as well as in creating, maintaining and retaining
municipal court records. Each year as part of its annual city budget the city
council shall set the salary of the municipal court clerk and provide for other
necessary expenses that may be incurred in operating the municipal court. The
municipal court clerk and all other court personnel shall be employees of the
City of Belgrade and subject to the terms and provisions of the City’s
personnel policies and procedures.
      5.   Limitation Of Appeals To State District Court:
         a.   Appeals from municipal court to state district court shall be
governed by Montana State law and the Montana Uniform Municipal Court Rules of
Appeal to District Court adopted by the Montana Supreme Court.
         b.   Appeal from a municipal court judgment shall be limited in the
following cases:
            (1)   In civil causes, a minimum amount in controversy shall exceed
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), before the district court has jurisdiction to
hear the appeal.
            (2)   In criminal causes, a minimum amount in controversy, fine or
restitution shall exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00) before the district
court has jurisdiction to hear the appeal, except if the judgment includes
incarceration, no minimum fine may be required for appeal.
            (3)   Appeals may be taken in criminal cases as provided in Montana
State law.
   G.   City Attorney:
      1.   Duties: The city attorney is responsible for the following:
         a.   Attend before the city court and other courts and prosecute on
behalf of the city.
         b.   Draw ordinances, contracts, and resolutions for the city’s use.
         c.   Provide opinions on questions concerning duties, rights,
liabilities, and powers of the city.
         d.   Perform other duties as assigned and/or requested by the manager
or council.
      2.   Attorney’s Appointment, Term: The city attorney shall be appointed
by the manager with consent of the council. The city attorney shall serve at
the pleasure of the city manager, subject to any employment and contract
rights.
   H.   Other Departments: The City Manager may establish other departments in
addition to the departments established herein and prescribe the duties,
responsibilities, functions, and supervision of such other departments. (amd.
Ord. 2023-1, 2-21-2023; Ord. 2023-4, 3-20-2023)
2.04. Boards, Commissions And Committees
   A.   Boards, Commissions and Committees: The following boards, commissions
and committees have been established to perform functions given to them through
law, ordinance, charter or this code. A city council member who has been
appointed to any board, commission or committee may be represented by any other
city council member at any meeting of any board, commission or committee with
full power and authority to vote or take such other action at such meeting.
   1.   Belgrade City-County Planning Board: A nine (9) member board with four
(4) members appointed by the mayor with council approval, and four (4) members
appointed by the county commissioners. The ninth member is a member at large
from either the city or the county area, and agreed upon by the council and the
commissioners.
      a.   Duties: The planning board shall oversee the city-county planning
activities, make recommendations on budgets, hold all necessary public
hearings, make recommendations to the council and the commissioners regarding
zoning amendments, subdivisions, conditional uses, and the city-county master
plan.
      b.   Compensation: The board shall serve without compensation.
      c.   Term Of Office: The terms of the members who are officers of any
governmental unit shall be one (1) year. The terms of other members shall be
two (2) years.
   2.   Library Board: A five (5) member board appointed by the mayor and
approved by the city council. Four (4) members must reside within the city. The
fifth member shall live in the area out of the corporate limits of the city and
within School District 44 limits.
      a.   Duties: The library board is an advisory board and is responsible
for overseeing the library operations, establishing budget recommendations to
the manager and setting policy for the library.
      b.   Compensation: The library board serves without compensation.
      c.   Term Of Office: Board members serve for a term of three (3) years.
   3.   Police Commission: A three (3) member board appointed by the mayor and
approved by the council. Members shall be qualified electors and cannot be
employees of the city of Belgrade.
      a.   Duties: It is the duty of the commission to examine all candidates
recommended by the chief of police for a position as a police officer and make
a recommendation for hiring to the city manager.
   It is also the duty of the commission to hear, try, and decide all charges
brought by any person or persons against any member or officer of the police
department as defined in Montana Code Annotated section 7-32-4155.
      b.   Compensation: Commission members will serve without compensation.
      c.   Term Of Office: Police commission members shall serve three (3) year
terms.
   4.   Board Of Adjustment: The board of adjustment is a seven (7) member
board appointed by the mayor and approved by the council. The board shall
consist of six( 6) members and one (1) ex-officio member. The ex-officio member
shall only be entitled to vote in the event of a tie vote by the regular
members.
      a.   Duties: The board of adjustment will hear and decide requests for
variances from the city zoning ordinance in accordance with powers granted to
them by the ordinance and Montana Code Annotated section 76-2-321.
      b.   Compensation: The board of adjustment members shall serve without
compensation.
      c.   Term Of Office: Members of the board of adjustment shall serve three
(3) year terms.
   5.   Belgrade Regional Park, Trails and Recreation District Board: The
Belgrade Regional Park, Trails and Recreation District Board is established
pursuant to the bylaws of the Belgrade Regional Park, Trails and Recreation
District and an interlocal agreement between the city and Gallatin County.
   6.   Impact Fee Advisory Committee 1 : The administration, function and
membership of the Impact Fee Advisory Committee is set forth in Section 1-8B-5,
Belgrade City Code, as amended from time to time.
   7.   Tree Board 2 :
      a.   Established: The city tree board has been established by ordinance
2007-9.
      b.   Members: The members of the tree board shall be the directors and ex
officio director of the Belgrade Regional Park, Trails and Recreation District
who reside in the city. The directors of the Belgrade Regional Park, Trails and
Recreation District who do not reside in the city shall not be members of the
tree board.
      c.   Duties: The duties of the tree board shall be to study, investigate,
counsel, develop and administer a plan for the care and preservation, pruning,
planting, replanting, removal or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks,
along streets and other public areas and present the plan to the city council
for acceptance and approval.
   8.   Senior Center Board: A five (5) member board shall be appointed by the
mayor and approved by the city council.
      a.   Duties: The senior center board is an advisory board and is
responsible for establishing budget recommendations to the manager and setting
policy for the Belgrade Senior Center.
      b.   Term Of Office: Board members serve for a term of three (3) years
after an initial staggered term.
   9.   Parking Violation Review Board:
      a.   Established: he three (3) member parking violation review board was
established in Title 5, Chapter 4, Belgrade City Code.
      b.   Members: The members of the parking violation review board shall be
members of the Senior Center Board and appointed from time to time by the
Senior Center Board.
      c.   Duties: The duties of the parking violation review board are set
forth in Title 5, Chapter 4, Belgrade City Code.
   5.   Senior Center Advisory Board: The Senior Center Advisory Board is a
five (5) member board appointed by the mayor and approved by the city council.
      a.   Duties: The Senior Center Advisory Board shall adopt policy for the
Belgrade Senior Center and shall make budget recommendations to the Belgrade
City Manager.
      b.   Term Of Office: Members of the Senior Center Advisory Board shall
serve three (3) year terms. The initial terms shall be staggered by appointment
of one (1) member to a one (1) year term, two (2) members to a two (2) year
term, and two (2) members to a three (3) year term.
      c.   No Compensation: The board members shall serve without compensation.
(Ord. 92-2, 5-18-1992; amd. Ord. 2008-2, 11-3-2008; Ord. 2008-3, 11-3-2008;
Ord. 2022-11, 8-1-2022; Ord. 2023-4, 3-20-2023; Ord. 2023-8, 7-17-2023)
 
Notes
1 See also section
  1-8B-5 of this code.
2 See also section
  3-4-2 of this code.
ARTICLE III
CAPITALIZATION POLICY FOR FIXED ASSETS
3.01. Fixed Assets
This policy establishes the criteria for capitalizing a fixed asset, as well as
the distinction between the treatment of maintenance costs versus additions,
betterment, and extraordinary repairs.
   A.   Fixed Asset: A fixed asset is property that meets all of the following
requirements:
      1.   Must be tangible in nature.
      2.   Must have a useful life of two (2) years or longer.
      3.   Must be of significant value.
   B.   Method Of Acquisition: Fixed assets may be acquired through donation,
purchases, or may be self-constructed.
      1.   Donations: The asset value for donations would be the fair market
value at the time of the donation.
      2.   Purchases: The asset value when purchased, is the initial cost plus
the original cost of the old asset given up, plus all costs of placing the
asset into operation. When the original cost of the old asset is unknown, use
the secondhand market price of the old asset.
      3.   Self-Constructed: The cost of the self-constructed assets should
include both the materials used and the cost of labor involved in the
construction of the asset.
   C.   Values Of Assets: The core of the capitalization policy is the
establishment of significant values for the different classes of assets.
      1.   Determination Of Significant Values: The following values shall be
used for determining significant values when capitalizing fixed assets:
 
Class Of Fixed Asset              Significant Value
Equipment and machinery           $10,000.00
Improvements other than buildings 10,000.00
Infrastructure                    25,000.00
Land                              All
Buildings                         All
 
      2.   Cost Below Significant Value: All machinery, equipment, buildings,
and improvements other than buildings, that have a cost below these significant
values should be expensed at the time of purchase. (Ord. 2016-2, 4-18-2016)
3.02. Maintenance Costs
Maintenance costs are those expenditures which are necessary to keep an asset
in its intended operating condition but which do not materially increases the
value or physical properties of the asset. Maintenance costs shall not be
capitalized and shall be charged against the appropriate expenditure account in
the current period.
3.03. Additions To Assets
Additions refer to a physical extension of an existing asset or the acquisition
of an entirely new asset which does not replace an existing asset. Additions
should be capitalized at cost when acquired or when construction is completed;
provided, that they are tangible in nature have a useful life of greater than
one year, and are of significant value.
3.04. Betterment Of Assets
Betterment exists when a part of an existing asset is replaced by another, and
the replacement provides a significant increase in the life or value of the
asset. The amount to be capitalized when a betterment is determined should be
the difference between the cost of the new asset and the cost of the asset it
replaces.
3.05. Extraordinary Repairs
Extraordinary repairs are those necessary costs related to the repair of a
substantial part of an asset. If adequate records are maintained or where
depreciation is not a factor, the cost of the replaced parts should be removed
from the asset account, along with any depreciation and the new part(s) added
to the asset account inclusive of the entire cost related to repairs. If
depreciation has been used and there are inadequate records, then charging of
the entire cost of repair to the accumulated depreciation account is
acceptable. (Ord. 92-2, 5-18-1992; amd. Ord. 2004-4, 4-5-2004; 2009 Code)
ARTICLE IV
SOCIAL SECURITY
4.01. Agreement To Participate
In 1954, the city filed a plan and agreement with the public employees
retirement division (formerly the state board of equalization) to extend
coverage to employees and officers of the city under the old age and survivors
insurance system and made the necessary appropriation of funds for such
coverage. (1983 Code § 1.12.010)
4.02. Payroll Deductions And Contributions
The director of finance is hereby authorized to establish a system of payroll
deductions to be matched by payments by the city to be made into the
contribution fund of the social security act through the public employees
retirement division, and to make charges of this contribution to the fund or
funds from which wages or salary payments are issued to employees of the city.
Such payments shall be in accordance with the provisions of the federal
insurance contribution act on all services which constitute employment within
the meaning of that act. Such payments shall be due and payable at such times
as established by the public employees retirement division. (1983 Code §
1.12.020)
EXHIBIT A
AGENDA
BELGRADE CITY COUNCIL MEETING
COUNCIL CHAMBERS
Date of Meeting
7:00 P.M.
1.   CALL TO ORDER
..... Pledge
..... Roll Call
..... Approve Minutes
2.   PUBLIC FORUM
3.   PUBLIC HEARING
4.   REPORTS
..... Mayor
..... City Attorney
..... City Manager
5.   DISCUSSION AGENDA
.....
.....
.....
6.   CONSENT AGENDA
.....
.....
7.   FOR YOUR INFORMATION
.....
.....
8.   ADJOURN
Next resolution number __________
Next ordinance number __________
This meeting is being tape recorded.
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1
BELGRADE CITY CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Rules Of Construction
1-1-4: Amendments
1-1-5: Code Alterations
1-1-6: Interpretation Of Administrative Authority
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon the adoption by the council, this code is hereby declared to be and shall
hereafter constitute the official city code of Belgrade. This code of
ordinances shall be known and cited as the BELGRADE CITY CODE and is hereby
published by authority of the council and shall be supplemented to incorporate
the most recent legislation of the city as provided in section
1-1-4 of this chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained
herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause
relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to
this code by title in any legal documents. (1983 Code §§ 1.00.010, 1.00.020;
amd. 2009 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
The city code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in administrative tribunals of this
state as the ordinances of the city of general and permanent effect, except the
excluded ordinances enumerated in section
1-2-1 of this title. (1983 Code § 1.00.020; amd. 2009 Code)
1-1-3: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION:
In the construction of this official code and all ordinances amendatory thereof
or supplementary thereto, the following rules shall be observed unless such
construction would be inconsistent with the manifest of the legislative body or
repugnant to the context:
   A.   Intent To Defraud: Whenever, by any of the provisions of this code, an
intent to defraud is required in order to constitute an offense, it is
sufficient if an intent appears to defraud any person, association or body
politic or any combination of persons.
   B.   Liability Of Employers And Agents: When the provisions herein contained
prohibit the commission or omission of any act, not only the person actually
doing the prohibited thing or omitting the directed act, but also the employer
and all other persons concerned or aiding or abetting the person shall be
guilty of the offense described and liable to the penalty set forth.
   C.   Title Of Section And Subsections 1 : The title of any section or
subsection of this code shall not be deemed to restrict, qualify or limit the
effect of the provisions set forth and contained in such section or subsection.
(1983 Code § 1.00.050)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  1-3-3 of this title.
1-1-4: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this code shall set forth the title, chapter and section
number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute
sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement that no ordinance or any
section thereof shall be revised or amended unless the new ordinance sets forth
the revised ordinance or amended section in full. All such amendments or
revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the codifiers, and
such ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in its proper place in
each copy of this code and in the digital copy of this code.(1983 Code §
1.00.030; amd. 2009 Code; Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-2024)
1-1-5: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may
be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized by the
council. The city clerk shall see that the replacement pages are properly
inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the city clerk. Any
person having custody of a copy of the city code shall make every effort to
maintain said code current as to the most recent ordinances passed. Such person
shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such are
delivered or made available to such person through the office of the city
clerk. Such code books, while in the actual possession of officials and other
interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the city and shall be
returned to the city clerk when directed so to do by order of the council.
(2009 Code; amd. Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-2024)
1-1-6: INTERPRETATION OF ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY:
Except as expressly provided by the Belgrade City Charter or applicable state
law, any authority, duty, or responsibility assigned in this code to a city
officer, employee, department, board, or committee is a delegation from the
City Manager. The City Manager retains supervisory control over each delegated
duty and may designate a qualified person to carry it out.
However, this delegation does not extend to the appointment of members to
boards, commissions, or committees unless the Charter or this code specifically
grants that authority to the City Manager. In the absence of such explicit
authority, appointments are made by the Mayor and approved by the City Council
or as otherwise provided by law.
References in this code to specific officials are to be read consistently with
this section. Nothing here limits the power of the City Council to create or
dissolve offices, boards, or commissions or to establish policy by ordinance or
resolution. (Ord. 2025-8, 10-6-2025)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal Of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Ways And Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Effect Of Repealing Ordinances
1-2-4: Court Proceedings
1-2-5: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the city passed prior to the adoption of this code
are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this code or are by
necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving
clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the following
ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation
ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations; franchise
ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or
corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances
establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places;
improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections;
ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the
city; and all special ordinances. (2009 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC WAYS AND PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways,
or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall
be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this code or by virtue of the
preceding section, excepting as the city code may contain provisions for such
matters, in which case, this code shall be considered as amending such
ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (2009 Code)
1-2-3: EFFECT OF REPEALING ORDINANCES:
The repeal of ordinances as provided shall not affect any right which has
accrued, any duty imposed, any penalty incurred, or any action or proceeding as
commenced under or by virtue of the ordinance repealed, or the tenure of office
of any person holding office at the time when they take effect; nor shall the
repeal of any ordinance thereby have the effect of reviving any ordinance
theretofore repealed or superseded. (1983 Code § 1.00.040)
1-2-4: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   Prior Acts: No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a
former ordinance whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as
to any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done,
any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or
claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any
such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as
practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party
affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes
effect.
   B.   Extend To All Repeals: This section shall extend to all repeals, either
by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making
any new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   C.   Currently Pending Actions: Nothing contained in this chapter shall be
construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general
ordinance of the city herein repealed, and the provisions of all general
ordinances contained in this code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions
and not a new enactment of the same provisions; nor shall this chapter be
deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or
to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or
as waiving any right of the city under any ordinance or provision thereof in
force at the time of the adoption of this code. (2009 Code)
1-2-5: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
of this code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional
or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision
shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of
this code, or any part thereof. The council hereby declares that it would have
passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or
phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections,
subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be
declared unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. (1983 Code § 1.00.050(4);
amd. 2009 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Construction Of Words
1-3-2: Definitions, General
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
   A.   Whenever any word in any section of this code importing the plural
number is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons,
any single matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although
distributive words may not have been used. When any subject matter, party or
person is referred to in this code by words importing the singular number only,
or a particular gender, several matters, parties or persons and the opposite
gender and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included; provided, that
these rules of construction shall not be applied to any section of this code
which contains any express provision excluding such construction or where the
subject matter or context may be repugnant thereto.
   B.   The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the city has been
changed in the content of this code to "title", "chapter", "section" and/or
"subsection" or words of like import for organizational and clarification
purposes only. Such change to the city's ordinances is not meant to amend
passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (2009 Code)
   C.   Words prohibiting anything being done, except in accordance with a
license or permit or authority from a board of officers, shall be construed as
giving such board of officers power to license or permit or authorize such
thing to be done.
   D.   Any use of the male or female pronouns in the code, whether "he",
"she", "him", "her" or words or phrases to similar effect, shall have no
significance in the interpretation and application of the terms, provisions and
conditions of this code, such use being solely for the sake of convenience.
(1983 Code § 1.00.050(5); amd. Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-2024)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code, they shall have
such meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either
expressly or by implication.
CITY: The city of Belgrade, county of Gallatin, state of Montana.
CODE: The municipal code of the city of Belgrade.
COUNCIL: Unless otherwise indicated, the city council of the city of Belgrade.
COUNTY: The county of Gallatin, state of Montana.
DAY: Any twenty four (24) hour period from twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight to
twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight.
DIRECTOR OF FINANCE: The director of finance of the city of Belgrade under the
direction of the City Manager.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this code to a city employee by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the city of
Belgrade".
KNOWINGLY: Imparts a knowledge that the fact exists which brings the act or
omission within the provisions of this code. It does not require any knowledge
of the unlawfulness of such act or omission.
LAND, REAL ESTATE AND REAL PROPERTY: Include land, tenements, hereditaments,
water rights, possessory rights and claims.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession
or occupation.
MCA: Abbreviation for Montana Code Annotated.
City Manager for the city of Belgrade
MAY: Permissive.
MONTH: A calendar month unless otherwise expressed.
MUNICIPALITY OR MUNICIPAL: The city of Belgrade.
NEGLECT, NEGLIGENCE, NEGLIGENT AND NEGLIGENTLY: Imparts a want of such
attention to the nature or probable consequences of the act or omission as a
prudent man ordinarily bestows in acting in his own concern.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive to the sensibilities of reasonable persons, or any
act or activity creating a hazard which threatens the health and welfare of
inhabitants of the city, or any activity which by its perpetuation can
reasonably be said to have a detrimental effect on the property of a person or
persons within the community.
OATH: Includes "affirmation", and the word "swear" includes the word "affirm".
Every mode of oral statement under oath or affirmation is embraced in the term
"depose".
OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with
others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of any
act required by the provisions of this code.
OFFICERS: Includes officers and boards in charge of departments and the members
of such boards. Whenever reference is made in this code to a city officer by
title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the
city of Belgrade".
OFFICIAL TIME: Standard time in the city of Belgrade.
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
PERSON: Any natural person, firm, association, joint venture, joint stock
company, partnership, organization, club, fraternal organization, company,
corporation, business, trust, or their manager, lessee, agent, servant,
officer, or employee of any of them.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Includes every description of money, goods, chattels,
effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any
pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged,
transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or
interest therein.
PROPERTY: Includes both real and personal property.
PUBLIC THOROUGHFARE: Includes streets, alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards,
public ways, public squares, public places and sidewalks.
QUARTER: Any three (3) month period ending with the last day of March, June,
September and December.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate
to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things direct to the consumer.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other
property.
SHALL: Mandatory.
SIGNATURE: Includes any name, mark, or sign written with the intent to
authenticate any instrument of writing.
STATE: The state of Montana.
STREET: Includes alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public
squares, public places and sidewalks.
TENANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies
the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.
WHOLESALER: The terms "wholesaler" and "wholesale dealer" as used in this code,
unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the
sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things to persons who purchase for the
purpose of resale.
WILFULLY: When applied to the intent with which an act is done or omitted,
implies simply a purpose or willingness to commit the act or make intent to
violate law or to injure another or to acquire an advantage.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by
law to any official or public writing or bond, it shall be in the proper
handwriting of such person, or in case such person is unable to write, by such
person's proper mark.
YEAR: Any one calendar year unless otherwise expressed. (1983 Code § 1.00.050
(5); amd. 2009 Code; Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-2024)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of the city code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or
reenacted 1 . (2009 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  1-1-3C of this title.
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: General Penalty
1-4-2: Execution On Fine
1-4-3: Civil Or Criminal Action
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY 1 :
   A.   Misdemeanor: Any violation of the provisions of this code is a
misdemeanor.
   B.   Penalty: The court, in imposing sentence upon an offender convicted of
an offense for violation of a provision of this code which refers to this
section of the code or for which no penalty is otherwise provided, may sentence
the offender to a term of imprisonment not to exceed six (6) months in the
county detention center, or fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00),
or both.
   C.   Separate Offense: Each day any violation of any provision of this code
shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
   D.   Revocation of a License or Permit: The revocation of a license or
permit is allowed in addition to any other penalty. (Ord. 2016-4, 6-20-2016)
 
Notes
1 1.   MCA §§ 7-1-4150, 7-1-4151, 7-5-109, 7-5-4207.
1-4-2: EXECUTION ON FINE:
   A.   Fine Only: If the judgment is for a fine alone, execution may issue
thereon as on a judgment in a civil case.
   B.   Fine And Imprisonment: If the judgment is for a fine and imprisonment
until the fine be paid, the defendant must be committed to the custody of the
proper officer, and by him detained until the judgment is complied with. The
imprisonment must not exceed one day for every fifty dollars ($50.00) of the
fine. (Code § 1.08.020; amd. 2009 Code)
1-4-3: CIVIL OR CRIMINAL ACTION 1 :
   A.   Court: All actions, whether civil or criminal, for a violation of any
of the provisions of this code may be commenced in any court of competent
jurisdiction.
   B.   Complaint: A criminal complaint must substantially comply with the
requirements of criminal complaints under state law. (Ord. 2016-4, 6-20-2016;
amd. Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-2024)
 
Notes
1 1.   MCA title 3, chapters 6 and 11.
CHAPTER 5
GENERAL AND CORPORATE PROVISIONS
SECTION:
1-5-1: Wards
1-5-2: Corporate Seal
1-5-3: City Limits
1-5-4: Depositories
1-5-5: Ordinances; Posting Or Publishing
1-5-6: Liability Insurance For City Contracts
1-5-7: Territorial Application Of Police Powers
1-5-8: Identity Theft Protection Program
1-5-9: Civil Litigation And Settlement Authority
1-5-1: WARDS 1 :
Established: Pursuant to Montana Code Annotated section 7-5-4401, the city
council hereby establishes the city into three (3) wards. The council, by
resolution, may update the boundaries of the wards from time to time to reflect
the changes in population. The official map shall be filed with the County
Clerk and Recorder, and a copy will be maintained at city offices.(Ord. 87-2,
5-4-1987; amd. Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-2024)
 
Notes
  1. See sections
1 5.03 and
  5.04 of charter for reapportionment of wards and redistricting.
1-5-2: CORPORATE SEAL:
A seal of circular form, capable of making an impression upon paper, with the
words, "CITY OF BELGRADE MONTANA" on the edge of said circle, with "INC" in
small print rotated at a ninety degree (90°) angle between the beginning of the
words "CITY" and "MONTANA" and the date "1906" in small print rotated at a
ninety degree (90°) angle between the end of the words "BELGRADE" and
"MONTANA"; in the center is a drawing showing the mountains, an airplane, water
tower and grain elevator, is hereby adopted and declared to be the corporate
seal of the city, to be used in all cases in which a seal is required by the
laws of Montana and the ordinances of the city, to be used in attesting its
corporate acts.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b04b0e5ccf6b07bdb8fe5d5bf5701ac5bc51801a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-27.png]
 
(1983 Code § 1.10.010; amd. Res. 2007-2, 2-5-2007; 2009 Code)
1-5-3: CITY LIMITS:
The Belgrade city limits are hereby defined to be as set forth on the official
map of said city as prepared by the Gallatin County clerk and recorder's
office. Said map is on file in the office of the city clerk, and, by this
specific reference, is made a part of this chapter. (1983 Code § 1.03.010; amd.
2009 Code; Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-2024)
1-5-4: DEPOSITORIES:
The city council of the city of Belgrade, Montana, shall designate by
resolution of the city council from time to time one or more banks, building
and loan associations, or savings and loan associations, which are subject to
national supervision or state examination, as depositories of funds of the city
of Belgrade. The city council may by resolution from time to time also
authorize and direct the deposit or investment of city funds in such other
financial institutions, investments or securities as authorized by the laws of
the state of Montana. (Ord. 2014-2, 5-19-2014)
1-5-5: ORDINANCES; POSTING OR PUBLISHING:
Every ordinance shall, as soon as practicable after its passage, be posted in a
conspicuous place within the city limits, or be published in some newspaper of
general circulation in the city, as the council may direct; or as may be
required by the provisions of the Montana Code Annotated, relating to the
government of cities. (1983 Code § 2.04.060; amd. 2009 Code)
1-5-6: LIABILITY INSURANCE FOR CITY CONTRACTS:
The city shall require all persons, including all forms of business entities,
as a condition of contracting with the city on all construction contracts, to
provide written documentation of liability insurance upon said person or entity
in the sum of at least one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for the entire
period of execution of said construction contract. (Ord. 90-2, 10-1-1990; amd.
Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-2024)
1-5-7: TERRITORIAL APPLICATION OF POLICE POWERS:
Belgrade police officers are hereby authorized and shall have power to make
arrests of persons charged with a crime within the limits of the city of
Belgrade, and within four and one-half (41/2) miles thereof. (Ord. 2012-2, 6-4-
2012)
1-5-8: IDENTITY THEFT PROTECTION PROGRAM:
   A.   Pursuant to federal law the federal trade commission (the "FTC")
adopted identity theft rules requiring the creation of certain policies
relating to the use of consumer reports, address discrepancy information and
the detection, prevention and mitigation of identity theft.
   B.   The FTC regulations, adopted as 16 CFR section 681.2, require
creditors, as defined by 15 USC section 1681a(r)(5), to adopt red flag policies
to prevent and mitigate identity theft with respect to covered accounts.
   C.   The city of Belgrade (the "city") is a creditor with respect to 16 CFR
section 681.2 by virtue of providing utility services or by otherwise accepting
payment for municipal services in arrears.
   D.   The FTC regulations require each creditor to adopt an identity theft
prevention program (the "program") which will use red flags to detect, prevent
and mitigate identity theft related to information used in covered accounts.
   E.   The city recognizes the responsibility to safeguard personal customer
information within the workplace. The creation and implementation of an
identity theft prevention program will identify, detect, mitigate, and update
red flags that signal the possibility of identity theft in connection with the
opening of a "covered account" or an existing "covered account".
   F.   The city hereby adopts by reference the red flag policy and identity
theft protection program. (Res. 2011-4, 6-6-2011)
1-5-9: CIVIL LITIGATION AND SETTLEMENT AUTHORITY:
   A.   Litigation Authority. The City Manager, in consultation with the City
Attorney, may initiate, defend, or intervene in any civil or administrative
proceeding when the City Manager determines that such action is necessary to
protect the legal, financial, or policy interests of the City of Belgrade.
   B.   Settlement Authority. The City Manager may approve and execute
settlement agreements, compromises, or releases of claims on behalf of the City
for an amount not exceeding eighty thousand dollars ($80,000) per matter,
provided that:
      1.   Sufficient appropriations exist in the adopted City budget; or
      2.   Such authority falls within the City Manager's authority under
Section 2-3-4 (Budget Administration) of the Belgrade City Code.
   C.   Personnel Matters. Settlements arising from personnel actions,
employment-related claims, or employee grievances are governed by the budgetary
authority already delegated to the City Manager and are not subject to the
monetary limit in subsection B of this section.
   D.   Council Authority. Nothing in this section limits the authority of the
City Council to amend the monetary limit established in subsection B, or to
otherwise modify the City Manager's authority under this section, by ordinance
or resolution consistent with applicable law. (Ord. 2025-8, 10-6-2025)
CHAPTER 6
CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 1
SECTION:
1-6-1: Bonds
 
Notes
1 1. See section 1.06 of the charter for the oath of office. See administrative
  code for provisions regarding city officials.
1-6-1: BONDS:
All city officers shall be included in a blanket bond for the faithful
performance of their duties, said bond to be executed by a duly authorized
surety company, insurance company, or the Montana Municipal Interlocal
Authority, the premiums thereon to be paid by the city. (2009 Code; amd. Ord.
2024-3, 3-4-2024)
CHAPTER 7
ELECTIONS
SECTION:
1-7-1: Elections In Accordance With State Statutes
1-7-2: Qualifications Of Electors
1-7-3: Election Wards And Precincts
1-7-1: ELECTIONS IN ACCORDANCE WITH STATE STATUTES:
All primary and general elections shall be held in accordance with the statutes
of the state of Montana. (1983 Code § 1.04.010)
1-7-2: QUALIFICATIONS OF ELECTORS:
Any person shall be qualified to vote in any and all city elections provided
they are a resident of the city or an area which has been annexed and certified
as such by the clerk and recorder of Gallatin County. (1983 Code § 1.04.020)
1-7-3: ELECTION WARDS AND PRECINCTS 1 :
Each ward of the town shall be a voting precinct of itself for the purpose of
elections, whether annual or special. (1983 Code § 1.04.030)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  1-5-1 of this title for establishment of wards.
CHAPTER 8
REVENUE AND FINANCE
SECTION:
1-8-1: Generally
1-8-1-1: Transfer Of Funds; When Authorized
1-8-1-2: Loan Of Funds; When Authorized
1-8-1-3: Recognition Of Home Rule Authority
1-8-2: Budget
1-8-2-1: Budget Administration And Oversight
1-8-2-2: Budget Operating Guidelines
1-8-2-3: Budget Status Reporting
1-8-3: General Fund Balance Requirement
1-8-3-1: Purpose
1-8-3-2: Definitions
1-8-3-3: Establishment Of Minimum End Fund Balance
1-8-3-4: Exceptions
1-8-3-5: Implementation
1-8-4: Collection Of Taxes
1-8-4-1: Tax Collection By County; When Authorized
1-8-4-2: Annual City Tax Levy Determination
1-8-4-3: Monthly Settlement And Collection From County Treasurer
1-8-4-4: Annual Tax Reports To Council; Contents
1-8-4-5: Special Assessments; Collection Procedure
1-8-4-6: Special Assessments; Procedure For Levy
1-8-4-7: Special Assessments; Payable When; Delinquency Penalty
1-8-4-8: Special Assessments; Form Of Notice And Receipt
1-8-4-9: Special Assessments; Notice Of Payment Deadlines And Delinquency
Conditions
1-8-4-10: Special Assessments; Delinquency Report
1-8-4-11: Delinquent Assessments; Declaration By Resolution; Conditions
1-8-4-12: Delinquent Assessments; Certificates To County Clerk And County
Treasurer
1-8-4-13: Delinquent Assessments; Notice Publication Required
1-8-4-14: Delinquent Assessments; Payment Procedure
1-8-4-15: Delinquent Tax Sales; Manager Or Designee Authority And Duties
1-8-4-16: Reinstating Special Assessments
1-8-4-17: Special Improvement Districts; Annual Reports
1-8-5: Purchasing
1-8-5-1: Authority To Establish Purchasing Policy
1-8-5-2: Purchasing Agreements And Authority
1-8-5-3: Authority To Enter Into Single And Multi-Year Contracts
1-8-5-4: Approval Of Multi-Year Contracts By City Council
1-8-5-5: Compliance With Budgetary Appropriations
1-8-5-6: Recordkeeping And Transparency
1-8-5-7: Review And Revision Of Purchasing Policy
1-8-5-8: Request For Proposal / Qualifications (RFP/RFQ)
1-8-5-9: Professional Services Contracts And Authority
1-8-5-10: Construction, Repair, Or Maintenance Contracts And Authority
1-8-6: Special Improvement District Revolving Fund
1-8-6-1: Established; Name And Purpose
1-8-6-2: Sources Of Funds
1-8-6-3: Loans From Revolving Fund To Special Improvement District Fund;
Conditions
1-8-6-4: Liens Imposed For Amounts Loaned
1-8-6-5: Use Of Surplus In Fund
1-8-6-6: Levy Of Tax; Method And Effect
1-8-6-7: Statutory Authority For Division Provisions
1-8-7: Urban Renewal, Tax Increment, And Economic Development Districts
1-8-7-1: Urban Renewal, Tax Increment, And Economic Development Districts;
Creation
1-8-7-2: Costs Which May Be Paid From Tax Increments
1-8-7-3: Use of Tax Increments For Bond Payments
1-8-7-4: Contents Of Ordinance
1-8-7-5: Termination Of Tax Increment Financing Provisions
1-8-7-6: Administration
1-8-7-7: Downtown Area Urban Renewal District
1-8-8: Business Improvement District Programs
1-8-8-1: Purpose And Intent
1-8-9: Impact Fees
1-8-9-1: Legislative Findings
1-8-9-2: Authority; Applicability
1-8-9-3: Intent
1-8-9-4: Definitions
1-8-9-5: Impact Fee Advisory Committee
1-8-9-6: Street Impact Fees
1-8-9-7: Fire Protection Impact Fees
1-8-9-8: Water Impact Fees
1-8-9-9: Sewer Impact Fees
1-8-9-10: Park Impact Fees
1-8-9-11: Administrative Fee
1-8-9-12: Credits Against Impact Fees
1-8-9-13: Miscellaneous Provisions
1-8-9-14: Appeal
1-8-10: Emergency Purchasing Authority
1-8-10-1: Purpose And Findings
1-8-10-2: Definitions
1-8-10-3: Emergency Procurement Procedures
1-8-10-4: Notification And Reporting
1-8-10-5: Accountability And Documentation
1-8-10-6: Duration Of Emergency Procurement Authority
1-8-10-7: Declaration Of Emergency Procurement Authority
1-8-11:    Master Fee Schedule
1-8-11-1: Purpose
1-8-11-2: Establishment Of Master Fee Schedule
1-8-11-3: Adoption And Amendment Process
1-8-11-4: Payment And Collection
1-8-11-5: Waivers And Adjustments
1-8-11-6: Enforcement And Compliance
1-8-1: GENERALLY:
1-8-1-1: TRANSFER OF FUNDS; WHEN AUTHORIZED:
The council shall have the power to transfer funds or moneys collected under
the general levy, or for fees, licenses or fines, from any fund into which they
may have been paid, to any other fund; provided, however, there shall be a
surplus in the fund from which such transfer is made. (Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-2024)
1-8-1-2: LOAN OF FUNDS; WHEN AUTHORIZED:
The Council shall have the power to loan monies between funds by resolution.
The resolution shall include the background information for the loan and the
payback schedule. Loans between funds shall not exceed ten (10) years and must
be acknowledged in the annual budget. (Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-2024)
1-8-1-3: RECOGNITION OF HOME RULE AUTHORITY:
The City Council hereby affirms and recognizes the home rule charter authority
of the City of Belgrade as established by the Montana Constitution. (Ord. 2024-
3, 3-4-2024)
1-8-2: BUDGET:
1-8-2-1: BUDGET ADMINISTRATION AND OVERSIGHT:
   A.   Responsibilities of the city council.
      1.   To review, pass and amend the budget, as necessary.
      2.   To review budget status reports, as presented.
      3.   To review accounts payable listings, as presented. Accounts Payable
listings will be electronically delivered to the council monthly.
   B.   Responsibilities of the city manager.
      1.   To prepare and present a budget to the council each fiscal year.
      2.   To execute the budget that has been adopted by the council, in
accordance with section
1-8-2-1.
      3.   To propose and schedule budget amendments, as necessary.
      4.   To report to the council on the financial condition of the city and
the status of the budget, according to the methods described in section
1-8-2-3. (Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-2024)
1-8-2-2: BUDGET OPERATING GUIDELINES:
   A.   Once the approved budget has been adopted, the city manager has the
authority to administer all city accounts, in accordance with the approved
budget. Within any fund, the city manager may re-allocate appropriation
authority among line items as long as the total appropriation amount is not
increased.
   B.   In addition, the city council hereby delegates appropriation and budget
amendment authority to the city manager for the expenditures from the following
funds: debt service funds; fee-based budgets; trust funds; federal, state and
private grants accepted and approved by the city council; special assessments;
moneys borrowed during the year; proceeds from sale of land and assets; and
funds for gifts or donations. The council also authorizes the city manager to
accept gifts and donations on behalf of the city, including any reasonable
restrictions on said funds.
   C.   Through the annual appropriation resolution each year, the city council
will authorize and re-appropriate the unexpended balance of capital improvement
program items and building repair and maintenance items previously budgeted
which have not been completed. (Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-2024)
1-8-2-3: BUDGET STATUS REPORTING:
   A.   The city manager will compile the following reports and make them
available to the council, city departments and the public:
      1.   Monthly budget-to-actual expenditure report.
      2.   Quarterly summary of revenues and expenditures report. (Ord. 2024-3,
3-4-2024)
1-8-3: GENERAL FUND BALANCE REQUIREMENT:
1-8-3-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this section is to establish and maintain a prudent financial
management practice by instituting an end fund balance requirement for the City
of Belgrade This measure aims to ensure fiscal stability, enhance financial
accountability, and provide a safeguard against unforeseen economic challenges.
(Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-2024)
1-8-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
 
END FUND The unassigned portion of the general fund balance at the close of the fiscal
BALANCE: year, calculated as the difference between total fund balance and assigned,
         restricted, and committed fund balances.
MINIMUM  The specified percentage of the City’s operating expenditures and transfers
END FUND out, to be maintained in the end fund balance. (Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-2024)
BALANCE:
 
1-8-3-3: ESTABLISHMENT OF MINIMUM END FUND BALANCE:
   A.   The City of Belgrade shall maintain a minimum end fund balance
equivalent to 10% of the total operating expenditures and transfers out for the
fiscal year.
   B.   The calculation of the minimum end fund balance shall be based on the
most recently adopted annual budget.
   C.   The City Finance Department shall regularly review the actual end fund
balance against the established minimum, and report any variance to the City
Council.
   D.   The council may adopt a budget with less than 10% of the fund balance
if in the adopting resolution a reason for below minimum standard is included.
The council shall at no time adopt a budget with a fund balance less than 3%.
(Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-2024)
1-8-3-4: EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   In the event of a declared emergency or unforeseen circumstances
affecting the City’s financial stability, the City Council may temporarily
suspend the minimum end fund balance requirement by passing a resolution with a
two-thirds majority vote.
   B.   Any suspension of the minimum end fund balance requirement shall be
clearly documented, and a plan for re-establishing the required balance within
a reasonable timeframe shall be outlined. (Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-2024)
1-8-3-5: IMPLEMENTATION:
   A.   The city manager is responsible for implementing and monitoring
compliance with this section.
   B.   The Finance Department shall provide annual reports to the City Council
on the status of the end fund balance and compliance with the established
requirements. (Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-2024)
1-8-4: COLLECTION OF TAXES:
1-8-4-1: TAX COLLECTION BY COUNTY; WHEN AUTHORIZED:
All taxes levied by the city of Belgrade for general, municipal and
administrative purposes shall be collected by the county treasurer, as provided
by MCA 7-6-4413. (Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-2024)
1-8-4-2: ANNUAL CITY TAX LEVY DETERMINATION:
The city council must, on or before the second Monday in August of each year,
by resolution, determine the amount of the city taxes for all purposes to be
levied and assessed on the taxable property in the city for the current fiscal
year, and the clerk of the council must duly certify to the county clerk a copy
of such resolution, and the county treasurer must collect such taxes, as
provided by MCA 7-6-4413. (Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-2024)
1-8-4-3: MONTHLY SETTLEMENT AND COLLECTION FROM COUNTY TREASURER:
The city manager or designee shall, immediately after the first of every month,
settle with and collect from the county treasurer all taxes for general,
municipal and administrative purposes collected by the county treasurer. (Ord.
2024-3, 3-4-2024)
1-8-4-4: ANNUAL TAX REPORTS TO COUNCIL; CONTENTS:
   A.   On or before January 1 of each and every year, the city manager or
designee shall make a report to the council showing:
      1.   Total assessable value of property within the city;
      2.   Taxable value of property within the city;
      3.   Rate of taxation for the city for general, municipal and
administrative purposes;
      4.   Total amount of taxes due the city for the preceding year;
      5.   Amount collected;
      6.   Amount delinquent.
   B.   On or before August 1 of each and every year, the manager or designee
shall make a like report to the council of the city.
   C.   The reports so made shall likewise contain a statement showing taxes
delinquent and due and owing to the city for prior years. (Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-
2024)
1-8-4-5: SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS; COLLECTION PROCEDURE:
All special assessments, of whatever kind and character, heretofore levied, or
which may be hereafter levied, by the council of the city to defray the cost of
any special improvements in the city, or special assessments heretofore levied
or hereafter levied for special purposes, as provided by law and this Code,
shall be collected by the city, by and through its manager or designee. The
manager or designee shall make these collections in the same manner and at the
same time as general taxes are collected by the county treasurer. The manager
or designee shall make proper distribution to the various funds for which such
collections are made of all money collected. (Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-2024)
1-8-4-6: SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS; PROCEDURE FOR LEVY:
Within two days after the passage and adoption of any resolution of the city
council levying and assessing any special improvement assessment, the city
clerk shall deliver the original or certified copy of such resolution of such
levy and assessment to the manager or designee, and the manager or designee
shall thereupon enter and spread the assessments so made in the special
improvement assessment book, against the property against which the assessment
is a lien. (Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-2024)
1-8-4-7: SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS; PAYABLE WHEN; DELINQUENCY PENALTY:
All special assessments, or installments of special assessments, heretofore or
hereafter levied and assessed for any purpose whatsoever, duly and regularly
levied by resolution according to law, shall be payable on or before 6:00 p.m.
on November 30 of each year, and in the event the same are not paid on or
before said date, the same shall become delinquent and shall be subject to a
penalty of five percent, and shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per
month from the date of delinquency. (Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-2024)
1-8-4-8: SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS; FORM OF NOTICE AND RECEIPT:
The city manager or designee shall prepare and adopt, a form of notice and
receipt for special assessments. Such notice and receipt shall conform
substantially to the form used by the county treasurer. The original shall
constitute the receipt to the taxpayer; the duplicate, the notice to the
taxpayer; and the triplicate, the permanent record in the office of the city
manager or designee. The notice herein specified shall contain an itemized
statement of the amount of taxes due the current year, and the amount due and
delinquent for other years (if any). The city manager or designee shall mail,
on or before October 25 of each year, postage prepaid, the aforesaid notice to
the last known address of each taxpayer. (Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-2024)
1-8-4-9: SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS; NOTICE OF PAYMENT DEADLINES AND DELINQUENCY
CONDITIONS:
   A.   On or before October 25 of each year, the manager or designee shall
publish a notice specifying:
      1.   That all special taxes, special assessments, or installments of
special assessments, made for special improvements or special services of any
nature, duly and regularly levied by resolution of the city council, according
to law, shall by payable before 6:00 p.m., on November 30 next thereafter, and
in the event the same are not paid on or before said date, the amount of such
taxes and assessments shall become delinquent, and all delinquent taxes shall
bear interest at the rate of one percent per month from the time they are first
delinquent until paid. A penalty of five percent shall be added to all
delinquent taxes;
      2.   The time and place at which payment of such taxes may be made;
      3.   That in the event that any installment of an assessment which has
been made payable in installments shall be allowed by a taxpayer to become
delinquent, the city council may declare all unpaid installments of such
assessment delinquent, also.
   B.   Provided that any failure to give any of these notices will not affect
the legality of the tax, nor relieve the taxpayer from any of the taxpayer’s
liability. (Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-2024)
1-8-4-10: SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS; DELINQUENCY REPORT.
   A.   Immediately after November 30, and before December 7 of each and every
year, the city manager or designee shall make to, and file with, the city
council a report showing the delinquencies for that year, and setting forth:
      1.   The name of the owner;
      2.   The description of the lot or parcel of property;
      3.   The amount of delinquent assessments for the current year;
      4.   The number and amount of unpaid installments of such delinquent
special assessments;
      5.   The amount due and delinquent for other years, if any. (Ord. 2024-3,
3-4-2024)
1-8-4-11: DELINQUENT ASSESSMENTS; DECLARATION BY RESOLUTION; CONDITIONS.
When the payment of any one installment of any special assessment becomes
delinquent, all payments of subsequent installments shall, at the option of the
council of the city, by appropriation resolution duly adopted, become
delinquent. The council shall thereupon, at its option, by appropriation
resolution duly adopted, declare all such unpaid special assessments, or
installment of such special assessments, and all subsequent installments of
such special assessments, due, payable and delinquent. The whole property may
be sold the same as other property is sold for taxes. (Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-2024)
1-8-4-12: DELINQUENT ASSESSMENTS; CERTIFICATES TO COUNTY CLERK AND COUNTY
TREASURER:
   A.   Before December 10 (or before June 10, if the December certification
has been omitted or incompletely or improperly made), the city manager or
designee shall certify all delinquent taxes and assessments to the county clerk
and to the county treasurer for collection as provided by law.
   B.   Such certificate shall contain:
      1.   The description of each lot or parcel of land on which any tax or
assessment has become delinquent, and against which it is a lien;
      2.   The name and address of the person to whom assessed;
      3.   The date when the same became delinquent;
      4.   The amount of the delinquent tax or assessment;
      5.   The penalty to be added thereto;
      6.   The total amount of such delinquent tax or assessment with penalty
added; and
      7.   If any special assessment is payable in installments, and any
installment thereof becomes delinquent, the amount of such delinquent
installment shall be included in such certificate, provided that in the event
the city council shall by resolution declare the whole of the assessment
remaining unpaid to be delinquent, then the whole of the assessment remaining
unpaid shall be included in such certificate. (Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-2024)
1-8-4-13: DELINQUENT ASSESSMENTS; NOTICE PUBLICATION REQUIRED:
   A.   Within ten days of the time of filing the certificates required in this
section, the manager or designee shall publish, in not less than one issue of
the newspaper of largest circulation in the city, a notice specifying:
      1.   That the manager or designee has certified to the county treasurer a
complete delinquent list of all persons and property in the city, against which
delinquent taxes are a lien and that the county treasurer will sell such
property at a later date at public auction unless prior to such auction all
delinquent taxes, together with interest, penalties and costs thereon due, are
paid;
      2.   That a complete delinquent list of all persons and property in the
city now owing taxes is on file in the office of the county treasurer and in
the office of the manager or designee and is subject to public inspection and
examination;
      3.   That the date of the sale shall be as determined by the county
treasurer;
      4.   That delinquent assessments may be reinstated by complying with the
provisions of MCA 7-12-4184. (Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-2024)
1-8-4-14: DELINQUENT ASSESSMENTS; PAYMENT PROCEDURE.
All delinquent assessments certified to the county clerk shall be paid to and
collected, with penalty and interest, by the county treasurer, and that the
county treasurer shall account therefor and pay the same to the manager or
designee, as provided by MCA 7-124184. (Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-2024)
1-8-4-15: DELINQUENT TAX SALES; MANAGER OR DESIGNEE AUTHORITY AND DUTIES.
At the time and place that property in the county upon which delinquent taxes
are a lien is sold, at public auction, as provided by MCA 15-17-122, the
manager or designee shall attend each delinquent tax sale, and shall then and
there take such proceedings as the council or city manager may direct, to
protect the interests of the city in and to any property sold for delinquent
taxes, and in which the city may have an interest by reason of delinquent
special assessments which are a lien thereon, and the city may at such
delinquent tax sale purchase, and may, under and by virtue of the provisions of
MCA 7-124227 and 7-12-4228, bid in said property, and have certificate of sale
issued to the city; or the city may, at any time subsequent to said delinquent
tax sales, or either of them, acquire any of the property struck off to the
county at said delinquent tax sales, as provided by said MCA chs. 7-12 and 15-
17 hereinbefore referred to, and under such terms and conditions as the council
may authorize and direct; that any properties so acquired shall be paid for
from the revolving fund, if and when such revolving fund is provided by the
council of the city, as provided by MCA ch. 7-18. (Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-2024)
1-8-4-16: REINSTATING SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.
When any special assessment, or installment or installments of special
assessments, have become delinquent, and are so declared by appropriate
resolution of the city council, and have been certified to the county clerk and
county treasurer for collection, as provided in this division, the council may
nevertheless, at its option, upon the payment to the manager or designee of the
assessment, or installment or installments of special assessments, with penalty
and interest, up to date, by appropriate resolution, be withdrawn from the
county treasurer, and cancelled from the treasurer’s records, and reinstated in
the office of the manager or designee on the director’s special improvement
assessment book. Such withdrawal and reinstatement may be had and made at any
time before or after the sale of the property for delinquent taxes, and before
tax deed therefor has been executed. When the council shall have passed a
resolution as contemplated in this division, and when a taxpayer shall have
complied with all the conditions therein specified, the manager or designee
shall file with the county clerk and the county treasurer a certified copy of
such resolution, which shall be the county treasurer’s authority to cancel and
withdraw such delinquent special assessments as may be therein specified. The
manager or designee shall then reinstate such assessments or installments on
the special improvement assessment book, as the manager or designee is directed
in the resolution of the council to reinstate. (Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-2024)
1-8-4-17: SPECIAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS; ANNUAL REPORTS.
   A.   On January 1 of each year, or at such time as the council may direct,
the city manager or designee shall make a written report to the council showing
the status of the assessments and bonds outstanding against the several special
improvement districts, setting forth the following:
      1.   Amount of special assessment levied against each district;
      2.   Amount of bonds or warrants issued in payment of the cost of the
improvement;
      3.   Bonds or warrants which have been paid;
      4.   Bonds or warrants outstanding;
      5.   Special improvement assessments outstanding but not delinquent;
      6.   Delinquent special assessments, if any, and the property against
which such delinquent special assessments are a lien. (Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-2024)
1-8-5: PURCHASING:
1-8-5-1: AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH PURCHASING POLICY:
The City Manager is hereby granted the authority to establish a comprehensive
purchasing policy for the City of Belgrade, Montana. The policy shall be in
accordance with applicable state laws and regulations governing municipal
purchasing. (Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-2024)
1-8-5-2: PURCHASING AGREEMENTS AND AUTHORITY:
   A.   The City Manager is authorized to enter into purchasing agreements for
the procurement of vehicles, machinery, equipment, goods, materials, supplies,
and services on behalf of the city in accordance with the established
purchasing policy in this section and state law.
   B.   The City Manager is authorized to enter into purchasing agreements for
items which cost $80,000 or less without city council approval.
   C.   The City Council recognizes cooperative purchasing programs that have
utilized a competitive bidding process that meets or exceeds state law.
   D.   The City Manager is authorized to enter into purchasing agreements for
any amount for items purchased through cooperative purchasing programs that
have utilized a competitive bidding process that meets or exceeds state law.
   E.   The purchase of any item which costs more than $80,000, other than a
purchase through a cooperative purchasing program, shall be by competitive bid
pursuant to MCA §7-5-4302, or by an exception to competitive bidding pursuant
to MCA §7-54303, with approval of the City Council. (Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-2024)
1-8-5-3: AUTHORITY TO ENTER INTO SINGLE AND MULTI-YEAR CONTRACTS:
   A.   The City Manager is granted the authority to enter into any single-year
contract that has been appropriated in the approved budget.
   B.   The City Manager is also granted the authority to enter into multi-year
contracts for general administrative services that are in the best interest and
value of the city, including but not limited to telephone services, internet
services, cellular services, copier contracts, and solid waste removal. (Ord.
2024-3, 3-4-2024)
1-8-5-4: APPROVAL OF MULTI-YEAR CONTRACTS BY CITY COUNCIL:
   A.   Any multi-year contract not authorized in Section
1-8-5-3 shall be brought before the City Council by the City Manager or
designee for approval by the City Council.
   B.   The City Manager shall provide the City Council with a detailed
explanation of the terms, conditions, and financial implications of the
proposed multi-year contract prior to seeking approval.
   C.   The City Council reserves the right to approve, modify, or reject any
multi-year contract presented by the City Manager. (Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-2024)
1-8-5-5: COMPLIANCE WITH BUDGETARY APPROPRIATIONS:
All contracts entered into by the City Manager, whether single-year or multi-
year, shall be subject to the budgetary appropriations approved by the City
Council. (Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-2024)
1-8-5-6: RECORDKEEPING AND TRANSPARENCY:
The City Manager or designee shall maintain records of all purchasing
transactions and contracts in accordance with applicable laws and shall provide
regular reports to the City Council for transparency and accountability. (Ord.
2024-3, 3-4-2024)
1-8-5-7: REVIEW AND REVISION OF PURCHASING POLICY:
The City Manager shall periodically review and, if necessary, revise the
purchasing policy to ensure compliance with state laws and the evolving needs
of the City. (Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-2024)
1-8-5-8: REQUEST FOR PROPOSAL / QUALIFICATIONS (RFP/RFQ):
   A.   The City Manager shall develop and implement procedures for the
creation and issuance of Requests for Proposals (RFPs) and Requests for
Qualifications (RFQs) for professional services for architectural, engineering,
and land surveying services for which the fees are estimated to exceed $50,000.
   B.   The RFP/RFQ process shall be designed to ensure fairness, and obtain
the best value for the City.
   C.   The City Manager shall establish evaluation criteria for RFP/RFQ
responses, considering factors such as cost, experience, qualifications, and
other relevant criteria.
   D.   The City Manager shall present the results of the RFP/RFQ process to
the City Council for approval before finalizing any contracts resulting from
such processes.
   E.   The City Manager shall ensure that any such process in this section
meets or exceeds applicable state and federal law. (Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-2024)
1-8-5-9: PROFESSIONAL SERVICES CONTRACTS AND AUTHORITY:
   A.   The City Manager is authorized to negotiate and enter into professional
services contracts for architectural, engineering, and land surveying services
for which the fees do not exceed $50,000.
   B.   Professional services for architectural, engineering, and land
surveying for which the fees are estimated to exceed $50,000 shall be approved
by the city council following the process set forth in Section
1-8-5-8 above. (Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-2024)
1-8-5-10: CONSTRUCTION, REPAIR, OR MAINTENANCE CONTRACTS AND AUTHORITY:
   A.   The City Manager is authorized to negotiate and enter into contracts
for construction, repair, or maintenance of streets, roads, utilities,
buildings and other improvements which are $80,000 or less.
   B.   The City Council shall approve all contracts for construction, repair,
or maintenance of streets, roads, utilities, buildings and other improvements
which are in excess of $80,000 after competitive bid pursuant to MCA §7-5-4302,
or by an exception to competitive bidding pursuant to MCA §7-5-4303. (Ord.
2024-3, 3-4-2024)
1-8-6: SPECIAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT REVOLVING FUND:
1-8-6-1: ESTABLISHED; NAME AND PURPOSE:
In order to secure the prompt payment of any special improvement district bonds
and/or warrants issued in payment of improvements made in any special
improvement district or districts created after February 25, 1929, and the
interest thereon, as it becomes due, there is created and established a fund to
be known and designated as “special improvement district revolving fund.” (Ord.
2024-3, 3-4-2024)
1-8-6-2: SOURCES OF FUNDS:
   A.   For the purpose of providing funds for the special improvement district
revolving fund, the council:
      1.   Transfer from general fund. May, in its discretion, from time to
time, transfer to the special improvement district revolving fund from the
general fund of the city such amount or amounts as may be deemed necessary,
which amount or amounts so transferred shall be deemed and considered and shall
be loans from such general fund to the special improvement district revolving
fund; and
      2.   Tax levy. Shall, in addition to such transfers from the general
fund, or in lieu thereof, levy and collect for the special improvement district
revolving fund such a tax, hereby declared to be for a public purpose, on all
the taxable property of the city, as shall be necessary to meet the financial
requirements of the fund, such levy, together with such transfer, not to exceed
in any one year five percent of the principal amount of the then-outstanding
special improvement district bonds and/or warrants. (Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-2024)
1-8-6-3: LOANS FROM REVOLVING FUND TO SPECIAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT FUND;
CONDITIONS:
Whenever any special improvement district bond or warrant, or interest thereon,
issued for improvements made in special improvement districts created after
February 25, 1929, shall be or shall become due and payable, and there shall
then be either no money or not sufficient money in the appropriate special
improvement district fund with which to pay the same, an amount sufficient to
make up the deficiency may, by order of the council, be loaned by the special
improvement district revolving fund to such special improvement district fund,
and thereupon such bond or warrant or such interest thereon, whether it be for
principal or for interest, or for both, as the council may in its discretion
elect or determine, shall be paid from the money so loaned, or from the money
so loaned when added to the insufficient amount, as the case may require. (Ord.
2024-3, 3-4-2024)
1-8-6-4: LIENS IMPOSED FOR AMOUNTS LOANED:
Whenever any loan is made to any special improvement district fund from the
special improvement district revolving fund, the special improvement district
revolving fund shall have a lien therefor on all unpaid assessments and/or
installments of assessments on such district, whether delinquent or not, and on
all moneys thereafter coming into such special improvement district fund to the
amount of such loan, together with interest thereon from the time it was made
at the rate or percentage borne by the bond or warrant for payment of which, or
of interest thereon, such loan was made. Whenever there shall be moneys in such
special improvement district fund which are not required for the payment of any
bond or warrant of such special improvement district, or of interest thereon,
so much of such moneys as may be necessary to pay such loan shall, by order of
the council, be transferred to the special improvement district revolving fund,
and after all the bonds and warrants issued on any special improvement district
have been fully paid, all moneys remaining in such special improvement district
fund shall, by order of the council, be transferred to and become a part of the
special improvement district revolving fund. (Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-2024)
1-8-6-5: USE OF SURPLUS IN FUND:
   A.   Whenever there is, in the special improvement district revolving fund,
an amount in excess of the amount which the council deems necessary for the
payment or redemption of maturing bonds or warrants, or interest thereon, the
council may:
      1.   Transfer to general fund. By a vote of all its members, at a meeting
called for that purpose, order such excess, or any part thereof, transferred to
the general fund of the city; or
      2.   Purchase of property for delinquent taxes. Use such excess, or any
part thereof, for the purpose of purchase of property at sales for delinquent
taxes or assessments, or both, or which may have been struck off or sold to the
county for delinquent taxes or assessments, or both, and against which property
there then are any unpaid assessments for special improvements on account
whereof there are outstanding special improvement district bonds or warrants of
the city; and
      3.   Disposition of property. Sell any tax certificates issued on any
such sale or sales. After acquiring title to such property, the council may
lease such property or sell the same at public or private sale and make
conveyance thereof, or otherwise dispose thereof, as the interest of the city
may require; and all proceeds from such sale of tax certificates, or from such
leasing, sale or other disposition of the property, shall belong to and be paid
into the special improvement district revolving fund, and be subject to
transfer, in whole or in part, to the general fund by the vote of all the
members of the council at a meeting called for that purpose, as hereinbefore
provided. (Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-2024)
1-8-6-6: LEVY OF TAX; METHOD AND EFFECT:
The special tax to be levied, as herein provided in section
1-8-6-2-A.2 , shall be in addition to the tax for general, municipal and
administrative purposes, and the levy shall be made by the council at the time
and by the resolution passed and adopted by the council as provided by this
section. (Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-2024)
1-8-6-7: STATUTORY AUTHORITY FOR DIVISION PROVISIONS:
This division is passed pursuant to the power and authority vested in the
council by chapter 24, Laws of Montana, 21st Session, 1929, entitled: “An Act
Relating to Special Improvement Districts in Cities and Towns; Authorizing the
Creation, Maintenance and Use of a Special Improvement District Revolving Fund
in any City or Town for the Purpose of Securing Prompt Payment of Special
Improvement District Bonds and Warrants and Interest Thereon, and Requiring
Levy of Taxes When Necessary for the Financial Requirements of Such Fund,” and
the interpretation thereof by the Supreme Court of the state in the case of
Stanley v. Jeffries, 86 Mont. 114. The statute is now codified as MCA 7-12-4221
et seq. (Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-2024)
1-8-7: URBAN RENEWAL, TAX INCREMENT, AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS:
1-8-7-1: URBAN RENEWAL, TAX INCREMENT, AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS;
CREATION:
   A.   The city council may, from time to time, create by ordinance an urban
renewal, tax increment financing, or economic development district pursuant to
Title 7, Chapter 15, Parts 42 and 43, MCA, following a public hearing on the
proposed district. In order for land to be included in the proposed district,
in addition to the requirements of Montana law, it must:
      1.   Consist of an area with an accurately described boundary;
      2.   Not be contained within the boundaries of another tax increment
financing, urban renewal, or other economic development district with a tax
increment provision;
      3.   Be zoned in accordance for the purposes for which the district will
be created and be in compliance with the Belgrade Community Plan; and
      4.   Be determined to be in compliance with all other legal requirements.
   B.   The district must have as its purpose only those authorized by law.
   C.   Notice of the public hearing on the creation of a proposed district
shall be given in accordance with the provisions of MCA 7-15-4215. (Ord. 2024-
3, 3-4-2024)
1-8-7-2: COSTS WHICH MAY BE PAID FROM TAX INCREMENTS:
The district’s tax increment may be used to pay for the costs incurred by an
authorized urban renewal, tax increment, economic development or authorized
infrastructure development project (in that district) as provided by Title 7,
Chapter 15, Parts 42 and 43, MCA and as authorized by ordinance of the city
council. (Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-2024)
1-8-7-3: USE OF TAX INCREMENTS FOR BOND PAYMENTS:
The tax increments received may be pledged for the payment of the principal of
premiums, if any, and interest on bonds which the city may issue for the
purpose of providing funds to pay for costs accrued pursuant to section
1-8-7-2 . (Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-2024)
1-8-7-4: CONTENTS OF ORDINANCE:
   A.   Each ordinance creating an urban renewal, tax increment financing, or
economic development district shall:
      1.   Designate each district by number;
      2.   Set forth a legal description of and map showing the boundaries of
the district;
      3.   Include a plan that describes the district or development project
and contains provisions for undertaking and implementing the district or
project; and
      4.   Establish the base year for the calculation of tax increment within
the district. (Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-2024)
1-8-7-5: TERMINATION OF TAX INCREMENT FINANCING PROVISIONS:
An urban renewal or economic development district’s tax increment financing
provisions shall terminate pursuant to Title 7, Chapter 15, Parts 42 and 43,
MCA. (Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-2024)
1-8-7-6: ADMINISTRATION:
The urban renewal, tax increment financing, or economic development district
programs created pursuant to this division shall be administered by the city
council. The council shall be advised on matters pertaining to the program by a
district board created pursuant to
article 5, division 10 of this chapter and may delegate specific authority to
such board pursuant to ordinance or resolution. (Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-2024)
1-8-7-7: DOWNTOWN AREA URBAN RENEWAL DISTRICT:
There hereby exists a downtown area urban renewal district created pursuant to
Ordinance No. 2017-6. (Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-2024)
1-8-8:   BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT PROGRAMS:
1-8-8-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose and intent of this division is to provide for the specific program
components of each business improvement district within the City of Belgrade
created pursuant to title 7, chapter 12, part 11, Montana Code Annotated (MCA
7-12-1101 et seq.). The districts shall be administered as provided by the
boards of trustees for each district created pursuant to article 5, division 11
of this chapter. The purpose of a business improvement district is to serve a
public use, promote the health, safety, prosperity, security, and general
welfare of the inhabitants of the district and of the people of this state and
be of specific benefit to the property within the boundaries of each district.
(Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-2024)
1-8-9: IMPACT FEES:
1-8-9-1: LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS:
The city council finds that:
   A.   Capital improvements to streets, fire protection, water and sewer
systems, and parks are necessary to accommodate continued growth within the
city to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the
city.
   B.   New residential and nonresidential development imposes increased and
excessive demands upon existing city facilities.
   C.   New development often overburdens existing public facilities and the
tax revenues generated from new development often do not generate sufficient
funds to provide public facilities to serve the new development.
   D.   New development is expected to continue, and will place ever increasing
demands on the city to provide public facilities to serve new development.
   E.   The creation of an equitable impact fee system would enable the city to
impose a proportionate share of the costs that are reasonably related to the
capital improvement demands of new development.
   F.   The impact fee study, dated February 14, 2007, and as updated, prepared
by TischlerBise Fiscal, Economic & Planning Consultants, sets forth reasonable
methodologies and analyses for determining the impacts of various types of
development on the city streets, fire protection, water and sewer systems, and
parks necessary to meet the demands for such services created by new
development.
   G.   The city establishes, as city standards, the assumptions and service
standards referenced in the impact fee studies as part of its current plans for
the major street system and for city fire protection, water and sewer systems
and parks.
   H.   The impact fees described in this article are based on the impact fee
study, and do not exceed the maximum impact fee determined by the impact fee
study.
   I.   The impact fees adopted in this article are reasonably related to and
reasonably attributable to the development’s share of the cost of
infrastructure improvements made necessary by the new development.
   J.   After the consideration of the need for capital improvements required
to serve new development, and after consideration of the payments for capital
improvements reasonably anticipated to be made by or as a result of the
development in the form of user fees, debt service payments, taxes and other
available sources of funding the capital improvements, the city council
determined that the impact fees adopted in this article do not exceed a
proportionate share of the costs incurred or to be incurred by the city in
accommodating the development and are reasonably related to the benefits
accruing to the development paying the impact fees.
   K.   The types of infrastructure included in the impact fee study all have
citywide service areas. Therefore, impact fees will be imposed on a citywide
basis with one benefit district comprised of all land within the city limits.
   L.   This article creates a system by which impact fees will be used to
expand or improve the city streets, fire protection, water and sewer systems,
and parks in ways that benefit the development that paid each fee within a
reasonable period of time after the fee is paid.
   M.   This article creates a system under which development impact fees shall
not be used to cure existing deficiencies in public facilities.
   N.   This article does not hold new development to a higher level of service
than existing users unless there is a mechanism in place for the existing users
to make improvements to the existing system to match the higher level of
service.
   O.   It is in the best interests of the city and new development to include
an administrative surcharge, not to exceed five percent (5%) of the total
impact fee, to help cover impact fee expenses.
   P.   The capital improvement plan for growth related projects adopted by the
city must cover at least a five (5) year period, and must be reviewed and
updated at least every two (2) years.
   Q.   This article adopts policies and procedures related to site specific
credits or developer reimbursements that are reasonably designed to avoid
double payment for growth related capital improvements. (Ord. 2007-11, 12-17-
2007; amd. Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-2024)
1-8-9-2: AUTHORITY; APPLICABILITY:
   A.   This article is enacted pursuant to the city’s general police power,
the authority granted to the city by the Montana state constitution, section 7-
1-101, and Montana Code Annotated title 7, chapter 6, part 16.
   B.   The provisions of this article shall apply to all of the territory
within the limits of the city.
   C.   The provisions of this article related to water impact fees shall also
apply to all properties located outside the city that are connected to the city
water system, if any.
   D.   The provisions of this article related to sewer impact fees shall also
apply to all properties located outside the city that are connected to the city
sewer system, if any. (Ord. 2007-11, 12-17-2007; amd. Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-2024)
1-8-9-3: INTENT:
   A.   It is the intent of this article to adopt impact fees that are
reasonably related to and reasonably attributable to the development’s share of
the cost of infrastructure improvements made necessary by the new development.
   B.   It is the further intent of this article to adopt impact fees that do
not exceed a proportionate share of the costs incurred or to be incurred by the
city in accommodating the development.
   C.   It is the intent of this article that impact fees collected under the
provisions of this article not be used to correct existing deficiencies in a
public facility.
   D.   It is the intent of this article that new development not be held to a
higher level of services than existing users unless there is a mechanism in
place for the existing users to make improvements to the existing system to
match the higher level of service.
   E.   It is the intent of this article that any monies collected from any
impact fee and deposited in an impact fee fund shall not be commingled with
monies from a different impact fee fund or ever be used for a type of facility
or equipment different from that for which the fee was paid. (Ord. 2007-11, 12-
17-2007; amd. Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-2024)
1-8-9-4: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following definitions apply:
CAPITAL       A.   Includes: Improvements, land, and equipment with a useful life of ten
IMPROVEMENTS: (10) years or more that increase or improve the service capacity of a public
              facility.
CAPITAL       A.   Includes: Improvements, land, and equipment with a useful life of ten (10)
IMPROVEMENTS: years or more that increase or improve the service capacity of a public facility.
             B.   Does Not Include: The term does not include consumable supplies.
CONNECTION    The actual cost of connecting a property to a public utility system, and is limited
CHARGE:       to the labor, materials, and overhead involved in making connections and installing
              meters.
              Construction, renovation, or installation of a building or structure, a change in
DEVELOPMENT:  use of a building or structure, or a change in the use of land when the
              construction, installation, or other action creates additional demand for public
              facilities.
GOVERNMENTAL  The city of Belgrade, Montana.
ENTITY:
              A.   Includes: Any charge imposed upon development by a governmental entity as part
              of the development approval process to fund the additional service capacity required
IMPACT FEE:   by the development from which it is collected. An impact fee may include a fee for
              the administration of the impact fee not to exceed five percent (5%) of the total
              impact fee collected.
             B.   Does Not Include: The term does not include:
                1.   A charge or fee to pay for administration, plan review, or inspection costs
              associated with a permit required for development;
                2.   A connection charge;
                 3.   Any other fee authorized by law, including, but not limited to, user fees,
             special improvement district assessments, fees authorized under Montana Code
              Annotated title 7 for county, municipal, and consolidated government sewer and water
              districts and systems, and costs of ongoing maintenance; or
                 4.   On site or off site improvements necessary for new development to meet the
             safety, level of service, and other minimum development standards that have been
              adopted by the governmental entity.
              An individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust, partnership, limited
PERSON:       liability company, association, joint venture, governmental subdivision, agency, or
              instrumentality, public corporation, or any other legal or commercial entity, other
              than the city of Belgrade, Montana.
PROPORTIONATE That portion of the cost of capital system improvements that reasonably relates to
SHARE:        the service demands and needs of the project. A proportionate share must take into
              account the limitations provided in Montana Code Annotated section 7-61608.
PUBLIC        A.   A water supply production, treatment, storage, or distribution facility;
FACILITIES:
             B.   A wastewater collection, treatment, or disposal facility;
             C.   A transportation facility, including roads, streets, bridges, rights of way,
              traffic signals, and landscaping;
             D.   A stormwater collection, retention, detention, treatment, or disposal facility
              or a flood control facility;
             E.   A police, emergency medical, rescue, or fire protection facility; and
              F.   Other facilities for which documentation is prepared as provided in Montana
             Code Annotated section 7-6-1602 that have been approved as part of an impact fee
              ordinance or resolution by a two-thirds (2/3) majority of the city council for the
              city of Belgrade. (Ord. 2007-11, 12-17-2007; amd. 2009 Code; Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-2024)
 
1-8-9-5: IMPACT FEE ADVISORY COMMITTEE 1 :
   C.   Created: An impact fee advisory committee is created for the purpose of
advising the city council regarding the process of calculating, assessing and
spending impact fees.
   B.   Membership: The Impact Fee Advisory Committee shall consist of five
members to be appointed by the City Council. The members shall be: the City
Manager; one representative of the development community; and three citizens of
Belgrade not employed in the development industry, as selected by the City
Council.
   C.   Terms: Upon the creation of the Committee, the members shall be
appointed for the following terms: The City Manager during the terms of his or
her office, two (2) members that are not employed in the development industry
for a term of two (2) years, one (1) member that is not employed in the
development industry for a term of three (3) years, and one (1) member who is a
representative of the development industry for a term of three (3) years. The
terms shall expire on January 1 of the second and third year, respectively,
following appointment. Thereafter, as terms expire, each new appointment shall
be for a term of two (2) years.
   D.   Residency: The members of the impact fee advisory committee, other than
the City Manager and the representative of the development industry, must be
residents of the City of Belgrade.
   E.   Compensation: Members shall serve without compensation for their time
and service.
   F.   Meetings: Meetings of the board shall be conducted in accordance with
all applicable rules and regulations of the city and any adopted bylaws of the
committee.
   G.   Training: The city may provide, and the members shall attend, training
in the necessary subject matter which will, in the judgment of the city, enable
informed participation by members of the committee. Such training may be
provided as deemed necessary by the city manager.
   H.   Functions: The impact fee advisory committee shall perform its
functions conterminously with the city use of impact fees. (Ord. 2013-4, 6-17-
2013; amd. Ord. 2018-3, 6-4-2018; Ord. 2019-2, 5-20-2019)
 
Notes
1 1. See article II, subsection 1-8-9-6 of the administrative code.
1-8-9-6: STREET IMPACT FEES:
   A.   Imposition Of Street Impact Fees:
      1.   On or after the effective date hereof, any person who seeks to
obtain a building permit, or an extension of a building permit that was issued
before the effective date hereof, is required to pay a street impact fee in the
amount specified in this article.
      2.   No building permit shall be issued, or extension granted, until the
street impact fee described in this article has been paid, unless the
development for which the permit is sought is exempted by subsection F of this
section.
   B.   Amount Of Street Impact Fee:
      1.   The amount of the street impact fee shall be one hundred percent
(100%) of the amounts set forth in the following street impact fee schedule:
STREET IMPACT FEE SCHEDULE
STREET IMPACT FEE SCHEDULE
Residential (per housing unit):
210 Single-family detached          $5,238.00
230 All other housing types         3,224.00
Nonresidential (per square foot of floor area):
820 Commercial/shop center          10,384.00
710 General office                  2,608.00
150 Warehousing                     466.00
140 Manufacturing                   1,052.00
110 Light industrial                1,328.00
Nonresidential (per unique demand indicator):
565 Daycare (per student)           1,095.00
320 Lodging (per room)              897.00
530 Secondary school                Case by case basis
Residential (per housing unit):
210 Single-family detached          $5,238.00
230 All other housing types         3,224.00
Nonresidential (per square foot of floor area):
820 Commercial/shop center          10,384.00
710 General office                  2,608.00
150 Warehousing                     466.00
140 Manufacturing                   1,052.00
110 Light industrial                1,328.00
565 Daycare (per student)           1,095.00
320 Lodging (per room)              897.00
530 Secondary school                Case by case basis
520 Elementary school               Case by case basis
   Other non-scheduled development Case by case basis
 
      The street impact fee for secondary schools, elementary schools and other
non-scheduled development shall be calculated as follows:
      Weekday One Way Trip Count x 368.37 x 1.4527 = Street Impact Fee
   C.   Payment Of Street Impact Fee:
      1.   Any person who applies for a building permit or for an extension of
a building permit that was issued before the effective date hereof, shall pay
the street impact fee required by this article to the city prior to the
issuance or extension of a permit.
      2.   All funds paid by a person pursuant to this section shall be
identified as street impact fees and shall be promptly deposited in the street
impact fee fund described in subsection D of this section.
   D.   Street Impact Fee Fund:
      1.   A single street impact fee fund is created, and such fund shall be
maintained in an interest bearing account.
      2.   Such fund shall contain only those street impact fees collected
pursuant to this article and any interest which may accrue from time to time on
such amounts.
   E.   Use Of Street Impact Fee Funds:
      1.   The monies in the street impact fee fund shall be used for capital
improvements that are reasonably related to the benefits accruing to the
development paying the impact fees for streets.
      2.   Street impact fees may be used to reimburse the city for costs of
excess capacity in existing capital facilities, when the excess capacity has
been provided in anticipation of the needs of new development, for that portion
of the facilities constructed for future users. The need to recoup costs for
excess capacity must have been documented pursuant to Montana Code Annotated
section 7-6-1602, in a manner that demonstrates the need for the excess
capacity. The city may continue to assess an impact fee that recoups costs for
excess capacity in an existing facility. Street impact fees used to reimburse
the city for the costs to provide the excess capacity must be based on the
actual cost of acquiring, constructing, or upgrading the facility and must be
no more than a proportionate share of the costs to provide the excess capacity.
   F.   Exemptions From Street Impact Fee:
      1.   The following types of development shall be exempted from payment of
the street impact fee:
         a.   Alterations or expansions of existing buildings where the use is
not changed, no additional residential or commercial units are created, and no
additional vehicle trips will be produced over and above those produced by the
existing use;
         b.   Construction of accessory buildings or structures that will not
produce additional vehicle trips over and above those produced by the primary
building or land use;
         c.   The replacement of a destroyed or partially destroyed building or
structure with a new building or structure of the same size and use where no
additional vehicle trips will be produced over and above those produced by the
original building or structure;
         d.   Any other type of development for which the applicant can
demonstrate that the proposed land use and development will produce no more
vehicle trips from such site over and above the trips from such site prior to
the proposed development, or for which the applicant can show that a street
impact fee for such site has previously been paid in an amount that equals or
exceeds the street impact fee that would be required by this article for such
development.
      2.   Any such claim for exemption must be made no later than the time
when the applicant applies for the building permit, or for an extension of a
building permit that was issued before the effective date hereof, and any claim
for exemption not made at or before that time shall have been waived.
      3.   The city manager or his designee shall determine the validity of any
claim for exemption pursuant to the criteria set forth in subsection F1 of this
section.
   G.   Site Specific Credits And Developer Reimbursements: The city council
shall adopt policies and procedures related to site specific credits or
developer reimbursements for street impact fees. Project improvements normally
required as part of the development approval process are not eligible for
credits against impact fees. (Ord. 2007-11, 12-172007; amd. Ord. 2019-2, 5-20-
2019)
1-8-9-7: FIRE PROTECTION IMPACT FEES:
   A.   Imposition Of Fire Protection Impact Fees:
      1.   On or after the effective date hereof, any person who seeks to
obtain a building permit, or an extension of a building permit that was issued
before the effective date hereof, is required to pay a fire protection impact
fee in the amount specified in this article.?
      2.   No building permit shall be issued, or extension granted, until the
fire protection impact fee described in this article has been paid, unless the
development for which the permit is sought is exempted by subsection F of this
section.
   B.   Amount Of Fire Protection Impact Fee:
      1.   The amount of the fire protection impact fee shall be one hundred
percent (100%) of the amounts set forth in the following fire protection impact
fee schedule:
FIRE PROTECTION IMPACT FEE SCHEDULE
FIRE PROTECTION IMPACT FEE SCHEDULE
Residential (per housing unit):
 Single-family detached          $272.00
 All other housing types         181.00
Nonresidential (per square foot of floor area):
  
 Commercial/shop center          302.00
 General office                  302.00
 Warehousing                     302.00
 Manufacturing                   302.00
 Light industrial                302.00
Nonresidential (per unique demand indicator):
 Daycare (per student)           302.00
 Lodging (per room)              302.00
 Other non-scheduled development 302.00
 
   C.   Payment Of Fire Protection Impact Fee:
      1.   Any person who applies for a building permit, or for an extension of
a building permit that was issued before the effective date hereof, shall pay
the fire protection impact fee required by this article to the city prior to
the issuance or extension of a permit.
      2.   All funds paid by a person pursuant to this section shall be
identified as fire protection impact fees and shall be promptly deposited in
the fire protection impact fee fund described in subsection D of this section.
   D.   Fire Protection Impact Fee Fund:
      1.   A single fire protection impact fee fund is created, and such fund
shall be maintained in an interest bearing account.
      2.   Such fund shall contain only those fire protection impact fees
collected pursuant to this article and any interest which may accrue from time
to time on such amounts.
   E.   Use Of Fire Protection Impact Fee Funds:
      1.   The monies in the fire protection impact fee fund shall be used for
capital improvements that are reasonably related to the benefits accruing to
the development paying the impact fees for fire protection.
      2.   Fire protection impact fees may be used to reimburse the city for
costs of excess capacity in existing capital facilities, when the excess
capacity has been provided in anticipation of the needs of new development, for
that portion of the facilities constructed for future users. The need to recoup
costs for excess capacity must have been documented pursuant to Montana Code
Annotated section 7-6-1602, in a manner that demonstrates the need for the
excess capacity. The city may continue to assess an impact fee that recoups
costs for excess capacity in an existing facility. Fire protection impact fees
used to reimburse the city for the costs to provide the excess capacity must be
based on the actual cost of acquiring, constructing, or upgrading the facility
and must be no more than a proportionate share of the costs to provide the
excess capacity.
   F.   Exemptions From Fire Protection Impact Fee:
      1.   The following types of development shall be exempted from payment of
the fire protection impact fee:
         a.   Reconstruction or replacement of a previously existing
residential or commercial unit that does not create any additional units.
         b.   Construction of unoccupied accessory units related to a
residential unit.
         c.   The replacement of a destroyed or partially destroyed building or
structure with a new building or structure of the same size and use where no
greater demand for fire protection will be produced over and above those
produced by the original building or structure.
         d.   Projects for which a fire protection impact fee has previously
been paid in an amount that equals or exceeds the fire protection impact fee
that would be required by this article.
         e.   Any other type of development for which the applicant can
demonstrate that the proposed land use and development will produce no more
demand for fire protection from such site over and above the fire protection
for such site prior to the proposed development, or for which the applicant can
show that a fire protection impact fee for such site has previously been paid
in an amount that equals or exceeds the fire protection impact fee that would
be required by this article for such development.
      2.   Any such claim for exemption must be made no later than the time
when the applicant applies for the building permit, or the extension of a
building permit issued before the effective date hereof for the proposed
development, and any claim for exemption not made at or before that time shall
have been waived.
      3.   The city manager or his designee shall determine the validity of any
claim for exemption pursuant to the criteria set forth in subsection F1 of this
section.
   G.   Site Specific Credits And Developer Reimbursements: The city council
may adopt policies and procedures related to site specific credits or developer
reimbursements for fire protection impact fees. Project improvements normally
required as part of the development approval process are not eligible for
credits against impact fees. (Ord. 2007 - 11, 12-17-2007; amd. Ord. 2019-2, 5-
20-2019; Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-2024)
1-8-9-8: WATER IMPACT FEES:
   A.   Imposition Of Water Impact Fees:
      1.   On or after the effective date hereof, any person who applies for a
building permit, or for the extension of a building permit that was issued
prior to the effective date hereof, or seeks to obtain a water service
connection, is required to pay a water impact fee in the amount specified in
this article.
      2.   No building permit shall be issued, or extension granted, or water
service connection allowed, until the water impact fee described in this
article has been paid, unless the development for which the permit is sought is
exempted by subsection F of this section.
   B.   Amount Of Water Impact Fee:
      1.   The amount of the water impact fee shall be one hundred percent
(100%) of the amounts set forth in the following water impact fee schedule:
WATER IMPACT FEE SCHEDULE
WATER IMPACT FEE SCHEDULE
Residential (per housing unit):
                   Single-family detached  $4,786.00
                   All other housing types 3,191.00
Apartments with more than 6-units served by a single meter (or single meter
plus irrigation meter) shall pay a water impact fee based on the
nonresidential water impact fee schedule.
Nonresidential (based upon meter size):
Meter Size (Inches)  
0.75                                       $4,786.00
1.00                                       7,977.00
1.50                                       15,955.00
2.00                                       25,527.00
3.00                                       47,864.00
4.00                                       79,773.00
 
      The water impact fee for a development requiring a meter size greater
than 4", or when the anticipated peak day peaking factor is in excess of 3,
shall be calculated as follows:
      Estimated Peak Day Gallons of Water Use x $4.37 = Water Impact Fee
   C.   Payment Of Water Impact Fee:
      1.   Any person who applies for a building permit, or applies for the
extension of a building permit issued prior to the effective date hereof, or
applies for a water connection, shall pay the water impact fee required by this
article to the city prior to the issuance or extension of any such permit.
      2.   All funds paid by a person pursuant to this section shall be
identified as water impact fees and shall be promptly deposited in the water
impact fee fund described in subsection D of this section.
   D.   Water Impact Fee Fund:
      1.   A single water impact fee fund is created, and such fund shall be
maintained in an interest bearing account.
      2.   Such fund shall contain only those water impact fees collected
pursuant to this article and any interest which may accrue from time to time on
such amounts.
   E.   Use Of Water Impact Fee Funds:
      1.   The monies in the water impact fee fund shall be used for capital
improvements that are reasonably related to the benefits accruing to the
development paying the impact fees for water.
      2.   Water impact fees may be used to reimburse the city for costs of
excess capacity in existing capital facilities, when the excess capacity has
been provided in anticipation of the needs of new development, for that portion
of the facilities constructed for future users. The need to recoup costs for
excess capacity must have been documented pursuant to Montana Code Annotated
section 7-6-1602, in a manner that demonstrates the need for the excess
capacity. The city may continue to assess an impact fee that recoups costs for
excess capacity in an existing facility. Water impact fees used to reimburse
the city for the costs to provide the excess capacity must be based on the
actual cost of acquiring, constructing, or upgrading the facility and must be
no more than a proportionate share of the costs to provide the excess capacity.
   F.   Exemptions From Water Impact Fee:
      1.   The following types of development shall be exempted from payment of
the water impact fee:
         a.   Reconstruction or replacement of a previously existing
residential or commercial unit that does not create any additional residential
units.
         b.   Construction of unoccupied accessory units related to a
residential unit.
         c.   The replacement of a destroyed or partially destroyed building or
structure with a new building or structure of the same size and use where no
greater demand for water will be produced over and above those produced by the
original building or structure.
         d.   Projects that the applicant can demonstrate will produce no
greater demand for water from such land than existed prior to issuance of such
permit.
         e.   Projects for which a water impact fee has previously been paid in
an amount that equals or exceeds the water impact fee that would be required by
this article.
         f.   Any other type of development for which the applicant can
demonstrate that the proposed land use and development will produce no more
demand for water from such site over and above the water demand for such site
prior to the proposed development, or for which the applicant can show that a
water impact fee for such site has previously been paid in an amount that
equals or exceeds the water impact fee that would be required by this article
for such development.
      2.   Any such claim for exemption must be made no later than the time
when the applicant applies for the building permit, or for the extension of a
building permit issued prior to the effective date hereof, or for a water
connection for the proposed development, and any claim for exemption not made
at or before that time shall have been waived.
      3.   The city manager or his designee shall determine the validity of any
claim for exemption pursuant to the criteria set forth in subsection F1 of this
section.
   G.   Site Specific Credits And Developer Reimbursements: The city council
may adopt policies and procedures related to site specific credits or developer
reimbursements for water impact fees. Project improvements normally required as
part of the development approval process are not eligible for credits against
impact fees. (Ord. 2007-11, 12-172007; amd. Ord. 2019-2, 5-20-2019; Ord. 2020-
4, 8-3-2020; Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-2024)
1-8-9-9: SEWER IMPACT FEES:
   A.   Imposition Of Sewer Impact Fees:
      1.   On or after the effective date hereof, any person who applies for a
building permit, or for the extension of a building permit that was issued
prior to the effective date hereof, or seeks to obtain a sewer service
connection, is required to pay a sewer impact fee in the amount specified in
this article.
      2.   No building permit shall be issued, or extension of a building
permit granted, or sewer service connection allowed, until the sewer impact fee
described in this article has been paid, unless the development for which the
permit is sought is exempted by subsection F of this section.
   B.   Amount Of Sewer Impact Fee: The amount of the sewer impact fee shall be
one hundred percent (100%) of the amounts set forth in the following sewer
impact fee schedule:
SEWER IMPACT FEE SCHEDULE
SEWER IMPACT FEE SCHEDULE
Residential (per housing unit):
                   Single-family detached  $2,709.00
                   All other housing types 1,806.00
Apartments with more than 6-units served by a single meter (or single meter
plus irrigation meter) shall pay a water impact fee based on the
nonresidential water impact fee schedule.
Nonresidential (based upon water meter size):
Meter Size (Inches)  
0.75                                       $ 2,709.00
1.00                                       4,515.00
1.50                                       9,030.00
2.00                                       14,449.00
3.00                                       27,091.00
4.00                                       45,158.00
 
      Nonresidential sewer impact fees are based on water meter size. The sewer
impact fee for a development requiring a meter size greater than 4", or when
the development is anticipated to generate high strength wastewater discharges
to the system (where Biological Oxygen Demand (BOD) is in excess of 400 mg/L or
Total Suspended Solids (TSS) is in excess of 389mg/L), shall be calculated as
follows:
      Estimated Average Daily Gallons of Discharge x $11.63 - Sewer Impact Fee
   C.   Payment Of Sewer Impact Fee:
      1.   Any person who applies for a building permit, or applies for the
extension of a building permit that was issued prior to the effective date
hereof, or applies for a sewer connection, shall pay the sewer impact fee
required by this article to the city prior to the issuance or extension of any
such permit.
      2.   All funds paid by a person pursuant to this section shall be
identified as sewer impact fees and shall be promptly deposited in the sewer
impact fee fund described in subsection D of this section.
   D.   Sewer Impact Fee Fund:
      1.   A single sewer impact fee fund is created, and such fund shall be
maintained in an interest bearing account.
      2.   Such fund shall contain only those sewer impact fees collected
pursuant to this article and any interest which may accrue from time to time on
such amounts.
   E.   Use Of Sewer Impact Fee Funds:
      1.   The monies in the sewer impact fee fund shall be used for capital
improvements that are reasonably related to the benefits accruing to the
development paying the impact fees for sewer or wastewater service.
      2.   Sewer impact fees may be used to reimburse the city for costs of
excess capacity in existing capital facilities, when the excess capacity has
been provided in anticipation of the needs of new development, for that portion
of the facilities constructed for future users. The need to recoup costs for
excess capacity must have been documented pursuant to Montana Code Annotated
section 7-6-1602, in a manner that demonstrates the need for the excess
capacity. The city may continue to assess an impact fee that recoups costs for
excess capacity in an existing facility. Sewer impact fees used to reimburse
the city for the costs to provide the excess capacity must be based on the
actual cost of acquiring, constructing, or upgrading the facility and must be
no more than a proportionate share of the costs to provide the excess capacity.
   F.   Exemptions From Sewer Impact Fee:
      1.   The following types of development shall be exempted from payment of
the sewer impact fee:
         a.   Reconstruction or replacement of a previously existing
residential or commercial unit that does not create any additional units.
         b.   Construction of unoccupied accessory units related to a
residential unit.
         c.   The replacement of a destroyed or partially destroyed building or
structure with a new building or structure of the same size and use where no
greater demand for sewer capacity will be produced over and above those
produced by the original building or structure.
         d.   Projects that the applicant can demonstrate will produce no
greater demand for sewer capacity from such land than existed prior to issuance
of such permit.
         e.   Projects for which a sewer impact fee has previously been paid in
an amount that equals or exceeds the sewer impact fee that would be required by
this article.
         f.   Any other type of development for which the applicant can
demonstrate that the proposed land use and development will produce no more
demand for sewer capacity from such site over and above the sewer capacity for
such site prior to the proposed development, or for which the applicant can
show that a sewer impact fee for such site has previously been paid in an
amount that equals or exceeds the sewer impact fee that would be required by
this article for such development.
      2.   Any such claim for exemption must be made no later than the time
when the applicant applies for the building permit, or for the extension of a
building permit, or for a sewer connection, for the proposed development, and
any claim for exemption not made at or before that time shall have been waived.
      3.   The city manager or his designee shall determine the validity of any
claim for exemption pursuant to the criteria set forth in subsection F1 of this
section.
   G.   Site Specific Credits And Developer Reimbursements: The city council
may adopt policies and procedures related to site specific credits or developer
reimbursements for sewer impact fees. Project improvements normally required as
part of the development approval process are not eligible for credits against
impact fees. (Ord. 2007-11, 12-172007; amd. Ord. 2019-2, 5-20-2019; Ord. 2020-
4, 8-3-2020; Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-2024)
1-8-9-10: PARK IMPACT FEES:
   A.   Imposition Of Park Impact Fees:
      1.   On or after the effective date hereof, any person who applies for a
residential building permit, or for the extension of a residential building
permit issued before the effective date hereof, is required to pay a park
impact fee in the amount specified in this article.
      2.   No residential building permit shall be issued, or no extension of a
residential building permit that was issued before the effective date hereof
shall be allowed, until the park impact fee described in this article has been
paid, unless the development for which the permit is sought is exempted by
subsection F of this section.
   B.   Amount Of Park Impact Fee: The amount of the park impact fee shall be
one hundred percent (100%) of the amounts set forth in the following park
impact fee schedule:
 
PARK IMPACT FEE SCHEDULE
Residential (per housing unit):
 Single-family detached  $1,139.00
 All other housing types 988.00
 
   C.   Payment Of Park Impact Fee:
      1.   Any person who applies for a residential building permit, or applies
for the extension of a residential building permit that was issued prior to the
effective date hereof, shall pay the park impact fee required by this article
to the city prior to the issuance or extension of any such permit.
      2.   All funds paid by a person pursuant to this section shall be
identified as park impact fees and shall be promptly deposited in the park
impact fee fund described in subsection D of this section.
   D.   Park Impact Fee Fund:
      1.   A single park impact fee fund is created, and such fund shall be
maintained in an interest bearing account.
      2.   Such fund shall contain only those park impact fees collected
pursuant to this article and any interest which may accrue from time to time on
such amounts.
   E.   Use Of Park Impact Fee Funds:
      1.   The monies in the park impact fee fund shall be used for capital
improvements that are reasonably related to the benefits accruing to the
development paying the impact fees for parks.
      2.   Park impact fees may be used to reimburse the city for costs of
excess capacity in existing capital facilities, when the excess capacity has
been provided in anticipation of the needs of new development, for that portion
of the facilities constructed for future users. The need to recoup costs for
excess capacity must have been documented pursuant to Montana Code Annotated
section 7-6-1602, in a manner that demonstrates the need for the excess
capacity. The city may continue to assess an impact fee that recoups costs for
excess capacity in an existing facility. Park impact fees used to reimburse the
city for the costs to provide the excess capacity must be based on the actual
cost of acquiring, constructing, or upgrading the facility and must be no more
than a proportionate share of the costs to provide the excess capacity.
   F.   Exemptions From Park Impact Fee:
      1.   The following types of development shall be exempted from payment of
the park impact fee:
         a.   Reconstruction or replacement of a previously existing
residential unit that does not create any additional residential units.
         b.   Construction of unoccupied accessory units related to a
residential unit.
         c.   The replacement of a destroyed or partially destroyed building or
structure with a new building or structure of the same size and use where no
greater demand for parks will be produced over and above those produced by the
original building or structure.
         d.   Projects that the applicant can demonstrate will produce no
greater demand for parks from such land than existed prior to issuance of such
permit.
         e.   Projects for which a park impact fee has previously been paid in
an amount that equals or exceeds the park impact fee that would be required by
this article.
         f.   Any other type of development for which the applicant can
demonstrate that the proposed land use and development will produce no more use
of parks from such site over and above the use of parks for such site prior to
the proposed development, or for which the applicant can show that a park
impact fee for such site has previously been paid in an amount that equals or
exceeds the park impact fee that would be required by this article for such
development.
      2.   Any such claim for exemption must be made no later than the time
when the applicant applies for the building permit, or for the extension of a
building permit issued prior to the effective date hereof, for the proposed
development, and any claim for exemption not made at or before that time shall
have been waived.
      3.   The city manager or his designee shall determine the validity of any
claim for exemption pursuant to the criteria set forth in subsection F1 of this
section.
   G.   Site Specific Credits And Developer Reimbursements: The city council
may adopt policies and procedures related to site specific credits or developer
reimbursements for park impact fees. Project improvements normally required as
part of the development approval process are not eligible for credits against
impact fees. (Ord. 2007-11, 12-172007; amd. Ord. 2019-2, 5-20-2019 ; Ord. 2024-
3, 3-4-2024)
1-8-9-11: ADMINISTRATIVE FEE:
   A.   Imposition Of Impact Fee Administrative Fees: Any person who is
responsible to pay an impact fee under this article shall also pay a fee for
the administration of the impact fee to the city when the impact fee is paid.
   B.   Amount Of Impact Fee Administrative Fee: The amount of the impact fee
administrative fee shall be five percent (5%) of the impact fee paid.
   C.   When Impact Fee Administrative Fee Paid:
      1.   Any person who pays an impact fee under this article shall also pay
the impact fee administrative fee to the city when the impact fee is paid.
      2.   All funds paid by a person pursuant to this section shall be
identified as impact fee administrative fees and shall be promptly deposited in
the impact fee administrative fee fund described in subsection D of this
section.
   D.   Impact Fee Administrative Fee Fund:
      1.   A single impact fee administrative fee fund is created, and such
fund shall be maintained in an interest bearing account.
      2.   Such fund shall contain only those impact fee administrative fees
collected pursuant to this section and any interest which may accrue from time
to time on such amounts.
   E.   Use Of Impact Fee Administrative Fund Fees: The monies in the impact
fee administrative fee fund shall be used for the administration of impact fees
pursuant to the provisions in Montana Code Annotated title 7, chapter 6, part
16. (Ord. 2007-11, 12-172007; amd. Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-2024)
1-8-9-12: CREDITS AGAINST IMPACT FEES:
   A.   Pro Rata Credit: After the effective date hereof, all mandatory or
voluntary monetary contributions for, land or easement dedications for, or
acquisition or construction of, capital improvements by an applicant in
connection with a proposed development may, at the discretion of the city
council, result in a pro rata credit against the impact fee for the same type
of service or facility otherwise due for such development, except that no such
credit shall be awarded for:
      1.   Projects not listed on the impact fee capital improvements program;
or
      2.   Land or easement dedications for, or acquisition or construction of,
project related improvements required as a condition of preliminary plat
approval, or other approval, of a development or subdivision; or
      3.   Any voluntary land or easement dedications not accepted by the city;
or
      4.   Any voluntary acquisition or construction of improvements not
approved, in writing, by the city prior to commencement of the acquisition or
construction.
   B.   Application: In order to obtain a credit against development impact
fees otherwise due, an applicant must submit a written offer to make a specific
monetary contribution for, to dedicate to the city specific parcels of
qualifying land or easements, or to acquire or construct specific capital
improvements in accordance with all applicable state or city design and
construction standards, and must specifically request a credit against such
impact fees. Such written request must be made on a form provided by the city,
must contain a statement under oath of the facts that qualify the applicant to
receive a credit, must be accompanied by documents evidencing those facts, and
must be filed not later than the initiation of construction of improvements or
the acceptance by the city of monetary contributions, land or easement
dedications, or the applicant’s claim for the credit shall be waived. The
granting of credit shall not occur without the approval of the city council.
   C.   Calculation Of Credit: The credit due to an applicant shall be
calculated and documented as follows:
      1.   Credit for qualifying land or easement dedications shall, at the
applicant’s option, be valued at:
         a.   One hundred percent (100%) of the most recent assessed value for
such land as shown in the records of the city assessor; or
         b.   That fair market value established by a private appraiser
acceptable to the city in an appraisal paid for by the applicant.
      2.   In order to receive credit for qualifying acquisition or
construction of capital improvements, the applicant shall submit complete
engineering drawings, specifications, and construction cost estimates to the
city. The city shall determine the amount of credit due based on the
information submitted, or, if it determines that such information is inaccurate
or unreliable, then on alternative engineering or construction costs acceptable
to the city.
   D.   Approved Credits Become Effective: Approved credits shall become
effective at the following times:
      1.   Approved credit for land or easement dedications shall become
effective when the land has been conveyed to the city in a form acceptable to
the city, and at no cost to the city, and has been accepted by the city
council. When such conditions have been met, the city shall note that fact in
the credit record maintained by the city finance department. Upon request of
the credit holder, the city shall send the credit holder a letter stating the
credit balance available to him (or her).
      2.   Approved credits for the acquisition or construction of capital
improvements shall generally become effective when:
         a.   All required construction has been completed and has been
accepted by the city; and
         b.   A suitable maintenance and warranty bond has been received and
approved by the city; and
         c.   All design, construction, inspection, testing, bonding, and
acceptance procedures have been completed in compliance with all applicable
city and state procedures.
            However, approved credits for the construction of improvements may
become effective at an earlier date if the applicant posts security in the form
of a performance bond, irrevocable letter of credit, or escrow agreement, and
the amount and terms of such security are accepted by the city. At a minimum,
such security must be in the amount of the approved credit or an amount
determined to be adequate to allow the city to construct the improvements for
which the credit was given, whichever is higher. When such conditions have been
met, the city shall note that fact in the credit record maintained by the city
finance department. Upon request of the credit holder, the city shall also send
the credit holder a letter stating the credit balance available to him (or
her).
   E.   Use Of Credit: Approved credits may be used to reduce the amount of
impact fees due from any proposed development for the same type of service or
facility for which the applicant made a monetary contribution, dedicated land
or easements, or acquired or constructed improvements, until the amount of the
credit is exhausted. Each time a request to use credit from a mandatory or
voluntary contribution, dedication, acquisition, or construction is presented
to the city, the city shall reduce the amount of the impact fee of the same
type otherwise due from the applicant and shall note in the city records the
amount of credit remaining, if any. In the case of a mandatory contribution,
dedication, acquisition, or construction, any credit in excess of the amount of
the impact fee otherwise due under this article shall be deemed excess credit
that is remaining and available for use by the applicant. In the case of a
voluntary contribution, dedication, acquisition, or construction, any credit in
excess of the amount of the impact fee of the same type and applicable to the
project, shall be deemed excess credit that is remaining and available for use
by the applicant. Upon request of the credit holder, the city shall also send
the credit holder a letter stating the amount of credit remaining to him (or
her).
   F.   Use Of Credit Against Other Fees: Approved credit shall only be used to
reduce the amount of development impact fees of the same type otherwise due
under this article and shall not be paid to the applicant in cash or in credit
against any impact fees for a different type of facility or service or against
any other monies due from the applicant to the city, except as described in
subsection G of this section.
   G.   Request For Reimbursement: If the amount of approved credit for a
mandatory contribution, dedication, acquisition, or construction exceeds the
amount of the impact fees of the same type otherwise due under this article,
the applicant may request, in writing, that the city provide for reimbursement
of any excess credit to the applicant in cash. Such written request must be
filed not later than the initiation of construction of improvements, or the
acceptance by the city of contributions or land or easement dedications, or the
applicant’s claim shall be waived. Upon receipt of such a written request, the
city may, at its discretion:
      1.   Arrange for the reimbursement of such excess credit from the impact
fee fund for the same type of service or facility from impact fees paid by
others; or
      2.   Reject the request for cash and provide credit. Such excess credit
shall be valued at one hundred percent (100%) of actual developer costs for the
excess improvements, or at the actual appraised value of such excess
improvements, at the city’s option.
   H.   Transfer Of Credit: Credit may be transferred from one holder to
another by any written instrument clearly identifying the credit issued under
subsection C of this section that is to be transferred; provided, that such
instrument is signed by both the transferor and transferee, and that the
document is delivered to the city for registration of the change in ownership.
   I.   Means And Method Of Valuation: The city council shall determine a means
and method of valuation of the proposed dedication or constructions to
establish credits against future impact fee revenue if the dedication of land
or construction of public facilities is of worth in excess of the impact fee
due from an individual development. (Ord. 2007-11, 12-17-2007; amd. Ord. 2019-
2, 5-20-2019; Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-2024)
1-8-9-13: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS:
   A.   Interest Earned: Interest earned on monies in any impact fee fund shall
be considered part of such fund, and shall be subject to the same restrictions
on use applicable to the impact fees deposited in such fund.
   B.   Use Of Funds: No monies from any impact fee fund shall be spent for
operations or maintenance of any facility or to cure deficiencies in public
facilities existing on the effective date of this chapter.
   C.   Project Improvements: Nothing in this article shall restrict the city
from requiring an applicant to construct reasonable project improvements
required to serve the applicant’s project, whether or not such improvements are
of a type for which credit is available under section
1-8-9-12 of this article.
   D.   Records: The city shall maintain accurate records of impact fees paid,
including the name of the person paying such fees, the project for which the
fees were paid, the date of payment of each fee, the amounts received in
payment for each fee, and any other matters that the city deems appropriate or
necessary to the accurate accounting of such fees, and such records shall be
available for review by the public during city business hours.
   E.   Component of City Budget: There shall be a component of the city budget
that schedules construction of public facility capital improvements to serve
projected growth; projects costs of capital improvements; allocates collected
impact fees for construction of the capital improvements; and covers at least a
5-year period and is reviewed and updated at least every 5 years.
   F.   Mistakes Or Misrepresentations:
      1.   Overpayments: If an impact fee has been calculated and paid based on
a mistake or misrepresentation, it shall be recalculated. Any amounts overpaid
by an applicant shall be refunded by the city to the applicant within thirty
(30) days after the city’s acceptance of the recalculated amount, with interest
at the rate of five percent (5%) per annum since the date of such overpayment.
      2.   Underpayments: Any amounts underpaid by the applicant shall be paid
to the city within thirty (30) days after the city’s acceptance of the
recalculated amount, with interest at the rate of five percent (5%) per annum
since the date of such underpayment.
      3.   City Error: In the event the underpayment is caused by an error
attributed solely to the city, the applicant shall pay the recalculated amount
without interest.
      4.   Issuance Of Additional Permits Or Approvals: In the case of an
underpayment to the city, the city shall not issue any additional permits or
approvals for the project for which the development impact fee was previously
paid until such underpayment is corrected, and if amounts owed to the city are
not paid within such thirty (30) day period, the city may also repeal any
permits issued in reliance on the previous payment of such impact fee and
refund such fee to the then current owner of the land.
   G.   Update: The service area report for each public facility for which an
impact fee is imposed shall be periodically updated approximately once every
five fiscal years. The service area report must comply with the requirements of
Section 7-6-1602, Montana Code Annotated.
   H.   Judicial Action Or Proceeding: Any judicial action or proceeding to
attack, review, set aside or annul the reasonableness, legality or validity of
any impact fee must be filed within ninety (90) days following the date of
imposition of the fee or the final determination of the city council, whichever
is the later. (Ord. 2013-5, 6-17-2013; amd. Ord. 2019-2, 5-20-2019; Ord. 2024-
3, 3-4-2024)
1-8-9-14: APPEAL:
   A.   Right To Appeal: The person charged an impact fee under the provisions
of this article may appeal the charge if the person believes an error has been
made.
   B.   Appeal Procedure:
      1.   The person making the appeal shall file with the city a written
notice of appeal that sets forth the basis for the appeal including the alleged
error.
      2.   The person making the appeal shall pay the city an appeal fee of one
hundred dollars ($100.00) at the time of filing the written notice of appeal.
      3.   The city manager shall fix a time and place for hearing the appeal,
and the city shall mail notice of the hearing to the appellant at the address
given in the notice of appeal. The hearing shall be conducted at the time and
place stated in such notice given by the city. The determination of the city
council shall be final.
      4.   The appeal shall be heard and determined by the city council within
sixty (60) days of the filing of written notice of appeal. (Ord. 2007-11, 12-
17-2007; amd. Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-2024)
1-8-10: EMERGENCY PURCHASING AUTHORITY:
1-8-10-1: PURPOSE AND FINDINGS:
The City Council of Belgrade hereby enacts this Emergency Purchasing Section to
establish rules and procedures for expeditious procurement during emergencies.
(Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-2024)
1-8-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
 
                              Any situation that poses an immediate threat to
EMERGENCY:                    public health, safety, or welfare, and requires
                              prompt action.
EMERGENCY PURCHASING OFFICER: The individual appointed by the city manager for
                              the City of Belgrade
                              Individuals designated by the Emergency
AUTHORIZED PERSONNEL:         Purchasing Officer to carry out emergency
                              purchasing functions. (Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-2024)
 
1-8-10-3: EMERGENCY PROCUREMENT PROCEDURES:
   A.   The Emergency Purchasing Officer is authorized to make emergency
purchases without following the normal competitive procurement process when
such action is necessary to respond to an emergency.
   B.   Emergency purchases may be made by direct negotiation with suppliers,
utilizing available contracts, or other appropriate means to ensure the prompt
delivery of goods and services.
   C.   The Emergency Purchasing Officer may waive any formalities or
procedures that would normally be required under standard procurement
regulations, provided that such actions are necessary for the timely resolution
of the emergency. (Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-2024)
1-8-10-4: NOTIFICATION AND REPORTING:
   A.   The Emergency Purchasing Officer shall promptly notify the City Council
of any emergency purchase made pursuant to this ordinance.
   B.   A report detailing the circumstances, justification, and expenditures
related to emergency purchases shall be submitted to the City Council as soon
as practicable following the resolution of the emergency. (Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-
2024)
1-8-10-5: ACCOUNTABILITY AND DOCUMENTATION:
   A.   All emergency purchases made under this ordinance shall be thoroughly
documented, including the justification for the emergency procurement, vendor
selection criteria, and the basis for the pricing.
   B.   Records of emergency purchases, including invoices and contracts, shall
be maintained by the city for audit and public inspection purposes. (Ord. 2024-
3, 3-4-2024)
1-8-10-6: DURATION OF EMERGENCY PROCUREMENT AUTHORITY:
The authority granted by this ordinance shall be limited to the duration of the
declared emergency and shall cease once the emergency is declared to be
resolved. (Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-2024)
1-8-10-7: DECLARATION OF EMERGENCY PROCUREMENT AUTHORITY:
The authority to declare an Emergency for the procurement purchase under this
section is granted to the city manager. The manager shall notify the mayor and
council upon exercising this authority (1-8-10-4) and provide an update at the
next regular session of the council.
(Ord. 2024-3, 3-4-2024)
1-8-11: MASTER FEE SCHEDULE
1-8-11-1: PURPOSE:
   The purpose of this section is to establish a centralized schedule of fees
for city services, permits, and programs, which shall be adopted by resolution
of the City Council and updated annually.
(Ord. 2025-5, 4-21-2025)
1-8-11-2: ESTABLISHMENT OF MASTER FEE SCHEDULE:
   A.   The master fee schedule shall include, but not be limited to, fees
related to:
      Building permits and inspections.
      Business licensing.
      Planning and zoning applications.
      Public safety services.
      Utility services and connections.
      Parks and recreation programs.
      Public facility rentals.
      Any other fees as deemed necessary by the City Council.
   B.   The master fee schedule shall be maintained by the finance department
and made publicly available on the city's website and at city hall.
   C.   The master fee schedule supersedes previous fees in the Belgrade City
Code aside from utility rates pursuant to state and local law.
(Ord. 2025-5, 4-21-2025)
1-8-11-3: ADOPTION AND AMENDMENT PROCESS:
   A.   The initial master fee schedule and any amendments thereto shall be
adopted by resolution of the City Council after a public hearing.
   B.   Fee adjustments shall be reviewed periodically and may be revised to
reflect the costs of providing services and programs.
   C.   Notice of proposed amendments to the master fee schedule shall be
published in accordance with Montana state law and the city's public
notification procedures.
(Ord. 2025-5, 4-21-2025)
1-8-11-4: PAYMENT AND COLLECTION:
   A.   All fees established under this chapter shall be payable to the City of
Belgrade in the manner prescribed by the applicable department.
   B.   The city may impose late fees, interest, and penalties for delinquent
payments as set forth in the master fee schedule or by separate ordinance.
   C.   Any unpaid fees may be collected through liens, legal proceedings, or
other methods permitted by law.
(Ord. 2025-5, 4-21-2025)
1-8-11-5: WAIVERS AND ADJUSTMENTS:
   A.   The city manager or designee may, in its discretion, waive or adjust
fees under extraordinary circumstances, including financial hardship, promotion
of economic development, or public benefit considerations.
   B.   Requests for fee waivers or adjustments shall be submitted in writing
and reviewed on a case-by-case basis.
(Ord. 2025-5, 4-21-2025)
1-8-11-6: ENFORCEMENT AND COMPLIANCE:
   A.   Failure to pay required fees may result in the suspension or revocation
of permits, licenses, or services.
      1.   For a first offense up to one hundred dollars ($100) fine;
      2.   For a second offense up to three hundred dollars ($300);
      3.   Third or subsequent violations pursuant sec.
1-4-1 of the Belgrade City Code, are misdemeanor offenses subject to those
penalties.
   B.   The city may take appropriate legal action to enforce compliance with
this chapter.
   C.   Any person aggrieved by a fee decision may appeal to the city manager
or designee within thirty (30) days of the decision.
(Ord. 2025-5, 4-21-2025)
TITLE 2
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL BUSINESS LICENSES
SECTION:
2-1-1: License Required
2-1-2: Application And Review
2-1-3: Expiration And Payment Of Fees
2-1-4: Regulation Of Licensee
2-1-5: Fee Schedules And Classifications
2-1-6: Report Of Licenses
2-1-7: Notice Of Delinquent Licenses
2-1-8: General Police Powers
2-1-9: Penalty For Failure To Obtain License
2-1-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, operate, transact, engage in,
or carry on any industry, trade, pursuit, profession, vocation, or business
within the city without first applying for and obtaining a license from the
city, as herein provided. If such application is granted, the person shall pay
any fees as hereinafter provided. (1983 Code § 5.02.010)
2-1-2: APPLICATION AND REVIEW:
   A.   Application: Application for a city business license shall be applied
for at the city office. Application shall be accompanied with the necessary
business license fee.
   B.   Review And Investigation: Upon receipt of said application and fee,
said application shall be reviewed and investigated by the zoning officer,
building inspector, fire marshal and police department.
   C.   Denial/Granting Of License: Upon completion of said review and
investigation, the city manager shall deny or grant the business license as
applied for.
   D.   Denial By Manager; Review By Council: In the event the city manager
shall deny a business license, said application shall be reviewed by the city
council at its next regularly scheduled meeting. After hearing reports deemed
relevant from the city manager, zoning officer, building inspector, fire
marshal, or the police department and the license applicant, the city council
shall determine if a license shall be granted. (Ord. 685, 9-8-1987)
2-1-3: EXPIRATION AND PAYMENT OF FEES:
All licenses, except as otherwise provided herein, shall be payable yearly, in
advance, and on or before January 1 of each calendar year. All fees for
licenses, except as otherwise provided herein, shall be payable yearly, in
advance, and on or before the date of expiration of the license which shall be
December 31. (1983 Code § 5.02.30)
2-1-4: REGULATION OF LICENSEE:
Every person licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to
regulation, inspection, control and supervision under the general police powers
of the city and of all the ordinances of the city now in force or which may
hereafter be adopted in aid of such police power and regulation. Nothing
contained in this chapter creates any vested right to any person to the
assignment, renewal, reissuance, or continuation of any license issued under
this chapter. (1983 Code § 5.02.040)
2-1-5: FEE SCHEDULES AND CLASSIFICATIONS:
   A.   Fees: The following business license fees shall be applied to all
businesses within the city as follows:
Type Of Business Annual Fee
Type Of Business                                             Annual Fee
Banks, banking firms, banking corporations or banking        $100.00
associations
Cable television: Any party or legal entity providing cable  100.00
television services to the residents of the city
Carnival, circus: Any persons or legal entities operating a
carnival, circus, menagerie, street fair, tent show, or the  50.00      (daily)
like within the city
 For each additional show, game, concession, or              25.00      (daily)
 miscellaneous riding device
Dairy                                                        50.00
Fortune teller, clairvoyant, hypnotist: Any person or entity
rendering services as a fortune teller, astrologer,
clairvoyant, horoscopist, palmist, phrenologist, hypnotist,  150.00
medium, reader of the past or future, by whatever other name
so called
Funeral homes and undertakers                                50.00
Gas or electric service: Every person and legal entity
providing gas and electric services to the residents of the  100.00
city
Grain brokers dealing in stocks and grain and buying and     50.00
selling upon orders and earning commissions thereon
Grain dealers operating grain elevators, warehouses and      50.00
other places for storing grain or other merchandise
Home occupation: A person who operates a business as a sole
proprietor, or on behalf of a partnership or a corporation   50.00
or any other legal entity from a residence within the city
limits in compliance with the zoning ordinance
Hotels, motels, tourist courts, lodging houses, rooming      50.00
houses
Itinerant vendor: A person acting in the business of
retailing to consumers by going from consumer to consumer,
either on the streets or to their places of residence or
employment, and there soliciting, selling, or offering to
sell, or exhibiting for sale, by sample, by catalog, or      150.00
otherwise, or taking orders for future delivery of any
goods, wares, or merchandise, or for services to be
performed in the future is within the meaning of this
chapter an "itinerant vendor"
Livestock merchant who receives commissions for the sale of  50.00
livestock or any other manner of fee
Manufacturing establishments and service establishments
engaged in manufacturing, cleaning, repairing, painting,
fabricating, woodworking, lumber, filling stations,          50.00
printers, dry cleaning, laundromats, shoe repair, painter's
shop, photographers and automobile repair stations
Merchants dealing in goods, wares and merchandise having a   50.00
permanent place of business
Nonprofit organizations: The Belgrade city manager is
authorized to waive business license fees for nonprofit      -
organizations at the time of license approval
Packing houses and slaughterhouses                           50.00
Pawnbroker                                                   50.00
Plumber: A person or legal entity operating or doing or
attempting to do mechanical work commonly known as plumbing,
or any person performing service to the city sewer system,
or underground plumbing which ultimately connects with the   100.00
city sewer system, or underground excavating within the
city; provided, however, before the city shall be
responsible to issue a license, the applicant shall be
responsible to give proof of the following:
 1. Liability Insurance; Bond: Proof of liability insurance
 in the sum of $300,000.00, or a bond in the sum of
 $300,000.00 of at least 2 sureties that all work will be
 performed in the city in a skillful, workmanlike and
 sanitary manner and guaranteeing that any and all damages
 which may result to any person from such negligent or
 unskillful or unsanitary work being done by such person, or
 by reason of any person or property being injured as a
 result of any work done or caused to be done by said
 plumber to which the city may become liable by reason of
 the work of said plumber or underground excavator.
 2. Failure To Comply; Penalty: Failure of any person to
 carry out the trade of plumbing or any of the activities
 described herein within the city without adhering to the
 terms above shall be punishable as provided in section
 1-4-1 of this code. Upon conviction of a second offense of
 this subsection, the court shall revoke the business
 license of the guilty party.
Professional services: Persons or business entities which
deliver professional services or professional work,          50.00
excluding those professions specifically exempted from
licensing by state law
Public auctioneer                                            50.00
Railroad: Any legal entity operating a railroad within the   100.00
city or upon rights of way within the city
Restaurants and cafes                                        50.00
Taxicabs and buses or any other parties engaged in providing 50.00
intracity or intercity transportation to persons
Telephone system: Every person and legal entity operating a  100.00
telephone system within the city
Theaters providing amusement and entertainment including     50.00
moving pictures
Transient retail merchant: A person who brings into
temporary premises within the city a stock of goods, wares,
or articles of merchandise, or articles of trade, and who
solicits, sells or offers to sell, or exhibits for sale such 150.00
stock of goods, wares, or articles of merchandise, or other
articles of trade at retail is within the meaning of this
chapter a "transient retail merchant"
Transient wholesale merchant: Every person who shall bring
into the city any goods, wares, articles of merchandise,
natural products of the farm, natural products of the
orchard, vineyard, or garden by use of an automobile or      150.00
truck for purposes of sale of said goods within the city is
within the meaning of this chapter a "transient wholesale
merchant"
Trucking business having a principal place of business       50.00
within the city limits
Every person and legal entity not otherwise listed herein    50.00
 
(1983 Code § 5.02.050; amd. Ord. 685, 12-19-1983; Ord. 685, 12-1-1986; Ord.
2005-18, 12-5-2005; Res. 2008-5, 6-2-2008)
   B.   Modification Of Fees: The city council is hereby authorized to modify
the amount of the business license fees set forth in subsection A of this
section by resolution. (Ord. 2005-18, 12-5-2005)
2-1-6: REPORT OF LICENSES:
The director of finance shall prepare an annual report showing:
   A.   Valid Licenses: The names of all the parties who have paid licenses for
the preceding year; the business for which the same was paid; and the amount.
   B.   Delinquent Licenses: Under the head of "delinquent licenses", the names
of all persons operating or transacting any business, trade, or profession in
this city for which a license is required, and then remaining unpaid; the time
for which such license is due; the amount due; and the business for which said
license is required; which list shall be filed in the office of the director of
finance. (1983 Code § 5.02.070)
2-1-7: NOTICE OF DELINQUENT LICENSES:
It shall be the duty of the director of finance to cause that portion of said
list showing "delinquent licenses" to be published once in a newspaper
circulated within this city. Such publication shall be made in the issue of
said newspaper first following the filing of such list with the director of
finance. (1983 Code § 5.02.080)
2-1-8: GENERAL POLICE POWERS:
   A.   Required To Obtain Licenses: All industries, trades, pursuits,
professions, vocations and businesses are required to obtain licenses under
this chapter as a result of special services, regulation, inspection, control
and protection provided under the general police powers of this city in view of
such special services involving health, sanitation, traffic control, building
use, fire protection and control, enforcement of the laws of the state, and
general conditions of the ordinances of the city.
   B.   Chief Of Police To Aid In Collection: It is the duty of the chief of
police to aid the director of finance in the collection of all license fees
required by this chapter to be paid and to make personal demands therefor upon
the request of the director of finance and, in the event of receipt of payment
for such license fees, to deliver to the director of finance such receipts
collected. (1983 Code § 5.02.090)
2-1-9: PENALTY FOR FAILURE TO OBTAIN LICENSE:
   A.   Complaint: When a violation of this chapter occurs or is alleged to
have occurred, any person may file a written complaint. Such complaint shall
state fully the cause and basis thereof and shall be filed with the city
office. Thereafter, an investigation of such allegations shall be made and
appropriate action taken as provided by this chapter.
   B.   Penalty: Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to penalty as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code. (1983 Code § 5.02.060)
CHAPTER 2
LIQUOR CONTROL
SECTION:
2-2-1: Definitions
2-2-2: Duty Of City Officials
2-2-3: Application For License
2-2-4: License Fees
2-2-5: Hours Of Business
2-2-6: Inspection Of Premises
2-2-7: Transfer Of License
2-2-8: Revocation And Suspension Of License
2-2-9: Violation; Penalty
2-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the definitions of words, phrases and
expressions set forth in Montana Code Annotated section 16-1-106, be and the
same are hereby adopted as the definitions of the same words, phrases and
expressions when used in this chapter. (1983 Code § 5.04.010)
2-2-2: DUTY OF CITY OFFICIALS:
It shall be the duty of the city attorney, chief of police, city judge and
other officers of the city to enforce the Montana alcoholic beverage code.
(1983 Code § 5.04.020)
2-2-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
   A.   Required; Form: Any person desiring to engage in the business of
selling alcoholic beverages in the city under the provisions of the Montana
alcoholic beverage code and this code shall first apply for a license therefor
from the director of finance. Application shall be made to the city council on
such application forms as shall be provided by the director of finance.
   B.   Filing; Council Action: The application shall be filed with the
director of finance and presented for the consideration of the city council at
its first regular meeting following the filing thereof, but action thereon may
be postponed for investigation or other good cause in the discretion of the
council. The action of the council, with reference to the application, shall be
entered in the minutes of its proceedings, and no license shall be issued
without the approval of the council so entered upon the minutes. The date of
such permission and the book and page where it is entered upon the minute book
shall be noted on any license issued pursuant thereto. If the application is
rejected, the reasons for such rejection shall be noted in said minute entry,
the applicant notified thereof and the tendered fee returned to such applicant.
   C.   License Fees; Proration: License fees shall be payable in advance and
shall accompany the application therefor, whether for original license or
renewal thereof. No rebate will be allowed for fractions of a year; except that
if a license is granted after June 30 of any year, the license fee for the
remainder of the calendar year shall be one-half (1/2) of the entire yearly
license; and except also, that if the entire yearly license fee has been paid
in advance and the business under the license shall have been discontinued
before July 1 in the year in which such license was granted, the director of
finance shall refund one-half (1/2) of the yearly license fee so paid upon
surrender of the license, make appropriate book entry of the fact of surrender
and refund, and report thereof shall be made to the city council at its next
meeting and entered in the minutes.
   D.   Term: All licenses shall expire at twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on
December 31 in the year in which such license is issued.
   E.   Prohibited Location: No license will be granted to sell alcoholic
beverages in any residence district of the city, and the decisions of the city
council as to what constitutes a residence district shall be conclusive upon
all applicants for licenses. (1983 Code § 5.04.030)
2-2-4: LICENSE FEES:
   A.   Annual Fee: The annual license fees shall be as follows:
 
Each beer retailer          $100.00
Each beer and wine retailer 100.00
Each all-beverage license   100.00
Each authorized club        100.00
 
(1983 Code § 5.04.060; amd. 2009 Code)
   B.   Payment; Proration: Such license fees shall be payable with the
application therefor. If the application is made prior to June 30, the fee
shall be paid for the entire calendar year. If the application is made after
June 30, the fee shall be paid for one-half (1/2) of the calendar year, which
calendar year shall run from January 1 to December 31 of each year.
   C.   Use Of Funds: Fees and fines collected under this chapter shall be
allocated to the appropriate fund of the city, to be used exclusively for the
purpose of defraying the cost of necessary police regulations, inspection and
control under the police power of the city and not for revenue.
   D.   Subject To Police Regulations: Any business licensed under this chapter
shall require and be subject to the general police regulations of the city.
   E.   Fees In Addition To Other Fees: All fees provided for in this chapter
are in addition to any and all other license fees required to be paid under any
other ordinances of the city. (1983 Code § 5.04.060)
2-2-5: HOURS OF BUSINESS:
All premises licensed to sell alcoholic beverages at retail within the city
shall remain closed and no alcoholic beverages shall be sold, offered for sale,
or given away upon any such premises during the following hours:
   A.   On any day between two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and eight o'clock (8:00)
A.M.
   B.   On any day of a general or primary election during the hours when the
polls are open, excepting bond elections. (1983 Code § 5.08.080; amd. 2009
Code)
2-2-6: INSPECTION OF PREMISES:
Every person shall be subject to regulation, inspection, control and
supervision under the general police power of the city, and all laws in force,
or which may hereafter be adopted, in and of such police power and regulation,
and each and every license shall be subject to suspension and revocation as
herein provided. (1983 Code § 5.04.070)
2-2-7: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
   A.   Approval Required: No license issued under the provisions of this
chapter shall be transferable without the approval of the city council, after
written application for permission to transfer is received, accompanied by
satisfactory evidence of the consent of the department of revenue to such
transfer of the license by it issued under the Montana alcoholic beverage code.
   B.   Application: The application for transfer shall be filed with the
director of finance and brought to the attention of the city council at its
first regular meeting thereafter.
   C.   Council Action: Action thereon may be postponed for investigation or
other good cause, in the discretion of the council. If permission for transfer
is granted, the applicant shall present the original license for endorsement by
the director of finance as to the fact of the permission to transfer, date when
such permission was granted, minute book and page, and the name of the
transferee.
   D.   Transfer Fee: The director of finance shall charge and collect such fee
as the city council may from time to time establish to cover the cost of all
proceedings in connection with such transfer. (1983 Code § 5.04.040)
2-2-8: REVOCATION AND SUSPENSION OF LICENSE:
   A.   State License Revoked Or Suspended: If any license issued by the
Montana department of revenue under the provisions of the Montana alcoholic
beverage code shall be revoked or shall be suspended under the provisions of
said code, the companion license issued under the provisions of this chapter
shall be automatically revoked or suspended for the said period, and in the
event such action by the Montana department of revenue shall, on appeal, be
modified or set aside, the suspension or revocation of the license issued under
the provisions of this chapter shall likewise be automatically affected.
   B.   Conviction For Violation:
      1.   Conviction: The conviction of any licensee, or any employee of such
licensee in the operation of or in connection with the business licensed under
this chapter and the Montana alcoholic beverage code for violation of this
chapter or said code shall make such license subject to revocation upon the
fact of such conviction being certified to the mayor by the director of finance
or judge of the court in which such conviction was had.
      2.   Mayor's Endorsement; Service: The mayor shall thereupon endorse upon
such certificate notice that the license of the person so certified as
convicted is revoked and cause the same to be served upon such licensee or
person in charge of such business at the time of such service, and thereupon
such license shall stand revoked; and the chief of police shall see to it that
such business is discontinued while such revocation is effective.
      3.   Appeal: Any licensee whose license is revoked under the provisions
of this chapter may appeal from such revocation to the city council for such
action as it may see fit to take, but pending action upon such appeal by the
city council, said license shall stand revoked.
      4.   Mayor Power To Suspend License: Every person licensed hereunder
shall conduct the business licensed in an orderly manner and licenses may be
suspended by the mayor for any improper or disorderly conduct which is
permitted or which occurs in or about the premises where such licensed business
is carried on.
   C.   City Council Power To Revoke License: When any person licensed
hereunder shall violate the provisions of this chapter or any of the ordinances
of the city, or laws of this state, or shall permit such violations on the
premises where such licensed business is carried on, the city council may
revoke any such license so issued.
   D.   Notice; Hearing: Before any final action shall be taken upon the
revocation of any license, the licensee shall be entitled to at least three (3)
days' notice of the time and place such action will be taken thereon and shall
have the right to be heard in the matter, except in cases where such action
shall be based upon a conviction in the city court, in which case, it shall be
lawful for the council to proceed without such notice. (1983 Code § 5.04.050)
2-2-9: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1983 Code § 5.04.090)
CHAPTER 3
GAMES OF CHANCE
SECTION:
2-3-1: Hours Of Operation
2-3-1: HOURS OF OPERATION:
No games of chance, live card tables, live bingo, live keno or video gambling
machines may be operated on any premises licensed under this title between two
o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of each day. (Ord. 91-2, 5-6-
1991)
CHAPTER 4
PAWNBROKERS
SECTION:
2-4-1: License Required
2-4-2: Definitions
2-4-3: Required Records
2-4-4: Records; Examination By Police
2-4-5: Persons From Whom Articles Shall Not Be Taken
2-4-6: Duration Articles Must Be Held
2-4-7: Internet Subscription Requirements
2-4-8: Requirement For Records
2-4-9: Declaration Of Ownership
2-4-10: Penalty
2-4-11: Repealer
2-4-12: Severability
2-4-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
Every pawnbroker before doing any business in the city of Belgrade shall first
procure a license therefor as provided in chapter 1 of this title. (Ord. 2009-
3, 6-2-2009)
2-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the following meanings:
PAWNBROKER: Any person whose business it is to take or receive by way of
pledge, pawn, or exchange, any goods, wares, or merchandise, or any kind of
personal property whatever, for the repayment or security of money loaned
thereon. (Ord. 2009-3, 6-2-2009)
2-4-3: REQUIRED RECORDS:
   A.   Every pawnbroker shall keep a database of records sufficient to
identify each pledge, contract for purchase, or purchase transaction, and each
forfeiture of property pursuant to the terms of a contract for purchase. Every
customer shall provide to the pawnbroker the following information for such
records:
      1.   The customer's name and date of birth;
      2.   The current street address, city, state and zip code of the
customer's residence;
      3.   The customer's identification from which will be of one or more of
the following:
         a.   A valid state identification card;
         b.   A valid state driver's license;
         c.   A military identification card;
         d.   A valid passport;
         e.   An alien registration card;
         f.   An official identification document lawfully issued by a state or
federal government.
   B.   All transactions shall be kept in a numerical register in the order in
which they occur, which register shall show the printed name and written or
electronic signature of the pawnbroker or agent, the purchase price or other
monetary amount of the transaction, the date, time and place of the
transaction, and an accurate and detailed account and description of each item
of tangible personal property involved, including, but not limited to, any and
all trademarks, identification numbers, serial numbers, model numbers, owner
applied numbers, brand names or other identifying marks on such property. (Ord.
2009-3, 6-2-2009)
2-4-4: RECORDS; EXAMINATION BY POLICE:
No person keeping records as required in section
2-4-3 of this chapter shall fail, neglect, or refuse to exhibit the same to the
chief of police, or any policeman, or any third party accompanied by such
officer, or any person brought as a friend to redeem property pledged by
another, when requested to do so, or refuse to permit the chief of police, or
any policeman, or any third party brought by a pledge or to redeem the property
pledged, to inspect any such article purchased or received. (Ord. 2009-3, 6-2-
2009)
2-4-5: PERSONS FROM WHOM ARTICLES SHALL NOT BE TAKEN:
It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or valuable article
dealer to receive, purchase or trade any article from a person who is under the
influence of alcohol, under the influence of drugs, or under the age of
eighteen (18) years. (Ord. 2009-3, 6-2-2009)
2-4-6: DURATION ARTICLES MUST BE HELD:
A pawnbroker shall hold all purchases made through a purchase transaction for a
period of ten (10) days, during which time the property shall not be disposed
of or altered from the form in which it was received. The holding period shall
begin on the day the purchase transaction is uploaded into the Belgrade police
department designated database. (Ord. 2009-3, 6-2-2009)
2-4-7: INTERNET SUBSCRIPTION REQUIREMENTS:
Every pawnbroker shall own, maintain and operate a computer system with
internet access. Every pawnshop or pawnbroker shall file all records
electronically on a daily basis directly to an internet subscription service
designated as an agent of the police department as prescribed by the chief of
police or to the police department if no internet service is available as
agreed by the chief of police or his designee. The pawnshop or pawnbroker shall
enter and upload all information from its database of records regarding
contract for purchase, pledges, and purchase transactions. (Ord. 2009-3, 6-2-
2009)
2-4-8: REQUIREMENT FOR RECORDS:
   A.   All records required to be kept under this chapter must be kept in the
English language, in a legible manner and shall be preserved and made
accessible for inspection for a period of three (3) years after the date of
redemption or forfeiture and sale of property.
   B.   Upon demand of any Belgrade police department officer or agent, the
pawnbroker shall produce and show any tangible personal property given to the
pawnbroker in connection with any contract for purchase or purchase
transaction. The pawnbroker's database shall list the date on which each
contract for purchase was canceled, whether it was redeemed, or forfeited or
sold, and, upon demand, such records shall be made available to any Belgrade
police department officer or agent. (Ord. 2009-3, 6-2-2009)
2-4-9: DECLARATION OF OWNERSHIP:
   A.   The pawnbroker shall at the time of making the loan contract for
purchase or purchase transaction obtain a written declaration of ownership from
the customer stating whether the property that is the subject of the
transaction is solely owned by the customer and, if not solely owned by the
customer, the customer shall attach a power of attorney from all co-owners of
the property authorizing the customer to sell or otherwise dispose of the
property;
   B.   The pawnbroker shall require the customer to sign his or her name, in
the presence of the pawnbroker on the declaration of ownership. (Ord. 2009-3,
6-2-2009)
2-4-10: PENALTY:
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall upon conviction thereof, be
punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 2009-3, 6-2-2009)
2-4-11: REPEALER:
All resolutions, ordinances and sections of this code and parts thereof in
conflict herewith are hereby repealed. (Ord. 2009-3, 6-2-2009)
2-4-12: SEVERABILITY:
If any provisions of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or
circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other
provisions of this chapter which may be given effect without the invalid
provision or application and, to this end, the provisions of this chapter are
declared to be severable. (Ord. 2009-3, 6-2-2009)
TITLE 3
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
CHAPTER 1
NUISANCES
SECTION:
3-1-1: Purpose
3-1-2: Applicability
3-1-3: Definitions
3-1-4: Responsibility For Maintenance
3-1-5: Public Nuisances
3-1-6: Enforcement
3-1-7: Summary Abatement
3-1-8: Abatement In Other Cases; Notice
3-1-9: Abatement By Owner Or Individual In Possession
3-1-10: Appeal Procedures; Hearing
3-1-11: Abatement By City
3-1-12: Notice Of Assessment; Appeal Of Charges
3-1-13: Personal Liability Of Owner And Individual In Possession
3-1-14: Overhead Charge; Civil Penalties
3-1-15: Unlawful To Create, Keep Or Maintain; Penalty
3-1-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   The intent of this chapter is to provide a comprehensive mechanism for
the identification and abatement of public nuisances within the city, to
safeguard the health, safety and welfare of the people by maintaining property
or premises in good appropriate condition; to promote a sound and attractive
community appearance; and to enhance the economic value of the community, and
each area in it, through the regulation of the maintenance of property or
premises.
   B.   The remedies provided for in this chapter are supplemental and
complementary to all of the provisions of this code, and state and federal law,
and nothing herein shall be read, interpreted or construed in any manner to
limit any existing right or power of the city to abate any and all public
nuisances. (Ord. 2002-6, 11-4-2002)
3-1-2: APPLICABILITY:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all property throughout the city
wherein any of the conditions hereinafter specified are found to exist;
provided, however, that any condition which would constitute a violation of
this chapter but which is duly authorized under any other city, state or
federal law, shall not constitute a violation. (Ord. 2002-6, 11-4-2002)
3-1-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
ABATEMENT: The removal, stoppage, prostration, or destruction of that which
causes or constitutes a nuisance, whether by breaking or pulling it down, or
otherwise destroying, or effacing it.
ATTRACTIVE NUISANCE: Any condition, instrument or machine which is unsafe,
unprotected and may prove detrimental to children whether in a building, on the
premises of a building, or on an unoccupied lot, including, but not limited to,
abandoned, broken or neglected vehicles, machinery, equipment, refrigerators,
freezers, swimming pools, holes or excavations.
OWNER: The owner of record or any person with legal, financial or equitable
interest in the property on which the alleged public nuisance exists at the
time of the violation.
PROPERTY: Any real property, premises, structure or location on which a public
nuisance is alleged to exist.
PUBLIC NUISANCE: Any fence, wall, shed, deck, house, garage, building,
structure or any part of any of the aforesaid; or any tree, pole, smokestack;
or any excavation, hole, pit, basement, cellar, sidewalk subspace, deck; or any
lot, land, yard, premises or location which, in its entirety or in any part
thereof, by reason of the condition in which the same is found or permitted to
be or remain, shall or may endanger the health, safety, life, limb or property,
or cause any hurt, harm, inconvenience, discomfort, damage or injury to any one
or more individuals in the city, in any one or more of the following
particulars:
   A.   By reason of being a menace, threat and/or hazard to the general health
and safety of the community.
   B.   By reason of being a fire hazard.
   C.   By reason of being unsafe for occupancy, or use on, in, upon, about or
around the aforesaid property.
   D.   By reason of lack of sufficient or adequate maintenance of the
property, and/or being vacant, any of which depreciates the enjoyment and use
of the property in the immediate vicinity to such an extent that it is harmful
to the community in which such property is situated or such condition exists.
   The term public nuisance shall mean any nuisance designated in section
3-1-5 of this chapter.
SUMMARY ABATEMENT: Abatement of the nuisance by the city, or a contractor
employed by the city, by removal, repair, or other acts without notice to the
owner, agent, or occupant of the property except for the notice required by
this chapter. (Ord. 2002-6, 11-4-2002)
3-1-4: RESPONSIBILITY FOR MAINTENANCE:
   A.   Every owner, occupant, lessee or holder of any possessory interest of
real property within the city is required to maintain such property so as not
to violate the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   The owner of the property shall remain liable for violations hereof
regardless of any contract or agreement with any third party regarding such
property or the occupation of the property by any third party. (Ord. 2002-6,
11-4-2002)
3-1-5: PUBLIC NUISANCES:
The following are declared to be public nuisances:
   A.   Unsafe Building Or Structure: Any building or structure which meets the
definition of an unsafe building or structure as provided in the international
building code or any successor provision.
   B.   Violation Of Planning And Zoning Laws And Regulations: Any violation of
title 10 of this code relating to the city planning and zoning laws and
regulations.
   C.   Imminent Life Safety Hazard: Any imminent life safety hazard which
creates a present and immediate danger to life, property, health or public
safety.
   D.   Attractive Nuisance: Any condition which constitutes an attractive
nuisance whether within a structure or on the premises.
   E.   Repeated Disruptive Activities: Any building or place which has been
operated or maintained in a manner that has resulted in repeated disruptive
activities including, but not limited to, disturbances of the peace, public
drunkenness, drinking in public, harassment of passersby, sale of stolen goods,
public urination, theft, assaults, batteries, acts of vandalism, excessive
littering, illegal parking, loud noises (particularly in late night or early
morning hours), traffic violations, or police detentions and arrests.
   F.   Detrimental To Health: Any condition which renders air, food or drink
unwholesome, unsanitary or detrimental to health.
   G.   Fire Hazard: Any condition which poses a fire hazard.
   H.   Animal Control: Any condition in violation of title 4, chapter 1 of
this code.
   I.   Owning Animals Without Provisions For Protection Of Surrounding
Properties: The ownership, possession or control of any animal or animals
without proper provisions for the protection of the surrounding properties from
odor and sound generated by the animals.
   J.   Fences: Fences or other structures on private property abutting,
fronting upon, or visible from the public right of way, which are severely
sagging, leaning, fallen, or decayed, extending into the public right of way
without permission of the city or which is otherwise in an unsafe or
dilapidated condition.
   K.   Accumulation Of Personal Property Or Wastes: The keeping, storage,
depositing or accumulation on the premises for a period in excess of five (5)
days of any personal property or wastes, including, but not limited to,
abandoned, wrecked, partially dismantled, unlicensed or inoperative vehicles,
abandoned, wrecked, partially dismantled or inoperative boats or vessels,
trailers, campers, automotive parts and equipment, appliances, furniture,
containers, packing materials, scrap metal, wood, building materials, junk,
rubbish, debris, dirt, sand, gravel, concrete or other similar materials which
is within the view of persons on adjacent or nearby real property or the public
right of way. However, building materials being used or to be used for a
project of repair or renovation for which a building permit has been obtained
may be stored for such period of time as is necessary to expeditiously complete
the project.
   L.   Rotting Or Putrid Matter: Rotting or putrid matter, garbage, rubbish,
refuse, or recyclable items which have not been recycled within fourteen (14)
days of being deposited on the property.
   M.   Lumber: Lumber (excluding building materials being used or to be used
for a project of repair or renovation for which a building permit has been
obtained may be stored for such period of time as is necessary to expeditiously
complete the project), salvage materials including, but not limited to, auto
parts, scrap metals, tires, or other materials stored on premises in excess of
five (5) days and visible from adjacent or nearby real property or the public
right of way.
   N.   Vegetation: Vegetation including, but not limited to, weeds or grass
that is overgrown and likely to harbor mice, rats, vermin, and other similar
nuisances detrimental to neighboring properties, or vegetation growing into the
public right of way, or vegetation obstructing the view of drivers on any
public street or right of way or private driveway.
   O.   Materials Stacked In Disorderly Manner: Materials stored or stacked on
business, commercial or industrial property in a disorderly manner in view from
the public right of way is prohibited. Nothing in this section shall be
construed as prohibiting the orderly storage of business related materials and
inventory above fence height where permitted by applicable zoning designation
and/or conditional use permit.
   P.   Tarpaulins Or Temporary Covering Materials: Tarpaulins or other types
of temporary covering materials used for covering of any material, item or
property that would be a public nuisance is itself a public nuisance and is not
a permissible means of abating a public nuisance.
   Q.   Unsecured Buildings: Unsecured buildings constituting a hazardous
condition or inviting or permitting trespassers or malicious mischief.
   R.   Threat To Health, Safety Or Welfare Of Public: Any other condition or
use of property which represents a threat to the health, safety and welfare of
the public by virtue of its unsafe, dangerous or hazardous nature.
   S.   Public Nuisance Defined In Statute: Any "public nuisance" as defined in
Montana Code Annotated section 45-8-111 or otherwise recognized in law as
constituting a public nuisance. (Ord. 2002-6, 11-4-2002)
3-1-6: ENFORCEMENT:
The city manager may designate a city department or employee to have primary
responsibility for the abatement of a public nuisance under this chapter. Said
city department or employee may be referred to herein as the enforcement
officer. (Ord. 2002-6, 11-4-2002)
3-1-7: SUMMARY ABATEMENT:
   A.   Complaint; Inspection: Whenever a complaint is made to the enforcement
officer of the existence of a "public nuisance", as defined in sections
3-1-3 and
3-1-5 of this chapter, the enforcement officer shall promptly cause to be
inspected the property on which it is alleged that such public nuisance exists.
Should the enforcement officer find that a public nuisance exists, and that the
public health, safety or welfare may be in immediate danger, then summary
abatement procedures shall be implemented and the enforcement officer may cause
the nuisance to be removed or abated. The enforcement officer may notify the
city building inspector if the public nuisance involves a building that appears
structurally unsafe. The building inspector, upon being notified by the
enforcement officer, shall cause the building on which it is alleged such
public nuisance exists to be inspected and submit a written report of such
inspection and the findings to the enforcement officer.
   B.   Notice To Owner: When summary abatement is authorized, notice to the
owner, agent or occupant of the property is not required. Following summary
abatement, the enforcement officer shall cause to be posted, on the property
liable for the abatement, a notice describing the action taken to abate the
nuisance. (Ord. 2002-6, 11-4-2002)
3-1-8: ABATEMENT IN OTHER CASES; NOTICE:
   A.   Regular Abatement Procedures Required: If, after inspecting the
property on which the nuisance is reported, the enforcement officer declares
the existence of a public nuisance, but the nature thereof is not such as to
require the summary abatement of such nuisance, then regular abatement
procedures shall be followed.
   B.   Notice: The enforcement officer shall determine the individual, firm or
corporation who, from the records in the county clerk and recorder's office,
appears to be the titled owner of the aforesaid property and shall attempt to
determine the individual in possession of the property, if different from the
owner, and immediately cause a written notice to be served on such individual,
firm or corporation by personal service. If the enforcement officer is unable
to serve such individual, firm or corporation by personal service, the
enforcement officer shall serve the notice by mailing a copy of the notice to
such owner and to the individual in possession of the property, if different
from the owner, at such owner's and individual's last known address, if any, by
United States certified mail, return receipt requested, and the enforcement
officer shall cause a copy of the aforesaid notice to be posted at such
structure, location or premises. Notice shall be deemed to have been given on
the day of personal service or three (3) days after mailing and/or posting of
said notice. The posting of notice shall be conclusively deemed to be adequate
notice to any and all occupants, users, possessors, or owners of the property
or its contents, and the failure of any such occupant, user, possessor, or
owner to see, read, understand, or otherwise receive the notice shall not
invalidate any of the proceedings under this chapter.
   C.   Contents Of Notice: The aforesaid notice to the owner and individual in
possession of the property shall state the findings of the enforcement officer
with respect to the existence of a public nuisance. The notice shall further
state that unless the owner or individual in possession thereof shall cause the
abatement of the public nuisance, pursuant to the orders contained in the
enforcement officer's notice, the public nuisance shall be abated by the city
at the expense of the owner and the individual in possession.
   D.   Defense: Any person who is the record owner and any individual that is
in possession of the premises, location or structure at the time an order
pursuant to this chapter is issued and served upon him, shall be responsible
for complying with that order, and liable for any costs incurred by the city
therewith, notwithstanding the fact that he, it or they conveys his, its or
their interest in the property to another after such order was issued and
served.
   E.   Not A Defense: It shall not be a defense to the determination that a
public nuisance exists that the property is boarded up or otherwise enclosed.
(Ord. 2002-6, 11-4-2002)
3-1-9: ABATEMENT BY OWNER OR INDIVIDUAL IN POSSESSION:
   A.   Time Limitation: Within thirty (30) days after notice to abate a
nuisance as provided for herein, the owner and individual in possession of the
affected property shall remove and abate such nuisance.
   B.   Grant Of Additional Time: The enforcement officer, upon written
application by the owner or individual in possession of the affected property
within the thirty (30) day period after the notice has been served, may grant
additional time to effect the abatement of the public nuisance, provided that
such extension is limited to a specific time period. (Ord. 2002-6, 11-4-2002)
3-1-10: APPEAL PROCEDURES; HEARING:
   A.   Notice Of Appeal: The owner or individual in possession of the property
who has been served with a notice pursuant to this chapter that a public
nuisance exists, may, within seven (7) calendar days after notice is deemed to
have been given pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, make a written
demand to the enforcement officer for a hearing on the question of whether a
public nuisance in fact exists. The hearing shall be held at the next scheduled
regular meeting of the city council following receipt by the enforcement
officer of the written demand and at least two (2) days' notice of the hearing
shall be given to the individual who made the written demand for the hearing.
   B.   Hearing: The hearing shall be conducted by the city council. The city
council may amend or modify the notice and/or order, or extend the time for
compliance with the enforcement officer's order by the owner by such date as
the majority of the council may determine.
   C.   Evidence: The owner or the individual in possession of the subject
property shall be given the opportunity to present evidence to the council in
the course of the hearing.
   D.   Abatement By City; Waiver Of Costs: In those instances where the
nuisance has been abated by the city, the council shall have discretion to
waive the cost of abating a nuisance, in whole or in part, if in the course of
the hearing reviewing the decision, the council finds that any of the following
did not conform to the provisions of this chapter:
      1.   The notice to remove the nuisance;
      2.   The work performed in abating the nuisance; or
      3.   The computation of charges. (Ord. 2002-6, 11-4-2002)
3-1-11: ABATEMENT BY CITY:
   A.   Authority To Enter And Abate: Should any public nuisance not be abated
at the expiration of time stated in the notice/order or within such additional
time as the enforcement officer or city council may grant, the enforcement
officer, and/or his representatives, shall have the authority to enter upon the
property and abate the public nuisance found thereon.
   B.   Salvaged Materials:
      1.   Sale: In abating such nuisance, the enforcement officer may go to
whatever extent may be necessary to complete the abatement of the public
nuisance and, should it be practicable to salvage any material derived in the
aforesaid abatement, the planning department may sell the salvaged material at
private or public sale at the best price obtainable and shall keep an
accounting of the proceeds thereof.
      2.   Proceeds: The proceeds, if any, obtained from the sale of any
material salvaged as a result of an abatement of a public nuisance by the
enforcement officer shall be deposited to the general fund of the city and any
deficit between the amount so received and the cost of the abatement may be
levied as an assessment against the property in question by the city council
and collected as any other assessment by the city; however, any other
alternative collection method may be utilized by the city to recoup the
deficit. Should the proceeds of the sale of such salvaged material exceed the
cost of abatement, the surplus, if any, shall be paid to the owner or
individual in possession of the property from which the public nuisance was
abated when a proper claim to the excess is established.
   C.   Assistance To Enforcement Officer: In abating a public nuisance, the
enforcement officer may call upon any of the city departments or divisions for
whatever assistance shall be deemed necessary or may, by private contract,
cause the abatement of the public nuisance.
   D.   Statement Of Costs: The enforcement officer shall, after completing the
removal and abatement, file a statement of costs with the finance department.
(Ord. 2002-6, 11-4-2002)
3-1-12: NOTICE OF ASSESSMENT; APPEAL OF CHARGES:
   A.   Notice Of Assessment; Objections: Upon receipt of the statement of
costs from the enforcement officer, the finance department shall provide notice
to the owner and individual in possession of the property, if different from
the owner, as provided for in this chapter of the amounts set forth in the
statement plus an additional amount sufficient to defray the costs of the
notice and stating that the city proposes to assess against the property and to
assess as a personal obligation of the owner and individual in possession of
the property the amount set forth in the notice and that objections to the
proposed assessment must be made, in writing, and received by the finance
department within twenty (20) days from the date notice is deemed given. Upon
the expiration of the twenty (20) day period, if no objections have been
received by the finance department, the finance department shall enter that
amount in the city liens docket which shall constitute a lien against the
property. The amount entered as a lien shall constitute a special tax assessed
on the property.
   B.   Administrative Review: If objections of either the property owner or
their representative are received by the finance department prior to the
expiration of the twenty (20) day period, the finance department shall refer
the matter for administrative review.
   C.   Written Determination: Upon conclusion of administrative review, the
enforcement officer shall make a written determination that the amount of the
charges shall be canceled, reduced, or remain the same. A copy of this
determination shall be furnished to the person making the objections together
with a notice of such person's right to appeal to the city council.
   D.   Lien: If no appeal of a determination by the enforcement officer is
filed within the time period allowed, a copy of the determination will be
furnished to the finance department who shall then enter a lien in the amount
determined in the city liens docket as provided in subsection A of this
section.
   E.   Appeal; Hearing: If a timely appeal is received by the city council, a
hearing shall be scheduled and held on the matter. If, after the hearing, the
city council determines that the proposed assessment does not comply with
subsection G of this section, the city council shall so certify to the finance
department and the proposed assessment shall be canceled. If, after the
hearing, it is determined that the proposed assessment or any part of it is
proper and authorized, the city council shall so certify to the finance
department who shall enter a lien in such amount as determined appropriate by
the city council, in the lien docket as provided in subsection A of this
section.
   F.   Final Administrative Decision: The determination of the city council is
a final administrative decision.
   G.   Criteria For Reduction Or Cancellation Of Assessment: The enforcement
officer, in administrative review, or the city council, on appeal, may reduce
or cancel a proposed assessment if it is determined that:
      1.   Any of the following did not conform to the provisions of this
chapter:
         a.   The notice to remove the nuisance; or
         b.   The work performed in abating the nuisance; or
         c.   The computation of charges; or (Ord. 2002-6, 11-4-2002)
      2.   The owner of the property was eligible for a reduction or
cancellation of the lien under subsection J of this section. (Ord. 2002-6, 11-
4-2002; amd. 2009 Code)
   H.   Criteria For Eliminating Civil Penalty: The enforcement officer, in
administrative review, or the city council, on appeal, may reduce a proposed
assessment by eliminating the civil penalty portion of the invoice if it is
determined that:
      1.   The current owner was not in possession of the property at the time
the notice required in section
3-1-8 of this chapter was posted; or
      2.   The owner did not receive the notice to remove the nuisance, did not
have knowledge of the nuisance and could not, with the exercise of reasonable
diligence, have had such knowledge.
   I.   Referral For Review: If, after a lien has been entered in the docket of
city liens, there is a written request of an owner who alleges that the owner
did not receive notice of the proposed assessment, the finance department shall
refer the matter for review pursuant to subsection B of this section.
   J.   Cancellation Or Reduction Of Lien: The lien may be canceled or reduced
by the enforcement officer, in administrative review, or the city council, on
appeal, if it is determined that the owner did not receive notice of the
proposed assessment, did not previously have knowledge of the lien or of the
nuisance abatement work constituting the basis of the lien, could not, in the
exercise of reasonable care or diligence, have had such knowledge, and in
addition, that the circumstances are such that a reduction or cancellation of
the charges would have been appropriate had the matter been reviewed pursuant
to this section prior to assessment. Upon receipt of a certification from the
city council, pursuant to subsection E of this section, the finance department
shall cancel or reduce the lien if required by the determination of the
enforcement officer and/or city council. (Ord. 2002-6, 11-4-2002)
3-1-13: PERSONAL LIABILITY OF OWNER AND INDIVIDUAL IN POSSESSION:
The person who is the owner and/or the person who is in possession of the
property at the time at which the notice required under section
3-1-8 of this chapter is deemed given shall be personally liable for the amount
of the assessment including all interest, civil penalties, and other charges.
The liability of the owner and/or person in possession of the property shall be
joint and several. (Ord. 2002-6, 11-4-2002)
3-1-14: OVERHEAD CHARGE; CIVIL PENALTIES:
   A.   Account Of Expenses Including Overhead Charge: Whenever a nuisance is
abated by the city, the enforcement officer shall keep an accurate account of
all expenses incurred, including an overhead charge of twenty five percent
(25%) for administration and a civil penalty of two hundred dollars ($200.00)
for each nuisance abated.
   B.   Subsequent Nuisance: When the city has abated a nuisance maintained by
any owner of real property, for each subsequent nuisance that is abated by the
city within two (2) consecutive calendar years concerning real property, owned
by the same person, an additional civil penalty of fifty percent (50%), minimum
of fifty dollars ($50.00), of the cost of abatement shall be added to the
costs, charges and civil penalties provided for in subsection A of this
section. The civil penalty shall be imposed without regard to whether the
nuisances abated by the city involved the same real property or was of the same
character. (Ord. 2002-6, 11-4-2002)
3-1-15: UNLAWFUL TO CREATE, KEEP OR MAINTAIN; PENALTY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to create, keep or maintain a public
nuisance in the city. Any person convicted of violating this chapter is guilty
of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars
($100.00) and not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment
not to exceed six (6) months, or by both fine and imprisonment, for each
offense. It is the intent of the city council that the criminal offenses listed
in this chapter be offenses involving legislative intent. Those offenses shall
not require proof of any one of the mental states described in Montana Code
Annotated, subsections 45-2-101(33), (37) and (58). (Ord. 2002-6, 11-4-2002)
CHAPTER 2
REFUSE COLLECTION AND REMOVAL
SECTION:
3-2-1: Definitions
3-2-2: Standards For Accumulation
3-2-3: Responsibilities
3-2-4: Prohibitions
3-2-5: Inoperable Or Unlicensed Vehicles
3-2-6: Enforcement; Penalty And Property Assessments
3-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions of terms shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates another meaning or unless elsewhere stated for specific application:
COMMERCIAL REFUSE COLLECTOR: The person or entity who is or intends to be
engaged in the collection and/or transportation of garbage and refuse, in any
part of the city.
COMMERCIAL REFUSE GENERATOR: Any person in charge or owning, leasing, renting
or occupying any multi-family dwelling unit with three (3) or more units,
business, industrial or commercial building, including, but not limited to, an
apartment complex, store, office, factory, motel or hotel that generates
garbage and refuse.
GARBAGE: Every accumulation of animal, vegetable or other matter that attends
the preparation, consumption, decay, dealing in or storage of meats, fish,
fowl, birds, fruits or vegetables, including the cans, containers and wrappers
wasted along with such materials.
OCCUPANT: The person occupying a dwelling unit or the person operating,
managing or keeping any hotel, restaurant, food establishment, commercial
establishment, business establishment, school, church, institution or premises
wherein or whereon garbage and refuse accumulates or is likely to accumulate.
REFUSE: Any waste product solid or having the character of solids rather than
liquids in that it will not flow readily without additional liquid and which is
composed wholly or partly of such materials as garbage, swill, seepings,
cleaning, trash, rubbish, litter, industrial solid wastes or domestic solid
wastes; organic wastes or residue or animals sold as meat; fruit or other
vegetable or animal matter from kitchens, dinning rooms, markets, food
establishments or any places dealing in or handling meat, fowl, fruits, grain
or vegetable offal, animal excreta, or the carcasses of animals; brick, plaster
or other waste matter resulting from the demolition, alteration or construction
of buildings or structures; accumulated waste material, cans, containers,
tires, discarded appliances, junk vehicles, furniture; wood, leaves, trimmings
from shrubs, dead trees or branches thereof, shavings, sawdust, excelsior,
wooden ware, printed matter, paper, paper board, pasteboard, grass, rags,
straw, boots, shoes, hats and all other combustible material not included under
the term "garbage" or any other such substance which may become a nuisance.
RESIDENTIAL REFUSE GENERATOR: Any person generating garbage or refuse other
than a commercial refuse generator including occupants and owners of duplex
dwellings which do not have common refuse collection containers or commercial
refuse containers. (Ord. 85-2, 6-17-1985)
3-2-2: STANDARDS FOR ACCUMULATION:
The following standards and requirements are established as a minimum for the
sanitary accumulation and storage of garbage and refuse containers pending
collection:
   A.   Use Of Containers Required: All garbage shall be placed in containers
owned by the commercial refuse collector or in containers owned by the property
owner or occupant as specified herein. Refuse which does not fit into the above
mentioned containers and/or which is not collected by the refuse collector
shall be the responsibility of the refuse generator as specified in sections
3-2-3 and
3-2-4 of this chapter.
   B.   Distribution And Placement Of Containers: Commercial refuse containers
and residential refuse containers owned by the commercial refuse collector
shall be distributed and placed as designated by the director of public works
considering accessibility for refuse and garbage generators and accessibility
for the efficient collection by the commercial refuse collector.
   C.   Owner To Provide Containers; Specifications: Garbage and refuse
containers shall be provided for every habitable building or business
establishment which does not have commercial refuse containers. The property
owner or his agent shall be responsible to provide such containers. Said
containers shall be portable, not more than thirty five (35) gallons' capacity,
galvanized metal, or plastic, sufficient to hold garbage accumulating between
collection periods. Said containers shall be provided with handles and
tightfitting covers. (Ord. 85-2, 6-17-1985)
3-2-3: RESPONSIBILITIES:
Every person shall have the duty of maintaining premises and equipment which
are owned by him or under his supervision; or of maintaining containers in
compliance with the requirements of this chapter, Gallatin County health
regulations and all applicable provisions of state law. Every property owner
shall remain liable for violations imposed upon him by this chapter even though
an obligation is also imposed on occupants of his buildings, and even though
the owner has, by agreement, imposed on occupants the duty of complying with
all the requirements of this chapter:
   A.   Commercial:
      1.   Maintenance Of Alleys: All commercial refuse generators shall
maintain their alleys, if they exist, free from refuse and garbage and keep the
area surrounding the refuse and garbage containers free from refuse, garbage
and other potential hazards to the public health, safety and welfare.
      2.   Maintenance Of Containers: Commercial establishments using
containers owned by the commercial refuse collector shall be responsible for
keeping the containers in a sanitary condition at all times.
   B.   Residential:
      1.   Storage Of Containers: Residential occupants and owners should store
their garbage and refuse containers in racks constructed in a manner which
keeps the containers six inches (6") to eighteen inches (18") aboveground.
      2.   Maintenance Of Alleys: Residential occupants and property owners
whose property is adjacent to an alley where garbage and refuse is accumulated
shall be responsible to keep one-half (1/2) of the alley adjacent to said
property clear of all garbage and refuse that originated from their property to
facilitate passage by the commercial refuse collector and all other vehicles
and maintain said alleys free from garbage and refuse accumulation.
      3.   Service By Commercial Refuse Collector: Residential occupants and
property owners whose property is serviced by the commercial refuse collector
on the street right of way shall be responsible to place their garbage
containers on the scheduled collection day(s) at the street right of way
adjacent to their property line. Containers and racks shall not be placed at
the street property line before three o'clock (3:00) P.M. on the day preceding
the day of collection, and, after the containers are emptied, they shall be
removed from the street property line on the day of collection and stored
within a structure upon the premises or immediately adjacent to a structure
upon the premises.
   C.   Break Down Materials To Fit In Containers: Refuse generators, wherever
possible, shall attempt to break down materials so they fit into containers.
   D.   Removal Of Garbage Not Removed By Commercial Collector: It shall be the
responsibility of all refuse generators and property owners to remove from
their property all garbage and refuse which is not removed by the commercial
refuse collector.
   E.   Construction, Repair Or Demolition: All persons, partnerships,
corporations or other legal entities engaged in the construction, repair or
demolition of any building or structure or part thereof shall remove and
dispose from any street, alley, gutter, park, sidewalk or any other public way
or any other property not owned by it, all waste matter and rubbish deposited
thereon in connection with that portion of the repair, construction or
demolition work under its special or general supervision. Said waste matter and
refuse shall be removed and disposed of within ten (10) days of final cessation
of work on such building or structure. (Ord. 85-2, 6-17-1985)
3-2-4: PROHIBITIONS:
The following prohibitions are placed upon all refuse generators, commercial
property occupants and owners, residential occupants, residential property
owners and individuals within the city:
   A.   Prohibited Substances: Placing in collection containers flammable
liquids, hot ashes, dead animals, concrete, dirt, plaster or materials which do
not allow the container lid to close. (Ord. 85-2, 6-17-1985)
   B.   Placing Or Allowing To Remain: Placing and allowing to remain upon any
lot, whether occupied or vacant, any garbage or refuse of any kind for a period
of ten (10) days or any shorter period of time specified by the director of
public works.
   C.   Burning: Burning any garbage or refuse on private or public property in
any manner other than in an incinerator which is established and enclosed
within an existing structure without permission of the director of public works
or the Central Valley fire district. (Ord. 85-1, 6-17-1985; amd. 2009 Code)
   D.   Unauthorized Use: Placing in or adjacent to any collection containers
owned or used by any commercial refuse collector garbage, trash or other
debris, of any type or nature, by any individual, agent or employee of any
firm, partnership or corporation not authorized to use any particular
commercial collection container. (Ord. 85-2, 2-17-1987)
3-2-5: INOPERABLE OR UNLICENSED VEHICLES:
   A.   Storage: Inoperable or unlicensed vehicles shall be stored on wheels
and tires or on blocks in a secure and safe manner.
   B.   Concealed: Inoperable or unlicensed vehicles and parts shall be covered
with a tarp or concealed and tightly secured or enclosed with a solid fence
rendering them generally unseen from public view.
   C.   Free Of Debris: The entire area where an inoperable or unlicensed
vehicle is stored shall be kept free from all accumulated debris. (Ord. 85-2,
6-17-1985)
3-2-6: ENFORCEMENT; PENALTY AND PROPERTY ASSESSMENTS:
   A.   Nuisance Declared: All garbage and refuse not collected and removed by
the commercial refuse collector and allowed to remain unremoved by the property
occupant or owner for a period of ten (10) days is hereby declared to be a
common nuisance.
   B.   Duties Of Police Officers And Community Service Officer: It shall be
the duty of all police officers, the community service officer and employees
under the community service officer's supervision to oversee the prompt removal
of all garbage and refuse not collected by the commercial refuse collector.
   C.   No Accumulation Allowed: No garbage or refuse shall be allowed to
accumulate along any street, alley, or public place, on or upon any vacant lot
or other lots by either the occupant or owner of the property. For purposes of
this chapter, one-half (1/2) of any street or alley lying next to the lands
abutting thereon shall be considered part of such land.
   D.   Notice By Community Service Officer: It shall be the duty of the
community service officer or his authorized representative to enforce the
provisions of this chapter and, upon determining a violation exists, shall
ascertain the name and mailing address of the occupant or owner of the premises
and the description of the premises where the violation exists. Written notice
of the violations shall be served upon said occupant or owner of the property
directing that said garbage or refuse be removed from the property within ten
(10) days or the city will cause said garbage and/or refuse to be removed, with
the cost thereof to be charged against the property owner from whose property
said garbage and refuse is to be removed. Charges for said garbage and removal
shall be set by the city council from time to time and communicated to the
community service officer considering not only the actual expense for removal
incurred by the city or charged by the city but also an administrative fee for
the issuance of notice and other related tasks related to such garbage and
refuse removal.
   E.   Failure To Remove: If the owner or occupant shall fail to remove said
garbage and/or refuse within the time specified in the notice of violation, the
community service officer shall cause the removal of said garbage and/or refuse
and shall bill the costs thereof, together with a reasonable charge for
administration and supervision, to the owner of the premises. If said charges
are not paid forthwith, the community service officer shall certify the same to
the city council, who shall pass a resolution asserting such charges as a
special tax against the premises involved. (Ord. 85-2, 6-17-1985)
   F.   Penalty For Violation: When a violation of this chapter occurs or is
alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written complaint. Such
complaint shall state fully the cause and basis thereof and shall be filed with
the city office. Thereafter, an investigation of such allegations shall be made
and appropriate action taken as provided by this chapter. Violation of the
provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements
shall constitute a misdemeanor. Persons or legal entities who violate this
chapter or fail to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, and, in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved
in conviction. Each day such violation occurs may be considered a separate
offense and punishable as such.
   G.   Intent Of Absolute Liability: It is the intent of the city council that
the misdemeanor criminal offenses listed in this chapter be offenses involving
legislative intent. Said offenses shall not require proof of any one of the
mental states in Montana Code Annotated subsections 45-2-101(35), (43) and
(65). (Ord. 85-2, 6-17-1985; amd. 2009 Code)
CHAPTER 3
WEEDS
SECTION:
3-3-1: Declared Nuisance
3-3-2: Duty To Maintain Property
3-3-3: Vacant Lots To Be Cleared
3-3-4: Duty To Notify
3-3-5: Notice Of Violation
3-3-6: Failure To Remove
3-3-7: Violation; Penalty
3-3-1: DECLARED NUISANCE:
All weeds, noxious or otherwise, grass and other wild and uncared for
vegetation are hereby declared to be a common nuisance. (Ord. 2007-5, 8-6-2007)
3-3-2: DUTY TO MAINTAIN PROPERTY:
   A.   Prohibited: No noxious or other weeds, grass, or other wild and uncared
for vegetation of whatever character, shall be allowed to grow upon any
property located in the city, or upon or along any boulevard, road, street,
avenue, or alley adjacent thereto. It shall be the obligation of the owner of
property located in the city to remove, cut or cause to be cut and at all times
keep down the growth of all noxious or other weeds, grass, or other wild or
uncared for vegetation on any such property, and upon and along any boulevard,
road, street, avenue or alley adjoining such property.
   B.   Roadway And Adjoining Property: For the purposes of this section, the
owner shall be obligated to maintain one-half (1/2) of any road, street,
avenue, or alley adjoining the property, and to maintain any boulevard
adjoining the property. (Ord. 2007-5, 8-6-2007)
3-3-3: VACANT LOTS TO BE CLEARED:
   A.   Clearing Required: No noxious or other weeds, grass, or other wild and
uncared for vegetation of whatever character shall be allowed to grow upon or
along the line of any railway, street, public place, or along or upon any
vacant or other lots, either by the owner or tenant of property. It shall be
the obligation of the owner or tenant to cut or cause to be cut and at all
times keep down the growth of all noxious or other weeds, grass, or other wild
or uncared for vegetation on any such property.
   B.   Considered Included In Property: For the purposes of this section, one-
half (1/2) of any road, street, avenue, or alley lying next to the lands
abutting thereon shall be considered part of such land. (1983 Code § 7.08.030)
3-3-4: DUTY TO NOTIFY:
It shall be the duty of the director of public works or his authorized
representative to enforce the provisions of this chapter, and, upon a
determination that a violation of this chapter exists, shall ascertain the name
and mailing address of the owner of the premises and the description of the
premises where the violation exists. The name and mailing address of the owner
may be obtained from the current assessment list maintained by the office of
the Gallatin County assessor. Written notice of violation shall be served upon
said owner directing that said noxious weeds shall be cut and removed from the
premises within ten (10) days or the city will cause said noxious weeds to be
removed, with cost thereof to be charged against said owner. Charges for weed
removal by the city shall be set by resolution of the city council from time to
time and communicated to the director of public works. The charge for weed
removal shall be up to seventy five dollars ($75.00) per hour until modified by
resolution of the city council. (Ord. 2007-5, 8-6-2007)
3-3-5: NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
Notice of violation shall be made either by posting a copy of said notice on
the premises, or by mailing a copy of said notice to the owner by first class
United States mail. Said notice shall be deemed complete on the day that notice
is posted or mailed. (Ord. 2007-5, 8-6-2007)
3-3-6: FAILURE TO REMOVE:
If the owner shall fail to remove said noxious weeds within the time specified
in the notice of violation, the director of public works shall cause said
noxious weeds to be cut and removed from the premises, and shall bill the cost
thereof, together with a reasonable charge for administration and supervision,
to the owner of the premises. If said charges are not paid forthwith, the
director of public works shall certify the same to the city council, who shall
pass a resolution asserting such charges as special tax against the premises
involved. (Ord. 2007-5, 8-6-2007)
3-3-7: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
   A.   Violation: When a violation of this chapter occurs or is alleged to
have occurred, any person may file a written complaint. Such complaint shall
state fully the cause and basis thereof and shall be filed with the city office
and thereafter an investigation of such allegations shall be made and
appropriate action taken as provided by this chapter.
   B.   Penalty: Any person who shall violate the provisions of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2007-5, 8-6-2007)
CHAPTER 4
TREES AND SHRUBS
SECTION:
3-4-1: Definitions
3-4-2: City Forester Duties
3-4-3: Tree Specifications And Standards
3-4-4: Hazards And Public Nuisances
3-4-5: Enforcement
3-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
CITY FORESTER: The employee assigned by the city manager or designee in charge
of forestry, assigned as part of this professional staff to implement this
chapter and carry out its enforcement.
HAZARD: A tree, or parts thereof, that by some natural cause or accident,
becomes an immediate threat to life or property.
LARGE TREE: Trees attaining a mature height of twenty-five (25) feet.
MAINTENANCE OR MAINTAINING: Means and includes but is not limited to pruning,
fertilization, insect and disease control, guying, cabling, bracing and repair
of trees.
PUBLIC AREA: Public way, city parks, and all other lands owned, leased, managed
or occupied by the city.
PUBLIC NUISANCE: Any tree or shrub or part thereof upon private or public
property which:
   Is dead or dying;
   Is interfering with the use of public property by reason of its location or
condition;
   By reason of location or condition constitutes an immediate danger to the
health, safety or welfare of the general public or which obstructs the free
safe passage of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or obstructs a streetlight or
sight triangle; or
   Is harboring insects or diseases which reasonably may be expected to injure
or harm other trees or shrubs.
PUBLIC WAY: All city property deeded or recorded as public streets, roads,
boulevards, alleys, sidewalks and parking strips.
SIGHT TRIANGLE: The area on the public right of way as described in the
Belgrade zoning code.
SMALL TREE: Trees attaining a mature height of less than twenty-five (25) feet
STREET LEVEL: The highest point of elevation of the finished surface of the
street.
STREET TREE: Trees planted in the public way.
(Ord. 2025-1, 4-1-2025)
3-4-2: CITY FORESTER DUTIES:
   A.   There is hereby created and established a city forester with the
following responsibilities and duties:
      1.   Administer, direct, manage, supervise, and control all city tree
programs; the forestry division; the establishment and maintenance of
professional standards, training, titles and certification for forestry
division personnel; and the forestry budget including establishing a city tree
fund.
      2.   Develop and periodically review and revise, as necessary, the
Belgrade tree manual. This manual shall contain regulations and standards
supplementing this division for establishing the valuation and appraisal of
trees and shrubs, the planting, maintenance and removal of trees and shrubs
upon all city-owned property or public areas.
      3.   Enforce or cause the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2025-1, 4-1-2025)
3-4-3: TREE SPECIFICATIONS AND STANDARDS:
   A.   The following specifications and standards are established for the
removal, planting, trimming, maintenance and care of trees and shrubs in the
public area:
      1.   Removing.
         a.   No person shall remove a tree or shrub without first obtaining a
permit and paying any permit fee established by the city council in the master
fee schedule.
         b.   All trees and shrubs which are marked for removal shall be
completely removed from the growing site and disposed of in an authorized
manner, as determined by the city forester. The stump shall be ground out to a
depth suitable for future planting of turf.
         c.   Any person may make a request to the city forester for a tree to
be removed. The city forester's decision to approve removal of a tree shall be
based on its detriment to the community due to disease, insect damage or other
damage which creates a hazard to the public health, safety and welfare. Any
person aggrieved by the city forester's decision to remove or not remove the
tree may then apply to the City Manager or designee to overturn the city
forester's decision, except when the city forester determines the tree to be a
hazard. The person may appeal the City Manager or designee's decision to the
city council.
         d.   If said tree is to be removed, full compensation for the cost of
removal of said tree will be paid by the person requesting removal.
      2.   Planting.
         a.   No tree shall be planted without first obtaining a permit from
the city forester and paying any permit fee established by the city council in
the master fee schedule. No tree with a mature height in excess of twenty-five
(25) feet shall be planted under any utility line.
         b.   All street trees shall be planted in line with each other and at
a spacing determined by the city forester.
         c.   Single-stem canopy trees may be permitted in sight vision
triangles, provided that mature trees do not significantly affect safe driving
conditions and are maintained such that no canopy foliage exists below a height
of fourteen (14) feet from street level.
      3.   Trimming.
         a.   No person, except for city crews or licensed arborist with which
the city has contracted for tree trimming services, shall trim a tree without
first obtaining a permit and paying any permit fee established by the city
council in the master fee schedule.
         b.   All trees and shrubs, including trees and shrubs on private
property, which have branches overhanding a public area shall have said
branches trimmed to a minimum clearance height of fourteen (14) feet above the
parking lane/street/alley and a minimum clearance of nine (9) feet above any
sidewalk, unless the city forester determines the clearance at this location
would be detrimental to public safety. The city forester may waive the
provisions of this section if the city forester determines that the tree or
shrub does not interfere with public travel, obstruct the light of any
streetlight, or endanger public safety.
         c.   All head wood, stubs, broken branches, badly formed branches,
disease-infected and insect-infested branches interfering with public travel,
lighting, existing buildings and traffic signs shall be removed with
consideration given to the symmetry and beauty of the tree or shrub.
         d.   In cases of storms, natural disasters, or other emergencies, the
city reserves the right to remove or prune trees and shrubs without prior
notice to protect the public and restore infrastructure.
         e.   Topping of trees is prohibited.
      4.   Maintenance And Duty To Avoid Damage To Trees And Shrubs.
         a.   No person or animal under any person's control shall break,
injure, mutilate, kill or destroy any tree or shrub; permit any fire to injure
any portion of any tree or shrub; or permit any toxic chemical to seep, drain
or be emptied on or about any tree or shrub.
         b.   During building operations, the builder shall erect suitable
protective barriers around public trees and shrubs which may be injured. If any
tree is damaged or must be removed during construction, the person causing the
removal of a tree shall replace the tree pursuant to this chapter.
         c.   It shall be the duty of the abutting property owner and tenant to
maintain all street trees and vegetative growth in front of and adjoining their
property and keep them free of becoming a public nuisance or hazard.
      5.   Public Utilities. Public utility work affecting trees or shrubs
shall be limited to the actual necessities of the service of the company and
such work shall be done in a neat and professional manner and according to the
Belgrade tree manual. The public utility shall replace any tree that dies or is
removed with a tree of equal value as determined by the city forester.
      6.   Planting, Removal, Maintenance And Protection Of Trees And Shrubs.
All trees and shrubs shall be planted, removed, maintained and protected
according to the Belgrade tree manual.
(Ord. 2025-1, 4-1-2025)
3-4-4: HAZARDS AND PUBLIC NUISANCES:
   A.   General Prohibition; Duty To Abate. It is unlawful for any person
having supervision or control over any lot, tract, parcel of land or portion of
it, occupied or unoccupied, improved or unimproved, within the city limits to
permit or maintain on any such lot, tract, or parcel or part any tree, shrub or
part thereof which is a public nuisance or hazard and it shall be the duty of
such person to promptly remove, eradicate or otherwise control such condition
in accordance with this chapter.
   B.   Trees And Shrubs In Public Areas. If the city forester determines, with
reasonable certainty upon inspection or examination, any tree or shrub exists
in or upon any public area in a hazardous condition or as a public nuisance,
the city forester shall immediately cause it to be treated, trimmed, removed or
otherwise abated in such manner as to prevent the spread of the hazard. The
manner in which the hazard shall be abated shall be determined by the city
forester.
   C.   If any part or the whole of any tree growing on private premises,
streets, alleys, boulevards, or other public ways shall be found after
inspection to be dangerous or unsafe or to otherwise constitute a public hazard
or nuisance, the city may declare such tree or portion thereof a public
nuisance, order the property owner to abate the nuisance or cause such nuisance
to be abated in accordance with the provisions of section
3-1-9 of this code. In addition to the costs of removal the property owner or
person in control of the property shall pay to the city an administrative cost
equal to an additional twenty-five (25) percent of the actual costs and
expenses of removing the nuisance.
   D.   Abatement At Owner's Expense. In the event that the public nuisance or
hazard is not abated by the date specified in the notice or specified by the
city council, the city forester is authorized to cause the abatement of said
nuisance. The reasonable cost of such abatement shall be filed as a lien
against the property on which the public nuisance or hazard was located.
(Ord. 2025-1, 4-1-2025)
3-4-5: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   No person shall prevent delay or interfere with the city forester, or
the city forester's assistants or agents, while engaged in or carrying out the
execution or enforcement of this chapter.
   B.   The City of Belgrade has the exclusive authority to regulate trees and
shrubs on city property and public ways within the City of Belgrade. Homeowner
associations, common-interest communities, businesses, and other entities, and
individuals are prohibited from regulating trees and shrubs on city property or
public ways within the City of Belgrade.
   C.   In addition to any penalty, the court, also, shall order restitution to
the city for each tree or part thereof, unlawfully damaged, destroyed or
removed,
   D.   Violation of this chapter for a first offense shall be punishable by a
fine up to one hundred dollars ($100), A second violation of this chapter
within five (5) years is punishable by a fine up to three hundred dollars
($300). Violation of this chapter for a third or subsequent offense within five
(5) years constitutes a Misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be
subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of the Belgrade City Code. Each day a violation exists constitutes a
separate offense.
(Ord. 2025-1, 4-1-2025)
CHAPTER 5
HANDBILLS AND POSTERS
SECTION:
3-5-1: Removal Required
3-5-2: Deemed Principal; Penalty
3-5-1: REMOVAL REQUIRED:
It shall be required for any person to remove any handbills, stickers,
placards, posters or any other advertising matter of any kind or description on
city property, buildings, traffic control devices, signs, street lighting
poles, or power transmission poles within two (2) days of the conclusion of the
sale and/or event being advertised. (Ord. 2005-8, 10-3-2005)
3-5-2: DEEMED PRINCIPAL; PENALTY:
Any person, firm, or corporation for or on whose behalf said advertising is
placed on said property described in section
3-5-1 of this chapter shall be deemed to be a principal in the commission of
this offense and shall be subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars
($50.00) or more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense. (Ord.
2005-8, 10-3-2005)
CHAPTER 6
NOISE
SECTION:
3-6-1: Loud Noises Prohibited
3-6-2: Specific Noises Prohibited
3-6-1: LOUD NOISES PROHIBITED:
No person shall make or cause to be made any loud and raucous noise in the city
which is offensive to the ordinary sensibilities of the inhabitants of the
city, which noise renders the enjoyment of life or property uncomfortable or
interferes with public peace and comfort. (Ord. 2022-5, 3-21-2022)
3-6-2: SPECIFIC NOISES PROHIBITED:
The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and
unnecessary noises in violation of this chapter; provided, however, that such
enumeration shall not be construed to be exclusive to other noises, to wit:
   A.   Horns and signal devices. The sounding of any horn or signal device on
any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle while not in motion, except as
a danger signal if another vehicle is approaching apparently out of control, or
if in motion only as a danger signal after or as brakes are being applied and
deceleration of the vehicle is intended, the creation by means of any such
signal device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound, and the sounding of such
device for any unnecessary and unreasonable period of time, except as the same
may be used by authorized emergency vehicles while on emergency calls or as may
be otherwise required while on duty, shall be deemed as unnecessary noise.
   B.   Radios, phonographs and musical instruments. The playing of any radio,
phonograph or any musical instrument in such a manner, or with such volume,
particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., so as to create a
noise such as reasonably calculated to disturb a person of ordinary disposition
under the same or similar circumstances residing in a dwelling or other type of
residence in the vicinity shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.
   C.   Automobiles and motorcycles. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or
other vehicle so out of repair or loaded or operated in such manner as to
create loud or unnecessary noises, such as spinning or squealing of tires,
grating, grinding, rattling or other noises, shall be deemed a violation of
this chapter.
   D.   Shouting or crying by peddlers. The shouting and crying of peddlers,
hawkers and vendors which disturbs the quiet and peace of the neighborhood
shall be deemed unnecessary noise and a violation of this chapter.
   E.   Drums, loudspeakers, etc., used for attracting attention. The use of
any drum, loudspeaker or other instrument or device for the purpose of
attracting attention to any performance, show or sale of merchandise by
creation of noise shall be deemed unnecessary noise and a violation of this
chapter.
   F.   Loudspeakers and amplifiers on vehicles. The use of loudspeakers and
amplifiers on trucks or other vehicles, except where specific license is
granted by the city, shall be deemed unnecessary noise and a violation of this
chapter. (Ord. 2022-5, 3-21-2022)
TITLE 4
POLICE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
ANIMAL CONTROL
(Rep. by Ord. 2016-7, 8-15-2016)
CHAPTER 2
MINORS; CURFEW
SECTION:
4-2-1: Short Title
4-2-2: Purpose
4-2-3: Scope
4-2-4: Definitions
4-2-5: Curfew For Minors
4-2-6: Exceptions
4-2-7: Minors Under Sixteen Years Of Age
4-2-8: Duty Of Parent
4-2-9: Duty Of Law Enforcement Officers
4-2-10: Penalty
4-2-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the CURFEW CHAPTER. (Ord. 93-6,
10-18-1993)
4-2-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish reasonable restrictions upon the
time of day during which minors shall be allowed on any of the streets or other
public places of the city. Such restrictions are enacted to further the general
welfare of the community and specifically to further the following community
interests:
   A.   The protection of the younger children in the city from each other and
from other persons on the street during the nighttime hours;
   B.   The enforcement of parental control of, and responsibility for, their
children;
   C.   The protection of the public from nocturnal mischief by minors;
   D.   The reduction in the incidence of juvenile criminal activity; and
   E.   Prevent exposure to, and the possibility of being led into involvement
with, crimes of violence, destruction and/or self- destruction.
These restrictions are enacted pursuant to the general police and other powers
granted to self-power local governments. (Ord. 93-6, 10-18-1993)
4-2-3: SCOPE:
The provisions of this chapter are intended to apply to all minors under the
age of sixteen (16) years and to any parent of any minor person under the age
of sixteen (16) years. (Ord. 93-6, 10-18-1993)
4-2-4: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
CITY: The local government of the city, and all of the area located within its
geographical boundaries.
CURFEW: A regulation establishing restrictions upon the time of day during
which minor persons may appear on any of the streets or public places of the
city.
LAW ENFORCEMENT FACILITY: The offices of the city of Belgrade police department
at 88 North Broadway, Belgrade, Montana, or the Gallatin County sheriff's
office, located in the city of Bozeman, Montana.
MASCULINE GENDER: Includes the feminine gender.
MINOR: Any person who has not attained the age of sixteen (16) years.
PARENT: Any person having legal custody of a minor:
   A.   As a natural or adoptive parent;
   B.   As a legal guardian; or
   C.   Is a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of court.
PERSON: Any human being, male or female.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any park, playground, school yard or other publicly owned
property.
SINGULAR NUMBER: Includes the plural number.
STREET: Any public street, highway, sidewalk, alley or other public way within
the city. (Ord. 93-6, 10-18-1993)
4-2-5: CURFEW FOR MINORS:
A curfew restricting the time of day during which minor persons may appear on
any of the streets or in any of the public places of the city, is hereby
established. No minor, as specified in section
4-2-7 of this chapter, shall be in or upon any street or public place within
the city during the hours provided in section
4-2-7 of this chapter. (Ord. 93-6, 10-18-1993)
4-2-6: EXCEPTIONS:
In the following exceptional cases, a minor in or upon any street or public
place within the city, during the hours provided in section
4-2-7 of this chapter, shall not be considered in violation of this chapter
when:
   A.   Accompanied by a parent of such minor.
   B.   Accompanied by a person over sixteen (16) years of age who is
authorized by a parent of such minor to take said parent's place in
accompanying said minor for a designated period of time and purpose within a
specified area.
   C.   In the performance of an errand or duty directed by a parent of such
minor.
   D.   Attending a school or religious activity. This exception will apply for
one-half (1/2) hour after the completion of such activity.
   E.   Engaged in legally recognized employment. This exception will apply for
the period from one-half (1/2) hour before to one-half (1/2) hour after work.
(Ord. 93-6, 10-18-1993)
4-2-7: MINORS UNDER SIXTEEN YEARS OF AGE:
Minors who have not reached their sixteenth birthday shall not be in or upon
any street or public place between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and
five o'clock (5:00) A.M. except on Friday or Saturday nights when such hours
shall be between twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and five o'clock (5:00) A.M.;
provided, however, that on any weekday night preceding a holiday recognized by
the United States of America, state of Montana, or the city of Belgrade, the
hours shall be between twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and five o'clock (5:00)
A.M. In addition, during the period of time that the state of Montana is
operating under daylight savings time, the aforementioned hours shall be
extended by one-half (1/2) hour. (Ord. 93-6, 10-18-1993)
4-2-8: DUTY OF PARENT:
No parent of any minor under the age of sixteen (16) shall allow or permit any
such minor to go or be in or upon any street or public place within the city
after the hours prescribed in section
4-2-7 of this chapter. The words "allow" or "permit" as used in this section
require actual or constructive knowledge on the part of a parent. A parent must
actually know about a minor's violation or the circumstances must be such that
a reasonable, responsible parent should have known of the minor's violation.
(Ord. 93-6, 10-18-1993)
4-2-9: DUTY OF LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS:
   A.   Ascertain Name And Address Of Parent: Upon finding a minor in or upon
any street or public place within the city in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter, it shall be the duty of the attending law
enforcement officer of the city to take the name of such minor and the name and
address of the minor's "parent" as defined in section
4-2-4 of this chapter.
   B.   Detention Of Minor; Notice To Parents; Medical Treatment: The law
enforcement officer shall detain the minor and the parent shall immediately be
notified to appear and take charge of such minor. If the minor requires
emergency medical treatment, the law enforcement officer shall arrange for such
treatment.
   C.   Minor Turned Over To Parent: When a minor is apprehended for violation
of the provisions of this chapter, the law enforcement officer shall turn the
minor over to the minor's parent or parents. If a parent cannot be located, or
fails to take charge of the minor, said minor may be entrusted to a relative,
neighbor or other person who will, on behalf of the parent, assume
responsibility of caring for the minor pending the availability or the arrival
of the parent.
   D.   Written Report: The law enforcement officer shall file a written report
to the chief of police or his designee within twenty four (24) hours of the
violation if criminal charges are to be made under this chapter. (Ord. 93-6,
10-18-1993)
4-2-10: PENALTY:
   A.   First Offense: Upon the first incident of violation of this chapter,
written notice shall be given to a parent or guardian of the minor who is in
violation of this chapter. Subsequent violation and conviction under this
chapter shall result in a fine of twenty five dollars ($25.00);
   B.   Second Offense: For a second offense a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00)
shall be imposed;
   C.   Third Offense: For a third offense a fine of one hundred dollars
($100.00) shall be imposed;
   D.   Fourth Offense: For a fourth offense a fine of two hundred dollars
($200.00) shall be imposed;
   E.   Fifth Offense: For a fifth offense a fine of four hundred dollars
($400.00) shall be imposed; and
   F.   Sixth And Subsequent Offense: For a sixth and subsequent conviction a
fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall be imposed.
   G.   Cited In Youth Court: "Minors" as defined in section
4-2-4 of this chapter may be cited into youth court upon violation of this
chapter at the discretion of the police officer. (Ord. 93-6, 10-18-1993)
CHAPTER 3
PUBLIC DRINKING
SECTION:
4-3-1: Definition
4-3-2: Public Consumption Prohibited
4-3-3: Violation; Penalty
4-3-1: DEFINITION:
"Alcoholic beverage" means a compound produced and sold for human consumption
as a drink that contains more than one-half percent (0.5%) of alcohol by
volume. (2009 Code)
4-3-2: PUBLIC CONSUMPTION PROHIBITED:
   A.   Consumption: No person shall drink or consume intoxicating liquor in or
on any motor vehicle when such vehicle is upon a public highway or in an area
used principally for public parking.
   B.   Possession: No person shall have in his possession while in or on a
motor vehicle upon a public highway or in an area used principally for public
parking, any bottle or receptacle containing intoxicating liquor which has been
opened, or the seal broken, or the contents of which have been partially
removed.
   C.   Unlawful To Keep Or Allow To Be Kept; Exception: It is unlawful for the
owner of any motor vehicle or the driver, if the owner be not then present in
or on the motor vehicle, to keep or allow to be kept in a motor vehicle when
such vehicle is upon a public highway or in an area used principally for public
parking, any bottle or receptacle containing such intoxicating liquor which has
been opened, or the seal broken, or the contents of which have been partially
removed, except when such bottle or receptacle shall be kept in the trunk of
the motor vehicle when such motor vehicle is equipped with a trunk, or kept in
some other area of the vehicle not normally occupied by the driver or passenger
if the motor vehicle is not equipped with a trunk. A utility compartment or
glove compartment shall be deemed to be within the area occupied by the driver
and passenger. (1983 Code § 9.08.020)
4-3-3: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1983 Code § 9.08.030)
CHAPTER 4
WEAPONS
SECTION:
4-4-1: Definitions
4-4-2: Discharge Of Firearms Or Bows And Arrows Prohibited; Exceptions
4-4-3: Non-Firearm Weapons Prohibited In Public Buildings, Parks And Schools;
Exceptions
4-4-4: Non-Firearm Weapons Prohibited In Public Meetings
4-4-5: Firearms Prohibited
4-4-6: Unpermitted Concealed Firearms And Unconcealed Firearms Prohibited
4-4-7: Screening for firearms and non-firearm weapons
4-4-8: Violations; Penalty
4-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
ARROW:                      A shaft, usually pointed at one end and feathered or vaned at the other, and
                            designed for shooting from a bow.
                            A flexible curved device with the ends connected by cord or wire, and designed
BOW:                        for shooting arrows. The term “bow” includes cross bow, compound bow, recurve
                            bow, traditional bow, or any other type of bow.
                            Any City owned and occupied building or structure, and any building or structure
                            leased and occupied by the City, where a governmental function, public service,
CITY FACILITY:              or public event is held. The use of a City owned or leased building or structure
                            by employees or members of the public, even if for limited periods of time, is
                            considered continual occupation of the building or structure.
FIREARM:                    A pistol, rifle, shotgun or any other type of instrument or device commonly known
                            as a firearm, but shall not include an air gun, BB gun, or pellet gun.
   Concealed Firearm     A firearm that is wholly or partially covered by the clothing or wearing apparel
                            of the person carrying or bearing the firearm.
   Permitted Concealed   A concealed firearm carried by a person with a current and valid permit issued
Firearm                     pursuant to Section 45-8-321, M.C.A. or a person recognized pursuant to Section
                            45-8-329, M.C.A.
   Unconcealed Firearm   The open carry of a firearm that is not wholly or partially covered by the
                            clothing or wearing apparel of the person carrying or bearing the firearm.
   Unpermitted Concealed A concealed firearm carried by a person who does not have a current and valid
Firearm                     permit issued pursuant to Section 45-8-321, M.C.A. and has not been recognized
                            pursuant to Section 45-8-329, M.C.A.
                            A dirk, dagger, slingshot, throwing star, nun-chucks, sword, sword cane, billy,
                            knuckles made of any metal or hard substance, knife having a blade 4 inches or
NON-FIREARM WEAPON          longer, razor, not including a safety razor, explosive device, destructive
                            device, or other deadly weapon. (Ord. 2009-1, 3-2-2009; amd. Ord. 2021-3, 8-2-
                            2021)
 
4-4-2: DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS OR BOWS AND ARROWS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   For public safety purposes, it is unlawful for any person to shoot,
fire or discharge any firearm within the city limits of the city of Belgrade,
or on any premises owned or controlled by the city.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to shoot, fire or discharge a BB gun, air
gun, pellet gun, or bow and arrow within the city limits of the city of
Belgrade, or on any premises owned or controlled by the city, except on private
property with the permission of the owner or occupant of such property, and
under circumstances when such BB gun, air gun, pellet gun or bow and arrow can
be fired, discharged or operated in such manner as not to endanger any person
or property, and also in such manner as to prevent any BB, pellet, projectile,
or arrow from traversing any grounds or space outside the limits of such
private property.
   C.   This section shall not apply to the city police, or other peace
officers of the United States or the state of Montana in the discharge of their
duty, or when done in the lawful use of force in the defense of the person,
property or family.
   D.   The city manager, or his or her designee, may, upon application, issue
permits to gun clubs, gun ranges, exhibitions or other shooting events, and
such permits shall specify the place, time, date or dates, and any other
requirements which may be deemed reasonable or necessary. The city council may
establish from time to time by resolution a fee for any such permit. (Ord.
2009-1, 3-2-2009; amd. Ord. 2021-3, 8-2-2021)
4-4-3: NON-FIREARM WEAPONS PROHIBITED IN PUBLIC BUILDINGS, PARKS AND SCHOOLS;
EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   No person shall wear, bear, carry or otherwise possess in any publicly
owned or leased building, park, or school, located in the city limits of the
City of Belgrade, any non-firearm weapon, whether concealed or unconcealed.
   B.   This section shall not apply to:
      1.   City police, or other peace officers of the United States or the
state of Montana in the discharge of their duty;
      2.   Persons participating or displaying firearms, BB guns, air guns,
pellet guns or bows and arrows at shows authorized by the city or school;
      3.   Persons participating in hunter or firearm safety courses sanctioned
by the Montana department of fish, wildlife and parks and/or authorized by the
city or school; or
      4.   Persons specifically authorized by the city or school to carry non-
firearm weapons or bows and arrows on its premises. (Ord. 2009-1, 3-2-2009;
amd. Ord. 2021-3, 8-2-2021)
4-4-4: NON-FIREARM WEAPONS PROHIBITED IN PUBLIC MEETINGS:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person, other than city police or other peace
officers of the United States or the State of Montana in the discharge of their
duty, to attend a public meeting anywhere within the City of Belgrade wearing,
bearing, carrying or possessing a non-firearm weapon or bow and arrow, unless
specifically authorized by the agency conducting the public meeting.
   B.   For the purposes of this section a “public meeting” means the convening
of the public or governmental bodies, boards, bureaus, commissions, agencies of
the state, or any political subdivision of the state for the purpose of
hearing, discussing or acting upon a matter over which the agency has
supervision, control, jurisdiction, or advisory power. (Ord. 2009-1, 3-2-2009;
amd. Ord. 2021-3, 8-2-2021)
4-4-5: FIREARMS PROHIBITED:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person, other than city police or other peace
officers of the United States or the State of Montana in the discharge of their
duty, to carry, possess or store a firearm in an area designated by the Chief
of the Belgrade Police Department as a secure area of law enforcement in a city
facility.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person, other than city police or other peace
officers of the United States or the State of Montana in the discharge of their
duty, to carry, possess or store a firearm within a courtroom or other area
used by court personnel in a city facility pursuant to a court order.
   C.   It is unlawful for any person, other than city police or other peace
officers of the United States or the State of Montana in the discharge of their
duty, to carry, possess or store a firearm in a school building located in the
City of Belgrade without the express advance permission of the trustees of the
school district pursuant to Section 45-8-361, M.C.A. (Ord. 2021-3, 8-2-2021)
4-4-6: UNPERMITTED CONCEALED FIREARMS AND UNCONCEALED FIREARMS PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person, other than city police or other peace officers
of the United States or the State of Montana in the discharge of their duty, to
carry, possess or store an unpermitted concealed firearm or an unconcealed
firearm in any city facility. (Ord. 2021-3, 8-2-2021)
4-4-7: SCREENING FOR FIREARMS AND NON-FIREARM WEAPONS:
   A.   Screening for firearms and non-firearm weapons at city facilities is
permissible. The city manager may determine the circumstances and locations
where screening if required and may establish standards for such screening.
   B.   The City may, in the discretion of its employees or officials acting
within their official capacity, deny entrance into a city facility to a person
who, in a city facility:
      1.   Possesses a unconcealed firearm;
      2.   Possesses an unpermitted concealed firearm;
      3.   Possesses a non-firearm weapon;
      4.   Possesses a permitted concealed firearm in locations of city
facilities that have been restricted pursuant to court order or otherwise
pursuant to state of local law.
   C.   The City may require a person to present proof of a valid permit to
carry a concealed firearm in a city facility. Refusing to provide a city
employee or official proof of a valid permit to carry a concealed firearm is a
basis for denial of entry to, or removal from, a the city facility. (Ord. 2021-
3, 8-2-2021)
4-4-8: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars
($500.00) or by imprisonment not to exceed six (6) months or both such fine and
imprisonment, for each such offense. (Ord. 2009-1, 3-2-2009; amd. Ord. 2021-3,
8-2-2021)
CHAPTER 5
PUBLIC USE AND DISPLAY OF MARIJUANA
SECTION:
4-5-1: Purpose And Intent
4-5-2: Definitions
4-5-3: Public Display, Smoking, Or Consumption Of Marijuana Prohibited
4-5-4: State Law Superseded And Applicable
4-5-5: Violation And Penalty
4-5-6: No Private Right Of Action
4-5-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   A.   The purpose of this chapter is to identify acts regarding the use of
marijuana within the city of Belgrade that are not authorized to be conducted
in a manner open or visible to the general public. In addition, the purpose of
this chapter is to identify that acts related to smoking, consuming, or
displaying marijuana in certain public areas are to be punished as criminal
acts and as such shall be subject to criminal penalties. The purpose of
establishing these acts where the use is further limited by the city as
criminal is to protect the public's health, safety, and general welfare.
   B.   It is the intent of this chapter that the visible or open display,
smoking, or consumption of marijuana is to be confined to private property
where that property or portions thereof are not adapted and fitted for public
travel or are not in common use by the public and, areas specifically licensed
for that activity by the Department of Revenue of the State of Montana. (Ord.
2010-7, 9-7-2010; amd. Ord. 2014-1, 5-5-2014; Ord. 2022-4, 2-22-2022)
4-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
 
MARIJUANA:                   Has the meaning provided in § 16-12-102(20),
                             MCA.
                             Any area or place that is adapted and fitted
                             for the use of the public and that is in
                             common use by the public, excluding areas
PUBLIC PLACE                 specifically licensed for the visible or open
                             display, smoking, or consumption of Marijuana
                             by the Department of Revenue of the State of
                             Montana.
                             Any highway, road, driveway, alley, lane,
                             parking area, sidewalk, park, trail, or other
                             public or private place within the city of
WAYS OF THE CITY OPEN TO THE Belgrade that is adapted and fitted for the
PUBLIC:                      use of the public and that is in common use
                             by the public. (Ord. 2010-7, 9-7-2010; amd.
                             Ord. 2014-1, 5-5-2014; Ord. 2022-4, 2-22-
                             2022)
 
4-5-3: PUBLIC DISPLAY, SMOKING, OR CONSUMPTION OF MARIJUANA PROHIBITED:
No person authorized by the Montana Regulation and Taxation Act, § 16-12-101,
et seq., MCA, to use, acquire, posses, cultivate, manufacture, deliver,
transfer, or transport Marijuana, shall, on the Ways of the City Open to the
Public, in a Public Place, or in or on property owned or leased by a
governmental entity, display, smoke, or consume Marijuana, in an open or
visible manner. A violation of this section is an absolute liability offense.
(Ord. 2010-7, 9-7-2010; amd. Ord. 2014-1, 5-5-2014; Ord. 2022-4, 2-22-2022)
4-5-4: STATE LAW SUPERSEDED AND APPLICABLE:
The provisions of this chapter shall supersede the Montana Regulation and
Taxation Act , § 16-12-101, et seq., MCA, only in so far as this chapter
expands the limitations on the use of Marijuana. All other provisions of state
law related to Marijuana shall be applicable. (Ord. 2010-7, 9-7-2010; amd. Ord.
2014-1, 5-5-2014; Ord. 2022-4, 2-22-2022)
4-5-5: VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
A violation of section
4-5-3 of this chapter is a misdemeanor and upon conviction a person shall be
subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. A person so convicted shall also be required to pay all
costs and expenses of prosecution and the courts as authorized by law. (Ord.
2010-7, 9-7-2010; amd. Ord. 2014-1, 5-5-2014)
4-5-6: NO PRIVATE RIGHT OF ACTION:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to create a private right of action
regarding the acquisition, possession, cultivation, manufacture, delivery,
transfer, or transport of either marijuana. (Ord. 2010-7, 9-7-2010; amd. Ord.
2014-1, 5-5-2014; Ord. 2022-4, 2-22-2022)
CHAPTER 6
ANIMAL CONTROL
SECTION:
4-6-1: Definitions
4-6-2: Voluntary Animal Registration
4-6-3: Commercial Kennel License
4-6-4: Exotic Animals
4-6-5: Dog At Large
4-6-6: Farm Animals Prohibited
4-6-7: Dog In Heat
4-6-8: Vaccination For Rabies
4-6-9: Quarantine Of Animals That Bite
4-6-10: Responsibilities Of Physicians And Veterinarians
4-6-11: Nuisance Animals
4-6-12: Vicious Animal
4-6-13: Dangerous Animals
4-6-14: Impounding Dog At Large
4-6-15:Use Of Public Property
4-6-16:Enforcement
4-6-17: Violations; Penalty
4-6-18: Animal Care And Treatment
4-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the context
indicates otherwise:
ANIMAL       Any premise owned, operated, or contracted by the City for the purpose of
SHELTER:     impounding and caring for animals.
             An animal off of the owner’s property, unless on a leash and under the strict
AT LARGE:    control of a competent human. An animal at large can be with or without the
             owner’s consent or knowledge.
COMMERCIAL   A commercial establishment or place where more than two dogs over the age of
KENNEL:      six months are kept for breeding, sale, training, boarding, or any other
             commercial purposes.
DANGEROUS    A dog with a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack without
DOG:         provocation, to cause injury to any person or other animal, or to otherwise
             threaten the safety of any person or other animal.
             Any wild or other animal which is not tame by nature, and includes but is not
             limited to: raccoon, fox, skunk, beaver, otter, wolf, wolf hybrid, bear,
             raptor, alligator, crocodile, poisonous snake, monkey, pig, pot belled pig,
EXOTIC       member of the feline species other than domestic cat (Felis domesticus), member
ANIMAL:      of the canine species other than domestic dog (Canis familiaris), or any other
             animal that would require a standard of care and control greater than that
             required for customary household pets sold by pet shops. The term exotic animal
             does not include rodents, domesticated ferret, and captive-bred species of fish
             and common cage birds.
             A domestic farm animal, including but not limited to, cattle, horses, mules,
FARM ANIMAL: asses, swine, sheep, goats, rabbits, chickens, hens, ducks, geese, turkeys, or
             other fowl.
HUMANE:      Marked by compassion, sympathy, or consideration.
             A person is lawfully on or in a private place when the person is on or in the
LAWFULLY ON  property in the performance of any duty imposed upon the person by the laws of
PRIVATE      this state or by the laws or postal regulations of the United States of America
PLACE:       or when the person is on or in the property as an invitee or licensee of the
             person lawfully in possession of the property.
             An animal that damages any property other than the owner’s property, or
NUISANCE     frequently or habitually howls, yelps, barks, screeches, vocalizes, or
ANIMAL:      otherwise causes serious annoyance or disturbance to a person or persons in the
             vicinity of the animal,
OWNER:       Any person, group of people, corporation, or other entity who owns, keeps,
             harbors, or maintains an animal.
POUNDMASTER: The operator of the city animal shelter, or the person with whom the city
             contracts to provide the services of an animal shelter.
TORTURE:     The causing of pain or anguish of body or mind.
             An animal that harasses, chases, bites or attempts to bite a person without
VICIOUS      provocation while the person is on or in a public place or lawfully on or in a
ANIMAL:      private place, including the property of the owner of the animal, or which
             harasses, chases, bites, or attempts to bite any other animal. (Ord. 2016-3, 4-
             18-2016; amd. Ord. 2016-7, 8-15-2016; Ord. 2024-8, 12-2-2024)
 
4-6-2: VOLUNTARY ANIMAL REGISTRATION:
   A.   Animal owners may voluntarily register their pets with the City of
Belgrade, registration is free, and owners are encouraged to provide microchip
identification numbers for added security and ease of identification in case
animals are lost.
   B.   Registration records are confidential, used solely to assist in
locating owners in cases of lost or found animals, or animals at large. (Ord.
2024-8, 12-2-2024)
4-6-3: COMMERCIAL KENNEL LICENSE:
   A.   A kennel license is required for commercial facilities such as breeding
or boarding operations, which house multiple animals for business purposes.
   B.   Conditional Use: A commercial kennel is not allowed in residential
zones within the city limits. A commercial kennel is allowed as a conditional
use in B-2, B-3, M-1 and M-2 districts upon proper application and hearing
before both the planning board and the city council.
   C.   Application Process:
      1.   The owner must complete a commercial kennel license application and
request a hearing in front of the planning board and then in front of the city
council.
      2.   Upon receipt of the application, the Police Chief or their
designated representative must review the application, investigate the
premises, and make a recommendation to the planning board and city council.
      3.   The applicant must give written notice of the hearing to all owners
and occupants of real property within two hundred (200) feet of the kennel. The
notice must give the intent to maintain a commercial kennel, and the date,
time, and place of the hearing.
   D.   Discretion of Council: The decision to authorize a commercial kennel
license is in the sole discretion of the city council.
   E.   Criteria for Approval: To approve a commercial kennel license, the city
council must find:
      1.   The site for the proposed use is adequate in size and topography to
accommodate such use, and all yards, paces, fences and enclosures are adequate
to the properly relate with the land and uses in the vicinity.
      2.   The proposed use will have no adverse effect on the abutting
property;
      3.   Any other condition the council deems appropriate for the dogs care,
welfare, or safety, including adequate shelter, water, exercise, and the
owner’s or public safety and welfare.
   F.   Exceptions: This section does not apply to licensed veterinary
hospitals.
   G.   License fee. Upon authorization of the council and payment of the
license fee, the City must issue a commercial kennel license. The license and
renewal fee are set by the city council by resolution. All commercial kennel
licenses are due and payable at the time the license is granted. There is no
prorated commercial kennel license fee. All annual renewals are due on the
first business day in January. If the renewal is paid after January 25 of each
year, the owner must pay a delinquency fee. The delinquency fee is set by city
council resolution.
   H.   Transferability: All commercial kennel licenses are for the designated
purpose . Kennel licenses are not transferrable to another person or entity or
for other purposes.
   +I.   Change in Location: In the event the licensee changes locations, a new
license application must be made.
   J.   Revocation: The city court or the city council may revoke a commercial
kennel license, after hearing and notice to the licensee. At the hearing, there
must be a showing by a preponderance of the evidence that the commercial kennel
is being operated or maintained in a manner that violates the commercial kennel
license, in an inhumane way, by showing the conditions of the kennel are
offensive to members of the neighborhood, or that improper, unhealthy or
unsanitary conditions exist. The city court may revoke a commercial kennel
license upon conviction that an individual or entity is operating the kennel as
a public nuisance. (Ord. 2016-3, 4-18-2016; amd. Ord. 2016-7, 8-15-2016; Ord.
2017-9, 12-18-2017; Ord. 2024-8, 12-2-2024)
4-6-4: EXOTIC ANIMALS:
   A.   License Required to Permit Keeping: It is unlawful to own, keep,
harbor, or maintain an exotic animal in the city without an exotic animal
license.
   B.   Limitations on Number of Exotic Animals. No owner will be allowed to
own, keep, harbor or maintain more than two (2) exotic animals in the city.
   C.   Application Process for Exotic Animal License:
      1.   The applicant must request a city council hearing.
      2.   The applicant must give written notice of the hearing to all owners
and occupants of real property within 200 feet of the site where the exotic
animal will be kept. The notice must give the intent to maintain an exotic
animal, the type, gender, and age of animal, the location where the animal will
be kept, and the date, time, and place of the hearing.
   D.   Discretion of City Council: Authorization of an exotic animal license
is in the sole discretion of the city council. The council may only authorize
an exotic animal license when the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of
the council that the animal will not be a threat to the health or safety of the
applicant or the public.
   E.   Additional Conditions: The city council may impose appropriate
conditions for the proposed housing, transport, or public access to the animal,
including:
      1.   The housing enclosure must be constructed according to applicable
zoning codes and must have the proper permits.
      2.   The animal and its housing enclosure must be inspected by the animal
control officer at least annually.
      3.   Each housing enclosure must provide an adequate exercise area and
sleeping quarters. Proper temperature control and ventilation for the
particular species must be provided in both areas.
      4.   Each housing enclosure must be kept locked and designed so that no
one can enter or place anything into the enclosure.
      5.   Each housing enclosure must be constructed so as to prevent the
animal from escaping. The housing enclosure must be kept in good repair to
prevent both escape and injury to the exotic animal.
      6.   Each housing enclosure must have a secured water container to
prevent it from being over-turned.
      7.   Each housing enclosure must be disinfected daily. Surfaces must be
of an impervious material to allow for disinfecting.
      8.   Any other condition the council deems appropriate for the exotic
animal’s care, welfare, safety, and the owner’s or public’s safety or welfare.
   F.   Exceptions: This section does not apply to:
      1.   Any zoological garden accredited by the American Association of
Zoological Parks and Aquariums;
      2.   Appropriately licensed theatrical exhibits or circuses;
      3.   Federally licensed research institutions;
      4.   Any government agency or its employees who use the wild animals for
an agency related education, propagation or behavior program;
      5.   Anyone holding a valid rehabilitation permit from the Montana
Department of Fish, Wildlife and Parks; but this exception is granted only for
animals which are in rehabilitation and are scheduled to be released into the
wild.
   G.   Animals Prohibited by Statute: This section does not permit the keeping
of any wild animal prohibited by state or federal law.
   H.   License Fee: Upon authorization of the council, the city will issue an
exotic animal license upon payment of the license fee for each exotic animal.
      1.   All exotic animal licenses are due at the time the license if
granted.
      2.   There is no prorated exotic animal license fee.
      3.   All annual renewals are due on the first business day in January.
      4.   The renewal is delinquent on the January 25th of each year.
      5.   The exotic animal license and renewal fees are set by city council
resolution. (Ord. 2016-3, 4-18-2016; amd. Ord. 2016-7, 8-15-2016)
4-6-5: DOG AT LARGE:
   A.   Unlawful - Responsibility of Owner: It is unlawful for a dog to be at
large in the city. An owner of a dog that is found at large in the city commits
a violation of this section.
   B.   Subject to Impoundment and Penalties: A dog found at large in the city
is subject to impound.
   C.   Strict Liability: Owners of dogs are strictly liable for the security
of buildings, pens, or other containment devices and are strictly liable for
the dog being at large.
   D.   While a dog is in the city, its owner is strictly liable for any
damages caused by such dog and any costs incurred by the city in the control,
impoundment, disposition or destruction of such dog. (Ord. 2016-3, 4-18-2016;
amd. Ord. 2016-7, 8-15-2016)
4-6-6: FARM ANIMALS PROHIBITED:
   A.   Farm Animals. It is unlawful for any person, family, group of people,
corporation, or other entity to own, keep, harbor, or maintain a farm animal in
the city, except for female domestic chickens as provided in Title 4, Chapter 7
of the Belgrade City Code.
   B.   Exception: The city council may allow the keeping of farm animals
except swine on undeveloped and unplatted property within the city limits. A
determination as to whether or not to allow farm animals must be made using the
Conditional Use Permit procedure in section 10-6 of this code. The city council
may revoke the conditional use permit at any time. If the conditional use
permit is revoked, the owner must immediately remove the farm animals from the
city. (Ord. 2016-3, 4-18-2016; amd. Ord. 2016-7, 8-15-2016; Ord. 2018-8, 11-10-
2021)
4-6-7: DOG IN HEAT:
The owner of a female dog while in heat must keep the dog in a secure enclosure
and in a way to prevent her from becoming a nuisance and to prevent contact
with male dogs, except for planned breeding. (Ord. 2016-3, 4-18-2016; amd. Ord.
2016-7, 8-15-2016)
4-6-8: VACCINATION FOR RABIES:
   A.   Required for Dogs and Cats: All dogs or cats within the city limits
must have a current certificate of immunization against rabies issued by a
licensed veterinarian.
   B.   Certificate of Vaccination. The veterinarian must issue a vaccination
certification showing the date of the inoculation and the expiration date.
   C.   Duplicate Certificate. The veterinarian must keep a duplicated copy of
the certificate and be subject to review by authorized animal control, health,
or police officers of the city or county. (Ord. 2016-3, 4-18-2016; amd. Ord.
2016-7, 8-15-2016)
4-6-9: QUARANTINE OF ANIMALS THAT BITE:
   A.   Report of Animal Bites: Every animal which bites a person in the city
must be reported promptly to the police department.
   B.   Quarantine. Any animal that bites a person must be kept under
quarantine under the direction of the animal control officer or a police
officer, unless there is proof of current rabies vaccination of the animal at
the time of the bite.
   C.   Quarantine Period: The animal must be quarantined for a minimum of 10
days and up to 14 days. The owner must pay for all quarantine costs.
   D.   Destruction of the Animal.
      1.   If the owner does not claim ownership of the animal within 72 hours
from the beginning of the quarantine period, the animal may be destroyed and
examined for rabies.
      2.   If, during the quarantine period, a veterinarian determines the
animal has rabies, the animal must be destroyed. The appropriate health
authorities must be notified.
   E.   Release of Animal: After the quarantine period is complete and the
animal is found to be free from rabies, the animal may only be released to the
owner upon payment of all quarantine costs and with the written consent of the
police department or the court.
   F.   Failure to Surrender Animal: It is unlawful for any person to refuse to
surrender any animal for quarantine, or to dispose of any animal after being
notified the animal is subject to quarantine, or to hide any animal in an
attempt to keep the animal from quarantine. (Ord. 2016-3, 4-18-2016; amd. Ord.
2016-7, 8-15-2016)
4-6-10: RESPONSIBILITIES OF PHYSICIANS AND VETERINARIANS:
   A.   Physicians: All physicians or other healthcare providers must report to
the animal control officer or police department the name, address and any other
pertinent information relating to any person treated for bites inflicted by
animals, if the person is bitten in the city.
   B.   Veterinarians. All veterinarians must report to the animal control
officer or police department any diagnosis or suspicion of rabies of any
animal. The report must include the name and breed of the animal and the name,
address and other pertinent information requested relating to the owner. This
section applies to all veterinarian practices within the city or any animal
that resides in the city or that bit or exposed a person to rabies in the city.
(Ord. 2016-3, 4-18-2016; amd. Ord. 2016-7, 8-15-2016)
4-6-11: NUISANCE ANIMALS:
Unlawful - Responsibility of Owner: It is unlawful for an animal to be a
nuisance animal in the city. An owner of an animal that is found to be a
nuisance animal in the city commits a violation of this section. (Ord. 2016-3,
4-18-2016; amd. Ord. 2016-7, 8-15-2016)
4-6-12: VICIOUS ANIMAL:
   A.   Unlawful - Responsibility of Owner: It is unlawful for an animal to be
a vicious animal in the city. An owner of an animal that is found to be a
vicious animal in the city commits a violation of this section.
   B.   Impound of Animal: A vicious animal may be impounded by the animal
control officer or a police officer until released by court order. The court
may impose conditions on the release of the animal. The owner of the animal is
responsible for all impound fees and costs.
   C.   Duty to Report: It is unlawful for the owner of an animal that bites a
person within the city to fail to immediately report the incident to the police
department. (Ord. 2016-3, 4-18-2016; amd. Ord. 2016-7, 8-15-2016)
4-6-13: DANGEROUS DOGS:
   A.   Confinement: Every dangerous dog in the city must be confined by its
owner within a building or secure enclosure while on the owner’s premises and,
whenever off premises of its owner, must be securely muzzled and restrained
with a chain having a minimum tensile strength of three hundred (300) pounds
and not more than three (3) feet in length, or caged. Every owner of a
dangerous dog is charged with an affirmative duty to confine the dog in such a
way that no other person has access to such dog.
   B.   Owner Responsibility: Every owner of a dangerous dog that is not
confined, muzzled or restrained as required in this section commits a violation
of this section. (Ord. 2016-3, 4-18-2016; amd. Ord. 2016-7, 8-15-2016)
4-6-14: IMPOUNDING DOGS AT LARGE:
   A.   Impounding Authorized: A dog at large may be impounded. The animal
control officer or any police officer may use a tranquilizer gun to capture a
dog at large, or other animal that cannot be reasonably taken in any other
manner.
   B.   Impound Register: The animal shelter must keep a complete register of
every impounded dog, showing the time, place, breed, if known, sex and color.
   C.   Redemption: The dog may be redeemed within seventy-two (72) hours after
all and current impound fees are paid in full, and if required by this chapter,
current license fees are paid and proof of rabies vaccination is given.
   D.   Written Authorization Required for Release: No dog may be released from
impound without a written authorization for release from the court or the
police department. It is the responsibility of the owner of the dog to obtain
written authorization for release from the court or the police department.
   E.   Separation Required: Upon impoundment, male dogs must be kept separate
from female dogs and healthy dogs must be kept separately from unhealthy dogs.
   F.   Injured or Ill Dog, Owner Unknown: If, in the opinion of the
veterinarian or other trained person, an injured or an ill dog requires
treatment and the owner cannot be immediately determined, the animal may be
destroyed in a humane manner.
   G.   Owner Responsibility: It is the responsibility of the owner of any dog
to know its whereabouts at all times. The owner must redeem an impounded dog
within seventy- two (72) hours.
   H.   Unredeemed Animals: A dog impounded and not redeemed within seventy-two
(72) hours may be destroyed in a humane way, or placed with other shelters, or
given up to sale or adoption to interested parties. The owner of an unredeemed
dog is responsible for all costs and expense associated with the disposition of
the dog.
   I.   Infectious Disease: Any dog with an infectious disease must not be
released, but be disposed of in a humane way, unless otherwise directed by the
animal control officer.
   J.   Fees: Impound fees are set by city council resolution.
   K.   Seeking to Defeat Impound Process Unlawful: It is unlawful for any
person to seek to defeat the impounding process, either by releasing an animal
from impoundment, or by claiming not to be the owner or keeper of such animal
when he is in fact the owner or keeper. (Ord. 2016-3, 4-18-2016; amd. Ord.
2016-7, 8-15-2016; Ord. 2024-8, 12-2-2024)
4-6-15: USE OF PUBLIC PROPERTY:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to regulate the use of public
property in the city, including school district property, by dogs and dog
owners in the most safe, healthy, and germ free environment as possible.
   B.   It is unlawful for the owner or person in possession of a dog to fail
to immediately remove any feces to a waste container if a dog defecates on
public property, or on private property without the permission of the occupant
of said property.
   C.   Exception: The owner or keeper of a dog serving a vision-impaired
person in an auxiliary ocular capacity or in any capacity to assist a person
with a physical impairment is not subject to this section.
   D.   Penalty: In addition to the other provisions of §
4-6-17, an owner or person in possession that violates this section is subject
to a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) which must be imposed upon first offense.
In addition to the other provisions of §
4-6-17, an owner or person in possession that violates this section is subject
to a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) which must be imposed upon second
and subsequent offenses. (Ord. 2016-3, 4-18-2016; amd. Ord. 2016-7, 8-15-2016)
4-6-16: ENFORCEMENT:
The animal control officer, or any city police officer, or any health officer
of either the city or the county, is empowered to demand from the occupants of
any premises in which any animal is sheltered or animal owner, the exhibition
of the animal and the rabies vaccination, if applicable. (Ord. 2016-3, 4-18-
2016; amd. Ord. 2016-7, 8-15-2016; Ord. 2024-8, 12-2-2024)
4-6-17: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
   A.   Intent: It is the intent of the city council that the provision of this
chapter are offenses involving legislative intent. These offenses do not
require proof of any one of the mental states described in Montana Code
Annotated subsections § 45-2-101(35), (43) and (65).
   B.   Penalty: Any person or owner who violates any of the provisions of this
chapter is subject to the penalty provided in section
1-4-1 of the Belgrade City Code.
   C.   Spaying or Neutering Ordered: In addition to any other penalty, the
court may, upon conviction of any person or owner for a violation of the
provisions of this chapter, order that the animal be spayed or neutered at the
owner’s expense.
   D.   Termination of Ownership; Removal from City: In addition to any other
penalty, the court may, upon the fourth or subsequent conviction of any person
or owner for violation of §
4-6-5 (Dog at Large) of this chapter, terminate all ownership rights in the
animal, order that the animal be permanently removed from the city limits, or
order that the animal be destroyed at the owner’s expense.
   E.   Removal from City; Destruction of Animal: In addition to any other
penalty, the court may, upon conviction of any person or owner for violation of
§
4-6-3 (Commercial Kennel License), §
4-6-4 (Exotic Animal), §
4-6-6 (Farm Animal Prohibited), §
4-6-11 (Nuisance Animals), §
4-6-12 (Vicious Animal), or §
4-6-13 (Dangerous Animal) of this chapter, terminate all ownership rights in
the animal, order that the animal be permanently removed from the city limits,
or order that the animal be destroyed at the owner’s expense.
   F.   Mandatory Removal from City: In addition to any other penalty, the
court must order that an animal that has bitten two or more persons without
provocation while the persons are on or in a public place or lawfully on or in
a private place, including the property of the owner of the animal, be
permanently removed from the city limits, unless the court has ordered that the
animal be destroyed at the owner’s expense. (Ord. 2016-3, 4-18-2016; amd. Ord.
2016-7, 8-15-2016; Ord. 2024-8, 12-2-2024)
4-6-18: ANIMAL CARE AND TREATMENT:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to fail to provide their animals(s) with
adequate care. Adequate care includes but not limited to the following:
      1.   Adequate Food And Water: Providing wholesome, species appropriate
food and clean, fresh water in sufficient quantity and quality for the species,
size, age, and physical condition of the animal.
      2.   Adequate Shelter: Providing a structure that allows the animal to
remain dry and protected from the weather, including access to shade from
direct sunlight and adequate ventilation. Shelter should be structurally sound
and kept in sanitary condition.
      3.   Sanitary Conditions: The area in which the animal is kept must be
maintained in a sanitary condition, free from the accumulation of waste,
debris, and offensive odors.
   B.   Medical Attention:
      1.   Animals must receive appropriate medical care and veterinary
attention to present suffering from injuries, parasites, and diseases. Any
person who owns or has custody of an animal must provide medical treatment when
necessary to prevent pain or suffering.
   C.   General Care And Welfare:
      1.   Animals shall not be confined in a way that poses a risk to their
physical health or mental well-being.
      2.   Tethering or restraint must not cause injury, entanglement, or
restriction of normal movement, and animals must not be left tethered in
extreme weather conditions. (Ord. 2024-8, 12-2-2024)
CHAPTER 7
KEEPING OF CHICKENS
SECTION:
4-7-1: Keeping Of Chickens Lawful
4-7-2: Location And Number
4-7-3: Specific Standards For Chickens
4-7-4: Permits Required/Inspections
4-7-5: Protest And Hearing
4-7-6: Enforcement
4-7-7: Penalty
4-7-1: KEEPING OF CHICKENS LAWFUL:
Subject to the standards in this Chapter, it shall be lawful to keep up to six
(6) female domestic chickens (hens) over the age of three (3) months, or six
(6) either sex domestic chickens under the age of three (3) months, or any
combination thereof not to exceed a total of six (6) chickens, per permit
holder. (Ord. 2018-8, 11-10-2021)
4-7-2: LOCATION AND NUMBER:
   A.   Chickens may be kept in the following locations, subject to all other
standards in this Chapter:
      1.   On a detached single-household parcel(s) within a residential zoning
district;
   B.   The number of chickens authorized per permit shall comply with the
following, subject to all other standards in this Chapter:
      1.   Minimum lot size of 7,000 square feet of any residential parcel.
(Ord. 2018-8, 11-10-2021)
4-7-3: SPECIFIC STANDARDS FOR CHICKENS:
   A.   No male chickens (roosters) over the age of three months are permitted.
   B.   No chickens may run at large within the corporate limits of the City of
Belgrade. All chickens must be contained within the permittee’s property
boundary.
   C.   The permittee shall provide the chickens with a covered, predator-proof
chicken house that is thoroughly ventilated, of sufficient size to admit free
movement of the chickens. The chicken house must be adjacent to and provide
free access to the chicken enclosure. Chicken enclosures may be movable. Any
heat source or electrical facilities installed in a chicken house must comply
with all adopted building and electrical codes of the City of Belgrade.
   D.   Chickens shall be secured within the chicken house from sunset to
sunrise.
   E.   Chicken enclosures and houses must be kept in a neat and sanitary
condition at all times and must be cleaned on a regular basis so as to prevent
offensive odors.
   F.   Chickens shall have continuous access to adequate food and water.
   G.   Stored feed must be kept in a rodent-proof and predator-proof
container.
   H.   Chickens shall be maintained in a healthy condition. Ill chickens shall
either receive appropriate medical care or be culled.
   I.   No chicken house or chicken enclosure shall be located in a front yard.
No chicken house shall be located closer than 20 feet to any structure
inhabited by someone other than the chicken owner, custodian, or keeper; not
closer than 10 feet to any neighbor’s property line or public alley; and not
closer than 20 feet from any property line along a public street or roadway.
Chicken houses may be movable but must comply with all standards of this
section.
   J.   No chicken shall be kept in a manner so as to create noxious odors or
noise of a loud, persistent and habitual nature.
   K.   No chickens shall be slaughtered within the public view. (Ord. 2018-8,
11-10-2021)
4-7-4: PERMITS REQUIRED/INSPECTIONS:
   A.   Prior to the keeping of any chicken(s), a party seeking to keep
chickens shall obtain a permit from the City of Belgrade. A permit fee may be
established by resolution of the City Council and may be revised from time to
time. Only one permit shall be issued per household. Issuance of a permit is a
discretionary act.
   B.   The owner of the chickens shall keep a copy of all signed City approval
documents for inspection upon request by an Animal Control Officer.
   C.   A permit for chickens under this section does not relieve any party
from any requirement to obtain any other permit or other necessary approvals
for any structure, fence, lighting, heat source, etc. as required by the
Belgrade City Code.
   D.   A party wishing to keep chickens shall submit an application to the
City of Belgrade for this purpose. The application shall contain the following:
      1.   A sketch identifying the property boundaries and showing that the
lot is a minimum of 7,000 square feet in area, the location of all structures
on the property and distances between said structures and between the property
boundaries. The sketch must also indicate the location(s) of the chicken
enclosure and chicken house.
      2.   The name, address, and signed statement of the property owner, if
different from the applicant, consenting to the keeping of the applied for
number of chickens on the property. The owner’s written consent shall be
submitted with the permit application or renewal.
      3.   The number of chickens to be kept, up to six (6).
      4.   A description of the enclosure and chicken house, including
materials used and cubic footage(s).
      5.   A sworn statement that all statements contained in the application
are true and that the permit holder shall keep the chickens in compliance with
the terms of the permit, application and this section.
      6.   The applicant shall provide each residence adjacent, including those
adjacent across a public right-of-way, an Acknowledgment of Notification and
Request for Hearing form and indicate on said form that the applicant intends
to keep chickens in the manner described in the application. The applicant
shall submit the signed forms and a listing of all adjacent residents with the
application. If a neighbor refuses to sign, the applicant shall so state on the
application. If two or more adjacent residences request a hearing, the City
shall schedule and notice a hearing before the City Council.
      7.   The applicant shall agree to allow the Animal Control Office to
inspect the property upon which the chickens are to be kept any day from 7:00
a.m. to 9:00 p.m. prior to and after the issuance of a permit as a condition of
the issuance of a permit.
   E.   If, during any inspection, the Animal Control Officer determines
changes are to be made to the enclosure, chicken house, or to the number of
chickens to be kept, or require mitigation for the impact to adjacent
properties, such as fencing or other screening, the applicant/permit holder
shall comply with the order of the Animal Control officer. A person aggrieved
by a decision of the Animal Control Officer may appeal to the City Manager who
shall review all applicable information and issue a decision on the appeal.
Appeals from the City Manager’s decision on an application, permit or order of
an Animal Control Officer’s decision may be made to the City Council. At the
time of final approval by Animal Control, the officer shall indicate final
approval on the permit and keep a record of final approval.
   F.   A permit to keep chickens is specific to the permit holder and the
location of the permit. A person wishing to move chickens to a different
property shall obtain a new permit. A new resident of a property who intends to
keep chickens shall obtain a new permit regardless of whether chickens were
kept on the property or continue to be kept on the property.
   G.   Approval of a permit to keep chickens authorizes the permit holder to
keep the number of chickens in the manner described on the application and
permit.
   H.   Nothing in this section shall prevent an Animal Control Officer from
requiring an inspection of a property prior to or after issuance of a permit
for any number of chickens.
   J.   Changes to the standards contained in this section shall require any
permit holder to comply with any new standard, regulation, or condition and no
notice to a permit holder is required prior to enforcement of any new standard
beyond that required for adoption of a new or revised ordinance. (Ord. 2018-8,
11-10-2021)
4-7-5: PROTEST AND HEARING:
For the keeping of chickens, a request by the occupants, owners, or residents
of two or more adjacent properties for the City Council to conduct a hearing on
the application shall subject the application to a hearing before the City
Council. Adjacent properties shall include those properties adjacent by a
public right-of-way and include those connected by property corners. If a
hearing is held the Council may issue a permit if the Council finds:
   A.   That the site for the proposed use is adequate in size to accommodate
such the keeping of chickens, and all yards, spaces, fences, and enclosures are
adequate to properly relate such use with the land and uses in the vicinity;
   B.   That the proposed use will have minimal adverse impact on adjacent
properties or residents; and
   C.   That any conditions stated in the approval are in addition to those
required in this Chapter and are deemed necessary, and shall apply and be
followed by the applicant and the property owner as a condition of approval.
(Ord. 2018-8, 11-10-2021)
4-7-6: ENFORCEMENT:
Upon receiving a complaint of a possible violation the Animal Control Officer
will investigate and determine if a violation of this section exists. If the
Animal Control Officer determines a violation exists the officer may serve upon
the permit holder or the owner or lessee of the property a written notice of
violation and an order to take corrective action, may issue a warning, or may
immediately issue a violation notice. The notice of violation may be served by
leaving the notice in a conspicuous location at the place of the keeping of the
chickens. (Ord. 2018-8, 11-10-2021)
4-7-7: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to penalty as provided in Title 1, Chapter 4 of
the Belgrade City Code. In addition thereto, the court may, upon conviction
thereof, terminate all ownership rights in the chickens, order that the
chickens be permanently removed from the city limits, or order that the
chickens be destroyed at the owner’s expense. It is the intent of the City
Council to impose absolute liability for the offenses described in this
chapter. (Ord. 2018-8, 11-10-2021)
TITLE 5
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1
UNIFORM TRAFFIC ACT
SECTION:
5-1-1: Adoption
5-1-2: Application; Speed Limit
5-1-3: Amendments
5-1-4: Violations; Penalty
5-1-1: ADOPTION:
The city hereby adopts by reference the uniform act regulating traffic on
highways, as set forth as Montana Code Annotated title 61, chapter 8. Such act
shall be known as the BELGRADE TRAFFIC CODE, and violations of the provisions
thereof shall be prosecuted in the city court. (1983 Code § 10.02.010)
5-1-2: APPLICATION; SPEED LIMIT:
All traffic within the city shall be governed and regulated by the provisions
of said uniform act regulating traffic on highways as set forth in the statutes
of Montana; provided, that the speed limit within the city limits shall be
twenty five (25) miles per hour, unless otherwise posted or specified. (1983
Code § 10.02.020)
5-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
The traffic code described in section
5-1-1 of this chapter shall be amended by the additions, deletions and
modifications set forth in the various chapters of this title. (1983 Code §
10.02.030)
5-1-4: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate a provision of this title shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, unless a more strict penalty is allowable under said
uniform act regulating traffic on highways. (1983 Code § 10.02.040)
CHAPTER 2
SPEED LIMITS 1
SECTION:
5-2-1: Speed Limits
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  5-1-2 of this title.
5-2-1: SPEED LIMITS:
   A.   Every person operating or driving a vehicle of any character on a
public street or roadway in the city limits shall drive the same in a careful
and prudent manner, and at a rate of speed no greater or less than is
reasonable and proper under the conditions existing at the point and time of
operation, taking into account the amount and character of traffic, condition
of brakes, width of vehicle, grade, and width of street or roadway, condition
of surface, freedom of obstruction to view ahead, and all other conditions then
existing, and so as not to unduly endanger the life, limb, property, or other
rights of any person entitled to the use of the street or roadway.
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to exceed any of the speed
limitations set out in this article or in subsequent council resolutions which
may be adopted from time to time as set out in subsection B of this section
when such speed limits are properly posted. In every charge of violation of
this chapter or subsequent council resolution, the complaint shall specify the
speed at which the defendant is alleged to have driven, and the speed
applicable at the time and place of the alleged violation, as posted,
      2.   The city manager or designee is hereby authorized to establish
temporary speed zones, including school or park zones, after conducting a
preliminary visual and engineering review of any proposed street, school or
park location, which may require a temporary designation. Such temporary
designation, when properly signed, shall be effective at all times until a
complete traffic and engineering study is completed or until the city council
makes an alternate determination.
   B.   Specified:
      1.   General Limit. The speed limit is twenty-five (25) miles an hour on
all streets within the city limits unless otherwise posted,
      2.   Maximum Speed. The maximum speed limit is thirty-five (35) miles an
hour on any street within the city limits, unless otherwise posted or
designated in this article.
      3.   Highways. There are various highways within the city limits of the
city over which the state transportation commission has authority to establish
speed limits. These speed limits are posted by the state department of
transportation as authorized in MCA 61-8-310,
      4.   Through school zones or other restricted areas as designated and
marked, not otherwise regulated by the State of Montana at a rate of speed as
defined in section D.
   C.   Marking: All traffic control devices shall be compliant with and be
positioned in accordance with the manual on uniform traffic control devices as
adopted by the Montana department of transportation pursuant to MCA 61-8-202,
   D.   Designation: The designation of a school zone or other modified speed
area shall be determined by the city manager or designee. The city manager or
designee may make the determination on the basis of a traffic study and a
signage plan compliant with the manual on uniform traffic control devices as
adopted by the Montana department of transportation. No designation of a school
zone or other modified area shall be effective until appropriately marked on
the ground by signs.
(Ord. 2025-4, 4-21-2025)
CHAPTER 3
TRUCK ROUTES
SECTION:
5-3-1: Definitions
5-3-2: Application
5-3-3: Exceptions
5-3-4: Routes Established
5-3-5: Maps Indicating Routes
5-3-6: Trucks To Weigh In
5-3-7: Violation; Penalty
5-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
DEVIATING TRUCK: A truck which leaves and departs from a truck route while
traveling inside the city.
TRUCK: Any vehicle designed or operated for the transportation of property, and
whose body weight or whose combined body and load weight exceeds eighteen
thousand (18,000) pounds.
TRUCK ROUTE: A way over certain streets, as designated herein, over and along
which trucks coming into, going out of and traveling within the city must
operate. (1983 Code § 10.04.010)
5-3-2: APPLICATION:
All trucks within the city shall be operated only over and along the truck
routes established by this chapter. (1983 Code § 10.04.020)
5-3-3: EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Operation On Street Of Destination: The operation of trucks upon any
street where necessary to the conduct of business at a destination point when
an established truck route is not available; provided, that streets upon which
such traffic is permitted are used only until reaching the intersection nearest
the destination point.
   B.   Emergency Vehicles: The operation of emergency vehicles upon any street
in the city.
   C.   Public Utilities: The operation of trucks owned by the city, public
utilities, any contractor or materialman, while engaged in repair, maintenance,
or construction of streets, street improvements, or street utilities within the
city; provided, that streets upon which such traffic is permitted are used
until reaching the intersection nearest the destination point.
   D.   Detour Trucks: The operation of trucks upon any officially established
detour in any case where such trucks could lawfully be operated upon the street
for which said detour is established.
   E.   Locally Owned And Operated Trucks: The operation of loaded or unloaded
trucks upon any street where such trucks are being driven to the owner's or
operator's premises for storage; provided, that streets upon which such traffic
is permitted are used only until reaching the intersection nearest the
destination point. (Ord. 94-13, 11-7-1994)
5-3-4: ROUTES ESTABLISHED:
The following truck routes are hereby established within the city:
   A.   Broadway from Cameron on the north to Madison on the south;
   B.   Madison from Colorado to Jackrabbit Lane;
   C.   Main Street from the eastern city limits to the western city limits.
(1983 Code § 10.04.040; amd. 2009 Code)
5-3-5: MAPS INDICATING ROUTES:
The director of finance shall keep and maintain accurate maps setting out truck
routes and streets upon which truck traffic is permitted; the maps shall be
available to the public. (1983 Code § 10.04.050)
5-3-6: TRUCKS TO WEIGH IN:
The police department shall have the authority to require any person driving,
or in control of any truck not proceeding over a truck route, or street on
which truck traffic is permitted, to proceed to any public or private scale
available for the purpose of weighing and determining whether this chapter has
been complied with. (1983 Code § 10.04.060)
5-3-7: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1983 Code § 10.04.070)
CHAPTER 4
PARKING, U-TURNS, TURNING AND PASSING RESTRICTIONS
SECTION:
5-4-1: Definition
5-4-2: Parking Restricted
5-4-3: Parking Prohibited In Specific Places
5-4-4: Stopping, Standing, Or Parking Prohibited On Certain Streets
5-4-5: Method Of Curbside Parking
5-4-6: Parking Trucks In Officially Zoned Residential District
5-4-7: Parking At Schools
5-4-8: No Parking Areas
5-4-9: Parking Time Limits
5-4-10: No Parking Of Certain Vehicles
5-4-11: Parking For Camping Purposes
5-4-12: Reserved Handicapped Parking
5-4-13: Emergency Declared
5-4-14: Vehicle Owner Responsibility
5-4-15: Legislative Intent
5-4-16: Enforcement; Penalty For Violation
5-4-17: Tampering With Or Removal Of Immobilization Device Prohibited; Penalty
5-4-18: Exclusive Authority To Regulate Parking
5-4-1: DEFINITION:
For purposes of this chapter the following definitions apply:
OFFICIAL MAILBOX: Any public container which is maintained by the United States
Postal Service (USPS) and is used primarily for depositing outgoing U.S. mail
with the intent of processing and distribution of said U.S. mail by the United
States Postal Service, or any private box which is maintained in accordance
with USPS regulations by a private citizen and is used primarily for either of
the following purposes, or both:
   A.   The collection of incoming U.S. mail as deposited by an official USPS
employee; or
   B.   The depositing of outgoing U.S. mail by the owner of the box with the
intention of collection of said outgoing U.S. mail by a USPS employee.
RIGHT-OF-WAY PARKING: Any vehicle with any portion extending into a public
right-of-way, including but not limited to streets, alleys, sidewalks, or
boulevards, shall be considered parked on the street and subject to all
applicable parking regulations.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property may be
transported or drawn upon the public highways. The term includes motor
vehicles, recreational vehicles, boats, watercraft, campers, trailers,
semitrailers, house trailers and motorcycles. The term does not include
bicycles.
(Ord. 86-2, 8-18-1986; amd. Ord. 2022-15, 12-5-2022; Ord. 2025-3, 4-21-2025)
5-4-2: PARKING RESTRICTED:
   A.   Prohibited Purposes For Parking On Street: No person shall park any
vehicle upon any public street, roadway, thoroughfare or alley, or on or in any
other public place for the principal purpose of:
      1.   Displaying such vehicle or motor vehicle for sale;
      2.   Greasing, maintaining or repairing such vehicle, except repairs that
are necessitated by an emergency rendering the vehicle inoperable.
   B.   Alleys: No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle within an alley
for a period of time longer than is necessary for the reasonably expeditious
loading or unloading of such vehicle. When such vehicles are loading or
unloading within a public alley, ten feet (10') of the width of the alleyway
shall be available at all times for the free movement of vehicular traffic.
When such a vehicle is loading or unloading in an alley, the same shall not be
parked in such a position as to block the driveway or entrance to any abutting
property.
   C.   It is unlawful for any person to store or leave upon any city street,
highway, or alley any camper, trailer, bus, commercial vehicle or equipment, or
any recreational vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary for the
reasonably expeditious loading or unloading of such vehicle.
   D.   It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle of any kind
either directly in front of any official mailbox or within eight (8) feet of
any mailbox between the hours of seven o’clock (7:00) a.m. and five o’clock (5:
00) p.m., or at any other time during which the daily U.S. mail is actively
being delivered, preventing U.S. mail from being delivered to and/or collected
from said mailbox.
   E.   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave standing any vehicle of
any kind, regardless of whether or not said person intended to park said
vehicle for any extended period of time, directly in front of any official
mailbox, or within eight (8) feet in any direction from the mailbox, between
the hours of seven o’clock (7:00) a.m. and five o’clock (5:00) p.m., or at any
other time during which the daily U.S. mail is actively being delivered,
preventing the U.S. mail from being delivered to and/or collected from said
mailbox.
      1.   Exemptions. This section shall not apply to vehicles belonging to
the following individuals or entities:
         a.   The lawful owner of the official mailbox to which U.S. mail is
being prevented from being delivered;
         b.   Any visitor to the residence or business for which the official
mailbox is intended to serve, so long as the visitor has the prior consent of
the lawful owner of the official mailbox to park in such a manner as to prevent
U.S. mail from being delivered to the owner's own mailbox; or
         c.   Any emergency vehicle operator who is conducting official
business within a reasonable distance of the official mailbox.
      2.   Enforcement.
         a.   Removal By Operator. Such vehicle shall be removed by the
operator responsible for the vehicle upon request of a law enforcement officer
to a position where parking is permitted,
         b.   Citation And Removal By A Law Enforcement Officer. The City of
Belgrade Police Department or Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to issue
an appropriate citation provided in section
5-4-16 of the Belgrade City Code.
(Ord. 86-2, 8-18-1986; amd. Ord. 2022-15, 12-5-2022; Ord. 2025-4, 4-21-2025)
5-4-3: PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIC PLACES:
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with the directions of a police
or traffic control officer, or highway patrolman in any of the following
places:
   A.   On a sidewalk.
   B.   In front of a public or private driveway.
   C.   Within an intersection or within fifteen feet (15') of an intersection.
   D.   Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant.
   E.   Within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk at an intersection.
   F.   Within thirty feet (30') of the approach to any traffic signal, stop
sign, or other traffic control device location at the side of a roadway.
   G.   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty feet (30')
of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless
the local authorities indicate a different length by signs or markings.
   H.   Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing.
   I.   Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire station,
and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station, within
seventy five feet (75') of said entrance when properly signposted.
   J.   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or construction when
stopping or parking would obstruct the flow of traffic, or leave less than
twenty feet (20') of available roadway for the free movement of traffic.
   K.   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge of a
curb, roadway or street.
   L.   Upon any bridge or elevated structure within the city.
   M.   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping.
(Ord. 86-1, 8-18-1986; amd. Ord. 86-2, 8-18-1986; Ord. 2005-12, 11-7-2005; 2009
Code; Ord. 2022-15, 12-5-2022)
5-4-4: STOPPING, STANDING, OR PARKING PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN STREETS:
   A.   Application Of Section: The provisions of this section prohibiting the
stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those
times herein specified or as indicated on official signs, except when it is
necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control
device.
   B.   Regulations Not Exclusive: The provisions of this section imposing a
time limit on parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe
other and more restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping,
standing, or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times by
municipal, county or state law.
   C.   Parking Time Limited On Certain Streets: When signs are erected in each
block to give notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle for more than the
posted time limit.
   D.   City Manager And Chief Of Police May Make Additional Parking
Regulations: The city manager and chief of police are authorized to make and
enforce such regulations.
   E.   Parking Signs Required: Whenever, by this title or any other city
ordinance, any parking time is imposed or parking is prohibited on designated
streets or public parking lots, it shall be the duty of the city manager to
erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof and no such regulations shall be
effective unless said signs are erected and in place at the time of any alleged
offense.
   F.   Owner Responsible For Illegal Parking: If any vehicle is found upon a
street or highway in violation of any ordinances, rules or regulations
controlling stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles and the identity of the
operator cannot be determined, the owner or person in whose name such vehicle
is registered, shall be prima facie responsible for such violation.
   G.   Parking In City Parking Lots: Parking in city parking lots shall be
limited to seventy two (72) consecutive hours. The owner of any vehicle
violating this provision is in violation of this section.
   H.   Handicapped Parking: Parking spaces designated by the city manager
shall be designated as handicapped parking spaces, subject to provisions of
Montana Code Annotated sections 49-4-301 through 49-4-307. Spaces must be
properly signed to be a legal handicapped zone.
(Ord. 96-4, 7-1-1996; amd. 2009 Code; Ord. 2022-15, 12-5-2022; Ord. 2025-3, 4-
21-2025)
5-4-5: METHOD OF CURBSIDE PARKING:
   A.   Parallel Parking: Except as otherwise provided in this section, a
vehicle parked upon any public street or thoroughfare shall be parked or
stopped with the right hand wheels of the vehicle parallel to and within
eighteen inches (18") of right hand curb, or right hand pavement edge or street
boundary, as long as such vehicle is facing the same direction as the traffic
flow upon such street.
   B.   Angle Parking: Angle parking is permitted only where appropriate signs
or markers are placed showing the propriety of angle parking.
(Ord. 86-2, 8-18-1986; amd. Ord. 2022-15, 12-5-2022)
5-4-6: PARKING TRUCKS IN OFFICIALLY ZONED RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT:
   A.   Parking Prohibited: No person shall stand or park any truck, truck
tractor, trailer, semitrailer, bus, or any vehicle exceeding the GVW limit of
eighteen thousand (18,000) pounds on the side any street which is adjacent to
an officially zoned residential district for any purpose or period of time
other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of such vehicles. An
"officially zoned residential district" is defined as any land area within the
city which has been zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-2-D or R-2-M.
   B.   Exception: The provisions of this section shall not apply to the
operator of a truck, truck tractor, trailer, semitrailer, bus, or any other
vehicle exceeding the GVW limit of eighteen thousand (18,000) pounds, while
such vehicle is actively being used in connection with the construction or
repair of buildings, service calls, or the moving of household goods, and shall
not be applicable to the operator of a bus while such vehicle is parked in a
designated bus stop.
(Ord. 86-2, 8-18-1986; amd. 2009 Code; Ord. 2022-15, 12-5-2022)
5-4-7: PARKING AT SCHOOLS:
   A.   Authority To Erect Signs: The chief of police and city manager are
hereby authorized to erect or direct the erection of signs indicating no
parking upon that side of any street adjacent to any school, when such parking
would, in their opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous
pedestrian safety situation.
   B.   Parking Prohibited: When official signs are erected indicating no
parking upon that side of a street adjacent to school property, no person shall
park a vehicle in any such designated place.
(Ord. 86-2, 8-18-1986; amd. Ord. 2022-15, 12-5-2022)
5-4-8: NO PARKING AREAS:
   A.   Authority To Designate: The city manager or designee are hereby
authorized to determine and designate portions of public streets, alleys and
roadways where the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles would create a
hazardous condition, could cause delay to traffic, or as deemed appropriate by
the city manager or designee.
   B.   Erection Of Signs: Such places shall be indicated by the erection of
signs indicating no parking, and/or by causing the adjacent curb to be painted
red.
   C.   Prohibited: When official signs are erected and/or red curbs are
painted at hazardous or congested places as authorized herein, no person shall
stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any such designated place.
(Ord. 86-2, 8-18-1986; amd. Ord. 95-15, 2-5-1996; Ord. 2022-15, 12-5-2022; Ord.
2025-3, 4-21-2025)
5-4-9: PARKING TIME LIMITS:
   A.   Whenever signs are erected at the direction of the city manager or
designee which prohibits parking of vehicles, establishing time limits in
certain parking zones, or in any way limiting or restricting parking of
vehicles, no person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in violation of the
provisions indicated by such signs.
   B.   Vehicles: No vehicle, other than a vehicle belonging to the city, shall
be parked on a public street, alley, roadway or other way open to the public
for more than three (3) days without being moved more than the length of the
vehicle.
   C.   Abandoned Vehicles: Any vehicle, other than a vehicle belonging to the
city, which has been parked on a public street, alley, or other way open to the
public for more than three (3) days without being moved more than the length of
the vehicle may be deemed abandoned. A written two (2) day notice of intent to
remove and impound the vehicle shall be placed on a vehicle that has been
deemed abandoned. The city, or authorized agent of the city, is authorized to
remove or tow a vehicle to the city impound lot or to a location associated
with the tow company any vehicle that has been deemed abandoned and not moved
more than the length of the vehicle within the two (2) day notice of intent to
remove and impound the vehicle pursuant to the provisions of subsections 5-4-
16I2, J, K, L, and M.
(Ord. 86-2, 8-18-1986; Ord. 2022-15, 12-5-2022; Ord. 2025-3, 4-21-2025)
5-4-10: NO PARKING OF CERTAIN VEHICLES:
It shall be unlawful at any time to park a motor vehicle giving off an
offensive or disagreeable odor, or any tank truck, tank trailer, or like
vehicle containing or used for the transportation of gasoline, butane, fuel
oil, or other highly toxic or flammable substance to be parked on any street,
alley, park, or other public place or upon any private property in the city
where it would create a hazard to life or adjacent property for a period longer
than thirty (30) minutes; however, this restriction shall not be construed to
prevent the delivery of such liquid to retail gas stations or to private
residences or business or business property, but only for so long as is
reasonably necessary to complete such delivery. (Ord. 86-2, 8-18-1986)
5-4-11: PARKING FOR CAMPING PURPOSES:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to camp or sleep in a vehicle,
motor home, camper trailer, camper or recreational vehicle, whether self-
propelled, towed, or hauled, parked on any public or private parking lot,
street or alley way, within the city except in a recreational vehicle and
travel trailer park or truck stop, unless specifically authorized by the chief
of police, city manager, or by resolution of the city council, to accommodate a
special event.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to camp or sleep in a vehicle,
motor home, camper trailer, camper or recreational vehicle, whether self-
propelled, towed, or hauled, parked on any private lot within the city, except
that the owner or occupant of a single family residential lot may allow one or
more persons to camp or sleep in a parked motor home, camper trailer, camper or
recreational vehicle located on the single family residential lot for a period
not to exceed one (1) year, provided that the use of the motor home, camper
trailer, camper or recreational vehicle is without compensation to the owner or
occupant of such single family residential lot, and provided that the owner or
occupant of such single family residential obtain a permit from the city. No
more than one (1) motor home, camper trailer, camper or recreational vehicle
shall be allowed on a single family residential lot at one (1) time. No part of
the motor home, camper trailer, camper or recreational vehicle shall be parked
on or extend over any public property or right of way, including any street,
alley, boulevard, sidewalk or park, or on an adjoining private lot. The motor
home, camper trailer, camper or recreational vehicle shall not be connected to
the Belgrade City sewer system, and shall not be allowed to release sewer or
gray water upon the ground. The camping permit holder shall provide the city
with proof of proper disposal of sewer and gray water at least once every three
(3) months during the permit period. A camping permit may be denied or revoked
at any time for good cause and determined by the city council following notice
and public hearing.
   C.   The initial fee for the camping permit shall be fifty dollars ($50.00).
The camping permit fee may be amended from time to time by resolution of the
city council or defined in the master fee schedule.
   D.   It is not the intent of this section to prevent property owners from
parking camper units upon their property for the purpose of storage of the
unit.
(Ord. 2011-1, 4-5-2011; amd. Ord. 2017-2, 6-5-2017; Ord. 2021-8, 12-6-2021;
Ord. 2022-15, 12-5-2022; Ord. 2025-3, 4-21-2025)
5-4-12: RESERVED HANDICAPPED PARKING:
Whenever a particular parking space has been designated and reserved for the
handicapped, no person shall park in said space unless a valid handicapped
parking permit or license plate, issued by a municipality, the State of Montana
or any other state, or the veteran's administration, is visibly displayed on
the vehicle.
(Ord. 86-2, 8-18-1986; amd. 2009 Code; Ord. 2022-15, 12-5-2022)
5-4-13: EMERGENCY DECLARED:
   A.   Power To Declare Parking Prohibition: Whenever the city manager or
designee determines that parking motor vehicles on city streets should be
prohibited or restricted for street cleaning, snow removal or other emergency
purposes, the city manager or designee shall put into effect a parking
prohibition on designated streets, as necessary, by declaring it in a manner
prescribed hereunder. The prohibition or restriction shall remain in effect
until terminated by announcement by the city manager or designee as may be set
forth in any notice given hereunder, except that any street area which has been
cleared of snow, ice or other debris for the length of an entire block shall be
automatically excluded therefrom.
   B.   Parking Prohibited: While the prohibition or restriction is in effect,
no person shall park any motor vehicle or allow any motor vehicle to remain
parked on any street to which the prohibition applies.
   C.   Notice: The city manager or designee shall cause each declaration made
by him or her pursuant to this chapter to be publicly announced by any
reasonable means of communication. Each announcement shall describe the action
taken by the city manager or designee, including the time it became or will
become effective, and shall specify the streets or areas affected. A parking
prohibition shall not go into effect until at least eight (8) hours after
notice thereof has been first announced.
(Ord. 86-2, 8-18-1986; amd. Ord. 2022-15, 12-5-2022; Ord. 2025-3, 4-21-2025)
5-4-14: VEHICLE OWNER RESPONSIBILITY:
If any vehicle is found in violation of this chapter or any rule, regulation,
sign or marking in force pursuant thereto, controlling stopping, standing or
parking of vehicles, any person in whose name such vehicle is registered shall
be responsible for such violation.
(Ord. 2022-15, 12-5-2022)
5-4-15: LEGISLATIVE INTENT:
It is the intent of the city council that the violations listed in this
chapter, except for a violation of section
5-4-17, are offenses involving absolute liability. It is also the intent of the
city council that a violation of section
5-4-17 is a misdemeanor criminal offense of absolute liability and shall not
require proof of any of the mental states described in Montana Code Annotated
sections 45-2-101(33), (37) and (58).
(Ord. 2022-15, 12-5-2022)
5-4-16: ENFORCEMENT; PENALTY FOR VIOLATION:
   A.   Fines: A violation of this chapter, except for a violation of section
5-4-17, shall be punishable by a penalty and the penalties shall be imposed as
follows:
      1.   The penalty for a violation of this chapter, except for a violation
of section
5-4-17, shall be a fine of forty dollars ($40.00). The penalty may be amended
by resolution of the city council or maintained in the master fee schedule. The
penalty is in addition to any other action or remedy authorized by this
chapter.
   B.   Failure To Pay: The determining factor with respect to the penalty is
the issuance of the citation and not the judgment. Failure to pay a citation
for violation of this chapter within ten (10) business days of issuance of the
citation results in an administrative charge of thirty dollars ($30.00), in
addition to the penalty. The administrative charge may be amended by resolution
of the city council.
   C.   Violation For Improperly Parked Vehicle:
      1.   If any motor vehicle is found to be in violation of any provision of
this title 5, chapter 4 of the Belgrade City Code, the vehicle may be cited for
the appropriate parking violation. The notice of violation shall be in the form
of a citation authorized by the city. The city employee issuing the notice of
violation shall note the vehicle's license plate or vehicle identification
number and any other information concerning the vehicle that will identify it
and, if the driver is not present, shall serve the citation by placing on the
vehicle a notice of the parking violation, or alternatively serve directly on
the owner/operator of the vehicle in person or serve the citation by regular
mail.
      2.   The registered owner of a vehicle at the time the violation occurred
shall be liable for all fines, fees and penalties related to the specific
violation.
      3.   The registered owner at the time a vehicle is found to be in
violation of any provisions of this article shall remain liable for all
violations despite having subsequently sold, transferred, or otherwise conveyed
the vehicle.
   D.   Notice Of Violation: Employees under the supervision of the chief of
police are authorized to provide enforcement of parking regulations and issue
related notices of violation for parking violations as set forth in this
article or violations of Montana Code Annotated title 61 and Montana Code
Annotated section 49-4-302. Employees under the supervision of the chief of
police are authorized to immobilize and/or impound a vehicle in accordance with
this section.
      1.   The form of the notice of the violation shall be designated by the
city, but shall contain in substance the following information:
         a.   A statement that the notice of the violation represents a
determination that a violation of this article or other parking prohibition has
been committed by the owner or user of the vehicle and that the determination
shall be final unless contested as provided by this chapter;
         b.   A statement that failure to pay a violation may result in
immobilization and/or impoundment of the vehicle for which the owner may be
liable for a penalty, administrative fees, including towing, handling and
storage costs;
         c.   A statement of the specific provision of this chapter or Montana
Code Annotated section violated and for which the citation was issued;
         d.   A statement of the monetary penalty established for the parking
violation, including that the violation may subject the owner to additional
administrative fees if not paid within ten (10) business days of the date of
issuance of the notice of violation; and
         e.   Information advising the owner of the vehicle that he or she must
admit the violation and pay the penalty set forth in subsection 5-4-16A, or
deny the violation and request an appeal pursuant to subsection 5-4-16F, within
ten (10) business days of the issuance of the notice of violation.
      2.   The notice of violation represents a determination that a violation
has been committed, and such determination shall be final unless contested as
provided herein.
      3.   Nothing herein shall be deemed to invalidate any previous notice or
citation issued by the city regarding a violation under this article or other
parking prohibition.
      4.   The original notice of violation must be filed with the city finance
department and may be disposed of only by official action of the city or by
payment of a fine to the finance department.
   E.   Response To Notice Of Violation Required:
      1.   Any person who is provided notice of a violation of this chapter or
Montana Code Annotated section shall respond to such notice as provided herein
within ten (10) business days of the date of the issuance of the notice, by
either paying the penalty set forth in the notice or requesting an
administrative appeal pursuant to subsection F of this section. If the person
provided notice fails to either pay the penalty or request an administrative
appeal within ten (10) business days, said failure shall result in the
assessment of a thirty dollars ($30.00) administrative fee which shall be in
addition to the penalty.
      2.   If the owner of a vehicle cited for a parking violation has not
responded to the notice of violation within ten (10) business days as provided
in subsection E1 of this section, the city shall send a written notice by
regular mail to the last known address of the registered owner of the vehicle.
Such notice shall state that if the owner of the vehicle does not respond to
the notice by either paying the penalty and administrative fee or by requesting
in writing an administrative appeal pursuant to these procedures within (10)
ten business days of the date of the notice, the owner shall be deemed to have
waived the owner's right to an administrative appeal and the determination that
a violation was committed shall be considered final. Any person who fails to
request an administrative appeal or pay the penalty and administrative fee
within the ten (10) business days of the notice described in this subsection
shall be deemed to have refused to pay the penalty and administrative fee and
the city shall be authorized to proceed to collect the fine and all
administrative fees in any manner available to the city.
      3.   All payments made by a person regarding a notice of a violation
under this article shall be paid only to the city finance department.
   F.   Administrative Appeal Of Parking Citation: Any person cited for a
violation of this article may contest the determination that a violation
occurred by submitting to the city a notice of administrative appeal of parking
citation within ten (10) business days of issuance of notice of violation. The
notice of appeal must contain a written statement detailing the appellant's
argument that the citation was issued in error and may include photographs, or
any other information the appellant wishes to rely upon. The citing employee's
supervisor ("administrative reviewer") shall review the information submitted
and, within twenty one (21) days of submittal of the notice of appeal, the city
shall inform the appellant via regular mail or other communication approved by
the appellant, whether the citation is affirmed, modified, or dismissed. If the
citing officer's decision is affirmed or modified, the petitioner shall have
ten (10) business days from the date of mailing or other approved communication
of the decision to pay the penalty. Failure to pay within said ten (10)
business day period shall result in the assessment of a sixty dollars ($60.00)
administrative fee which shall be in addition to the penalty, and shall
authorize the city to proceed to collect the fine and all administrative fees
in any manner available to the city.
   G.   Rehearing And Judicial Review:
      1.   There shall be a review board which shall consist of three (3)
hearing examiners, but in no event shall the administrative reviewer whose
decision is being reviewed be included in the panel.
      2.   A request for review of a decision of an appellate reviewer shall be
submitted to the review board within ten (10) business days of notice of the
administrative reviewer's determination. The review board shall have the power
to review the facts and the law in order to affirm, reverse, or modify any
original decision for error of fact or law.
      3.   Procedure: The hearing shall afford a reasonable opportunity for
person(s) to demonstrate by the statements of witnesses and other evidence that
the citation was invalid or unjustified. The review board shall establish the
necessary rules and regulations regarding the conduct of such hearings.
      4.   Appearance Of Officer: The officer or other person authorized by the
city who issued the notice of violation shall not be required to appear at the
hearing unless the review board determines that the officer's presence is
required. The review board may grant one postponement if the officer is not
available at the time of the hearing.
      5.   Determination: At the conclusion of the hearing, the review board
shall immediately render a decision, either finding the person liable and
assessing a fine pursuant to subsection A1 of this section, or declaring the
violation unproven.
      6.   Failure To Appear: Failure of the appellant to appear at a hearing
when required to appear shall constitute an admission of the parking violation
and shall subject the person charged with the violation to the appropriate
fines and costs assessed by the city acting through the review board and shall
authorize the city to proceed to collect the fine and all administrative fees
in any manner available to the city.
      7.   Final Decision: The decision of the review board shall be the final
decision by the city. Any person aggrieved by a decision may file a petition
for judicial review in a court of competent jurisdiction. An appeal must be
brought within thirty (30) days from the date of the decision of the review
board, and confined to review of the record and questions of law.
   H.   Immobilization Of Vehicle:
      1.   Actions under this subsection H1 to immobilize a vehicle are for the
purpose of collection and are not considered a penalty. The city may, using any
immobilization device (i.e., a "boot"), immobilize any vehicle while parked
legally or illegally upon the ways of the city open to the public when:
         a.   The vehicle is subject to three (3) or more unpaid violations of
this article as determined by subsection H3 of this section regarding that
vehicle;
         b.   An owner of the vehicle has three (3) or more unpaid violations
of this article as determined by subsection H3 of this section and those
violations were issued for any vehicle the person currently owns or has owned;
or
         c.   A city court or municipal judge has ordered the vehicle
immobilized or impounded.
      If immobilization is conducted pursuant to subsection H1a or H1b of this
section, a judgment or order of the city court or municipal court is not
required.
      2.   Prior to immobilization, the city shall send via regular mail with
delivery confirmation requested a notice to the last known address of the owner
of any vehicle having three (3) or more unpaid violations of this article as
determined by subsection H3 of this section that the vehicle may be impounded
or immobilized when located upon the ways of the city open to the public. The
notice must reference all the unpaid violations of this article against the
vehicle or the owner and allow the person ten (10) business days from the date
of mailing of the notice to pay all unpaid violations of this article or
contest the determination the vehicle is subject to immobilization in the city
or municipal court. If the vehicle owner does not respond within ten (10)
business days of the date of the mailing, the city may immobilize or impound
the vehicle.
      3.   Only the following violations of this article may be considered in
determining the number of violations that subject a vehicle to immobilization:
         a.   All violations occurring after the effective date of this
chapter:
         b.   Any violation occurring prior to the effective date of this
chapter, wherein a summons and compliant has been lawfully served on the
vehicle owner; and
         c.   Any violation of this article for which a judgment has been
entered by the city court or municipal court as long as the judgment occurred
no more than ten (10) years prior to the date the notice of a pending
immobilization is sent pursuant to subsection H2 of this section.
      4.   A one hundred fifty dollar ($150.00) immobilization fee and costs of
immobilization and impoundment will be assessed against the owner and must be
paid prior to release.
      5.   At the time a vehicle is immobilized, the city shall conspicuously
affix to the vehicle a written notice via a highly visible sticker or other
material with an adhesive backing that can be fastened to the driver-side
window containing the following information:
         This vehicle has been immobilized for three (3) or more unpaid
violations of Title 5, Chapter 4 of the Belgrade City Code or by Order of the
Belgrade City or Municipal Court. Release from immobilization may be obtained
by paying all unpaid violations at City Hall, 91 East Central, Belgrade,
Montana, or by appearing in Belgrade City or Municipal Court, 91 East Central,
Belgrade, Montana, to answer to the unpaid violations. All assessed fees,
including a $150.00 fee for immobilization, must be paid prior to release of
this vehicle. If the vehicle remains immobilized for more than 24 hours, the
vehicle is subject to being towed and impounded as provided in Title 5, Chapter
5 of the Belgrade City Code, with additional fees assessed at that time.
Removal or attempted removal of the immobilization device before a release is
obtained is unlawful and may be punishable as a criminal offense subject to the
penalty provided in Title 1, Chapter 4 of the Belgrade City Code. The owner may
contest the action of immobilization and/or impoundment by filing a request for
a hearing with the Belgrade City or Municipal Court within ten (10) business
days of the immobilization or impoundment. Please call 406-388-4262 for
information on how to release this vehicle.
      6.   If the vehicle has been immobilized, and has remained immobilized
for a period of twenty four (24) hours or longer, and a release has not been
obtained from the city or the city court or municipal court, then the city may
impound the vehicle as provided for in subsection I of this section.
      7.   Nothing herein shall prohibit the city from providing alternative
methods of notice that a vehicle is subject to immobilization or that a vehicle
has been immobilized.
   I.   Removal/Impoundment Of Vehicle:
      1.   The city, or authorized agent of the city, is authorized to remove
or tow a vehicle from the ways of the city open to the public pursuant to this
chapter to the city impound lot or to a location associated with the tow
company where the vehicle will be stored until the owner of such vehicle
appears and claims the same or the vehicle is sold at auction in compliance
with Montana Code Annotated sections 25-13-701 through 25-13-709, under the
following circumstances:
         a.   When any vehicle is left unattended upon any bridge/viaduct or
causeway or in any tube or tunnel where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction
to traffic;
         b.   When a vehicle is left unattended and that vehicle constitutes an
obstruction to the safe and efficient removal of snow, ice, other weather
caused obstructions or the vehicle must be removed to facilitate the repairs or
replacement of city services;
         c.   When a vehicle upon a street constitutes an obstruction to
traffic and the person in charge of the vehicle fails to or is unable to
provide for its custody or removal;
         d.   Upon issuance of a judicial order for any reason, including
offenses under this chapter or Title 61, Montana Code Annotated (Montana Code
Annotated sections 61-1-101 et seq.);
         e.   In conjunction with an investigation in which the vehicle is
seized pursuant to provisions allowed under Montana Code Annotated section 46-
5-311, or seized pursuant to a court order; or
         f.   Whenever any vehicle is found by the city parked or left standing
in the ways of the city open to the public streets or alleys of the city; and
            (1)   The vehicle is subject to three (3) or more unpaid violations
of this article as determined by subsection H3 of this section regarding that
vehicle;
            (2)   An owner of the vehicle has three (3) or more unpaid
violations of this article as determined by subsection H3 of this section and
those violations were issued for any vehicle the person currently owns or has
owned; or
            (3)   A city court or municipal judge has ordered the vehicle
immobilized or impounded.
      2.   Prior to towing a vehicle under subsection I1f of this section, the
city must have immobilized the vehicle and sent notice to the last known
registered owner of the vehicle in a similar form to that required in
subsection H of this section.
      3.   Whenever a city employee authorizes the removal of a vehicle from
the ways of the city open to the public as authorized in this subsection I and
the employee removing the vehicle knows or is able to ascertain from the
registration records on the vehicle the name and address of the owner thereof,
and in compliance with Montana Code Annotated section 61-12-402, such officer
or another city employee shall send a notice by certified mail within seventy
two (72) hours to such owner and lien-holder, if applicable, of the fact of
such removal and the reasons thereof and of the place to which such vehicle has
been removed. If any such vehicle is stored in a public garage or other storage
facility, a copy of such notice shall be given to the attendant or owner of the
facility. Further, a city employee authorizing the removal of the vehicle,
shall adequately update written or electronic records of the immobilization
and/or tow to provide for later identification of all fees relative to the
release of the vehicle to the registered owner.
      4.   Impound Fee: The cost of towing or removing such vehicle,
administrative fees related to notification of the removal, and costs of
storing the vehicle shall be chargeable against the vehicle as the impound fee
and shall be paid by the owner of the vehicle before the vehicle shall be
released pursuant to subsection J of this section.
      5.   Storage Fee: The vehicle may be stored in a public or a private
place; if a private place, the storage charges shall be the amount charged for
such private storage; if stored on public property, the storage fee shall be
one hundred and seventy-five dollars ($175.00) for each month, or any part
thereof, up to a maximum of five hundred dollars ($500.00). The storage fee
shall be as prescribed from time to time by city council resolution. The owner
of a vehicle impounded and towed must secure the release of the vehicle as
required by subsection J of this section. The city assumes no responsibility
for the condition of the vehicle upon towing to impound or a facility provided
by a private towing entity.
   J.   Release Of Vehicle To Owner For Immobilization Or Impoundment:
      1.   An immobilized or impounded vehicle may be released from
immobilization or impoundment only after evidence of ownership or right to
possession to the owner or authorized agent of the owner of the vehicle is
furnished provided to the city.
      2.   The owner of an immobilized or impounded vehicle may secure its
release:
         a.   Prior To Impoundment: By paying all unpaid violations of this
chapter and all administrative costs, including the costs of immobilization,
with the city finance department;
         b.   Impoundment Due To Court Order: By paying the unpaid violations
of this article and all administrative costs, including the costs of
immobilization and/or impoundment as stated in subsection H4 of this section,
to the city finance department, or as determined by the city court or municipal
court; or
         c.   After Impoundment: By posting a bond with the city finance
department in an amount equal to:
            (1)   All outstanding violations of this article and all
administrative costs;
            (2)   The immobilization fee of one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00); and
            (3)   A sum equal to the impound fee and costs if the vehicle was
impounded.
         d.   After Normal Business Hours: By posting cash bond with the police
department that includes all costs listed in subsection J2c of this section for
emergency exceptions, as necessary.
      3.   At the time the vehicle is released, the owner or the authorized
agent of the owner may challenge the immobilization or impoundment in writing
within the city court or municipal court. The owner shall state in writing
whether the payments made are in full satisfaction of all debts and judgments
or whether the owner is making payment as a bond and will challenge the
immobilization or impoundment with the city court or municipal court. If at the
time of vehicle release the owner posts a bond pursuant to subsection E1b of
this section and yet fails to challenge the immobilization or impoundment
pursuant to subsection K of this section, the bond shall be forfeited and
considered as final payment for all debts and judgments listed in subsection
J2c of this section.
   K.   Hearing For Vehicle Immobilization Or Towing/Impoundment:
      1.   Within ten (10) business days of notification of a pending
immobilization under subsection H2 of this section, or within ten (10) business
days after an immobilization or impoundment, the owner or operator of a vehicle
which is the subject of the notice or the action may file a written petition to
challenge the notice or action in city court or municipal court.
      2.   Upon receipt of a petition, the city or municipal court has
jurisdiction and shall set the matter for hearing on an expedited schedule. The
court shall give at least forty eight (48) hours written notice of the hearing
date to the citing city employee or designated representative, the city
prosecutor's office, and the petitioner.
      3.   Upon filing the petition, if the petition is filed based upon the
notice, and an immobilization or impoundment action has not yet taken place,
then any future immobilization or impoundment will be stayed pending the
outcome of the hearing. An appropriate order shall issue from the court.
      4.   The court shall not require a response to the petition from the
city, but shall take testimony and examine the facts of the case, except that
the issues are limited to:
         a.   For Immobilization Under Subsection H Of This Section:
            (1)   Whether at the time of an immobilization the vehicle was
either the subject of three (3) or more unpaid violations of this article, an
owner of the vehicle has three (3) or more unpaid violations of this article as
determined by subsection H3 of this section and those violations were issued
for any vehicle the person currently owns or has owned, or the vehicle or owner
is the subject of an order of immobilization in the city court or municipal
court; and
            (2)   Whether a representative of the city had sent, prior to
immobilization, to the registered owner of the vehicle a written notice
complying with subsection H2 of this section.
         b.   For Impoundment: Whether the vehicle was properly the subject of
an act of immobilization or towing as provided in under this chapter.
      5.   Based upon the issues in subsection K4 of this section the court
shall determine whether the petitioner is entitled to rescission of the notice
or action of immobilization or impoundment. If the petitioner is entitled to
rescission, then the court may order the city to pay or reimburse the fees for
immobilization or impoundment. If the petition is denied, then the petitioner
is subject to the action of immobilization or impoundment and must pay the
costs of such action, if taken, together with any costs associated with the
hearing should the court find the petition was without merit.
      6.   If the immobilization or impoundment was deemed justified by court,
the court shall forfeit the bond. Any fines or fees remaining in excess of the
amount of the bond posted shall be ordered by the court to be paid to the court
by the owner of the vehicle.
      7.   The petitioner's failure to appear at the hearing may result in a
judgment against the petitioner pursuant to procedures established by law and
an order may be issued by the court requiring all debts, judgments, and
administrative costs, including costs related to immobilization or impoundment
and costs of the court, and said order shall be complied with prior to release
of the vehicle.
   L.   Sale Of Impounded Vehicles:
      1.   Vehicles that are not reclaimed within thirty (30) days after
notification by certified mail or prescribed publication, in accordance with
subsection I2 of this section, or any vehicles seized and held as evidence
where the vehicle no longer has any evidentiary value and for which an order
for disposal of the vehicle has been signed by a judge in accordance Montana
Code Annotated sections 46-5-307 and 46-5-308, may be sold at public auction in
the manner provided in Montana Code Annotated sections 25-13-701 et seq.
      2.   Proceeds from a sale involving vehicles seized pursuant to this
article shall be applied first to pay for costs and charges as listed in
subsection J2c of this section, with any additional balance deposited in the
city general fund except when the city is required by law to deposit the
balance or any part thereof with another party. In the event of a sale
resulting in recovery of costs less than those listed in subsection J2c of this
section, any unpaid violations or costs may form the basis for additional
enforcement under this article.
   M.   Statute Of Limitations: Enforcement and collection actions, to include
issuing a notice of immobilization under subsection H2 of this section, may not
be issued if the following time periods have been exceeded:
      1.   Civil Citation Only: For citations issued after the effective date
of this chapter, for which a summons has not been issued in accordance with
subsection G1 of this section, one year from the date of issuance of the
citation and prior to the date of notice of immobilization under subsection H2
of this section;
      2.   Court Summons Issued For Civil Citation: For citations issued after
the effective date of this chapter, for which a summons has been issued in
accordance with subsection G1 of this section, but a judgment has not been
entered, three (3) years after issuance of the summons and prior to the date of
notice of immobilization under subsection H2 of this section;
      3.   Court Summons Issued For Criminal Citation: For any citation issued
prior to the effective date of this chapter, that was issued as a criminal
citation and where a summons and complaint had been filed with the city court,
three (3) years from the date of filing with the court and prior to the date of
notice of immobilization under subsection H2 of this section;
      4.   Judgment Entered: For any violation, whether occurring prior to the
effective date of this chapter, or later, if a judgment has been entered by a
court, ten (10) years after judgment and prior to the date of notice of
immobilization under subsection H2 of this section.
(Ord. 2022-15, 12-5-2022; amd. Ord. 2025-3, 4-21-2025)
5-4-17: TAMPERING WITH OR REMOVAL OF IMMOBILIZATION DEVICE PROHIBITED; PENALTY:
   A.   A person commits the offense of tampering with or removal of an
immobilization device if, before a release of the immobilization device is
authorized by the city court or municipal court, the person:
      1.   Removes or attempts to remove an immobilization device from a
vehicle;
      2.   Relocates the immobilization device from its original installation
position;
      3.   Causes damage of any kind or amount to the immobilization device; or
      4.   Removes an immobilized vehicle with or without the immobilization
device attached from the vehicles location at the time the immobilization
device was attached.
   B.   A person convicted of this offense is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall
be subject to the penalty provide in section 1-4-1 of the Belgrade City Code.
   C.   As an alternative to incarceration, the person may be ordered to
participate in a supervised community corrections program or community service
pursuant to Montana Code Annotated section 46-18-201.
   D.   In addition, the person so convicted shall be ordered to pay
restitution for the damages caused in an amount to be determined and set by the
court. The court shall give full and due consideration to the person's ability
to pay the restitution, and may modify the order upon good cause shown by the
person. Restitution must be paid in full prior to release from jurisdiction of
the city.
(Ord. 2022-15, 12-5-2022)
5-4-18: EXCLUSIVE AUTHORITY TO REGULATE PARKING:
The City of Belgrade has the exclusive authority to regulate parking of
vehicles on public streets, alleys, and roadways within the City of Belgrade.
Homeowner associations, common-interest communities, businesses, any other
entities, and individuals are prohibited from regulating parking of vehicles on
public streets, alleys and roadways within the City of Belgrade.
(Ord. 2022-15, 12-5-2022)
CHAPTER 5
ABANDONED VEHICLES
SECTION:
5-5-1: Unlawful To Leave On Private Or Public Property
5-5-2: Notice To Owner
5-5-3: Removal By City; Costs
5-5-4: Authority Of City Manager
5-5-5: Penalty
5-5-1: UNLAWFUL TO LEAVE ON PRIVATE OR PUBLIC PROPERTY:
It shall be unlawful to park, store, leave, or permit parking or storing of any
motor vehicle or machinery of any type or part thereof, for a period of time in
excess of five (5) days which is abandoned, wrecked, partially dismantled,
unlicensed or inoperative, whether attended or not, upon any private or public
property within the city limits, unless the same is completely enclosed within
a building. (Ord. 2002-7, 11-4-2002)
5-5-2: NOTICE TO OWNER:
   A.   Written Notice: The chief of police, or his designee, shall give
written notice to the registered or known owner of any motor vehicle,
machinery, or part thereof which is in violation of this chapter, or to give
such notice to the owner or lessee of private land upon which said motor
vehicle, machinery, or part thereof is situated, giving notice that said
vehicle, machinery, or part thereof violates this chapter and demanding that
said motor vehicle, machinery, or part thereof be removed from the city limits,
or completely enclosed within a building within five (5) days from the time of
serving the notice. Said notice may be given by personal service, or by posting
on the property and by mailing a copy of the notice by United States certified
mail, return receipt requested. No notice shall be required for a second or
subsequent violation of this chapter by the same registered or known owner of
any motor vehicle, machinery, or part thereof, or owner or lessee of private
land upon which said motor vehicle, machinery or part thereof is situated for
the same motor vehicle, machinery, or part thereof.
   B.   Service: Service shall be deemed given if the chief of police, or his
designee, shall cause a copy of the notice to be posted on the vehicle,
machinery or part thereof, or in a prominent location on the land upon which
said motor vehicle, machinery, or part thereof is situated, and shall mail a
copy of the notice by United States certified mail, return receipt requested,
addressed to the last known address of the owner of the vehicle, machinery or
part thereof, and to the owner or individual in possession of the property upon
which the vehicle, machinery or part thereof is located, if different from the
owner of the vehicle, machinery or part thereof. If the last known address
cannot be determined after reasonable search and inquiry, posting of said
notice as set forth above shall be deemed proper and sufficient notice and
mailing of said notice shall not be required.
   C.   Notice Deemed Given: Notice shall be deemed to have been given on the
day of personal service or three (3) days after mailing and posting of said
notice. (Ord. 2002-7, 11-4-2002)
5-5-3: REMOVAL BY CITY; COSTS:
In the event that any of the aforesaid persons, whether an individual, firm, or
corporation, fails, neglects, or refuses to remove the abandoned, wrecked,
partially dismantled, unlicensed or inoperative vehicle, machinery, or part
thereof, or house the same in a building as provided in section
5-5-1 of this chapter, after the required notice, the city, its agent or
contractor, may remove the vehicle, machinery, or part thereof, and the cost of
removal and storage shall be assessed against the owner of such vehicle,
machinery, or part thereof, or the owner of the private property or lessee or
other known person in possession of private property upon which such vehicle,
machinery, or part thereof is located. Ownership of any vehicle, machinery or
part thereof removed by the city, its agent or contractor shall, upon removal,
be vested in the city, its agent or contractor, as applicable. (Ord. 2002-7,
11-4-2002)
5-5-4: AUTHORITY OF CITY MANAGER:
The city manager is authorized to enter into a written contract or agreement
with a duly licensed junk dealer for the removal of abandoned, wrecked,
partially dismantled, unlicensed or inoperative vehicle, machinery, or part
thereof wherein the consideration for the services of said junk dealer shall be
the vehicle, machinery, or part thereof at no expense to the city. Said junk
dealer, before entering into a contract with the city or being appointed its
agent or contractor in reference to section
5-5-3 of this chapter and this section, shall furnish evidence of public
liability insurance to adequately protect such agent or contractor and the city
deemed reasonable in the opinion of the city manager. In the event a qualified
and suitable junk dealer is not available to contract with or act as the city
agent or contractor as provided herein, the city manager is authorized to
contract with the lowest responsible bidder to provide for the removal of
abandoned, wrecked, partially dismantled, unlicensed or inoperative vehicles,
machinery, or parts thereof under section
5-5-3 of this chapter. (Ord. 2002-7, 11-4-2002)
5-5-5: PENALTY:
   A.   In the event that any of the aforesaid persons, whether an individual,
firm, or corporation, fails, neglects, or refuses to remove the abandoned,
wrecked, partially dismantled, unlicensed or inoperative vehicles, machinery,
or parts thereof, or house same in the building as provided in section
5-5-1 of this chapter after the required notice, said person, firm, or
corporation shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and each such person shall
be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion
thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter are
committed, continued, or permitted, and, upon conviction of any of such
violation, such persons shall be punishable by a fine of not less than twenty
five dollars ($25.00) and not exceeding three hundred dollars ($300.00), or by
imprisonment not to exceed ninety (90) days, or by both fine and imprisonment
for each offense.
   B.   It is the intent of the city council that the criminal offenses listed
in this chapter be offenses involving legislative intent. Those offenses shall
not require proof of any one of the mental states described in Montana Code
Annotated subsections 45-2-101(33), (37) and 58. (Ord. 2002-7, 11-4-2002)
CHAPTER 6
TRAINS
SECTION:
5-6-1: Purpose
5-6-2: Train Blocking Street
5-6-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for maximum safety of vehicular and
pedestrian traffic within the city by regulating railroad trains operating
within the city. (Ord. 92-1, 4-20-1992)
5-6-2: TRAIN BLOCKING STREET:
It is unlawful for the directing officer, engineer, conductor or any other
person in charge of any railroad train to direct the operation of or to operate
the same in such a manner as to prevent the use of any street in the
municipality over which said railroad crosses for a period of time longer than
ten (10) minutes. (Ord. 92-1, 4-20-1992)
TITLE 6
FIRE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
FIRE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
6-1-1: Established
6-1-2: Fire Chief; Assistant Fire Chief
6-1-3: Removal Of Members
6-1-4: Organization
6-1-5: Fire Chief In Charge Of Fires
6-1-6: Supervision Of Department
6-1-7: Equipment Report
6-1-8: Unlawful Use Of Equipment
6-1-9: Fire Prevention; Removal Of Dangerous Buildings
6-1-10: Interference With Firefighters And Other Officers
6-1-11: Violations; Penalty
6-1-1: ESTABLISHED:
The fire department shall consist of a chief of the fire department, an
assistant chief of the fire department and such honorary members and volunteer
organizations as the city council may elect or denominate; and the members of
the police department shall be ex officio members of the fire department. (1983
Code § 2.10.010)
6-1-2: FIRE CHIEF; ASSISTANT FIRE CHIEF:
   A.   Appointment Of Assistant Chief: The chief of the fire department shall
appoint an assistant chief of the fire department, whose appointment shall not
take effect until approved by the city council.
   B.   Term Of Office:
      1.   Fire Chief: The term of office of the chief of the fire department
shall be one year from the date of his appointment, or until his successor is
appointed and qualified.
      2.   Assistant Fire Chief: The term of office of the assistant chief of
the fire department shall be the same as that of the chief of the fire
department.
   C.   Duties Of Assistant: In case of the absence of the chief of the fire
department, the assistant chief shall exercise all the powers and perform all
the duties of the chief, and when the chief is present, the assistant chief
shall actively assist in executing all orders of his superior officer. (1983
Code § 2.10.020)
6-1-3: REMOVAL OF MEMBERS:
The city council may, at any time, by a majority vote, remove or discharge any
member of the fire department, or any member of any volunteer organization
which may have become a part of the fire department, or may dispense with the
service of any such volunteer organization as a whole. (1983 Code § 2.10.030)
6-1-4: ORGANIZATION:
Any volunteer fire company organized and becoming a part of the fire department
hereby created may adopt such constitution, bylaws, rules and regulations for
its government as it shall deem best, consistent with the city ordinances, and
may select such officers as its members may deem necessary and proper for the
administration of its affairs, subject, however, to the supervision and control
of the city council; and such company may, on or before May 1 of each year,
recommend to the mayor one of its members for the office of chief of the fire
department and if such member be satisfactory to the mayor, he shall appoint
him chief of the fire department, subject to the approval of the city council.
(1983 Code § 2.10.040)
6-1-5: FIRE CHIEF IN CHARGE OF FIRES:
The fire department, under the direction of the chief or other proper officer,
shall, upon alarm of fire, depart with the utmost dispatch to the place of
fire, with the hose and other apparatus under its care, and there work the
same, under the direction of the chief or other officer in charge, and shall
place and work such hose and other apparatus in the most effective manner until
the fire has been extinguished. The officer in charge shall be responsible for
the workings of the fire department, and his orders must be promptly and
strictly obeyed by each and every member of the fire department. (1983 Code §
2.10.050)
6-1-6: SUPERVISION OF DEPARTMENT:
The light, fire and water committee of the city council, subject to the orders
of the city council, shall have exclusive supervision of all rooms occupied by
the fire department, where such rooms are the property of the city or where the
rent of such rooms is paid in whole or in part by the city; and of all fire
apparatus of whatever kind or description, owned by the city and used by the
fire department, and all such fire apparatus and property shall be kept in such
places as the city council may provide and designate. (1983 Code § 2.10.060)
6-1-7: EQUIPMENT REPORT:
   A.   Report Of Inventory: It shall be the duty of the chief of the fire
department to make a complete inventory of all fire apparatus and property
belonging to the city and report the same, in writing, to the city council;
and, from time to time thereafter, to report any addition or loss of such fire
apparatus or property.
   B.   Monthly Report On Condition: At least once a month or more often, in
his discretion, or when required by the city council, the chief shall carefully
examine the condition of such fire apparatus or property to see that the same
is at all times in good condition and repair, and to report to the city council
any defects or injury to said apparatus or property, or any attention, repairs,
or additions needed thereto.
   C.   Monthly Report Of Fire And Alarms: The chief shall further report, in
writing, at the regular monthly meeting of the council, an accurate list of all
fires and fire alarms, if any, that may have taken place during the month next
preceding that at which said report is made, with the cause of such fires, if
known, and the number and description of all buildings destroyed or damaged,
and the estimated loss or damage to all property.
   D.   Management And Control Of Apparatus: Subject to the provisions of this
chapter, the chief of the fire department shall have the management and control
of all fire apparatus and property and of all hydrants provided by the city for
the extinguishment and control of fires and the prevention thereof, and he
shall be responsible for the proper use of the same. (1983 Code § 2.10.070)
6-1-8: UNLAWFUL USE OF EQUIPMENT:
   A.   Use Beyond City Limits: It shall be unlawful for any officer in command
of the fire department to allow any of the fire apparatus or property of the
city to be taken beyond the city limits without permission of the mayor.
   B.   Use For Private Purposes: It shall be unlawful for any person having
charge of any fire apparatus or property of the city to allow the same to be
applied or used for private purposes without the permission of the mayor. (1983
Code § 2.10.080)
6-1-9: FIRE PREVENTION; REMOVAL OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS:
The chief of the fire department, or, in his absence, anyone acting in the
capacity of chief of the fire department, may during the progress of any fire,
whenever in his judgment such action is necessary to check or control the same,
order any fence, building, or structure to be torn or cut down and removed; and
he shall, with the consent of the mayor, or with the consent of any two (2)
members of the city council, have the power and authority to cause any building
or structure to be destroyed for the purpose of checking or extinguishing the
fire; and he may tear down, or cause to be torn down, any portion of any
building which may remain after a fire if, in his judgment, such portion of any
building so remaining standing shall be dangerous to persons or property. (1983
Code § 2.10.090)
6-1-10: INTERFERENCE WITH FIREFIGHTERS AND OTHER OFFICERS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully interfere or hinder any city
officer or firefighter in the performance of his duty at, going to, or
returning from any fire, or while attending to his duties as a member of the
fire department, or to wilfully or negligently drive any vehicles across,
along, or upon any fire hose, or to wilfully cut, deface, destroy, or injure,
any telegraph wire or pole or signal box or bell, or any of the property
belonging to or connected with fire department, or any fire alarm telegraph.
(1983 Code § 2.10.100)
6-1-11: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1983 Code § 2.10.110)
CHAPTER 2
FIRE PREVENTION
SECTION:
6-2-1: Fire Code
6-2-2: Fire Prevention Committee; Fire Investigation Team
6-2-3: Limits Of Prohibited Areas For Storage Of Flammable Or Combustible
Substances
6-2-4: Modifications
6-2-5: New Materials, Processes Or Occupancies Requiring Permits
6-2-6: Inspection Fees And Related Administrative Charges
6-2-7: Appeals
6-2-8: Penalty
6-2-1: FIRE CODE:
   A.   Adoption: There is hereby adopted by the city for the purpose of
prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property
from fire and explosion, that certain code known as the International Fire
Code, 2012 edition and appendices B, C, D, and I thereof, except those portions
controlled by state statute and such portions as are hereinafter deleted,
modified or amended by section
6-2-4 of this chapter, and the following amendment to conform with State
building code amendments:
Section 903.2.8 Group R is amended to read as follows: An automatic fire
sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3 shall be provided
in residential occupancies with five (5) or more units.
   B.   Copies On File: No less than three (3) copies have been and are now
filed in the city fire department and a copy in the city office and the same is
hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and
from the date on which this chapter shall take effect, the provisions thereof
shall be controlling within the limits of the city and within the one mile
zoning jurisdiction of the city. (Ord. 85-1, 6-3-1985; amd. Ord. 2012-3, 8-20-
2012)
6-2-2: FIRE PREVENTION COMMITTEE; FIRE INVESTIGATION TEAM:
   A.   Fire Prevention Committee: This chapter and the fire prevention code
shall be enforced by the fire prevention committee of the city fire department
which is hereby established and which shall be operated under the supervision
of the chief of the fire department.
   B.   Appointment Of Fire Chief 1 : The fire chief shall be appointed by the
mayor upon his recommendation and approval of the city council.
   C.   Composition Of Committee: The fire chief shall be responsible to
appoint an assistant within the department to be on the fire prevention
committee and appoint from within the fire department, or recommend to the city
council, hiring of a paid fire marshal to administer and carry out the terms of
this chapter. These parties shall comprise the fire prevention committee.
   D.   Fire Investigation Team: The fire prevention committee shall also be
designated as the fire investigation team and additional fire personnel as
deemed necessary by the fire chief. The fire investigation team shall be
responsible to thoroughly investigate the circumstances of all incendiary or
suspicious fires within its jurisdiction. The fire chief shall, if he deems
fit, request a city police officer to assist the team in its investigation.
(Ord. 85-1, 6-3-1985)
 
Notes
1 1.   See also section
  6-1-4 of this title.
6-2-3: LIMITS OF PROHIBITED AREAS FOR STORAGE OF FLAMMABLE OR COMBUSTIBLE
SUBSTANCES:
The storage of flammable or combustible liquids in above and below ground
tanks, the storage of liquified petroleum gases, and the storage of explosives
and blasting agents is prohibited within the city limits; provided, however,
said uses may be allowed in M-2 zoned areas as defined in the zoning ordinance
as a conditional use, as approved upon conditions and recommendations of the
city-county planning board. Said conditions and recommendations shall not be
below minimum standards and conditions as required by the fire code in effect
at the time said conditions and recommendations are made by the city-county
planning board. Storage of flammable liquids (i.e., gasoline and diesel fuels)
in the B-2, B-3 and M-1 districts may be allowed as permitted in the city
zoning ordinance 2  provided all requirements set forth within this chapter are
complied with. (Ord. 85-1, 6-3-1985)
 
Notes
2 2.   See title 10 of this code.
6-2-4: MODIFICATIONS:
The fire prevention committee shall have power to modify any of the provisions
of the fire code upon application, in writing, by the owner or lessee, or his
duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of
carrying out the strict letter of the code; provided, that the spirit of the
code shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done.
The details of such modification, when granted or allowed, and the decision of
the fire prevention committee thereon shall be entered upon the records of the
department and a signed copy shall be furnished by the applicant. (Ord. 85-1,
6-3-1985)
6-2-5: NEW MATERIALS, PROCESSES OR OCCUPANCIES REQUIRING PERMITS:
The city building inspector and the fire prevention committee shall act in
conjunction to determine and specify, after giving effected persons an
opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or occupancies, which
shall require permits, in addition to those now enumerated in said code. The
fire marshal shall post such a list in a conspicuous place in the fire
department and in the city office, and distribute copies thereof to interested
persons. (Ord. 85-1, 6-3-1985)
6-2-6: INSPECTION FEES AND RELATED ADMINISTRATIVE CHARGES:
It shall be the responsibility of the fire prevention committee to establish
inspection fees and other related administrative fees with consideration to the
relative costs of services rendered pursuant to this chapter and as required by
state statute. A statement of such fees shall be submitted every two (2) years
to the city council for their approval. Upon approval, said fees shall
thereafter be charged and collected by the fire prevention committee and
thereafter deposited in a fire inspection fund as established by the director
of finance. (Ord. 85-1, 6-3-1985)
6-2-7: APPEALS:
Whenever the fire prevention committee shall disapprove an application or
refuse to grant a permit as applied for, or when it is claimed that the
provisions of the code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the
code have been misconstrued or wrongfully interpreted, the applicant may appeal
such decision of the fire prevention committee within thirty (30) days to the
fire prevention committee who shall notify the state fire marshal who shall be
requested to render an opinion after review of the facts (and inspection, if
necessary). (Ord. 85-1, 6-3-1985)
6-2-8: PENALTY:
   A.   Misdemeanor: Any person or entity who shall violate any of the
provisions of this code hereby adopted or who fail to comply therewith, or who
shall build in violation of any detailed statement or specifications or plans
submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued
thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to
comply with such an order as affirmed by a court of competent jurisdiction
within the time fixed herein, shall severally for each and every such violation
and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor, subject to penalty
as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 85-1, 6-3-1985; amd. 2009 Code)
   B.   Separate Offense: The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall
not excuse the violation or permit it to continue, and all such persons shall
be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable
time; and when not otherwise specified, each ten (10) days that prohibited
conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense.
   C.   Enforced Removal: The application of the above penalty shall not be
held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. (Ord. 85-1, 6-3-
1985)
CHAPTER 3
OPEN BURNING
SECTION:
6-3-1: Definitions
6-3-2: When Permit Required; Fees
6-3-3: Other Burning Allowed With A Permit
6-3-4: Burning Allowed Without A Permit
6-3-5: Materials Prohibited For Open Burning
6-3-6: Burn Barrels Prohibited
6-3-7: Permit Holder Responsibilities
6-3-8: Safety Conditions
6-3-9: Enforcement; Penalty
6-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
BEST AVAILABLE CONTROL TECHNOLOGY: Those techniques and methods of controlling
emissions of air contaminants from an open burning source and that limit those
emissions to the maximum degree taking into consideration impacts on energy
use, the environment, the economy, and any other costs, including the cost to
the source, including, but not limited to:
   A.   Scheduling burning during periods and seasons of good ventilation;
   B.   Considering atmospheric dispersion forecasts;
   C.   Utilizing predictive modeling results from the Montana department of
environmental quality to minimize smoke;
   D.   Limiting the amount of burning to be performed during any one period of
time;
   E.   Using ignition and burning techniques that minimize smoke production;
   F.   Selecting fuel preparation methods to minimize dirt and moisture
content;
   G.   Promoting fuel arrangements that create an adequate air to fuel ratio;
   H.   Prioritizing burns as to air quality impact and assigning control
techniques accordingly; and
   I.   Promoting alternative treatments and uses of materials so that they do
not have to be burned.
MAJOR OPEN BURNING: Open burning that, on a statewide basis, will emit more
than five hundred (500) tons of carbon monoxide or fifty (50) tons of any other
pollutant regulated under the administrative rules of Montana (ARM) title 17,
chapter 8, in a calendar year, except hydrocarbons. Major open burning requires
a permit from the state of Montana.
MINOR OPEN BURNING: Open burning that emits less pollutants than major open
burning and must comply with this chapter, any other applicable state, federal,
or county law including the ARMs and uses the "best available control
technology" (BACT).
OPEN BURNING: The burning or combustion of any material directly in the open
air or in a receptacle other than a furnace, multiple chambered incinerator, or
a wood waste burner commonly used by the wood products industry. (Ord. 2000-1,
2-22-2000)
6-3-2: WHEN PERMIT REQUIRED; FEES:
   A.   March Through November: For burning between the periods of March 1
through November 30, a Gallatin County open burn permit must be obtained prior
to engaging in any open burning within the city limits. When limits for
atmospheric conditions or hours restrict burning, these limits will be
designated in the permit restrictions.
   B.   December Through February: For any major open burning during any time
of the year or for open burning during the months of December, January, and
February, a person may make a written application to the state department of
environmental quality for permission to burn.
   C.   Permit And Permission Required: Where burning is conducted on public
property or the property of someone other than the permit applicant within the
city limits, the permit applicant will obtain a burn permit as well as written
permission from the owner, or the owner's authorized agent.
   D.   Fees: The fees for the permits will be set in accordance with a
schedule adopted by the Gallatin County commission. (Ord. 2000-1, 2-22-2000)
6-3-3: OTHER BURNING ALLOWED WITH A PERMIT:
   A.   Agricultural Open Burning: Essential agricultural open burning on a
farm or ranch is allowed during the months of March through November with a
burning permit and only for the purposes of eliminating excess vegetative
matter from irrigation ditches or cultivated fields or improving range
conditions or wildlife habitat when no reasonable alternative method of
disposal is available.
   B.   Prescribed Wild Land Open Burning: Prescribed wild land open burning,
if conducted on forest land or relatively undeveloped rangeland, is allowed
with a burning permit only for the purpose of improving wildlife habitat or
range conditions; reducing fire hazards from forestry practices; controlling
forest pests and diseases; promoting forest regeneration; or promoting other
accepted forestry practices. (Ord. 2000-1, 2-22-2000)
6-3-4: BURNING ALLOWED WITHOUT A PERMIT:
   A.   Definition: For the purposes of this section, a "recreation fire" is
defined as any fire not contained in an incinerator, outdoor fireplace,
barbecue grill or pit and which is burned for pleasure, religious, ceremonial,
cooking or similar purposes.
   B.   March Through November: From March 1 through November 30, a permit is
not required for small recreational fires in controlled areas. However, from
September 1 through November 30, the burner must call to see if there are
restrictions.
   C.   Fire Size: The fire must not exceed three feet (3') in diameter and two
feet (2') in height. (Ord. 2000-1, 2-22-2000)
6-3-5: MATERIALS PROHIBITED FOR OPEN BURNING:
Open burning within the city limits is totally prohibited for:
   A.   Food wastes;
   B.   Styrofoam, plastic wastes and other materials generating noxious odors;
   C.   Poultry litter, animal droppings, dead animals or dead animal parts;
   D.   Rubber materials including, but not limited to, tires;
   E.   Treated lumber and timbers;
   F.   Pathogenic wastes;
   G.   Asbestos or asbestos containing materials;
   H.   Materials resulting from "salvage operations" to reclaim or salvage any
product or material, except materials from the forest practice commonly
referred to as a "salvage cut" in timber harvesting;
   I.   Hazardous wastes, which are a waste or combination of wastes that,
because of the quantity, concentration of physical, chemical or infectious
characteristic, if any, cause or significantly contribute to an increase in
mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible
illness; or pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or
the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, or disposed of or
otherwise managed as defined in the code of federal regulations; and
   J.   Any other materials specifically prohibited by Montana Code Annotated
and the ARMs. (Ord. 2000-1, 2-22-2000)
6-3-6: BURN BARRELS PROHIBITED:
The use of burn barrels is totally prohibited within the city limits. (Ord.
2000-1, 2-22-2000)
6-3-7: PERMIT HOLDER RESPONSIBILITIES:
   A.   Call Gallatin County: A permit holder must call the Gallatin County
open burning number each day burning is planned at least thirty (30) minutes
before the planned burn and give the following information:
      1.   Name, permit number, and phone number;
      2.   Material to be burned;
      3.   Starting time of burning, during daylight hours;
      4.   Location of burn;
      5.   If on forest service property, the legal description including
section, township, and range; and the number of acres to be burned.
   B.   Fire Suppression Equipment And Personnel: Before setting a fire, permit
holders must ensure that adequate fire suppression equipment and personnel are
present for fire control for the duration of the burn. The permit holder will
not leave the immediate fire area until the fire has completely burned out,
with no remaining embers or smoke.
   C.   Delegation Of Responsibility: The permit holder may delegate any of
these duties to a designated responsible person; however, the permit holder is
ultimately responsible for any violations. (Ord. 2000-1, 2-22-2000)
6-3-8: SAFETY CONDITIONS:
   A.   Wind Or Weather Conditions: No fire shall be set if wind or weather
conditions make it hazardous to burn. If wind or other weather conditions
change making the fire hazardous, the fire must be extinguished as quickly as
possible.
   B.   Temporary Suspension Of Permit: When there is high fire danger, because
winds or other conditions make burning hazardous, or when fire suppression
resources are not available, permits may be temporarily suspended until good
ventilation exists and to allow assignment of burn priorities, if others
request permission to burn on the same day.
   C.   Closure Or Restriction Of Open Burning: The city fire chief or designee
may close or restrict open burning when necessary. All permit holders must
extinguish fires upon request of any city or county law enforcement officer or
firefighter. Failure to do so will be a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2000-
1, 2-22-2000)
6-3-9: ENFORCEMENT; PENALTY:
   A.   Enforcement: The city police department has the authority to
investigate complaints, issue written notices of violation, orders to take
corrective action, and citations to enforce this chapter. (Ord. 2000-1, 2-22-
2000)
   B.   Violation; Penalty: A violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor
subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2000-1, 2-22-2000; amd. 2009 Code)
CHAPTER 4
FIREWORKS
SECTION:
6-4-1: Definition
6-4-2: Prohibited
6-4-3: Minors
6-4-4: Sale Permitted
6-4-5: Discharge
6-4-6: Public Display Permit
6-4-7: Violation; Penalty
6-4-1: DEFINITION:
"Fireworks" means and includes any combustible or explosive composition, or any
substance, or combination of substances, or article prepared for the purpose of
producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration,
or detonation, and includes skyrockets, Roman candles, helicopters, dago bombs,
blank cartridges, toy cannons, toy canes, or toy guns in which explosives other
than toy paper caps are used; the type of balloons which require fire
underneath to propel the same; firecrackers, torpedoes, sparklers, or other
fireworks of like construction; and any fireworks containing any explosive of
flammable compound or any tablets or other device containing any explosive
substance. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as applying to toy paper
caps containing not more than twenty five hundredths (0.25) grain of explosive
composition per cap, nor to the manufacture, storage, sale, or use of signals
necessary for the safe operation of railroads or other classes of public or
private transportation, nor applying to the military or navy forces of the
United States or of this state, or to peace officers, nor as prohibiting the
sale or use of blank cartridges for ceremonial, theatrical, or athletic events.
(Ord. 2003-4, 5-5-2003)
6-4-2: PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any adult individual, minor child, firm, partnership,
corporation or association to possess for sale, sell or offer for sale, at
retail, or discharge within the city any "fireworks", as defined herein, except
as specifically permitted herein. (Ord. 2003-4, 5-5-2003)
6-4-3: MINORS:
It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian, or custodian of any minor child
to permit or consent to the possession or discharge by the minor child in his
charge or custody of any "fireworks", as defined herein, except as specifically
permitted herein. Possession or discharge by any minor child of any fireworks
within the city shall be presumed to be with the permission and consent of such
parent, guardian, or other person having the custody of such minor child. (Ord.
2003-4, 5-5-2003)
6-4-4: SALE PERMITTED:
It shall be lawful for an adult individual, firm, partnership, corporation or
association to offer for sale, expose for sale, sell at retail or wholesale,
within the city, those and only those permissible "fireworks" enumerated,
described and defined in Montana Code Annotated section 50-37-105, between the
hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M., each day, from
June 24 through July 5 and December 29 through December 31 of each year. A copy
of the city fireworks ordinance requirements shall be posted in a conspicuous
location at all sites offering fireworks for sale. (Ord. 2003-4, 5-5-2003)
6-4-5: DISCHARGE:
   A.   Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to discharge, at any time, any
"fireworks", as defined herein, within the boundaries of any park that the city
owns and/or maintains. In addition, it is unlawful to discharge, at any time,
any "fireworks", as defined herein, within the boundaries of any properties
under the ownership and/or control of Belgrade School District 44.
   B.   Permitted: It shall be lawful for an adult individual, minor child,
firm, partnership, corporation or association to possess and discharge within
the city, those and only those "permissible fireworks" enumerated, described
and defined in Montana Code Annotated section 50-37-105, between the hours of
ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. and eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M., each day, from July 1
through July 5 and on January 1 from twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight to one
o'clock (1:00) A.M. of each year. (Ord. 2003-4, 5-5-2003)
6-4-6: PUBLIC DISPLAY PERMIT:
   A.   Power To Grant: The city council shall have the power to grant permits
for supervised public displays of "fireworks", as defined herein, to be held at
any time and at any location within the city by the city, fair associations,
amusement parks and other organizations or groups. Applications must be
approved by the city fire marshal and chief of police and issued by the city
manager.
   B.   Application: Application for permits shall be made, in writing, at
least fifteen (15) days in advance of the date of the display.
   C.   Permit Granted: After such privilege shall have been granted, sales,
possession, use and distribution of fireworks for such display shall be lawful
for that purpose only.
   D.   Transferability: No permit granted under this section shall be
transferable.
   E.   Liability Insurance: The permit holder shall have liability insurance
in the minimum amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) to insure against
those damages which may be caused either to a person or persons or to property
by reason of the fireworks display, and arising from any acts of the licensee,
his agents, employees, or subcontractors. The city shall be named as an
additional insured under the policy. Proof of insurance shall be provided to
the city before the permit is issued. (Ord. 2003-4, 5-5-2003)
6-4-7: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. It is the intent of the city council that the criminal
offenses listed in this chapter be offenses involving legislative intent. Those
offenses shall not require proof of any one of the mental states described in
Montana Code Annotated subsections 45-2-101(33), (37) and (58). (Ord. 2003-4,
5-5-2003)
TITLE 7
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
CONSTRUCTION OF SIDEWALKS
SECTION:
7-1-1: Specifications For Construction
7-1-2: Widths Specified
7-1-3: Supervision
7-1-4: Grade
7-1-5: Notice Of Street Improvements
7-1-6: Service Of Notice
7-1-7: Failure To Construct After Notice
7-1-8: Power Of Council After Failure To Construct
7-1-9: Sidewalk Openings
7-1-10: Prohibited Sidewalk Projections
7-1-11: Damage To Sidewalks
7-1-12: Defects To Be Reported
7-1-13: Violation; Penalty
7-1-1: SPECIFICATIONS FOR CONSTRUCTION:
All sidewalks, crosswalks and curbs constructed in the public streets and
alleys of the city shall be of concrete only and in accordance with plans and
specifications to be approved by the city council. (1983 Code § 12.02.010)
7-1-2: WIDTHS SPECIFIED:
All sidewalks constructed in the streets and alleys of the city shall be in
widths as follows:
   A.   On Northern Pacific Avenue, ten feet (10') in width, including curbing
from lot line;
   B.   On Kennedy Street, Broadway and Weaver Streets, six feet (6') in width,
commencing from lot line to the intersection of said Kennedy, Broadway and
Weaver Streets with Central Avenue;
   C.   On Kennedy, Weaver and Broadway Streets, except as hereinbefore
specified, and on all other streets and alleys of said city, except Northern
Pacific Avenue, five feet (5') in width, commencing one foot (1') from lot
line. (1983 Code § 12.02.020)
7-1-3: SUPERVISION:
All sidewalks, grading and other street improvements hereafter ordered by the
city council shall be constructed under the direction and to the satisfaction
of the street commissioner, and to correspond to the grade prescribed by
ordinance as the established grade of the street so improved, and according to
the instructions of the city council. The same rules and regulations shall
apply to all street improvements hereafter made, whether ordered by the city
council or not. (1983 Code § 12.02.030)
7-1-4: GRADE:
   A.   Grade Given By Street Commissioner: All sidewalks, paving, or other
improvements upon streets where no grade has been established shall be built
upon the grade given therefor by the street commissioner.
   B.   Failure To Obtain Grade: If any person shall build any sidewalk,
paving, or other street improvement where no grade has been established without
first obtaining a grade therefor from the street commissioner, or contrary to
any grade given by him, or shall build any street improvement contrary to the
grade established by ordinance of the city, or contrary to any of the
provisions of this chapter, such person shall be punished as provided in
section
7-1-13 of this chapter. (1983 Code § 12.02.040)
7-1-5: NOTICE OF STREET IMPROVEMENTS:
When any street improvement or repair is ordered to be made by the city council
under the provisions of this chapter, such order shall describe the kind of
walk or improvement to be built or repaired and state the estimated cost
thereof and declare what part of the expenses thereof, if any, shall be borne
by the abutting property, or by property to be benefitted, and name the ratio
or benefit the property affected will receive from such improvement. After the
adoption of such order by the city council, the street commissioner shall
forthwith notify the owner or the agent of such owner of the property affected
by serving upon him a notice in the manner herein provided. (1983 Code §
12.02.050)
7-1-6: SERVICE OF NOTICE:
Such notice hereinabove mentioned may be served personally or by leaving the
same at the residence or place of business of such owner, or any known agent of
such owner. If no owner or agent is known to the street commissioner, then such
notice may be served by posting it upon the property where such improvement is
to be made. After serving such notice, the street commissioner shall make a
certificate of such service, showing the manner and date of such service and
shall file the same with the director of finance. (1983 Code § 12.02.060)
7-1-7: FAILURE TO CONSTRUCT AFTER NOTICE:
If any such improvement shall not be constructed within the time mentioned in
the notice, such failure shall be reported to the city council by the street
commissioner. (1983 Code § 12.02.070)
7-1-8: POWER OF COUNCIL AFTER FAILURE TO CONSTRUCT:
   A.   Order Construction: After such report has been rendered, the city
council may order the construction of such improvement in conformity with its
original order.
   B.   Costs: An accurate record shall be kept by the street commissioner of
the cost of such construction, and the council may order an assessment,
assessing the proportionate share of the expense thereof upon the real property
of the owner failing to comply with the said order; and thereafter, the
director of finance shall certify such assessment to the county treasurer, to
be by him placed upon the assessment roll and collected as other taxes are
collected. (1983 Code § 12.02.080)
7-1-9: SIDEWALK OPENINGS:
Every opening of a vault, coal hole, cellar, or any aperture in a sidewalk over
any coal hole or vault shall be protected with a substantial cover and the
construction of all coal holes and vaults and the openings thereto in the
streets and alleys shall be subject to the direction and supervision of the
street commissioner. (1983 Code § 12.02.090)
7-1-10: PROHIBITED SIDEWALK PROJECTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, or cause to be constructed or
placed any porch, door, sign, or window which shall project over the sidewalk
of Northern Pacific Avenue, or to construct any such porch, door, sign, or
window on any other street without the permission of the city council being
first obtained. (1983 Code § 12.02.100)
7-1-11: DAMAGE TO SIDEWALKS:
If any person shall break or otherwise injure any footpaths or sidewalks, such
person shall, within twenty four (24) hours thereafter, cause the same to be
sufficiently repaired. (1983 Code § 12.02.110)
7-1-12: DEFECTS TO BE REPORTED:
It shall be the duty of the chief of police and all police officers to take
note of all defects in sidewalks and streets and report the same to the street
commissioner or the city council; and, in case of accident, they shall
immediately report the same to the city attorney, together with the names of
any witnesses. (1983 Code § 12.02.120)
7-1-13: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1983 Code § 12.02.130)
CHAPTER 2
STREET AND SIDEWALK OBSTRUCTIONS
SECTION:
7-2-1: Obstructions Prohibited
7-2-2: Obstructed Or Unrepaired Sidewalks
7-2-3: Barbed Wire Fences, Poles, Or Wires Prohibited
7-2-4: Violation; Penalty
7-2-1: OBSTRUCTIONS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct any sidewalk, street, or alley
without first obtaining a permit from the public works department. Obstruction
permits shall be subject to an application fee of $25.00. The application fee
may be amended by resolution of the city council. The director of public works
may limit, restrict or deny any application for an obstruction permit to
promote public use and safety of city sidewalks, streets and alleys. This does
not apply to motor vehicles or trailers. (1983 Code § 12.04.010; amd. Ord.
2016-5, 6-20-2016)
7-2-2: OBSTRUCTED OR UNREPAIRED SIDEWALKS:
It shall be the duty of the occupant of any premises within the city limits, or
in case the same are unoccupied, then the owner or his agent, to keep the
sidewalks in front of and adjoining his premises clean and safe for
pedestrians, and to repair the same from time to time, and such occupant,
owner, or agent shall, with all reasonable dispatch, remove snow, ice, slush,
mud, or other impediments to safe and convenient foot travel. (1983 Code §
12.04.020)
7-2-3: BARBED WIRE FENCES, POLES, OR WIRES PROHIBITED 1 :
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any poles or wires
between the east side of Kennedy Street and the west side of Quaw Boulevard, or
to erect or maintain a barbed wire fence anywhere in the city. (1983 Code §
12.04.030; amd. 2009 Code)
 
Notes
1 1.   See also subsection
  10-5-11B of this code.
7-2-4: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1983 Code § 12.04.040)
CHAPTER 3
REMOVAL OF ICE AND SNOW
SECTION:
7-3-1: Definitions
7-3-2: Removal Required
7-3-3: Deposit Or Accumulation Prohibited
7-3-4: Failure To Comply; Abatement By City
7-3-5: Violation; Penalty
7-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of
this chapter:
CITY: The city of Belgrade.
LOT OR PARCEL: A parcel of land occupied or intended for occupancy by one main
building together with its accessory buildings and which may include more than
one platted lot.
MANAGER: The city manager or his/her duly designated and acting representative.
PERSON: Any individual, business association, partnership, corporation or other
legal entity, to include owner, tenant, occupant, lessee, or otherwise.
ROADWAY: That portion of a street or highway improved, designed, or ordinarily
used for vehicular travel or parking, exclusive of the berm or shoulder.
SIDEWALK: A paved, concrete, or cement pathway intended for public pedestrian
use and located parallel to a street or road, on either public right of way or
a public use easement. (Ord. 2007-1, 2-5-2007)
7-3-2: REMOVAL REQUIRED:
   A.   Duty To Remove: Every person owning, in charge or control of, or
occupying as tenant any building or lot of land within the city which fronts
on, abuts, or contains within a public use easement a sidewalk, shall remove
and clear away, or cause to be removed and cleared away, snow, ice, slush, mud,
or other impediment to safe and convenient foot travel from so much of said
sidewalk as is in front of, abuts on, or is contained within said building or
lot of land. It is further such person's duty to prevent accumulation of the
same upon such sidewalks.
   B.   Time Limitation For Removal: Snow, ice, slush, mud, or other impediment
shall be removed from all sidewalks in the city by twelve o'clock (12:00) noon
of the next day following a snowfall.
   C.   Use Of Sand And Deicing Agents: When from freezing of water, snow or
slush thereon, or by reason of such compaction resulting from the wear of foot
travel or from any cause whatever, sidewalks are rendered dangerous, unsafe or
difficult to the free passage of pedestrians, it shall be the duty of the
owners or tenants of premises in front of, adjoining or contained within a
public use easement such sidewalks, to forthwith remedy such conditions by
sprinkling sand or deicing agents on the sidewalks, or chipping or by other
safe and efficient means. (Ord. 2007-1, 2-5-2007)
7-3-3: DEPOSIT OR ACCUMULATION PROHIBITED:
No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited any accumulation of snow or
ice on or against a fire hydrant or on any sidewalk, pedestrian roadway
crossing, roadway, roadway shoulder or berm, curb or gutter, any handicap
parking space, any loading and unloading area of a public transportation system
or any area designated for use by emergency vehicles for access. (Ord. 2007-1,
2-5-2007)
7-3-4: FAILURE TO COMPLY; ABATEMENT BY CITY:
   A.   Power Of City Manager: In the event of the failure of any person
responsible for clearing the sidewalk to clear away or treat with abrasives or
suitable deicing agents and subsequently clear away any snow, ice, slush, mud,
or other impediment from any sidewalk as required by this chapter, or cause
this to be done, the manager may, as soon as practicable after such failure,
cause such work to be done at the expense of the property owner.
   B.   Required Records: The manager shall ascertain and keep a record of:
      1.   The exact date and costs of all work caused to be done in accordance
with this section on account of each act or omission of each person;
      2.   A legal description of the lot or lots fronting, abutting on or
contained within a public use easement the sidewalks cleared along with the
street address; and
      3.   The identity of the owner(s) of the premises along with, when
possible, any tenant(s), occupant(s) or lessee(s).
   C.   Costs Of Removal: Each person whose act or omission makes it necessary
that the manager cause work to be done in accordance with this section shall be
liable to the city for the cost of such work. The costs will be a minimum of
twenty five dollars ($25.00) for up to one-half (1/2) hour of snow removal work
plus actual time for snow removal beyond one-half (1/2) hour prorated at the
rate of fifty dollars ($50.00) per hour, plus an administrative fee of thirty
five dollars ($35.00). Actual fees may exceed the minimum fee in instances in
which actual costs are documented to exceed the minimum fee.
   D.   Notice Of Costs; Collection: The manager shall give each person written
notice of the amount owed to the city as soon as practicable. The payment of
such amount may be enforced through suit for collection or by levying an
assessment on the premises, or both.
   E.   Assessment; Lien: In the event of assessment, the city council shall
annually pass and adopt a resolution levying an assessment and tax against each
lot or parcel of land fronting, abutting on, or contained within a public use
easement the sidewalks cleared under the order of the manager and according to
his/her report. Any such assessment or tax against the lot or parcel of real
estate to which this sidewalk clearing service is furnished and for which
payment is delinquent, shall become a lien on the real estate receiving the
benefit. (Ord. 2007-1, 2-5-2007)
7-3-5: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of
a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount of not
less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) or more than fifty dollars ($50.00).
Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute
a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. There shall be no
penalty of imprisonment for a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2007-1, 2-5-
2007)
CHAPTER 4
HIGHWAY MAINTENANCE
SECTION:
7-4-1: Agreement To Maintain Highway
7-4-2: Authorization Of County To Do Work
7-4-1: AGREEMENT TO MAINTAIN HIGHWAY:
The city hereby agrees to maintain the following described portions of the
federal aid constructed highway in an adequate manner and to the satisfaction
of the state highway department:
Approximately three-tenths (3/10) of a mile of the secondary and feeder
highway, known as the Belgrade-West Road, which runs at a point commencing on
U.S. Highway 10, thence southwest on Broadway Street until the said Broadway
Street intersects with Madison Avenue and thence west on Madison Avenue to the
city limits. (1983 Code § 12.06.010)
7-4-2: AUTHORIZATION OF COUNTY TO DO WORK:
The city agrees that if, for any reason, it is unable to maintain the
previously described portion of the above named road to a standard satisfactory
to the state highway department and Gallatin County, said Gallatin County is
thereupon authorized to perform the necessary work to place the road, within
the incorporated city limits, in a satisfactory condition by such means as may
be at the disposal of said Gallatin County and that said Gallatin County will
be reimbursed by the city for any expense it may incur in the performance
thereof, on the basis of cost plus ten percent (10%). (1983 Code § 12.06.020)
CHAPTER 5
EXCAVATIONS
SECTION:
7-5-1: Permit Required; Hindrance Or Obstruction Prohibited
7-5-2: Bond
7-5-3: Liability Insurance
7-5-4: Bonding And Insurance Coverages
7-5-5: Penalty
7-5-1: PERMIT REQUIRED; HINDRANCE OR OBSTRUCTION PROHIBITED:
No person shall impede, obstruct, or tear up any pavement, sidewalk or
crosswalk, or any part thereof; dig any hole, shaft, ditch or drain; or dig or
remove any sod, earth, stones, sand or gravel from any street, avenue, alley
and public place without first having obtained a permit from the director of
public works; or hinder or obstruct the making or repairing of any public
improvement or work ordered or done by or under the authority of the city.
(Ord. 2005-1, 3-7-2005)
7-5-2: BOND:
All applicants requesting permits to excavate in any public right of way shall
either file or have on file with the director of public works a street opening
bond prior to conducting any work in the public right of way. The bond may be
posted in cash or by a bond issued by a company licensed to do business in the
state of Montana. (Ord. 2005-1, 3-7-2005)
7-5-3: LIABILITY INSURANCE:
All applicants requesting permits to excavate in any public right of way shall
either file or have on file with the director of public works proof of general
liability insurance coverage, prior to conducting any work in the public right
of way. The insurance company shall be licensed to do business in the state of
Montana. (Ord. 2005-1, 3-7-2005)
7-5-4: BONDING AND INSURANCE COVERAGES:
The amount of bonding and insurance coverages required shall be as established,
and may be amended from time to time, by resolution of the city council. (Ord.
2005-1, 3-7-2005)
7-5-5: PENALTY:
Violation of this chapter constitutes a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2005-1, 3-7-2005; amd. 2009 Code)
CHAPTER 6
CITY PARKS
SECTION:
7-6-1: Definitions
7-6-2: Hours Of Occupancy
7-6-3: Violation; Penalty
7-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words used in this chapter shall be defined as follows:
PARKS: Any public playground, athletic field, picnic facility or recreational
area owned or controlled by the city and used for the purpose of recreational
or cultural activities.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon or on which any person or property may be
transported or drawn on a public highway including automobiles, trucks,
commercial motor vehicles, trailers, motor homes, recreational vehicles, and
motorcycles. (Ord. 93-7, 10-4-1993)
7-6-2: HOURS OF OCCUPANCY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to remain upon or cause any vehicle to
remain upon the premises of any park or city owned adjoining property between
the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. without
written permission of the city. All unauthorized vehicles shall be towed away
at the owner's expense. (Ord. 93-7, 10-4-1993)
7-6-3: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 93-7, 10-4-1993)
CHAPTER 7
DISPOSAL OR SALE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY
SECTION:
7-7-1: Authorization
7-7-2: Competitive Sale
7-7-1: AUTHORIZATION:
The City Manager of the City of Belgrade is hereby authorized to sell, donate,
or dispose of supplies, equipment, and other personal property owned by the
City that is obsolete, not needed, or unsuitable for public use, and to
determine the appropriate manner of doing so. (Ord. 2022-7, 4-5-2022)
7-7-2: COMPETITIVE SALE:
In the event that the City Manager determines that it is appropriate to sell
supplies, equipment, or other personal property owned by the City, the sale
shall be conducted in a manner that gives an opportunity for competition under
rules established by the City Manager. (Ord. 2022-7, 4-5-2022)
TITLE 8
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING CODES
SECTION:
8-1-1: Building Codes Adopted
8-1-1: BUILDING CODES ADOPTED:
Pursuant to Montana Code Annotated section 50-60-301 and the Administrative
Rules of Montana, chapter 24, the city adopts the following codes:
   A.   International Building Code:
      1.   The International Building Code, 2021 edition, as amended by ARM
24.301.131 together with appendix chapter C (group U-agricultural buildings).
      2.   Modifications to the International Building Code applicable to both
the department and local government code enforcement programs as amended by ARM
24.201.146.   
   B.   International Residential Code: The International Residential Code,
2021 edition, as amended by ARM 24.301.154.
   C.   International Existing Building Code: The International Existing
Building Code, 2021 edition, as provided by ARM 24.301.171.
   D.   International Energy Conservation Code: The International Energy
Conservation Code, 2021 edition as amended by ARM 24.301.161.
   E.   Uniform Plumbing Code: The Uniform Plumbing Code, 2021 edition, as
amended by ARM 24.301.301.
   F.   Incorporation by reference of independent accountant's reporting format
for applying agreed upon procedures during audits of certified city, county, or
town building code enforcement programs, ARM 24.301.208.
   G.   International Swimming Pool And Spa Code: The International Swimming
Pool and Spa Code, 2021 edition as provided by ARM 24.301.175(2)
   H.   International Mechanical Code: The International Mechanical Code, 2021
edition as amended by ARM 24.301.170.
   I.   National Electrical Code: National Fire Protection Association Standard
NFPA 70, National Electrical Code, 2020 edition as amended by ARM 24.301.401.
   J.   International Fuel Gas Code: International Fuel Gas Code, 2021 edition
as amended by ARM 24.301.173.
   These codes are applicable to all buildings within the building code
enforcement area of the city, including, but not limited to, residential
buildings containing less than five (5) dwelling units or their attached to
structures, and farm or ranch buildings, and any private garage structures used
only for the owner's own use as provided by Montana Code Annotated section 50-
60-102(1)(a).
(Ord. 2007-3, 4-16-2007; amd. Ord. 2010-8, 9-20-2010; Ord. 2015-1, 2-2-2015;
Ord. 2020-1, 1-21-2020; Ord. 2021-1, 5-3-2021; Ord. 2021-4, 8-16-2021; Ord.
2022-10, 7-5-2022)
CHAPTER 2
PLUMBING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
8-2-1: Uniform Plumbing Code Adopted
8-2-2: Scope Of Provisions
8-2-3: Administration
8-2-4: Permit Required
8-2-5: Permit Requirements
8-2-6: Enforcement
8-2-7: Violation; Penalty
8-2-1: UNIFORM PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED:
   A.   Adopted: The uniform plumbing code, 2006 edition, as amended by ARM
24.301.301 is hereby adopted by reference and all installations, repairs and
alterations of plumbing shall be performed in accordance with its provisions.
   B.   Copy On File: One copy of the uniform plumbing code shall be kept on
file in the city offices for inspection by and use of the public and shall be
marked with the words, "City of Belgrade, Official Copy". (1983 Code §
15.10.010; amd. Ord. 99-2, 5-17-1999; Ord. 2007-3, 4-16-2007)
8-2-2: SCOPE OF PROVISIONS:
The provisions of the uniform plumbing code shall apply to and govern
"plumbing" as defined in the code, including the practice, materials and
fixtures used in the installation, maintenance, extension and alteration of all
piping, fixtures, appliances and appurtenances in connection with any of the
following: sanitary drainage or storm drainage facilities, the venting system,
and public or private water supply systems, within or adjacent to any building
or other structure or conveyance; also the practice and materials used in the
installation, maintenance, extension, or alteration of the stormwater or sewage
system of any premises to their connection with any point of public disposal or
other terminal. (1983 Code § 15.10.020)
8-2-3: ADMINISTRATION:
The administration and enforcement of this chapter shall be the duty of the
building official hereby authorized to take such action as may be reasonably
necessary to enforce the purposes of this code. The city council may appoint
and authorize such assistants or agents as they may deem necessary to enforce
the provisions of this code. (1983 Code § 15.10.030)
8-2-4: PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   Issuance Of Permit: No plumbing work, unless excepted in this section,
shall be undertaken prior to the issuance of a permit therefor by the building
official.
   B.   Application For Permit: Application for permit shall be made on
suitable forms provided by the director of finance. The application shall be
accompanied by the fees in accordance with the schedule of fees. (1983 Code §
15.10.040)
   C.   Schedule Of Fees: Fees shall be as determined from time to time by
resolution of the city council. (2009 Code)
8-2-5: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Plans And Specifications:
      1.   Required: No permit shall be issued until plans and specifications
showing the proposed work in necessary detail have been submitted to the
building department and the city council has determined, from examination of
such plans and specifications, that they give assurance that the work will
conform to the provisions of this code. If a permit is denied, the applicant
may submit revised plans and specifications without payment of additional fees.
      2.   Change In Plans: If, in the course of the work, it is found
necessary to make any change from the plans and specifications on which a
permit has been issued, amended plans and specifications shall be submitted and
a supplementary permit, subject to the same conditions applicable to the
original application for permit, shall be issued to cover the change.
   B.   Repairs: Repairs involving only the working parts of a faucet or valve,
the clearance of stoppages, repairing of leaks, or replacement of defective
faucets or valves may be made without a permit, provided no changes are made in
the piping to the fixtures.
   C.   Protection Of Water Supply System: The building department shall make
such rules and regulations in furtherance of the purposes of this code, and not
inconsistent with the specific provisions of this code, for the installation,
repair, or alteration of air conditioning systems, water treatment equipment
and water operated devices as may be deemed necessary to properly protect the
water supply system. (1983 Code § 15.10.050)
8-2-6: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Inspection And Tests: It shall be the duty of the building department
to enforce the provisions of this code and to make the inspections and tests
required thereunder.
   B.   Right Of Entry: The building official shall, after proper
identification, have the right to enter any premises for the purpose of
inspecting any plumbing system at such times as may be reasonably necessary to
protect the public health. (1983 Code § 15.10.060)
8-2-7: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1983 Code § 15.10.070)
CHAPTER 3
MANUFACTURED HOMES
SECTION:
8-3-1: Definition
8-3-2: Ownership
8-3-3: Utility Connections
8-3-4: Permanency
8-3-5: Building And Zoning Requirements
8-3-6: Health Regulations
8-3-7: Permit Required
8-3-8: Exemptions
8-3-1: DEFINITION:
"Manufactured home" as used herein shall mean all manufactured homes or
trailers used for temporary or permanent housing on a site in the city by one
or more persons. (1983 Code § 15.14.010; amd. 2009 Code)
8-3-2: OWNERSHIP:
All manufactured homes and sites shall be owned by one or more of the regular
occupants thereof. (1983 Code § 15.14.020; amd. 2009 Code)
8-3-3: UTILITY CONNECTIONS:
All manufactured homes shall be permanently hooked up to standard water, power
and sanitary facilities in compliance with the ordinances and regulations of
the city and the statutes and regulations of the state. (1983 Code § 15.14.030;
amd. 2009 Code)
8-3-4: PERMANENCY:
All manufactured homes must be placed on permanent concrete foundations or
footings sufficient to support a mobile home. (1983 Code § 15.14.040; amd. 2009
Code)
8-3-5: BUILDING AND ZONING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Regulations Apply: Except as hereinafter provided, the building and
zoning regulations of the city shall apply to all manufactured homes moved on
or replacing those manufactured homes now situated on lots or parcels of ground
in the city.
   B.   Minimum Floor Space, Site Space: Each manufactured home, exclusive of
porch or entry, shall have not less than seven hundred (700) square feet of
floor space and be situated on a site of not less than seven thousand (7,000)
square feet, unimproved except for utilities.
   C.   One Unit Per Space: Only one manufactured home per seven thousand
(7,000) square foot site, unimproved except for utilities, shall be permitted.
   D.   Skirting: Each manufactured home shall be skirted with material to
match that of the manufactured home, and any additions that attach thereto
shall conform as close as possible to the present outside materials of the
unit. (1983 Code § 15.14.050; amd. 2009 Code)
8-3-6: HEALTH REGULATIONS:
The occupants of manufactured homes shall comply with all health and sanitation
ordinances and regulations of the city and the state. (1983 Code § 15.14.060;
amd. 2009 Code)
8-3-7: PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   Temporary Permit Required: Except as hereinafter provided, no
manufactured home shall be placed on any site in the city without the owner
thereof first applying for a temporary permit.
   B.   Application: Such application shall be made, in writing, to the city
building inspector who shall issue the permit only after he is satisfied that
the requirements of this chapter apparently will be met.
   C.   Fee: The regular building permit fee as provided by resolution shall be
paid by the applicant before the temporary permit is issued.
   D.   Term: Said temporary permit shall be valid for a period not to exceed
ninety (90) days.
   E.   Permanent Permit: After the manufactured home has been situated in
conformance with this chapter, the building inspector shall issue a permanent
permit to the owner of the manufactured home, without additional charge. (1983
Code § 15.14.070; amd. 2009 Code)
8-3-8: EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   Installation Prior To October 6, 1966: Sections
8-3-2,
8-3-4 and
8-3-5 of this chapter shall not apply to those manufactured homes installed in
the city before October 6, 1966.
   B.   Manufactured Home Parks: This chapter shall not apply to those
manufactured homes now or hereafter situated in a licensed manufactured home
park. (1983 Code § 15.14.080; amd. 2009 Code)
TITLE 9
WATER AND SEWER
CHAPTER 1
WATER SERVICE UTILITY REGULATIONS
SECTION:
9-1-1: Purpose
9-1-2: Definitions
9-1-3: General Provisions
9-1-3-1: Information Available To Public; Establishment Of Policies
9-1-3-2: Rates
9-1-3-3: Specifications
9-1-4: Meters
9-1-4-1: Meters Required
9-1-4-2: Notice Of Water Meter Installation
9-1-4-3: Authorized Meters Only
9-1-4-4: Installation Of Meters
9-1-4-5: Meters Property Of City
9-1-4-6: Meter Cutoffs And Bypass
9-1-4-7: Tampering With Meters And Piping
9-1-4-8: Meter Testing And Adjustment Of Bills
9-1-4-9: Prevention Of Freezing
9-1-5: Service Conditions
9-1-5-1: Application For Water Use
9-1-5-2: Situation Of Service Pipe
9-1-5-3: Condition Of New Service
9-1-5-4: Rates
9-1-5-5: Billing
9-1-5-6: Transfer Of Use; Administrative Fee
9-1-5-7: Impact Fee
9-1-5-8: Temporary Connections
9-1-5-9: Private Fire Service Use
9-1-5-10: Discontinuance Of Use
9-1-5-11: Service Charge And Tap Fee
9-1-5-12: Discontinuance Of Improper Use
9-1-5-13: Service Pipes And Costs
9-1-5-14: Department Repairs
9-1-6: Irrigation And Sprinkling
9-1-6-1: Authority To Regulate
9-1-6-2: Flat Rate Irrigation Fees
9-1-7: Violation; Penalty
9-1-7-1: Private Wells Restricted
9-1-7-2: Unlawful Acts
9-1-7-3: Termination Of Water Use Authorized
9-1-7-4: Misdemeanor; Penalty
9-1-7-5: Absolute Liability
9-1-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter, duly enacted by the city council, is intended to be a
comprehensive statement of the rules and regulations under which the city water
department operates, said rules and regulations are intended to be made a part
of the contract with every individual, business entity, firm or corporation, in
making application for water services. (Ord. 90-4, 11-19-1990)
9-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions apply to the terms used in this chapter:
CITY: The city of Belgrade.
COUNCIL: The Belgrade city council.
DEPARTMENT: The city of Belgrade water department or a person acting on behalf
of said water department.
DIRECTOR: The director of public works and the person responsible for the
proper functioning of the city water department.
METER: All installed devices and equipment used to measure the amount of water
supplied to a user.
SERVICE AGREEMENT: An agreement or contract between the city water department
and a water user to whom water is supplied by the city water department.
SYSTEM: The city water system, its physical structure and equipment owned and
operated by the city.
USER: Any individual, partnership, association, firm, public or private
corporation, or governmental entity or any other entity receiving water service
from the city water system.
WATER SERVICE: The supplying of or availability, at the point of delivery, of
water and also the water delivered or used. (Ord. 90-4, 11-19-1990)
9-1-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
9-1-3-1: INFORMATION AVAILABLE TO PUBLIC; ESTABLISHMENT OF POLICIES:
There shall be made available to the public at the principal offices of the
city copies of this chapter, rate schedules, and forms of agreement for water
services. The council may from time to time establish policies regarding
acceptable materials to be used in the system. (Ord. 90-4, 11-19-1990)
9-1-3-2: RATES:
The council may adopt both flat rate and meter rate schedules for the payment
of water services. (Ord. 90-4, 11-19-1990)
9-1-3-3: SPECIFICATIONS:
The currently adopted city specifications include the Montana public works
standard specifications, the Belgrade modifications to the Montana public works
standard specifications, and the uniform plumbing code. (2009 Code)
9-1-4: METERS:
9-1-4-1: METERS REQUIRED:
   A.   Standard Meter: The department shall install five-eighths inch (5/8")
meters on water service pipes of persons and entities using water from the
system.
   B.   Larger Meters: Larger meters shall be paid for by the owner or user
minus the cost of a five-eighth inch (5/8") meter.
   C.   Installation: Meters shall be installed on meter service pipes in such
a manner and place as may be determined by the water department, and, in
addition thereto, the water department shall have the authority to establish
meter service pipes and remote meter readouts.
   D.   Larger Service Lines: The department shall have discretionary authority
to allow property owners to install service lines of a diameter greater than
three- fourths inch (3/4") for connection to five-eighth inch (5/8") water
meters installed by the department. (Ord. 90-4, 11-19-1990)
9-1-4-2: NOTICE OF WATER METER INSTALLATION:
The department shall give the property owner ten (10) days’ notice of meter
installation. It shall be the duty of the owner to see that the department has
access to its property for installation of meters and remote readout apparatus.
The property owner shall also be responsible to provide access to its property
at all reasonable times and hours for the purpose of inspecting the condition
of the pipes and fixtures and the manner in which the water is used. (Ord. 90-
4, 11-19-1990)
9-1-4-3: AUTHORIZED METERS ONLY:
No meters shall be placed in service or recognized as standard meters unless
approved by the department as prescribed by the department. No person shall
place any other meter on any service pipe except the standard meters as herein
prescribed and of a size as prescribed in each case by the department. The
department shall have the right to remove meters not approved by the department
and replace with approved meters with the cost charged to the user. (Ord. 90-4,
11-19-1990)
9-1-4-4: INSTALLATION OF METERS:
No water meter shall be installed except by a plumber, duly licensed under the
laws of the state of Montana, or by an employee of the department, and no
person, other than one acting under the authority and direction of the
department, shall open, repair, or interfere with any water meter in service.
(Ord. 90-4, 11-19-1990)
9-1-4-5: METERS PROPERTY OF CITY:
Meters are owned by the city and are furnished to consumers and set in place
without charge; provided, however, that proper receptacles are provided for
said meters and service pipes are suitably arranged. (Ord. 90-4, 11-19-1990)
9-1-4-6: METER CUTOFFS AND BYPASS:
All meters installed shall be provided with a cutoff or valve on each side of
the meter so that any meter may be removed for the purpose of testing and a
bypass placed in the service pipe for the purpose of supplying the consumer
with water during the testing of said meter. (Ord. 90-4, 11-19-1990)
9-1-4-7: TAMPERING WITH METERS AND PIPING:
All meters shall be sealed by the department. Breaking the seals by
unauthorized persons or tampering with the meter or the meter piping is
prohibited and shall be classified as a misdemeanor under this chapter. (Ord.
90-4, 11-19-1990)
9-1-4-8: METER TESTING AND ADJUSTMENT OF BILLS:
If the meter fails to register correctly, the charges to the consumer shall be
at the rate used for the corresponding period of the month previous, or if for
any reason the rate for the corresponding period of the previous month cannot
be justly applied, the rate shall be equitably adjusted by the department. The
testing of each meter at the request of the user, either property owner or
lessee, shall not be charged to the user if the meter is found to be defective.
However if the meter is found in good order or registering in favor of the
user, a service charge shall be made as is established by the council from time
to time. (Ord. 90-4, 11-19-1990)
9-1-4-9: PREVENTION OF FREEZING:
The meter shall be located at some convenient accessible point inside the
premises and so located that it cannot freeze. Users shall take every
reasonable precaution to protect meters from injury or damage by frost or
otherwise and shall be liable for all damage to meters. If there is a general
danger of freezing of the system mains or service lines, the department may
inform users that water may be run to prevent such freezing at no additional
cost to the user. Metered users who inform the department, in writing, that
they intend to run water to prevent freezing shall be billed only for the
amount based on the user’s average use instead of the actual amount as
determined by the meter reading during the freeze threat period. (Ord. 90-4,
11-19-1990)
9-1-5: SERVICE CONDITIONS:
9-1-5-1: APPLICATION FOR WATER USE:
   A.   Forms: All parties desiring water use must make written application to
the office of the department on printed forms provided.
   B.   Purpose For Use: The application shall indicate all purposes for which
the use will be made upon the user’s premises.
   C.   Owner Responsible For Payment: If the user is not the owner of the
premises, the owner of said premises is responsible for payment of the use.
   D.   Signature Of Owner Required: All applications for installation of use
to any premises must be signed by the property owner.
   E.   Change In Ownership: Any change in the identity of the owner at a
premises will require a new application for use. (Ord. 90-4, 11-19-1990)
9-1-5-2: SITUATION OF SERVICE PIPE:
Service pipe shall be so arranged that the supply of water to each separate
building, house or premises may be controlled by a separate curb valve placed
on or near the property line under rules established by the department. The
curb valve and curb box must be kept easily accessible by the owner of the
premises. (Ord. 90-4, 11-19-1990)
9-1-5-3: CONDITION OF NEW SERVICE:
Application for introduction of use to any premises must be made on the regular
form provided by the department. If such application is granted, the
department, at the expense of the property owner, may tap the water main and
install a corporation valve. Materials used and labor furnished by the
department in connection with the tapping of the main shall be borne by the
applicant. Expenses of laying and maintaining the service pipe from the main to
the user’s premises must be borne by the user. Service pipes must be laid below
street grade and on the user’s premises at a standard depth as designated and
approved by the department to prevent freezing. (Ord. 90-4, 11-19-1990)
9-1-5-4: RATES:
Water use rates will be charged to the property owner from the date on which
the water use is established until the date on which the property owner or
agent thereof orders the water use terminated. In no event shall the charge be
less than the minimum monthly rate prorated on a daily basis. (Ord. 2009-5, 6-
15-2009)
9-1-5-5: BILLING:
   A.   Date Payable: Bills for water use are due and payable at the department
office on the fifteenth day of each month after receipt for use of the
preceding month on a metered account and in advance for flat rate accounts.
   B.   Delinquent; Penalty: Said bills shall become delinquent on the
sixteenth day of the month, and 0.015 percent per month interest rate shall be
charged as a penalty. Final notice shall be sent giving the user five (5) days
to remit full payment.
   C.   Termination Of Service; Reinstatement: After five (5) days, use shall
be terminated and not resumed until all delinquent bills are paid including an
additional charge as may be established from time to time by the council in
order to resume water use.
   D.   Owner Responsibility: Owners of property appropriately noticed will be
held responsible for all water use and service charges. Payments will be
accepted from tenants, but such acceptance will not ultimately relieve the
property owner if the tenant is delinquent in payment of a bill for such use.
(Ord. 90-4, 11-19-1990)
9-1-5-6: TRANSFER OF USE; ADMINISTRATIVE FEE:
An administrative fee, as may be established from time to time by the council,
shall be charged to transfer a use connection from one party to another without
termination of such use and shall result in the new user being charged said
fee. (Ord. 90-4, 11-19-1990)
9-1-5-7: IMPACT FEE:
An impact fee, as may be established from time to time by the council, shall be
charged for the introduction of any new use to be imposed upon the system.
(Ord. 90-4, 11-19-1990)
9-1-5-8: TEMPORARY CONNECTIONS:
For temporary connections for use to accomplish building, construction,
vacation homes, cleaning purposes, filling tanks, or any other temporary use,
an application must be made specifically for such use. Administrative fees,
initiation use fee, and a disconnection fee, all of which may be established
from time to time by the council, may be charged. (Ord. 90-4, 11-19-1990)
9-1-5-9: PRIVATE FIRE SERVICE USE:
If a street connection or a private fire service is requested, the applicant
shall bear the entire cost of labor and material for tapping into the city main
and installation of the meter and its removal, if necessary. (Ord. 90-4, 11-19-
1990)
9-1-5-10: DISCONTINUANCE OF USE:
A user who is intending to vacate the premises supplied with the use or for any
reason wishes to have the use discontinued shall be required to give at least
twenty four (24) hours’ written notice to the department. Notice shall specify
the date on which the user desires discontinuance of use. (Ord. 90-4, 11-19-
1990)
9-1-5-11: SERVICE CHARGE AND TAP FEE:
The council may from time to time establish and the department shall assess a
service charge on all service calls regarding use and a fee to tap into the
water main for new service. Said service charges shall be in addition to the
charges for connection or disconnection from the system. (Ord. 90-4, 11-19-
1990)
9-1-5-12: DISCONTINUANCE OF IMPROPER USE:
If improper waste is permitted by a user, water is bypassed to other users, or
a user deceives, misrepresents, or abuses the privilege of the system use, the
use will be terminated without notice and a penalty, as may be established from
time to time by the council, shall be paid to the department before the use is
resumed. The abusive user may be subject to further sanctions as provided in
this chapter. (Ord. 90-4, 11-19-1990)
9-1-5-13: SERVICE PIPES AND COSTS:
The installation of the line from the system main to and including the curb
cock and box will be the responsibility of the property owner. Upon
establishment of the line to the curb cock and box, the department will assume
responsibility for that portion from the curb cock to the main service line.
The property owner will be responsible for the line from the curb cock to the
point of service. (Ord. 90-4, 11-19-1990)
9-1-5-14: DEPARTMENT REPAIRS:
The department reserves the right, at any time without notice, to shut off its
water mains for the purpose of making repairs, extensions, or for any other
purpose, and no claim may be made against the department by reason of the
breakage of any service pipe or from any other damages that may result from
temporary termination of use at a particular property. (Ord. 90-4, 11-19-1990)
9-1-6: IRRIGATION AND SPRINKLING:
9-1-6-1: AUTHORITY TO REGULATE:
The council, at its discretion, may restrict or wholly prohibit the use of the
department water for use in gardens, lawns, or other outdoor irrigation
purposes. In emergency situations, as determined by the council or the
department, outdoor irrigation use may be wholly prohibited by public notice.
The department shall prominently post, within its local office, a notice
advising the public of the hours and days of restricted use. Users may be
notified by newspaper publication or through receipt of their water bill.
Restricted use shall be in force twenty four (24) hours after public notice has
been made in a local newspaper or has been made by public service radio
announcement within the city. (Ord. 90-4, 11-19-1990)
9-1-6-2: FLAT RATE IRRIGATION FEES:
The criteria for determining the rate of irrigation fees shall be as follows:
   A.   Entire lot, less structures, sidewalks and driveways will be charged.
   B.   A vacant lot, not developed, landscaped, or irrigated will not be
charged.
   C.   Any portion of a vacant lot, not developed or landscaped, that is
irrigated will be charged accordingly. Fees will be assessed according to the
portion of said lot which is irrigated.
   D.   No reduction or adjustment of irrigation fees shall be made for flat
rate customers with private wells. (Ord. 90-4, 11-19-1990)
9-1-7: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
9-1-7-1: PRIVATE WELLS RESTRICTED 1 :
It shall be unlawful to establish, use, or operate a private well within the
corporate limits of the City of Belgrade unless specifically permitted by city
council as provided for herein. The council may permit the establishment and
operation of a private well within the city upon the following conditions:
   A.   The well is established by a public institution or entity;
   B.   For the exclusive purpose of irrigation.
   C.   The city is assured the aquifer supplying city wells will not be
affected; and
   D.   The quality of the city water system is not jeopardized in any manner.
(Ord. 91-3, 5-20-1991; amd. Ord. 2020-9, 12-7-2020)
 
Notes
1 1.   See also chapter 2 of this title.
9-1-7-2: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
It shall be a misdemeanor violation of this chapter for any person to:
   A.   Break or deface the seal of any meter.
   B.   Obstruct, alter, injure, or prevent the action of any meter or other
instrument used to measure or register the quantity of water supplied to a
user.
   C.   Make any connection by means of pipe, or otherwise, with any main or
pipe used for delivery of water to a user thereof, in such manner as to take
water from said main or pipe without its passage through the meter or other
instrument provided for registering the amount of quantity used, or to use any
water so obtained.
   D.   Make any connection or reconnection with a main or pipe of the system,
or turn off or on, or in any manner interfere with any valve, shutoff valve or
other appliance connected therewith.
   E.   Prevent the establishment or construction of any device or by any other
means, free access to any meter or other instrument for registering or
measuring the amount of water used, or to interfere with, obstruct, or prevent,
by any means, the employees of the department from working on the system.
   F.   Irrigation by sprinkling or any other means during time not authorized
as approved sprinkling or irrigation periods. (Ord. 90-4, 11-19-1990)
9-1-7-3: TERMINATION OF WATER USE AUTHORIZED:
The department, at its discretion, is authorized to terminate water use to any
user for violation of this chapter and thereafter only resume use to the user
upon compliance with this chapter and payment of a fee to be established from
time to time by the council. (Ord. 90-4, 11-19-1990)
9-1-7-4: MISDEMEANOR; PENALTY:
Any user, whether individual person or business entity, may be charged with
violation of the provisions of this chapter. Said charge shall be as a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 90-4, 11-19-1990; amd. 2009 Code)
9-1-7-5: ABSOLUTE LIABILITY:
It is the intent of the council that the misdemeanor offenses listed in this
chapter be offenses involving legislative intent. Those offenses shall not
require proof of any one of the mental states described in Montana Code
Annotated subsections 45-2-101(35), (43) and (65). (Ord. 90-4, 11-19-1990; amd.
2009 Code)
CHAPTER 2
INDIVIDUAL WATER SUPPLIES 1
SECTION:
9-2-1: General Regulations
9-2-2: Quantity And Quality Of Water
9-2-3: Location Of Water Supply
9-2-4: Construction
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  9-1-7-1 of this title.
9-2-1: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   Ground Water Supply: A ground water supply shall be properly located,
constructed and operated in order to be safeguarded against contamination.
   B.   Well Location: The well site shall be chosen to permit the well to be
situated an adequate distance from existing and potential sources of
contamination, as specified in table A of section
9-2-3 of this chapter.
   C.   Classification: Wells shall be classified into four (4) groups on the
basis of methods of construction as follows: dug, bored, driven and drilled.
(1983 Code § 4.04.010)
9-2-2: QUANTITY AND QUALITY OF WATER:
   A.   Minimum Quantity: The minimum quantity of water to provide for ordinary
domestic use shall be not less than fifty (50) gallons per person per day. The
well and pumping equipment shall be adequate to provide the required quantity
of water at the rate of five (5) gallons per minute.
   B.   Safe Water: The water shall contain no chemical or mineral substances
capable of causing unfavorable physiological effects on those consuming the
water.
   C.   Chlorination: The water shall be free from pathogenic bacteria and
other disease producing organisms. The well shall be chlorinated after
construction or repair to remove any contamination which may have gained access
to the supply. (1983 Code § 4.04.020)
9-2-3: LOCATION OF WATER SUPPLY:
   A.   Minimum Distance: The minimum distance between any ground water point
of origin and suction lines and any source of contamination shall be not less
than given in table A.
TABLE A
DISTANCES FROM SOURCE OF CONTAMINATION
 
                          Distance
                          (Feet)1
Sewers                    100
Septic tanks              100
Subsurface pits           100
Subsurface disposal field 150
Seepage pits              150
Cesspools                 200
 
Note:
      1.   These distances constitute minimum separation and should be
increased in areas of creviced rock or limestone, or where the direction of
movement of the ground water is from sources of contamination toward the well.
   B.   Elevation: The well site shall have good surface drainage and shall be
at a higher elevation than possible sources of contamination. The top of the
well shall be at least two feet (2') above the highest known watermark and at
least fifty feet (50') measured horizontally from surface bodies of water.
   C.   Compliance To Table A Required: No septic tank, subsurface pit,
subsurface disposal field, seepage pit, cesspool, or other sewage disposal
facility of similar nature shall be constructed closer to an existing
individual water supply than those distances set forth in table A of this
section. (1983 Code § 4.04.030)
9-2-4: CONSTRUCTION:
   A.   Depth: In no case shall an individual water supply be developed from a
water bearing stratum located less than twenty feet (20') below grade.
   B.   Outside Casing: The well should be provided with an outside watertight
casing extending at least ten feet (10') below and six inches (6") above the
ground surface. In the case of drilled or driven wells, the casing should be of
steel or wrought iron. For dug or bored wells, the casing should be of concrete
six inches (6") thick, except that in the case of the buried slab type of dug
or bored well, the upper ten foot (10') section of casing shall be of steel or
wrought iron as provided for drilled wells. The annular space between the
casing and the earth formation shall be grouted to a depth of at least ten feet
(10'). The casing shall be large enough to permit the installation of an
independent drop pipe. The casing should preferably be sealed in an impermeable
stratum or extended several feet into the water bearing stratum.
   C.   Cover: Every well shall be provided with a watertight cover overlapping
the top of the casing or pipe sleeve. The annular opening between the casing or
pipe sleeve and drop pipe shall be sealed either by extending the casing or
pipe sleeve into the base of the pump or by some suitable type of "well seal".
   D.   Drainage: The well platform or pump room floor shall be sloped to drain
away from the well. The platform or floor shall be constructed of concrete at
least four inches (4") thick, or other material approved by the city council or
its designated official.
   E.   Dug Or Bored Well: In the case of a dug or bored well, the cover shall
overlap and extend downward at least two inches (2") outside the well or
curbing of the well. (1983 Code § 4.04.040)
CHAPTER 3
SEWER REGULATIONS
SECTION:
9-3-1: Definitions
9-3-2: Connection Required
9-3-3: Compliance Required
9-3-4: Connections To Public Sewer
9-3-5: Requirements For Service
9-3-6: Charges
9-3-7: Prohibited Substances
9-3-8: Construction
9-3-9: Sewage Quantities
9-3-10: Industrial Wastewater Classification Survey
9-3-11: Industrial Discharge Permit
9-3-12: Monitoring Facilities
9-3-13: Sampling, Analysis And Inspection
9-3-14: Reporting And Compliance Requirements
9-3-15: Affirmative Defenses
9-3-16: Upsets
9-3-17: Bypass
9-3-18: Suspension And Revocation Of Permit
9-3-19: Nuisance, Injunctive Relief Available
9-3-20: Criminal Penalties
9-3-21: Civil Penalties
9-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
AASHO: The American Association Of State Highway Officials.
ASA: American Standards Association.
ASTM: American Society For Testing Materials.
AWWA: American Water Works Association.
BUILDING SEWERS: That part of the horizontal piping of the drainage system
which extends from three feet (3') outside the building and which receives the
discharge from the building sanitary sewer drainage and conveys it to the
public sewer.
PUBLIC SEWERS: The sewers constructed in streets, alleys, roadways and
easements, and are the sewers to which the building sewers connect. All public
sewers are under the control of the city.
SANITARY SEWERS: Pipes which carry sewage from building sewers, but exclude
storm, surface, or ground water runoff. (1983 Code § 4.08.010)
9-3-2: CONNECTION REQUIRED:
Every building having plumbing fixtures installed or intended for human
habitation and occupancy or use on premises abutting streets, alleys, roadways,
or easements in which there are public sewers shall have a connection with the
public sewer. (1983 Code § 4.08.020)
9-3-3: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
Compliance with the currently adopted city specifications including the Montana
public works standard specifications, the Belgrade modifications to the Montana
public works standard specifications, and the uniform plumbing code is required
for all sewer installations. (2009 Code)
9-3-4: CONNECTIONS TO PUBLIC SEWER:
Connections to the public sewer shall be made with a cast iron or PVC wye
branch. The wye branch furnished shall be a make specifically manufactured for
the particular public sewer pipe. In all cases, the installation of the wye
shall be according to the manufacturer's specifications and a watertight joint
must be provided. In all cases, this will require a mastic or bonding material
(usually supplied by the manufacturer) and stainless steel bands to connect the
wye to the system. The wye entry into the city public sewer will be made in a
downstream direction at an angle of about forty five degrees (45°). The
installation of the wye branch will be inspected by the city personnel. In
areas where special improvement districts have been constructed and in- line
wyes are already in place, the city personnel will be contacted as to its
location and the connection for the sewer service will be made into this
particular wye. (1983 Code § 4.08.050)
9-3-5: REQUIREMENTS FOR SERVICE:
The building sewer shall serve no more than the buildings located on one lot,
with the exception where a single building and associated structures contiguous
to the building occupy more than one lot. (1983 Code § 4.08.060)
9-3-6: CHARGES:
The city will make a charge in an amount to be determined from time to time by
resolution of the city council for installation and inspection of each service
connection being made. Special conditions could be established by the city in
the case of multiple hookups. (1983 Code § 4.08.090; amd. 2009 Code)
9-3-7: PROHIBITED SUBSTANCES:
   A.   Unpolluted Drainage: No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface
drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters
into the city sanitary sewer unless specifically authorized to do so under the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2013-7, 8-5-2013)
   B.   Prohibited Discharges: No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewer:
      1.   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid, or gas.
      2.   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids,
or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in
the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.
      3.   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to sewers, structures,
equipment and personnel of the sewage works.
      4.   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works, such as, but not limited to, ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wool, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole
or ground by garbage grinders.
   C.   Interceptors: Grease, oil and sand interceptors and other treatment
devices shall be provided when, in the opinion of the city, they are necessary
for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive
amounts, organic materials in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand,
or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors or treatment
devices shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units.
All interceptors or treatment devices shall be of a type and capacity approved
by the city engineer or sewer superintendent and shall be located as to be
readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
   D.   Pretreatment; Flow Equalizing Facilities: Where preliminary treatment
or flow equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall
be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner
at his expense. (1983 Code § 4.08.100)
9-3-8: CONSTRUCTION:
   A.   Costs And Expenses; Indemnification: All costs and expenses incident to
the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the
owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may
directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
   B.   Trench: When the character of the material will permit, the bottom of
the trench shall be shaped to conform to the bottom of the sewer. Where the
bottom of the trench cannot be shaped or rocks and boulders are present, the
contractor shall provide a minimum of four inches (4") of bedding material
below the service pipe and a minimum of six inches (6") of bedding material on
the sides, and the top of the service pipe and shall consist of sand, sand
gravel, or other suitable granular material having a maximum size of three-
fourths inch (3/4"), having uniform grading, and having a maximum plasticity of
6 as determined by AASHO methods T89-60 and T90-61. The bedding material shall
be compacted to the extent that the bed of the pipe is firm and is exact to
line and grade. (1983 Code § 4.08.110)
9-3-9: SEWAGE QUANTITIES:
Where the expected sewage flow from a facility exceeds one hundred (100)
gallons per minute, or ten thousand (10,000) gallons per day, a special
connection application must be made to the city engineer. Within this
application, information relating to flow equalizing equipment and pretreatment
facilities for heavy loadings of BOD, suspended solids, nutrients and heavy
metals, if any, will be required. (1983 Code § 4.08.120)
9-3-10: INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER CLASSIFICATION SURVEY:
   A.   All industrial users shall complete and file with the city a wastewater
classification survey containing the following information prior to discharging
into the municipal wastewater system: name and facility address; type of
services rendered and products produced; principal raw materials and catalysts
used; plant operational characteristics; water use information; wastewater
discharge information; wastewater quantities and constituents including, but
not limited to, high suspended solids, biochemical oxygen demand (BOD)
nutrient, or heavy metal contents; wastewater pretreatment; a plot plan of
sewers on the user's property showing sewer and pretreatment monitoring
facility locations; details of systems to prevent and control the losses of
materials through spills to the publicly owned treatment works (POTW); and
nondischarge wastes and their disposal.
   B.   All industrial users obtaining a building permit for initial
construction or for building expansion or remodel shall complete and submit the
survey to the city for review prior to approval of said building or remodel
permit.
   C.   All industrial users shall update the wastewater classification survey
on file with the city whenever significant changes are made in the wastewater
discharge. Significant changes include, without limitation, an increase or
decrease in wastewater volume, concentration of materials or substances or
changes in types of wastes that will last for a period exceeding normal
wastewater production variations. The city may request a new submittal of the
wastewater classification survey as deemed necessary. (Ord. 2013-7, 8-5-2013)
9-3-11: INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGE PERMIT:
   A.   A "significant industrial user" means:
      1.   All industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards
under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40 CFR ch. 1, subch. N; and
      2.   Any other industrial user that discharges an average of twenty
thousand (20,000) gallons per day or more of process wastewater to the POTW
(excluding sanitary noncontact cooling and boiler wastewater); contributes a
process waste stream which makes up five percent (5%) or more of the average
dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or is
designated as such by the city on the basis that the industrial user has a
reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for
violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.
   B.   A significant industrial user shall obtain an industrial discharge
permit renewable every two (2) years at the initial cost of one hundred fifty
dollars ($150.00) and a renewal fee of seventy five dollars ($75.00) if the
user:
      1.   Is subject to national categorical pretreatment standards; or
      2.   Is determined by the city to have significant impact, either singly
or in combination with other contributing industrial users, on the quality of
the POTW effluent, sludge, scum or residues, or such that interference with the
treatment process or facilities would result.
   C.   Existing significant industrial users shall apply for a wastewater
discharge permit within sixty (60) days after the effective date hereof and
proposed new significant industrial users shall apply at least sixty (60) days
prior to discharging into the wastewater utility. The application shall include
a statement regarding whether or not applicable pretreatment standards are
being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, what additional operation and
maintenance and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the standards.
   D.   The city manager or his designee may at any time, and in accordance
with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that an industrial user meeting the criteria
of this section is not a significant industrial user if the user has no
reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for
violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.
   E.   Industrial wastewater permits are subject to all provisions of this
chapter and all other applicable reports, regulations, user charges and fees
established by the city. Permits may contain, without limitation, the
following:
      1.   A statement of duration;
      2.   A statement of nontransferability;
      3.   Effluent limits based on applicable general pretreatment standards,
categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and state and local law;
      4.   Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or
requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
      5.   Schedules for installation of pretreatment equipment to bring
discharge into compliance with applicable regulations;
      6.   Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities;
      7.   Specifications for monitoring programs that include sampling
locations; frequency of sampling; number, type and standards for tests; and
reporting schedules;
      8.   Requirements for submission of technical reports, discharge reports
and compliance progress report;
      9.   Requirements for maintaining and retaining records relating to
wastewater discharge as specified by the city and affording city access
thereto;
      10.   Requirements for notification of the city to the new introduction
of wastewater constituents or any change in character of the wastewater
constituents or average volume being introduced into the wastewater utility;
      11.   A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for
violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable
compliance schedule. Such schedules may not extend the compliance date beyond
applicable federal deadlines; and
      12.   Other conditions as deemed necessary by the city in order to
enforce the provisions of this chapter.
   F.   The city manager or his designee shall issue industrial discharge
permits for a specified time period not to exceed two (2) years. The industrial
user shall apply for permit reissuance at least thirty (30) days prior to the
expiration of the user's existing permit. The terms and conditions for the
permit may be subject to modification by the city during the term of the permit
if limitations or requirements are modified, if necessary to meet requirements
of the city's national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) discharge
permit to accommodate new or increased contributions of wastewater or changes
in the nature of the wastewater, or if there is other good cause. Any changes
or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for
compliance.
   G.   An applicant for a permit shall pay the prescribed fees.
   H.   A wastewater discharge permit may not be sold, traded, assigned,
transferred or sublet. Any new significant industrial user must obtain a
wastewater discharge permit regardless of whether a permit previously existed
for the same premises. (Ord. 2013-7, 8-5-2013)
9-3-12: MONITORING FACILITIES:
   A.   All significant industrial users shall provide and operate, at their
expense, monitoring equipment and facilities sufficient to allow inspection,
sampling and flow measurements of the private sewer or internal drainage
system.
   B.   The monitoring facility shall normally be situated outside of the
building on the user's premises. If the industrial user's service line ties
into an existing city manhole and such manhole allows for safe sampling and
isolation of the industrial user's discharge, the city may allow said manhole
to serve as the industrial user's monitoring facility.
   C.   Any significant industrial user or user discharging prohibited
substances or specific pollutants into the POTW shall install a monitoring
facility for each separate discharge. Each separate monitoring facility shall
meet requirements set forth by the city with safe and independent access for
city personnel at all times.
   D.   There shall be ample room in or near such monitoring manhole or
facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis.
The industrial user shall maintain and operate its own monitoring facility and
all sampling and measuring equipment at all times in a safe and proper
operating condition at the industrial user's expense.
   E.   Whether constructed on public or private property, the industrial user
shall construct the sampling and monitoring equipment and facilities in
accordance with monitoring requirements and all applicable local construction
standards and specifications within sixty (60) days following written
notification by the city or before final building inspection approval.
   F.   All industrial users shall provide safe access to sampling and
monitoring sites and pretreatment facilities at all times for authorized city
personnel.
   G.   The city may inspect the facilities of any industrial user to determine
whether the intent of this chapter and all applicable requirements are being
met. Owners, employees or occupants of premises where wastewater is discharged
shall allow city representatives or agents ready access at all reasonable times
to all parts of the premises where wastewater is created or discharged,
including industrial process areas, for the purpose of inspection, sampling,
records examination and copying, or performance evaluation. Where an industrial
user has security measures in force which require proper identification and
clearance before entry into industrial user's premises, the industrial user
shall make necessary arrangements with the security personnel so that upon
presentation of suitable identification, personnel authorized by the city, the
state, or United States environmental protection agency will be permitted to
enter without delay for the purpose of performing their specific
responsibilities under this chapter. (Ord. 2013-7, 8-5-2013)
9-3-13: SAMPLING, ANALYSIS AND INSPECTION:
   A.   All industrial users shall obtain the city's approval for all sampling
and measuring equipment prior to its installation or use. All measuring, tests
and analyses and all sampling that the industrial user is required to make
shall be done at the user's own expense.
   B.   All industrial users shall make all measurements, tests, sampling and
analyses required by this chapter in accordance with the techniques prescribed
in 40 CFR 136 and amendments thereto. The city may direct an industrial user to
deliver a split sample to a designated laboratory for analytical verification.
   C.   The city shall determine the frequency of sampling, measuring and
analyses and include them as conditions of the user's industrial discharge
permit. The city may impose mass limitations on industrial users that use flow
equalization to meet applicable standards or requirements or in other cases
where imposition of mass limitations are appropriate.
   D.   The city may place upon the industrial user's property such devices as
are necessary to conduct sampling inspection, compliance monitoring and/or
metering operations at the user's expense.
   E.   Sampling and analysis may be performed by the city in lieu of the
industrial user at the user's expense. Where the city itself collects all the
information required for the report, the industrial user may be excused from
submitting duplicate test data results.
   F.   The city may randomly sample and analyze the effluent from industrial
users and conduct surveillance activities in order to identify, independent of
information supplied by the industrial users, occasional and continuing
noncompliance with pretreatment standards at the user's expense.
   G.   The city shall inspect and sample the effluent from each significant
industrial user at least once a year at the user's expense.
   H.   The city will bill each industrial user for the cost of inspection,
measuring, testing, sampling, analysis, and monitoring that the city performs,
and the user shall pay such bill within thirty (30) days. (Ord. 2013-7, 8-5-
2013)
9-3-14: REPORTING AND COMPLIANCE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   All significant industrial users required to meet categorical
pretreatment standards must submit the reports required in 40 CFR 403.12. All
reports shall be based on sampling and analysis performed during the period
covered by the report, and performed in accordance with the techniques
described in 40 CFR part 136 and amendments thereto. All reports shall be
signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user and certified by
a qualified professional. All industrial users that have permits or that have
the potential to discharge prohibited substances or specific pollutants that
may cause a significant impact on the POTW shall submit to the city semiannual
compliance reports at the times designated on the permit, and containing
information and data as required by the permit, including, but not limited to,
the following:
      1.   The name and address of the industrial user including the name of
the operator and owners;
      2.   Any environmental control permits held by or for the industrial
user;
      3.   A brief description of the nature and average rate of production by
the industrial user;
      4.   A brief description of the standard industrial classification of the
operation carried out by the industrial user;
      5.   Building plans or details that indicate all points of discharge to
the city sewer system from the regulated process;
      6.   The measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per
day, to the POTW from each of the following:
         a.   Regulated process streams; and
         b.   Other streams as necessary to allow use of the combined waste
stream formula of 40 CFR 403.6(e). All flows shall be measured unless cost or
feasibility justify allowing a verifiable estimate of the flow;
      7.   Nature and concentration of pollutants or materials prohibited in
the discharge;
      8.   A statement indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met
on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and
maintenance and/or additional pretreatment is required for the industrial user
to meet the requirements; and
      9.   If additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance will be
required to meet the requirements, the industrial user shall supply the
shortest schedule by which the industrial user will provide such additional
pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance.
   B.   An industrial user is in significant noncompliance if its violation
meets one or more of the following criteria:
      1.   Chronic violation of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those in which sixty six percent (66%) or more of all the measurements taken
during a six (6) month period exceed (by any magnitude) the daily maximum limit
or the average limit for the same pollutant parameter;
      2.   Technical review criteria (TRC) violation, defined here as those in
which thirty three percent (33%) or more of all the measurements for each
pollutant parameter taken during a six (6) month period equal or exceed the
product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the
applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease, and 1.2 for all
other pollutants except pH);
      3.   Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum
or longer term average) that the city determines has caused, alone or in
combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through (including
endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public);
      4.   Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment
to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the POTW's
exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
      5.   Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days after the schedule date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction or
attaining final compliance;
      6.   Failure to provide, within thirty (30) days after the due date,
required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, ninety (90) day
compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance
with compliance schedules;
      7.   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; and
      8.   Any other violation or group of violations which the city determines
will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment
program.
   C.   The city may publish an annual public notification, in the largest
daily newspaper published in the municipality or county in which the POTW is
located, of industrial users which, at any time during the previous twelve (12)
months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment
requirements.
   D.   All industrial users shall notify the POTW, EPA regional waste
management division director, and state hazardous waste authorities in writing
of any discharge into the POTW of a substance, which, if otherwise disposed of,
would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR part 261. Such notification shall be
conducted in accordance with the provisions of 40 CFR 403.12(p).
   E.   All industrial users shall promptly notify the POTW in advance of any
substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants in their discharge,
including the listed or characteristic hazardous wastes for which the
industrial user has submitted initial notification under 40 CFR 403.12(p).
   F.   Any industrial user submitting information to the city pursuant to this
chapter may claim it to be confidential if it demonstrates to the satisfaction
of the city manager or his designee that release of such information would
divulge information processes, or methods of production entitled to protection
as the user's trade secrets.
      1.   The user must assert such claim at the time of submission by
stamping the words "confidential business information" on each page containing
such information. If no such claim is made at the time of submission, the city
may make information available to the public without further notice.
      2.   Such confidential business information shall not be made available
to the public, but the city may use the information for determining compliance
with this chapter.
      3.   Effluent or discharge data is not confidential.
      4.   The city may provide confidential business information to
governmental agencies upon written request for uses directly related to
enforcement of this chapter, but, the city shall not transmit the confidential
information to any government agency until the city has received written
approval from the user.
   G.   No person shall make any false statement, representation or
certification, knowing it to be false, in any application, record, plan, data
or document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this chapter.
   H.   No person shall falsify, tamper with or knowingly render inaccurate any
monitoring device or method required under this chapter.
      1.   The city manager or his designee shall have access to records and
wastewater testing facilities during normal working hours of the user. (Ord.
2013-7, 8-5-2013)
9-3-15: AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES:
   A.   An industrial user shall have an affirmative defense in any action
brought against it alleging a violation of the general and specific
prohibitions established in section
9-3-7 of this chapter where the user can demonstrate that:
      1.   It did not know or have reason to know that its discharge, alone or
in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, would cause
pass-through or interference; and
      2.   A local limit designed to prevent pass-through and/or interference,
as the case may be, was developed by the city for each pollutant in the
industrial user's discharge that caused pass-through or interference, and the
user was in compliance with each such local limit directly prior to and during
the pass- through or interference; or
      3.   If a local limit designed to prevent pass-through and/or
interference, as the case may be, has not been developed for the pollutant that
caused the pass-through or interference, the industrial user's discharge
directly prior to and during the pass-through or interference did not change
substantially in nature or constituents from the industrial user's prior
discharge activity when the POTW was regularly in compliance with the POTW's
NPDES permit requirements and, in the case of interference, applicable
requirements for sewage sludge use or disposal. (Ord. 2013-7, 8-5-2013)
9-3-16: UPSETS:
   A.   An industrial user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of
upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating
logs, or other relevant evidence that:
      1.   An upset occurred and the industrial user can identify the cause of
the upset;
      2.   The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance
procedures;
      3.   The industrial user has submitted the following information to the
POTW and the city within twenty four (24) hours of becoming aware of the upset
(if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided
within 5 days):
         a.   A description of the indirect discharge and cause of
noncompliance;
         b.   The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or,
if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to
continue;
         c.   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent
recurrence of the noncompliance.
   B.   In any enforcement proceeding, the industrial user seeking to establish
an affirmative defense for the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of
proof. (Ord. 2013-7, 8-5-2013)
9-3-17: BYPASS:
   A.   An industrial user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause
pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is
for essential maintenance to ensure efficient operation. These bypasses are not
subject to the provision of subsections B and C of this section.
   B.   The industrial user shall provide notice of bypass, to the city, as
follows:
      1.   If an industrial user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it
shall submit prior notice to the POTW, if possible at least ten (10) days
before the date of the bypass.
      2.   An industrial user shall submit oral notice of an unanticipated
bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards to the POTW within twenty
four (24) hours from the time the industrial user becomes aware of the bypass.
A written submission shall also be provided within five (5) days of the time
the industrial user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall
contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass,
including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the
anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to
reduce, eliminate and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass.
The city may waive the written report on a case by case basis if the oral
report has been received within twenty four (24) hours.
   C.   Bypass is prohibited, and the city may take enforcement action against
an industrial user for bypass, unless:
      1.   Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury or
severe property damage; and
      2.   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use
of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or
maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not
satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been installed in the
exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred
during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventative maintenance; and
      3.   The industrial user submitted notices as required under subsection B
of this section.
   D.   The city may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its
adverse effects, if the city determines that it will meet the three (3)
conditions listed in subsection C of this section. (Ord. 2013-7, 8-5-2013)
9-3-18: SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
   A.   The city may suspend or revoke any industrial discharge permit and
terminate the wastewater service if the permittee:
      1.   Discharges wastewater which presents imminent or substantial
endangerment to the environment and/or public health, safety and welfare;
      2.   Discharges wastewater which causes interference with the POTW or
causes the city to violate any conditions of its NPDES permit;
      3.   Violates any condition stated in the permit or provisions of this
chapter;
      4.   Fails to report an accidental discharge of a toxic substance;
      5.   Increases the use of process water or attempts to dilute the
discharge for the sole purpose of achieving compliance with any limitations;
      6.   Falsifies any report of the wastewater constituents and
characteristics;
      7.   Tampers with, disrupts or damages monitoring and sampling equipment
or facilities;
      8.   Refuses reasonable access to the industrial user's premises for the
purpose of inspection or monitoring; or
      9.   Fails to pay fees or charges.
   B.   In the event of any violation of this section, the city manager or his
designee shall revoke the industrial discharge permit for the remainder of its
term or suspend it for a shorter period based on the severity of the
disqualification, its effect on public health, safety and welfare, and the time
during which the disqualification can be remedied if at all.
   C.   No user will be permitted to discharge into the POTW any wastewater
which is in violation of this section. Any user may have their wastewater
service suspended or terminated by the city manager or his designee.
   D.   Any person notified of a revocation or suspension of such person's
wastewater treatment service and/or the wastewater contribution permit shall
immediately stop or eliminate the contribution. In the event of failure of the
person to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the city shall sever
the sewer connection or take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or
minimize damage to the POTW system or endangerment to any individuals. The city
shall reinstate the wastewater contribution permit and/or the wastewater
treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge.
A detailed written statement submitted by the user describing the causes of the
harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence
shall be submitted to the city manager or his designee within fifteen (15) days
of the date of occurrence.
   E.   Any user, whose permit is revoked or suspended, may request a hearing
before the city council to show cause why the proposed enforcement action
should not have been taken.
      1.   The city council will cause the user to be notified of the time and
place set for the hearing. Notice will be served personally or by registered or
certified mail at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing.
      2.   The city council's designated representative will conduct the
hearing by accepting testimony and evidence relevant to the matter involved in
the hearing. Testimony shall be taken under oath and transcribed so that it may
be made available to any party at the hearing or the public.
      3.   The city council will, within ten (10) days after the hearing, issue
its final determination to the user.
   F.   The user shall pay all costs and expenses associated with any such
suspension and restoration of service. (Ord. 2013-7, 8-5-2013)
9-3-19: NUISANCE, INJUNCTIVE RELIEF AVAILABLE:
   A.   Any discharge into the POTW in violation of this chapter or any rule,
regulation, limitation, permit condition or order in force pursuant thereto, is
declared to be a nuisance.
   B.   If any person discharges into the POTW in violation of this chapter or
any rule, regulation, limitation, permit condition or order in force pursuant
thereto, the city attorney may, in addition to any other remedies, commence an
action for equitable or legal relief, or both, including a petition in a court
of competent jurisdiction for a temporary restraining order, and preliminary
and permanent injunctions to prohibit the continuation of any violation of this
chapter.
   C.   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or any rule,
regulation, limitation, permit condition or order in force pursuant thereto,
shall be liable for any loss, damage or expense to the city or others arising
out of, resulting from or occurring in connection with said violation,
including, but not limited to, injury to or death of any person, damage to
property, enforcement of this chapter, attorney fees or increased costs for
managing effluent, sludge or operating POTW.
   D.   Any person who discharges into the POTW in violation of any provision
of this chapter or any rule, regulation, limitation, permit condition or order
in force pursuant thereto, shall be liable for any expense arising out of,
resulting from or occurring in connection with said discharge if the city is
found to violate any condition of its NPDES permit, including, but not limited
to, fines assessed against the city, enforcement of this chapter, attorney
fees, sampling or analytical testing. (Ord. 2013-7, 8-5-2013)
9-3-20: CRIMINAL PENALTIES:
Any person who purposely, knowingly or negligently violates any provision of
this chapter, or any rule, regulation, limitation, permit condition or order in
force pursuant thereto, shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor,
punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per
violation per day or imprisonment for not more than six (6) months, or both.
(Ord. 2013-7, 8-5-2013)
9-3-21: CIVIL PENALTIES:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, or any rule, regulation,
limitation, permit condition or order in force pursuant thereto, shall be
subject to a civil penalty in an amount of not less than two hundred dollars
($200.00) or more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation, and a
separate violation shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 2013-7, 8-5-2013)
CHAPTER 4
SEWER AND WATER CONNECTIONS
SECTION:
9-4-1: Sewer Connection Charges
9-4-2: Water Connection Charges
9-4-3: Time Of Payment
9-4-4: Time Limitations For Connection And Inspection
9-4-5: Inspection
9-4-6: Violation; Penalty
9-4-1: SEWER CONNECTION CHARGES:
   A.   Existing Sewer Line; No Special Improvement District: In the event
connection is sought to any existing sewer line within the city limits which
was constructed without creation of a special improvement district for the
purpose of payment for said construction and maintenance of said sewer line,
the connection cost to said sewer line will be in an amount to be determined
from time to time by resolution of the city council.
   B.   Existing Sewer Line; Assessed Within Special Improvement District: If
connection is sought to a sewer line previously in existence, and constructed
and maintained pursuant to the creation of a special improvement district, and
the property to be served by said connection was assessed within the special
improvement district created for the construction and maintenance of said sewer
line, the connection cost in an amount to be determined from time to time by
resolution of the city council.
   C.   Existing Sewer Line; Special Improvement District; Not Assessed: If the
connection sought is with reference to a sewer line constructed and maintained
pursuant to the creation of a special improvement district, and the property to
be served by said connection has not been assessed within said special
improvement district, the connection cost will be in an amount to be determined
from time to time by resolution of the city council, plus a proportionate share
of the cost of installation and maintenance of said sewer line which would have
been assessed if the property had been originally within the assessment area of
said special improvement district. (1983 Code § 4.10.010; amd. 2009 Code)
9-4-2: WATER CONNECTION CHARGES:
   A.   Existing Water Line; No Special Improvement District: In the event
connection is sought to any existing water line, within the city limits, which
was constructed previous to the request for connection and was constructed
without creation of a special improvement district for the purpose of payment
for said construction and maintenance of said water line, the connection cost
to said sewer line will be an amount determined from time to time by resolution
of the city council.
   B.   Existing Water Line; Assessed Within Special Improvement District: If
connection is sought to a water line previously in existence, and constructed
and maintained pursuant to the creation of a special improvement district, and
the property to be served by said connection was assessed within the special
improvement district created for the construction and maintenance of said water
line, the connection cost will be an amount determined from time to time by
resolution of the city council.
   C.   Existing Water Line; Special Improvement District; Not Assessed: If the
connection sought is with reference to a water line constructed and maintained
pursuant to the creation of a special improvement district, and the property to
be served by said connection has not been assessed within said special
improvement district, the connection cost will be an amount determined from
time to time by resolution of the city council, plus a proportionate share of
the cost of installation and maintenance of said water line which would have
been assessed if the property had been originally within the assessment area of
said special improvement district. (1983 Code § 4.10.020; amd. 2009 Code)
9-4-3: TIME OF PAYMENT:
Each of the charges as hereinabove specified shall be required to be paid at
the city offices previous to connection with any sewer lines or water lines
where the charges are required to be paid as provided in this title. (1983 Code
§ 4.10.030)
9-4-4: TIME LIMITATIONS FOR CONNECTION AND INSPECTION:
   A.   During Regular Work Hours: Connection to the city water main and sewer
laterals will be made at no extra cost to the adjacent landowner other than the
required connection fee as hereinabove provided if said connections to said
water main and sewer laterals are done and inspection made by the city
superintendent during the normal eight (8) hour workday, Monday through Friday.
(1983 Code § 4.10.040)
   B.   After Regular Work Hours, Weekends Or Holidays: If connection to the
city water main or sewer laterals is made after regular hours, Saturdays,
Sundays, or holidays, there will be an additional charge in an amount to be
determined from time to time by resolution of the city council assessed in
addition to the sewer connection charge or water connection charge as
hereinabove provided. (1983 Code § 4.10.040; amd. 2009 Code)
9-4-5: INSPECTION:
All connections to water and sanitary sewer service to the city mains shall not
be done without an inspection to be conducted by the city superintendent. Said
inspection shall include an inspection of the service connection after
construction has been completed to include refill, compacting, leveling and
grading of all of the city property which was disturbed during construction of
said water or sewer line connection. (1983 Code § 4.10.050)
9-4-6: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1983 Code § 4.10.060)
CHAPTER 5
WELLHEAD PROTECTION
SECTION:
9-5-1: Short Title
9-5-2: Purpose
9-5-3: Definitions
9-5-4: Regulated Substances
9-5-5: Restrictions Within Primary Protection Zone
9-5-6: Establishment Of Management Zones
9-5-7: Restriction Within Management Zones
9-5-8: Exemptions
9-5-9: Penalty
9-5-10: Maps And Details
9-5-11: Conflict With Other Ordinances
9-5-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and cited as the WELLHEAD PROTECTION ORDINANCE OF
BELGRADE. (Ord. 95-16, 1-22-1996)
9-5-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is the protection of health, life, resources, and
property through the regulation of hazardous substance transport and storage
and related aspects of land use and development in the vicinity of any well
that supplies potable water to the Belgrade water system. (Ord. 95-16, 1-22-
1996)
9-5-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
AQUIFER: A geologic formation, group of formations, or part of a formation that
contains sufficient saturated, permeable material to yield significant
quantities of water to wells and springs.
COMMUNITY WATER SYSTEM 1 : A public water system that serves at least fifteen
(15) service connections used by year round residents or that regularly serves
at least twenty five (25) year round residents.
FACILITY: A building or buildings, appurtenant structures, and surrounding land
used by a single business, private entity, or governmental unit or subunit at a
single location or site.
GROUND WATER: Water in a saturated zone or stratum beneath the surface of land,
whether or not it is flowing through known and definite channels.
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES: Those materials specified in section
9-5-4 of this chapter.
MANAGEMENT ZONES: A zone or zones established to provide protection to the area
surrounding a well or well field from potential contaminant sources. Management
options may include limits on certain activities, more stringent design and
operating standards, strict monitoring of potential pollution sources,
promoting best management practices, and/or implementing education programs.
Multiple protection zones may be established for different management
strategies based on proximity to the well field.
PETROLEUM PRODUCT: Fuels (gasoline, diesel fuel, kerosene and mixtures of these
products), lubricating oils, motor oils, hydraulic fluids, and other similar
products.
POTABLE WATER: Water that is satisfactory for drinking, culinary, and domestic
purposes meeting current state and federal drinking water standards.
PRIMARY CONTAINMENT: The first level of product-tight containment, i.e., the
inside portion of that container which comes into immediate contact on its
inner surface with the hazardous material being contained.
PRIMARY PROTECTION ZONE: An area extending not less than two hundred feet
(200') radially from any well supplying potable water to any community water
system.
PUBLIC UTILITY: Any utility (gas, water, sewer, electrical, telephone, cable
television, etc.) whether publicly owned or privately owned.
SECONDARY CONTAINMENT: The level of product-tight containment external to and
separate from the primary containment. Secondary containment shall consist of
leakproof trays under containers, floor curbing or other containment systems
and shall be of adequate state approved size and design to handle all spills,
leaks, overflows. Specific design and selection of materials shall be
sufficient to preclude any substance loss. Containment systems shall be
sheltered so that the intrusion of precipitation is effectively prevented.
STORAGE SYSTEM: Any one or combination of tanks, sumps, wet floors, waste
treatment facilities, pipes, vaults, or other portable or fixed containers
used, or designed to be used, for the storage of hazardous substances at a
facility.
WELL: Any excavation that is drilled, cored, bored, washed, driven, dug,
jetted, or otherwise constructed when the intended use of such excavation is to
conduct ground water from an aquifer or aquifer system to the surface by
pumping or natural flow, or to monitor the characteristics of ground water
within an aquifer system. (Ord. 95-16, 1-22-1996; amd. 2009 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. MCA § 37-42-102(3).
9-5-4: REGULATED SUBSTANCES:
The materials regulated by this chapter shall consist of the following:
   A.   Petroleum products as defined in section
9-5-3 of this chapter.
   B.   Substances listed in section
9-5-5 of this chapter, and the federal hazardous waste list.
   C.   Substances other than those listed on the federal hazardous waste list
that are determined by state or federal agencies to pose a significant threat
to any community water supply well or well field. (Ord. 95-16, 1-22-1996)
9-5-5: RESTRICTIONS WITHIN PRIMARY PROTECTION ZONE:
   A.   Discharge Of Hazardous Substance: No person shall discharge or cause or
permit the discharge of a hazardous substance (including herbicide and
pesticide) to the soils, ground water, or surface water within the primary
protection zone. Any person knowing or having evidence of a discharge shall
report such information to the appropriate water system personnel.
   B.   Sanitary Landfills: New sanitary landfills are prohibited within the
primary protection zone.
   C.   Use, Handling, Production And Storage Of Hazardous Substances: The use,
handling, production, and storage of hazardous substances is prohibited in the
primary protection zone except as provided under section
9-5-8 of this chapter.
   D.   Feedlots: Feedlots or other concentrated animal facilities are
prohibited within the primary protection zone.
   E.   Wastewater Treatment Plants: Wastewater treatment plants are prohibited
within the primary protection zone.
   F.   Septic Tanks: Septic tanks are prohibited within the primary protection
zone. (Ord. 95-16, 1-22-1996)
9-5-6: ESTABLISHMENT OF MANAGEMENT ZONES:
   A.   First Management Zone: Additional protection beyond the primary
protection zone shall be accomplished by the establishment of management zones.
The first management zone shall begin at a point or points not less than two
hundred feet (200') radially from any community water supply well and extend
outward to a point or points as determined by the wellhead protection area
planning committee.
   B.   Subsequent And Additional Management Zones: Subsequent and additional
management zones may be established whenever it is determined that the wellhead
protection area needs to be expanded to provide adequate protection for the
ground water within and/or adjacent to the wellhead protection area.
   C.   Determination Of Size, Shape And Location: The wellhead protection area
planning committee, using acceptable methods, shall determine the size, shape,
and location of each management zone. The boundaries of each management zone
shall be proposed and submitted for approval to city council members.
   D.   Management Zone 1 Boundaries: The boundaries of management zone 1 shall
begin at a point or points along the outer perimeter of the primary protection
zone and extend outward to all points within and including the city limit
boundaries. Furthermore, as the city limit boundaries are extended or changed,
the management zone 1 boundaries shall be extended or changed in like manner
and simultaneously.
   E.   Management Zone 2:
      1.   Boundaries: The boundaries of management zone 2 shall include all
the area extending between the primary protection zone and/or the management
zone 1 outer perimeter and a minimum of one mile radially from any well
supplying water to the aforementioned community water system.
      2.   Area: The area within management zone 2 shall be managed by
conducting a public education program to inform the property owners of the need
for and methods of wellhead protection. If additional management methods are
necessary, the appropriate governing bodies with jurisdiction over the area
within the management zone 2 shall be notified. (Ord. 95-16, 1-22-1996)
9-5-7: RESTRICTION WITHIN MANAGEMENT ZONES:
   A.   Determined By Wellhead Protection Area Planning Committee: Restriction
within each management zone shall be determined by a wellhead protection area
planning committee.
   B.   Survey To Identify Sources Of Contamination: The planning committee or
their appointee shall conduct a survey of the wellhead area and identify the
potential sources of contamination therein.
   C.   Management Methods Submitted For Approval: After assessing the local
ground water protection needs, the method or combination of management methods
shall be submitted for approval.
   D.   Modification Of Restrictions: The restrictions, if any, within each
management zone may be modified periodically to provide additional protection
or to prevent future contamination. (Ord. 95-16, 1-22-1996)
9-5-8: EXEMPTIONS:
The following activities or uses are exempt from the provisions of this
chapter:
   A.   Hazardous Substance:
      1.   Transportation: The transportation of any hazardous substance
through the well field protection area, provided the transporting vehicle is in
transit.
      2.   Use: The use of any hazardous substance solely as fuel in a vehicle
fuel tank or as a lubricant in a vehicle.
      3.   Retail Sales Establishments: Retail sales establishments that store
and handle hazardous substances for resale in their original unopened
containers.
      4.   Storage And Use As Fuel Or Lubricant To Provide Auxiliary Power: The
storage and use of hazardous substances as fuel or lubricant to provide
auxiliary power for emergency use to the well field, provided an enclosed
secondary containment system is provided for the substance.
   B.   Use Of Herbicides And Pesticides: The use of herbicides and pesticides
is prohibited within the primary protection zone but is allowed within the
management zones, provided best management practices are used or it is
determined that the use of such herbicides and pesticides does not pose a
serious threat to the ground water.
   C.   Emergency Services; Public Utility Facilities: Fire, police, emergency
medical services, emergency management center facilities, or public utility
transmission facilities.
   D.   Consumer Products:
      1.   Janitorial Or Minor Maintenance: Consumer products limited to use at
a facility solely for janitorial or minor maintenance purposes.
      2.   In The Home: Consumer products located in the home which are used
for personal, family, or household purposes.
   E.   Water Treatment Chemicals: The use of water treatment chemicals
connected with the operation of the well. (Ord. 95-16, 1-22-1996)
9-5-9: PENALTY:
Any violation of this chapter occurring within management zone shall constitute
a misdemeanor and be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each separate violation hereof. (Ord. 95-16, 1-22-1996;
amd. 2009 Code)
9-5-10: MAPS AND DETAILS:
Complete details of this chapter as well as maps illustrating the areas
referred to herein may be inspected at the city hall and copies may be obtained
at a reasonable charge for copying. (Ord. 95-16, 1-22-1996)
9-5-11: CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES:
In case of a conflict between this chapter, or any part thereof, and the whole
or part of any existing or future ordinances, the provisions of the most
restrictive shall apply. (Ord. 95-16, 1-22-1996)
TITLE 10
ZONING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION TO AND HOW TO USE THE CODE
SECTION:
10-1-1: Title
10-1-2: Purpose And Intent
10-1-3: Growth Policy
10-1-4: General Provisions
10-1-5: Zoning Map
10-1-6: Interpretation And Measurements
10-1-7: How To Use This Ordinance
10-1-1: TITLE:
   A.   This title and all chapters herein shall be known and cited as the
Zoning Ordinance and be referred to as the Zoning Regulations Title of the
Official Ordinance of the City of Belgrade, Montana. (Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023)
10-1-2: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   A.   The purpose of the Zoning Ordinance is to protect and promote the
health, safety, and general welfare of the residents of the City of Belgrade,
Montana in addition to the following objectives:
      1.   Govern land use decisions in the City of Belgrade in conformance
with MCA § 76-2-304(1);
      2.   Implement the policies and goals contained in the officially adopted
Growth Policy and other adopted plans;
      3.   Establish clear and efficient development review and approval
procedures; and
      4.   Accommodate compatible, healthy, environmentally-sensitive, and
orderly development in accordance with the preceding purposes. (Ord. 2023-7, 7-
17-2023)
10-1-3: GROWTH POLICY:
   Within the State of Montana, governing bodies must substantially comply with
their adopted Growth Policy when adopting and implementing regulations like
zoning and when considering proposed land uses. The state requires that the
Growth Policy address eight (8) subject areas, including Land Use. This Zoning
Ordinance document should be updated at regular intervals and assessed for
consistency with the most recently adopted Growth Policy. (Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-
2023)
10-1-4: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Authority. This zoning ordinance is adopted pursuant to the powers
granted and limitations imposed by Montana law and the City of Belgrade’s home-
rule authority.
   B.   Severability. If any provision of this Zoning Ordinance or its
application to any person, properties, or circumstances is held invalid, the
remainder of the Zoning Ordinance or the application of the provision to other
persons, properties, or circumstances is not affected.
   C.   Effective Date. This Zoning Ordinance shall become effective on INSERT
DATE. The previously adopted Zoning Ordinance is hereby repealed and considered
an archived Zoning Ordinance. A copy of the archived Zoning Ordinance shall
remain on file at the City of Belgrade Planning Department.
   D.   Applicability. The regulations of this zoning ordinance apply to all
development, public or private, within the corporate limits of the City of
Belgrade. In addition to the requirements of the zoning ordinance, all uses and
development must comply with all other applicable city, state and federal
regulations.
   E.   Conflicting Provisions. This Zoning Ordinance is not intended to
interfere with, abrogate or annul any easement, covenant, deed restriction or
other agreement between private parties. If the provisions of this Zoning
Ordinance impose a greater restriction than imposed by a private agreement or
covenant, the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance shall control. Where this
Zoning Ordinance conflicts with other city, state, or federal regulations, the
more restrictive provision will control, to the extent permitted by law. The
more restrictive provision is the one that imposes more stringent controls.
   F.   Ordinance Figures, Images, or Tables. If a conflict occurs between text
in this Ordinance and a figure, image, graphic, or photo in this Ordinance, the
text shall control. If a conflict occurs between text in this Ordinance and a
table in this Ordinance, the table shall control. (Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023)
10-1-5: ZONING MAP:
   A.   Zones And Districts: The City and its extraterritorial limits
surrounding the city is hereby divided into zones or districts, as shown on the
Official Zoning Maps, which together with all explanatory matter thereon, is
hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter.
      1.   The City is hereby divided and classified into the following zones
and districts:
 
CATEGORY          ZONES AND DISTRICTS
                  Rural Zone (R)       Neighborhood (N)     Community Living
Residential                                                 (CL)
                  Residential Suburban Mixed Residential     
                  (RS)                 (MR)
Mixed Use &       Commercial Corridor  Mixed Use (MU)       Downtown District
Commercial        (CC)                                      (DD)
Industrial and    Flex Employment (FE) Innovation District  Industrial (I)
Business Park                          (ID)
Special Districts Educations &         Open Space & Parks   Airport District
                  Institutional (EI)   (OSP)                (AD)
 
   B.   Official Zoning Map: The Community Development Department shall be
responsible for all changes to the Official Zoning Map. The Official Zoning
Maps shall be available in the City Office and shall bear a certificate with
the signature of the Mayor, attested by the City Clerk, and the date of
adoption of this map.
      1.   No unauthorized person may alter or modify the Official Zoning Map.
      2.   The certificate should read as follows: “This is to certify that
this is an Official Zoning Map referred to in Section 10.01.05 of the Official
Zoning Ordinance of the City of Belgrade, Montana.”
      3.   If any changes to the map are made by amendment of this chapter in
accordance with Section 10.06.11 hereof, such changes shall be made to the
Official Zoning Map and signed, dated, and certified upon the map or upon the
material attached thereto.
      4.   Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the Official
Zoning Maps which may from time to time be made or published, the Official
Zoning Maps kept in the City Office shall be the final authority as to the
current zoning status of land and water area, buildings, and other structures
in the City.
      5.   In the event that the Official Zoning Maps become damaged,
destroyed, or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes
and additions thereto, the City Council may adopt and certify new Official
Zoning Maps. The new Official Zoning Maps may correct drafting or other errors
or omissions in the prior map, but no such corrections shall have the effect of
amending the original Official Zoning Maps or any subsequent amendment thereof.
      6.   Interpretation of Boundaries shall be interpreted as follows where
uncertainty exists:
         a.   When the zoning map shows a zoning district boundary as following
a particular feature, or reflects a clear intent that the boundary follows the
feature, the boundary will be construed as following that feature as it
actually exists.
         b.   Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at
variance with those shown on the Official Zoning Map or where other
circumstances or controversy arises over district boundaries, the City Council
shall interpret the district boundary.
         c.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerline of
streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerline.
         d.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines
shall be construed as following such lot lines;
         e.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits shall
be construed as following such city limits.
         f.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following railroad lines
shall be construed as following such railroad lines;
         g.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following centerline of
streams, rivers, canals, or ditches shall be construed as following such
centerline.
         h.   Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features
indicated on the Official Zoning Map shall be determined by the scale on the
map. (Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023)
10-1-6: INTERPRETATION AND MEASUREMENTS:
   A.   Language: When used in this Ordinance, the following rules for words
must apply:
      1.   The words “shall”, “must”, “will”, “is to”, and “are to” are always
mandatory.
      2.   “Should” is not mandatory but is strongly recommended; and “may” is
permissive.
      3.   The present tense includes the past and future tenses; and the
future tense includes the present.
      4.   The singular number includes the plural number, and the plural the
singular, unless the natural construction of the word indicates otherwise.
      5.   The words “includes” and “including” must mean “including but not
limited to...”.
      6.   When used to describe the applicability of two or more requirements
of this Zoning Ordinance, the word “or” shall mean that compliance with any of
the series is sufficient, and the words “and” and “and/or” must mean that
compliance with all of the series is required.
      7.   The words “occupied” or “used” must be considered as though followed
by the words “or intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied”.
      8.   In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text
of this Zoning Ordinance and any caption or illustration, the text shall
control.
      9.   In case of any difference of meaning or implication between a
specific definition found elsewhere in this Ordinance and the definition found
in this chapter, the specific definition shall control.
      10.   Time Limits. Whenever a number of days is specified in the
Ordinance, or in any permit, condition of approval, or notice provided in
compliance with the Ordinance, the number of days must be constructed as
consecutive calendar days. A time limit shall extend to 5 p.m. on the following
working day where the last of the specified number of days falls on a weekend
or holiday.
      11.   Allowable Uses of Land. The Director has the authority to determine
similar uses beyond what is identified in Section 10-3.4. The Director may also
refer any issue of similar use to the City Council for their determination.
   B.   Front Street, Side Street, And Property Line Determinations: Front
streets, side streets, and property lines shall be interpreted as follows:
      1.   Where only one street abuts a lot, that street is considered a front
street.
      2.   For purpose of this provision, the front property line is the
property line that “faces” and is adjacent to the front street.
      3.   A lot with more than one street front must designate at least one
front street. A lot may have more than one front street. The Director will
determine which streets are front streets based on:
         a.   The street or streets with the highest classification;
         b.   The established orientation of the block;
         c.   The street or streets abutting the longest face of the block;
         d.   The street or streets parallel to an alley within the block;
         e.   The street that the lot takes its address from; and
         f.   The pedestrian orientation of adjacent or abutting development,
existing or proposed.
   C.   Measurement.
      1.   Measurement of Setbacks. The method of measuring setbacks is as
follows:
         a.   Unless otherwise described in this Ordinance, required setbacks
must be measured horizontally from the nearest point of the front, side, or
rear lot line to the nearest line of the structure, see
Figure 1  below.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b04b0e5ccf6b07bdb8fe5d5bf5701ac5bc51801a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2164.jpg]
Figure 1: Setback Measurement
   For an irregular shaped lot, required setbacks (e.g., front, side, rear
setbacks) shall be determined by the Review Authority. Examples of setbacks on
irregular shaped lots are illustrated in Figure 3 above.
         b.    In measuring a front or secondary front setback, the setback
must be measured as the perpendicular distance between the closest edge of
right-of way and the corner or face of structure closest to the street.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b04b0e5ccf6b07bdb8fe5d5bf5701ac5bc51801a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2168.jpg]
   Figure 2: Sample Setback Measurement Graphic
         c.   For lots fronting on a substandard street, the front and
secondary front setbacks must be measured from the edge of right-of-way, based
upon the City’s adopted street standards.
         d.    Through parcels must have a front setback on both opposing sides
of the parcel.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b04b0e5ccf6b07bdb8fe5d5bf5701ac5bc51801a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2170.jpg]
   Figure 3: Structure Height on Steep Grade
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b04b0e5ccf6b07bdb8fe5d5bf5701ac5bc51801a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2172.jpg]
   Figure 4: Structure Height
   D.    Height Measurements.
      1.     Unless otherwise described in this Ordinance, the maximum
allowable height must be measured as the vertical distance from the average
elevation of the finished grade along the front of the building to the highest
point of the building structure (see
Figure 4 above).
         a.   Average elevation of the finished grade is determined by
calculating the average of the highest and lowest elevation along natural or
improved grade (whichever is more restrictive) along the front of the building
parallel to the front street setback line (see
Figure 3 above).
      2.   Flagpoles must be consistent with the height limit in the respective
zoning district.
      3.   Agricultural structures and steeples attached to a place of worship
are exempt from height maximum standards. (Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023; amd. Ord.
2023-9, 12-18-2023)
10-1-7: HOW TO USE THIS ORDINANCE:
   A.   The following steps describe how to navigate this Zoning Ordinance:
      1.   Locate your property on the zoning map and identify which zoning
district it falls within;
      2.   Within Chapter 2, Zones and Districts, find your zoning district and
the corresponding section where the regulations applicable to that zoning
district are displayed. The regulations therein apply to permitted property
uses, and physical standards for buildings and sites;
      3.   Permitted uses can be found in
Chapter 3, along with regulations for specific uses.
      4.   Additional regulations applicable to your zoning district can be
found in
Chapter 4, Generally Applicable Regulations (ie. Parking, Signage, Buffering/
Landscaping, as well as other generally applicable regulations).
      5.   If your property existed prior to the adoption of this Zoning
Ordinance, and aspects of your property are not in conformance with this
document, see
Chapter 7, Nonconformities to understand how nonconformities are handled in the
Zoning Ordinance;
      6.   If you require a permit or an additional planning approval, see
Chapter 6, Administration and Procedures to read about the corresponding
application process; and
      7.   If the specific use of a term within this document is unclear, refer
to the glossary for a definition of the term.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b04b0e5ccf6b07bdb8fe5d5bf5701ac5bc51801a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2188.jpg]
(Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023)
CHAPTER 2
ZONES AND DISTRICTS
SECTION:
10-2-1: Intent
10-2-2: Compliance With Zoning District Regulations
10-2-3: Use Permissions And Interpretation
10-2-1: INTENT:
   A.   The following districts and zones are hereby established for the
regulation of land in the City of Belgrade, Montana. The districts and zones
have been formulated to realize the general purpose as set forth in the City of
Belgrade Growth Policy, as may be amended from time to time. The specific
purpose of each district and zone shall serve the regulatory basis for existing
and future development within each district and zone, in addition to the
following:
      1.   A variety of districts is established to provide locations for the
many uses needed within a healthy, equitable, sustainable, and dynamic
community.
      2.   Each district, in conjunction with other standards incorporated in
this chapter, establishes allowable uses of property, separates incompatible
uses, and sets certain standards for use of land.
      3.   This provides predictability and reasonable expectation in use of
land within particular zoning designations and sites.
      4.   The zoning provisions implement the community goals and objectives
that are contained in the city’s adopted Growth Policy.
      5.   Zoning districts and the zoning map communicate the City’s
expectation for land use in each particular district. (Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023)
10-2-2: COMPLIANCE WITH ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS:
   A.   The regulations for each district and zone in this Code shall be
minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of
structure or land, except as hereinafter provided or as otherwise granted by
the Board of Adjustments.
   B.   Setbacks are measured from the property line or Public Access Easement,
whichever is more restrictive.
   C.   No building, structure or land shall be used or occupied and no
building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, constructed,
reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in conformity with all of
the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located.
   D.   No building or other structure shall be erected or altered:
      1.   To provide for greater height or bulk;
      2.   To occupy a greater percentage of lot area; or
      3.   To have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards or
other open spaces than herein required, or in any other manner be contrary to
the provisions of this Code.
      4.   No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this Code shall be
reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein.
Yards or lots created after the effective date of this Code shall meet at least
the minimum requirements set forth herein.
      5.   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, any
single lot of record existing on the effective date of this ordinance shall
comply with the yard dimension requirements in effect at the time such lot was
platted and/or created. (Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023; amd. Ord. 2023-9, 12-18-2023)
10-2-3: USE PERMISSIONS AND INTERPRETATION:
   A.   Development and use regulations and standards are included in each
district and zone below.
   B.   Permitted Uses and Conditional Uses for each district and zone are set
forth within each section. Permitted Uses shall include all Accessory Uses, as
such term is defined within this Code, except as expressly set forth herein.
Conditional Uses require the grant of a Conditional Use permit.
   C.   It is recognized that this Code may require interpretation to assign
all possible uses to individual zones or districts. Therefore, any use which is
not specifically set forth in this Code shall be reviewed by the Community
Development Director or a designee for consistency with the intent set forth in
each district and for compatibility with use characteristics typical of uses
permitted within those zones or districts. Based upon this review, the
Community Development Director shall determine the appropriate district or zone
for any use which is not specifically set forth herein. In case of disagreement
with the determination of the Director of Development in assigning a use to an
appropriate district or zone, any aggrieved party may file an appeal with the
Board of Adjustments.
Table 10-2: Districts and District Abbreviations
DISTRICT ABBREVIATION DISTRICT
DISTRICT ABBREVIATION DISTRICT
R                     Rural District
N                     Neighborhood Residential District
RS                    Residential Suburban District
MR                    Mixed Residential District
CL                    Community Living District
CC                    Commercial Corridor District
MU                    Mixed Use District
DD                    Downtown District
FE                    Flex Employment District
ID                    Innovation District
I                     Industrial District
EI                    Educational and Institutional District
OSP                   Open Space & Parks District
AD-A                  Airport District A
AD-B                  Airport District B
Rural District (R)
Intent: Preserve agricult ural uses and open space and discoura ge small lot
development.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b04b0e5ccf6b07bdb8fe5d5bf5701ac5bc51801a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2206.jpg]
Lot Dimensions
Lot Dimensions
Minimum Lot Size (square feet)               40,000
Minimum Frontage (lineal feet)               100
Min. Front Setback (lineal feet)             35
Max. Front Setback (lineal feet)             -
Side Setback (lineal feet)                   10
Secondary Street Front Setback (lineal feet) 25
Rear Setback (lineal feet)                   25
 
 
Building and Site Standards
Height Maximum (feet) to peak      40
First Floor Height Min. (feet)     -
Maximum Projection from Primary    8
Structure (feet)
Floor Area Ratio                   -
Location of Parking                Within or below building, or in rear yard
                                   or side yard
Pervious Surface Minimum (grass or 40%
landscaped) (%)
 
Neighborhood Residential District (N)
Intent: Provide flexibility for lower density residential development utilizing
either traditional building practices or manufactured homes with lot sizes
between 4,000 and 10,000 sf
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b04b0e5ccf6b07bdb8fe5d5bf5701ac5bc51801a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2208.jpg]
Lot Dimensions
Lot Dimensions
Minimum Lot Size (square feet)               4,000
Minimum Frontage (lineal feet)               25
Min. Front Setback (lineal feet)             20 with 25' from the garage
Max. Front Setback (lineal feet)             -
Side Setback (lineal feet)                   5
Secondary Street Front Setback (lineal feet) 10 with 15' from the garage
Rear Setback (lineal feet)                   10
 
 
Building and Site Standards
Height Maximum (feet)              35
First Floor Height Min. (feet)     -
Maximum Projection from Primary    8
Structure (feet)
Floor Area Ratio                   -
                                   Within or below building, or in any yard
Location of Parking                on driveway (paved surface proceeding
                                   from curb cut to garage, which does not
                                   exceed width of garage at any point)
Pervious Surface Minimum (grass or 20%
landscaped) (%)
 
Residential Suburban District (RS)
Intent: Flexibility for existing residences and flexibility for new
subdivisions.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b04b0e5ccf6b07bdb8fe5d5bf5701ac5bc51801a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2210.jpg]
Lot Dimensions
Lot Dimensions
Minimum Lot Size                             12,000 sf.
Minimum Frontage (lineal feet)               80
Min. Front Setback (lineal feet)             25
Max. Front Setback (lineal feet)             -
Side Setback (lineal feet)                   8
Secondary Street Front Setback (lineal feet) 25
Rear Setback (lineal feet)                   20
 
 
Building and Site Standards
Height Maximum (feet)              35
First Floor Height Min. (feet)     -
Maximum Projection from Primary    8
Structure (feet)
Floor Area Ratio                   -
                                   In any yard on driveway (paved surface
Location of Parking                proceeding from curb cut to garage, which
                                   does not exceed width of garage at any
                                   point)
Pervious Surface Minimum (grass or 20%
landscaped) (%)
 
Mixed Residential District (MR)
Intent: Permit multi-unit residential uses in a diversity of housing types with
a mix of neighborhood amenities.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b04b0e5ccf6b07bdb8fe5d5bf5701ac5bc51801a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2212.jpg]
Lot Dimensions
Lot Dimensions
Minimum Lot Size (square feet)         2,500
Minimum Frontage (lineal feet)         25
Min. Front Setback (lineal feet)       10 with 25' from the garage
Max. Front Setback (lineal feet)       -
Side Setback (lineal feet)             5 / 0 for horizontally attached
                                       Structures
Secondary Street Front Setback (lineal 10 with 25' from the garage
feet)
Rear Setback (lineal feet)             10
 
 
Building and Site Standards
Height Maximum (feet)              50
First Floor Height Min. (feet)     -
Maximum Projection from Primary    8
Structure (feet)
Floor Area Ratio                   -
Location of Parking                Within or below building, or in rear yard
                                   or side yard and driveway
Pervious Surface Minimum (grass or 20%
landscaped) (%)
 
Community Living District (CL)
Intent: Accommodate Belgrade’s densest housing types and a mix of neighborhood
amenities.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b04b0e5ccf6b07bdb8fe5d5bf5701ac5bc51801a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2214.jpg]
Lot Dimensions
Lot Dimensions
Minimum Lot Size (square feet)         5,000
Minimum Frontage (lineal feet)         25
Min. Front Setback (lineal feet)       25
Max. Front Setback (lineal feet)       -
Side Setback (lineal feet)             5 / 0 for horizontally attached
                                       Structures
Secondary Street Front Setback (lineal 10
feet)
Rear Setback (lineal feet)             10
 
 
Building and Site Standards
Height Maximum (feet)              50
First Floor Height Min. (feet)     -
Maximum Projection from Primary    8
Structure (feet)
Floor Area Ratio                   -
Location of Parking                Within or below building, or in rear yard
                                   or side yard
Pervious Surface Minimum (grass or 30% (no less than 20% of the site where
landscaped) (%)                    multiunit residential uses are found
                                   should be shared greenspace)
 
Commercial Corridor District (CC)
Intent: Foster flexibility to promote infill and adaptive reuse while
maintaining ease of access for cars.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b04b0e5ccf6b07bdb8fe5d5bf5701ac5bc51801a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2216.jpg]
Lot Dimensions
Lot Dimensions
Minimum Lot Size (square feet)         4,000
Minimum Frontage (lineal feet)         25
Min. Front Setback (lineal feet)       20
Max. Front Setback (lineal feet)       -
Side Setback (lineal feet)             5 / 0 for horizontally attached
                                       Structures
Secondary Street Front Setback (lineal 20
feet)
Rear Setback (lineal feet)             10
 
Building and Site Standards
Building and Site Standards
Height Maximum (feet) to peak                      60
First Floor Height Min. (feet)                     -
Maximum Projection from Primary Structure (feet)   8
Floor Area Ratio                                   -
Location of Parking                                -
Pervious Surface Minimum (grass or landscaped) (%) 30%1
1. A reduction of 10% of the required pervious surface is permitted if 50% of
the required landscaping is xeriscape with water efficient irrigation. The
xeriscape landscaping shall be designed by a landscape architect and a
maintenance document shall be provided with the landscaping plan.
 
Mixed-Use District (MU)
Intent: Foster a variety of amenities such as retail, dining, and office to
serve nearby residential areas, with option for apartments above commercial
uses.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b04b0e5ccf6b07bdb8fe5d5bf5701ac5bc51801a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2218.jpg]
Lot Dimensions
Lot Dimensions
Minimum Lot Size (square feet)         2,500
Minimum Frontage (lineal feet)         25
Min. Front Setback (lineal feet)       0
Max. Front Setback (lineal feet)       30
Side Setback (lineal feet)             5 / 0 for horizontally attached
                                       Structures
Secondary Street Front Setback (lineal 10
feet)
Rear Setback (lineal feet)             20
 
 
Building and Site Standards
Height Maximum (feet) to peak      50
First Floor Height Min. (feet)     12
Maximum Projection from Primary    8
Structure (feet)
Floor Area Ratio                   -
Location of Parking                Within or below building, or in rear yard
                                   or side yard
Pervious Surface Minimum (grass or -
landscaped) (%)
Downtown District (DD) - Main Street
Intent: Preserve the architectural character of the downtown area (possibly
with historic regulations) while allowing variety of use.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b04b0e5ccf6b07bdb8fe5d5bf5701ac5bc51801a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2220.jpg]
Lot Dimensions
Lot Dimensions
Minimum Lot Size (square feet)         2,500
Minimum Frontage (lineal feet)         25
Min. Front Setback (lineal feet)       -
Max. Front Setback (lineal feet)       15 (not to exceed 25% of street
                                       frontage)
Side Setback (lineal feet)             -
Secondary Street Front Setback (lineal -
feet)
Rear Setback (lineal feet)             -
 
 
Building and Site Standards
Height Maximum (feet) to peak      60
First Floor Height Min. (feet)     12
Maximum Projection from Primary    8
Structure (feet)
Floor Area Ratio                   -
Location of Parking                Within or below building, or in rear yard
                                   or side yard
Pervious Surface Minimum (grass or -
landscaped) (%)
 
 
Design Standards (Commercial & Mixed Use)
Front Transparency (Commercial 65% of front elevation between two (2)
Buildings, New Build)          and ten (10) vertical feet shall be
                               glazed openings (windows/doors)
Design Standards (Commercial)  See
                               Note 1
Front Facade Materials         See
                               Note 3
                               Located in front yard, corner yard, or
                               tree lawn; one shade tree per 30 full
Street Trees                   feet of street frontage. Buildings that
                               have less than a five foot (5') setback
                               are exempt from this street tree
                               requirement.
                               25' max uninterrupted facade facing a
                               street or public space.
                               **No building constructed prior to 1950
                               shall be demolished in the Downtown
Non-Monotony**                 District unless granted approval from the
                               Planning Board, and the building is
                               deemed to: 1. Be structurally
                               compromised, 2. Have no economically
                               viable use.
 
 
Note 1: Building and Site Design Standards
At least three (3) of the following different building or design features shall
be provided:
Pedestrian Projection      Green Infrastructure to
(Awning or Canopy)         Replace Greywater Runoff
Articulated Corner Facade  Structures (bioswales,    Front Courtyard (must be
(on corner lot only)       rain garden, or retention grass- or garden- covered,
Raised belt Courses at Top pond with adjacent        pathways may be
and Mid-Point of Building  decorative plantings that hardscaped)
Decorative Brickwork on    take the place of         Triple-Paned Glass Windows
Front Facade               greywater runoff          Rotary Doors
Green Roof or Solar Panel  solutions)                Bicycle Parking
Installation               Permeable Pavers for All  Electrical Vehicle
Enhanced Tree Canopy by    Paved Surfaces (emergency Charging Stations
Minimum 20% (beyond        vehicle lane may be paved
minimum tree plantings and with an impermeable
landscaping required)      material)
 
Note 2: Reserved
 
Note 3: Downtown District Building Materials
APPROVED                           ADMINISTRATIVE       PROHIBITED
                                   APPROVAL
Brick          Stucco/plaster      High Quality         Exterior Insulation
                                   Synthetic Materials  Finish System (EIFS)
Stone          Concrete Cladding   Metal Fiber Cement   Vinyl Siding
Glass          Weather-proof Wood  Concrete Block        
Architectur al Any Durable Natural *Need definition for  
Metal          Material            structurally
Terra Cotta                       compromised           
 
Downtown District (DD) - Central Avenue, South Broadway, And Madison Avenue
Intent: Preserve the architectural character of the downtown area (possibly
with historic regulations) while allowing variety of use.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b04b0e5ccf6b07bdb8fe5d5bf5701ac5bc51801a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2226.jpg]
Lot Dimensions
Lot Dimensions
Minimum Lot Size (square feet)         2,500
Minimum Frontage (lineal feet)         25
Min. Front Setback (lineal feet)       -
Max. Front Setback (lineal feet)       15 (not to exceed 25% of street
                                       frontage)
Side Setback (lineal feet)             -
Secondary Street Front Setback (lineal -
feet)
Rear Setback (lineal feet)             -
 
 
Building and Site Standards
Height Maximum (feet) to peak      60
First Floor Height Min. (feet)     12
Maximum Projection from Primary    8
Structure (feet)
Floor Area Ratio                   -
Location of Parking                Within or below building, or in rear yard
                                   or side yard
Pervious Surface Minimum (grass or -
landscaped) (%)
 
 
Design Standards (Commercial & Mixed Use)
Front Transparency (Commercial 50% of linear frontage at ground floor
Buildings, New Build)          should be glazed openings (windows/doors)
Design Standards (Commercial)  See
                                Note 1
Front Facade Materials         See
                               Note 3
                               Located in front yard, corner yard, or
Street Trees                   tree lawn; one shade tree per 30 full
                               feet of street frontage
                               25' max uninterrupted face
                               **No building constructed prior to 1950
                               shall be demolished in the Downtown
Non-Monotony**                 District unless granted approval from the
                               Planning Board, and the building is
                               deemed to: 1. Be structurally
                               compromised, 2. Have no economically
                               viable use.
 
 
Note 1: Building and Site Design Standards
At least three (3) of the following different building or design features shall
be provided:
                           Green Infrastructure to
Pedestrian Projection      Replace Greywater Runoff  Front Courtyard (must be
(Awning or Canopy)         Structures (bioswales,    grass- or garden- covered,
Articulated Corner Facade  rain garden, or retention pathways may be
(on corner lot only)       pond with adjacent        hardscaped)
Raised belt Courses at Top decorative plantings that Triple-Paned Glass Windows
and Mid-Point of Building  take the place of         Rotary Doors
                           greywater runoff
                           solutions)
 
Decorative Brickwork on
Front Facade               Permeable Pavers for All
Green Roof or Solar Panel  Paved Surfaces (emergency Bicycle Parking
Installation               vehicle lane may be paved Electrical Vehicle
Enhanced Tree Canopy by    with an impermeable       Charging Stations
Minimum 20% (beyond        material)
minimum tree plantings and
landscaping required)
 
Note 2: Reserved
 
Note 3: Downtown District Building Materials
APPROVED                           ADMINISTRATIVE       PROHIBITED
                                   APPROVAL
Brick          Stucco/plaster      High Quality         Exterior Insulation
                                   Synthetic Materials  Finish System (EIFS)
Stone          Concrete Cladding   Metal Fiber Cement   Vinyl Siding
Glass          Weather-proof Wood  Concrete Block        
Architectur al Any Durable Natural *Need definition for  
Metal          Material            structurally
Terra Cotta                       compromised           
 
Downtown District (DD) - All Other Areas
Intent: Preserve the architectural character of the downtown area (possibly
with historic regulations) while allowing variety of use.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b04b0e5ccf6b07bdb8fe5d5bf5701ac5bc51801a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2232.jpg]
Lot Dimensions
Lot Dimensions
Minimum Lot Size (square feet)               2,500
Minimum Frontage (lineal feet)               25
Min. Front Setback (lineal feet)             -
Max. Front Setback (lineal feet)             30
Side Setback (lineal feet)                   -
Secondary Street Front Setback (lineal feet) -
Rear Setback (lineal feet)                   -
 
 
Building and Site Standards
Height Maximum (feet) to peak      60
First Floor Height Min. (feet)     12
Maximum Projection from Primary    8
Structure (feet)
Floor Area Ratio                   -
Location of Parking                Within or below building, or in rear yard
                                   or side yard
Pervious Surface Minimum (grass or -
landscaped) (%)
 
 
Design Standards (Commercial & Mixed Use)
                               On facades that front a street, windows
                               shall comprise the following percentages
                               of the facade area between two (2) and
                               ten (10) feet above grade: 1. Office
Front Transparency (Commercial distribution and light industrial
Buildings, New Build)          buildings - twenty-five (25%) percent. 2.
                               All other buildings - forty (40%)
                               percent. 3. Residential buildings -
                               twenty-five (25%) percent. 4.
                               Agricultural buildings - exempt.
Design Standards (Commercial)  See
                               Note 1
Front Facade Materials         See
                               Note 3
                               Located in front yard, corner yard, or
Street Trees                   tree lawn; one shade tree per 30 full
                               feet of street frontage
                               25' max uninterrupted face
                               **No building constructed prior to 1950
                               shall be demolished in the Downtown
Non-Monotony**                 District unless granted approval from the
                               Planning Board, and the building is
                               deemed to: 1. Be structurally
                               compromised, 2. Have no economically
                               viable use.
 
 
Note 1: Building and Site Design Standards
At least three (3) of the following different building or design features shall
be provided:
                           Green Infrastructure to
Pedestrian Projection      Replace Greywater Runoff  Front Courtyard (must be
(Awning or Canopy)         Structures (bioswales,    grass- or garden- covered,
Articulated Corner Facade  rain garden, or retention pathways may be
(on corner lot only)       pond with adjacent        hardscaped)
Raised belt Courses at Top decorative plantings that Triple-Paned Glass Windows
and Mid-Point of Building  take the place of         Rotary Doors
                           greywater runoff
                           solutions)
 
Decorative Brickwork on
Front Facade               Permeable Pavers for All
Green Roof or Solar Panel  Paved Surfaces (emergency Bicycle Parking
Installation               vehicle lane may be paved Electrical Vehicle
Enhanced Tree Canopy by    with an impermeable       Charging Stations
Minimum 20% (beyond        material)
minimum tree plantings and
landscaping required)
 
Note 2: Reserved
 
Note 3: Downtown District Building Materials
APPROVED                           ADMINISTRATIVE       PROHIBITED
                                   APPROVAL
Brick          Stucco/plaster      High Quality         Exterior Insulation
                                   Synthetic Materials  Finish System (EIFS)
Stone          Concrete Cladding   Metal Fiber Cement   Vinyl Siding
Glass          Weather-proof Wood  Concrete Block        
Architectur al Any Durable Natural *Need definition for  
Metal          Material            structurally
Terra Cotta                       compromised           
 
Flex Employment District (FE)
Intent: Flexibility to combine light industrial, R&D, tech, office, commercial
uses to provide maximum flexibility for a robust mix of employment uses and
business amenities
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b04b0e5ccf6b07bdb8fe5d5bf5701ac5bc51801a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2238.jpg]
Lot Dimensions
Lot Dimensions
Minimum Lot Size (square feet)               4,000
Minimum Frontage (lineal feet)               35
Min. Front Setback (lineal feet)             20
Max. Front Setback (lineal feet)             -
Side Setback (lineal feet)                   10
Secondary Street Front Setback (lineal feet) 20
Rear Setback (lineal feet)                   20
 
 
Building and Site Standards
Height Maximum (feet)                              70
First Floor Height Min. (feet)                     -
Maximum Projection from Primary Structure (feet)   8
Floor Area Ratio                                   -
Location of Parking                                Side or Rear Yard
Pervious Surface Minimum (grass or landscaped) (%) 20%
 
Innovation District (ID)
Intent: Accommodate the existing industrial and commercial uses while also
permitting other employment and appropriate residential uses like live-work
units and multi-unit structures in a manner that is flexible and compatible.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b04b0e5ccf6b07bdb8fe5d5bf5701ac5bc51801a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2241.jpg]
Lot Dimensions
Lot Dimensions
Minimum Lot Size (square feet)         3,000
Minimum Frontage (lineal feet)         25
Min. Front Setback (lineal feet)       0
Max. Front Setback (lineal feet)       -
Side Setback (lineal feet)             10 / 0 for horizontally attached
                                       structures
Secondary Street Front Setback (lineal 0
feet)
Rear Setback (lineal feet)             10
 
 
Building and Site Standards
Height Maximum (feet)           60
First Floor Height Min. (feet)  12
Maximum Projection from Primary 8
Structure (feet)
Floor Area Ratio                -
Location of Parking             Within or below building, or in rear yard
                                or side yard
Pervious Surface Minimum        -
(grass or landscaped) (%)
 
Industrial District (I)
Intent: Allow for all uses of Flex Employment Zone as well as heavy
manufacturing/ industrial.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b04b0e5ccf6b07bdb8fe5d5bf5701ac5bc51801a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2243.jpg]
Lot Dimensions
Lot Dimensions
Minimum Lot Size (square feet)               6,000
Minimum Frontage (lineal feet)               50
Min. Front Setback (lineal feet)             20
Max. Front Setback (lineal feet)             -
Side Setback (lineal feet)                   20
Secondary Street Front Setback (lineal feet) 20
Rear Setback (lineal feet)                   20
 
 
Building and Site Standards
Height Maximum (feet)                            70
First Floor Height Min. (feet)                   -
Maximum Projection from Primary Structure (feet) 8
Floor Area Ratio                                 -
Location of Parking                              Side or Rear Yard
Pervious Surface Minimum                         30%
(grass or landscaped) (%)
 
Educational And Institutional District (EI)
Intent: Accommodate needs of existing schools, government uses, and places of
worship.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b04b0e5ccf6b07bdb8fe5d5bf5701ac5bc51801a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2248.jpg]
Lot Dimensions
Lot Dimensions
Minimum Lot Size (square feet)               20,000
Minimum Frontage (lineal feet)               35
Min. Front Setback (lineal feet)             20
Max. Front Setback (lineal feet)             -
Side Setback (lineal feet)                   20
Secondary Street Front Setback (lineal feet) 10
Rear Setback (lineal feet)                   20
 
 
Building and Site Standards
Height Maximum (feet)                              -
First Floor Height Min. (feet)                     -
Maximum Projection from Primary Structure (feet)   8
Floor Area Ratio                                   -
Location of Parking                                Side or Rear Yard
Pervious Surface Minimum (grass or landscaped) (%) 40%
 
Open Space & Parks District (OSP)
Intent: To protect and preserve open spaces and designated parks that are held
in either public or private ownership.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b04b0e5ccf6b07bdb8fe5d5bf5701ac5bc51801a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2250.jpg]
Lot Dimensions
Minimum Lot Size (square feet) -
Lot Dimensions
Minimum Lot Size (square feet)               -
Minimum Frontage (lineal feet)               15
Min. Front Setback (lineal feet)             5
Max. Front Setback (lineal feet)             -
Side Setback (lineal feet)                   0
Secondary Street Front Setback (lineal feet) 5
Rear Setback (lineal feet)                   5
 
 
Building and Site Standards
Height Maximum (feet)                              -
First Floor Height Min. (feet)                     -
Maximum Projection from Primary Structure (feet)   -
Floor Area Ratio                                   -
Location of Parking                                -
Pervious Surface Minimum (grass or landscaped) (%) 50%
 
Airport District (AD-A, AD-B)
Intent: Accommodate the needs of Bozeman Yellowstone International Airport.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b04b0e5ccf6b07bdb8fe5d5bf5701ac5bc51801a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2252.jpg]
Lot Dimensions
Lot Dimensions
Minimum Lot Size (square feet)               -
Minimum Frontage (lineal feet)               20
Min. Front Setback (lineal feet)             -
Max. Front Setback (lineal feet)             -
Side Setback (lineal feet)                   -
Secondary Street Front Setback (lineal feet) -
Rear Setback (lineal feet)                   -
 
 
Building and Site Standards
Height Maximum (feet)                              FAA Regulations
First Floor Height Min. (feet)                     -
Maximum Projection from Primary Structure (feet)   8
Floor Area Ratio                                   -
Location of Parking                                -
Pervious Surface Minimum (grass or landscaped) (%) -
 
Airport Overlay District (AD)
Intent: Accommodate the needs of Bozeman Yellowstone International Airport.
   A.   Purpose: In order to implement the provisions of Resolution #318, on
file with Gallatin County, there are hereby created and established certain
airport Land Use Districts. Which include all of the land lying within the
approach zone, transitional zones, horizontal zones, and conical zones as they
apply to the Airport.
      1.   Airport Land Use Districts shall not extend more than 10,000 feet
out from the thresholds of the primary instrument approach runway or exceed one
(1) mile in width on each side of the primary instrument approach runway and
its extended centerline. Such Airport Land Use Districts are shown on the
Official Airport Influence Area Map.
   B.   Airport Influence Area: No person may recover from local government
damages caused by noise and vibrations from normal and anticipated normal
airport operations within this area, effective the date of the Resolution #381.
   C.   Procedures:
      1.   Resolution #381 contains procedures for variances, conditional uses,
special conditions, and complaints and violations. (Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023;
amd. Ord. 2023-9, 12-18-2023; Ord. 2024-06, 11-18-2024)
CHAPTER 3
USES
SECTION:
Article I: Uses In General
10-3-1: Use Table
10-3-2: Interpreting Use Table
10-3-3: Classification Of Uses
10-3-4: Principal Use Table
10-3-5: Applications And Permits
Article II: Residential Uses
10-3-6: Reserved
10-3-7: Reserved
10-3-8: Modular Home
10-3-9: Reserved
10-3-10: Townhouse Standards
10-3-11: Reserved
Article III: Commercial Uses
10-3-12: Reserved
10-3-13: Reserved
10-3-14: Adult-Oriented Businesses
10-3-15: Casinos
10-3-16: Commercial Kennel
10-3-17: Overnight Lodging
10-3-18: Garage, Automotive/Vehicular Repair
10-3-19: Reserved
10-3-20: Marijuana Business
Article IV: Industrial/Agricultural
10-3-21: Reserved
10-3-22: Reserved
10-3-23: Reserved
Article V: Health And Wellness
10-3-24: Reserved
10-3-25: Reserved
10-3-26: Reserved
Article VI: Public Uses
10-3-27: Parking Garage
10-3-28: Reserved
10-3-29: Reserved
Article VII: Recreation
10-3-30: Reserved
10-3-31: Reserved
10-3-32: Reserved
10-3-33: Recreational Vehicles And Travel Trailer Parks
Article VIII: Education And Childcare
10-3-35: Reserved
10-3-36: Reserved
10-3-37: Reserved
Article IX: Accessory Uses
10-3-38: General Applicable Regulations
10-3-39: Accessory Dwelling Unit
10-3-40: Beekeeping And Apiaries
10-3-41: Fallout Shelters
10-3-42: Home-Based Businesses/Home Occupations
10-3-43: Reserved
10-3-44: Reserved
10-3-45: Keeping Of Chickens
10-3-46: Reserved
10-3-47: Short-Term Rentals
10-3-48: Outdoor Storage Facility
10-3-49: Small Farm Animal Keeping
10-3-50: Reserved
10-3-51: Reserved
10-3-52: Swimming Pool
10-3-53: Walk-Up/Bike-Up Window
Article X: Temporary Uses
10-3-54: Reserved
10-3-55: Camping And Recreational Vehicles
10-3-56: Reserved
10-3-57: Reserved
10-3-58: Reserved
10-3-59: Reserved
Article XI: Other
10-3-60: Wireless Telecommunications Facilities
10-3-61: Small Cell Facilities
10-3-62: Solar Energy Facilities
ARTICLE I: USES IN GENERAL
10-3-1: USE TABLE:
   Principle uses are allowed as specified in 10-3-4. (Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023)
10-3-2: INTERPRETING USE TABLE:
   A.   Use Classification System.
      1.   Use Classification System Uses are listed in the first column of
Table 10-3-4. This zoning ordinance classifies uses into categories and
subcategories, as explained in (B). In some cases, specific use types are
listed in addition to the use categories and subcategories.
   B.   Permitted Uses.
      1.   Uses identified with a “P” are permitted as-of-right in the subject
zoning district, subject to compliance with any supplemental regulations
identified in the final column of
Table 10-3-4 and with all other applicable regulations of this zoning
ordinance.
      2.   Uses identified with a “P2” are permitted as-of-right in the subject
zoning district but only above the ground floor. Such uses are prohibited on
the ground floor.
   C.   Conditional Uses.
      1.   Conditional Uses identified with “C” are allowed only if reviewed
and approved as specified in
10-6-12 and subject to compliance with any supplemental regulations identified
in the final column of
Table 10-3-4, and with all other applicable regulations of this zoning
ordinance.
   D.   Prohibited Use.
   1.   Uses identified with an “-” are expressly prohibited. Uses that are not
listed in the table and that cannot be reasonably interpreted as specified in
10-3-3.E. to fall within any defined use category or subcategory are also
prohibited.
   E.   Reference.
      1.   The final (“Reference”) column of
Table 10-3-4 includes a cross-reference to the use definition and any
applicable supplemental use regulations that apply to the use. Unless otherwise
expressly stated, compliance with supplemental use regulations is required
regardless of whether the use is permitted as-of-right or requires conditional
use approval.
   F.   Accessory Uses.
      1.   
Table 10-3-4 identifies some types of accessory uses allowed in conjunction
with principal uses. Other types of accessory uses may be allowed in
conjunction with principal uses permitted by right or by conditional use
approval. Accessory uses are subject to compliance with all applicable
accessory use regulations as specified in
Article IX of this Title. (Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023)
10-3-3: CLASSIFICATION OF USES:
   A.   General:
      1.   This section describes the system used to classify principal uses in
this zoning ordinance.
   B.   Use Categories:
      1.   This zoning ordinance classifies principal land uses into ten (10)
major groupings. These major groupings are referred to as “use categories.” The
use categories are as follows:
         a.   Residential (see
Article II)
         b.   Commercial (see
Article III)
         c.   Industrial/Agricultural (see
Article IV)
         d.   Health And Wellness (see
Article V)
         e.   Public Uses (see
Article VI)
         f.   Recreation (see
Article VII)
         g.   Education And Childcare (see
Article VIII)
         h.   Accessory (see
Article IX)
         i.   Temporary (see
Article X)
         j.   Other (see
Article XI)
   C.   Use Subcategories:
      1.   Each use category is further divided into more specific
“subcategories.” Use subcategories to classify principal land uses and
activities based on common functional, product, or physical characteristics,
such as the type and amount of activity, the type of customers or residents,
how goods or services are sold or delivered, and site conditions.
   D.   Specific Use Types:
      1.   Some use subcategories are further broken down to identify specific
types of uses that are regulated differently than the subcategory.
   E.   Classification Of Uses:
      1.   The community development director is authorized to classify uses on
the basis of the use category, subcategory, and specific use type descriptions
of this article.
      2.   When a use cannot be reasonably classified into a use category,
subcategory, or specific use type or appears to fit into multiple categories,
subcategories, or specific use types, the community development directors is
authorized to determine the most similar and, thus, most appropriate use
category, subcategory or specific use type based on the actual or projected
characteristics of the principal use or activity in relation to the use
category, subcategory, and specific use type descriptions provided in this
article. In making such determinations, the community development director must
consider the following:
         a.   The types of activities that typically occur in conjunction with
the use;
         b.   The types of equipment and processes to be used;
         c.   The existence, number, and frequency of residents, customers, or
employees;
         d.   The type of building or structure (if any) in which the use is
located;
         e.   Parking demands or the use; and
         f.   Other factors deemed relevant to a use determination.
         g.   If a use can reasonably be classified in multiple categories,
subcategories, or specific use types, the community development director is
authorized to categorize each use in the category, subcategory, or specific use
type that provides the most exact, narrowest, and appropriate “fit.”
   F.   If a use can reasonably be classified in multiple categories,
subcategories, or specific use types, the community development director is
authorized to categorize each use in the category, subcategory, or specific use
type that provides the most exact, narrowest, and appropriate “fit.” (Ord.
2023-7, 7-17-2023)
10-3-4: PRINCIPLE USE TABLE:
For a key to Districts and District Abbreviations, see
Table 10-2.
Table 10-3-4: Principal Use Table Districts
USE CATEGORY Residential  Mixed Use & Industrial Special Districts
                          Commercial                               Additional
Specific Use R N RS MR CL CC MU DD    FE ID I    EI OSP AD-A AD-B  Regulations
Type
Table 10-3-4: Principal Use Table Districts
                                Mixed Use             Special
USE CATEGORY       Residential  &          Industrial Districts      Additional
                                Commercial                           Regulations
Specific Use Type  R N RS MR CL CC MU DD   FE ID I    EI OSP AD- AD-
                                                             A   B
RESIDENTIAL
Group Care         - - -- C  P  P  P  C    -- C  --   -- --  --  --  10-3-10
Facility           - -
Group Home         C C C  P  P  P  P  --   -- C  --   -- --  --  --
Permanent          - - -- C  P  P  P  --   -- P  --   C  --  --  --
Supportive Housing - -
Residential (1-    P P P  P  P  C2 P2 P    -- -- --   -- --  --  --
2 units)
Residential (2-    - - -- P  P  P2 P2 P    -- P  --   -- --  --  --  10-3-10
4 units)           - -
Residential (5+    - - -- C  P  P2 P2 P    -- P  --   P  --  --  --
units)             - -
Residential Care   - - -- P  P  P  P  --   -- P  --   C  --  --  --
Facility           - -
Senior Assisted    - - -- C  P  P  P  --   -- C  --   P  --  --  --
Living Facility    - -
Senior Independent - C C  C  P  P  P  --   -- C  --   P  --  --  --  10-3-47
Living Facility    -
Short-term Rentals P P P  P  P  P  P  P    -- -- --   -- --  --  --
Skilled Care       - - -- C  P  P  P  --   -- P  --   C  --  --  --
Facility           - -
Transitional       - - -- C  P  P  C  P    -- C  --   -- --  --  --
Dwelling           - -
COMMERCIAL
Adult              - -
Entertainment      - - -- -- -- -- -- --   -- C  --   -- --  --  --  10-3-14
Business
Airport            C - -- -- -- -- -- --   -- -- --   -- --  P   P
                     -
Antique Shop       - - -- -- -- P  P  P    P  P  --   -- --  --  --
                   - -
Art Studio         - - -- P  P  P  P  P    P  P  --   P  --  --  --
                   - -
Beverage Sales,    - -
Liquor, Beer, or   - - -- -- P  P  P  P    P  P  --   -- --  --  P
Wine Store
Beverage, Brewing  - - -- -- -- C  C  --   C  P  P    -- --  --  --
and Distilling     - -
Small-scale
Beverage, Brewing  - - -- -- C  P  P  P    P  P  P    -- --  --  P
and Distilling/    - -
Winery
Beverage           - - -- -- -- -- -- --   P  P  P    -- --  --  --
Distribution       - -
Car Wash           - - -- -- -- P  -- --   P  P  P    -- --  --  P
                   - -
Casino             - - -- -- -- C  C  C    C  C  C    -- --  --  --  10-3-15
                   - -
Clinic, Veterinary C - -- -- -- P  P  P    P  P  P    -- --  --  --
                     -
Commercial Kennel  - - -- -- -- C  -- C    C  -- C    -- --  --  --  10-3-16
                   - -
Drugstore          - - -- C  P  P  P  P    P  P  --   -- --  --  --
                   - -
Financial          - - -- -- -- P  P  P    P  P  --   -- – --  --
Institution        - -
Food Sales, Large  - - -- -- -- P  -- C    P  P  --   -- --  --  --
Grocery            - -
Food Sales, Small  - - -- C  P  P  P  P    P  P  --   -- --  --  P
Grocery            - -
Food Service,      - - -- C  P  P  P  P    P  P  --   -- --  --  --
Commissary/ Bakery - -
Food Service, Deli - - -- C  P  P  P  P    P  P  --   -- --  --  P
                   - -
Funeral Home       - - -- C  -- P  P  --   P  -- --   C  --  --  --
                   - -
Garden Center      - - -- -- -- P  -- C    P  P  --   -- --  --  --
                   - -
Indoor Storage     - - -- -- -- P  C  --   P  -- C    -- --  --  P
Facility           - -
Offices, Business  - - -- -- -- P  P  P    P  P  P    P  --  --  --
and Professional   - -
Outdoor Storage    - - -- -- -- -- -- --   P  -- --   -- --  --  P
Facility           - -
Overnight Lodging, - - -- P  P  P  P  P    P  P  --   -- --  --  C
Bed and Breakfast  - -
Overnight Lodging, - - -- -- C  P  P  P    P  P  --   -- --  --  C
Boutique Hotel     - -
Overnight Lodging, - - -- -- -- P  C  C    P  P  --   -- --  --  C   10-3-17
Hotel              - -
Overnight Lodging
- Private          P - -- C  C  P  P  C    P  P  --   -- --  --  C
Transient            -
Occupancies/STR
Personal Services  - - -- C  C  P  P  P    P  P  C    -- --  --  --
                   - -
Research/          - -
Laboratory         - - -- -- -- P  -- --   P  P  P    P  --  --  P
Facility
Restaurant - Full  - - -- C  P  P  P  P    P  P  C    -- --  --  P
Service            - -
Restaurant -       - - -- C  P  P  P  P    P  P  C    -- --  --  P
Limited Service    - -
Restaurant - Quick - - -- C  P  P  P  P    P  P  C    -- --  --  P
Service            - -
Retail Gasoline    - - -- -- -- P  -- C    P  P  --   -- --  --  P
and Convenience    - -
Retail Store       - - -- -- C  P  P  P    P  P  --   -- --  --  P
                   - -
Vehicle or         - - -- -- -- P  C  --   P  -- P    -- --  --  P   10-3-18
Equipment Repair   - -
Vehicle Sales      - -
(Vehicle Service   - - -- -- -- P  -- C    P  -- P    -- --  --  P
is Accessory)
Large Vehicles and - -
Equipment (Service - - -- -- -- -- -- --   P  P  P    -- --  --  --
is Accessory)
MARIJUANA BUSINESSES
Adult-Use          - - -- -- -- P  P  P    P  P  P    -- --  --  --  10-3-20
Dispensary         - -
Dispensary         - - -- -- -- P  P  P    P  P  P    -- --  --  --  10-3-20
                   - -
Medical Marijuana  - - -- -- -- P  P  P    P  P  P    -- --  --  --  10-3-20
Dispensary         - -
Marijuana          - -
Production         - - -- -- -- -- -- --   P  P  P    -- --  --  --  10-3-20
Facility
Testing Laboratory - - -- -- -- -- -- --   P  P  P    -- --  --  --  10-3-20
                   - -
Transporter        - - -- -- -- -- -- --   P  P  P    -- --  --  --  10-3-20
Facility           - -
INDUSTRIAL/AGRICULTURAL
Agriculture        P - -- -- -- -- -- --   -- -- --   -- --  P   P
                     -
Artisan            C C -- -- C  P  P  P    P  P  P    -- --  --  P
Manufacturing
Manufacturing,     - - -- -- -- -- -- --   -- -- P    -- --  --  --
Heavy              - -
Manufacturing,     - - -- -- -- -- C  --   P  P  P    -- --  --  P
Light              - -
Warehouse          - - -- -- -- -- -- --   P  -- P    -- --  --  P
                   - -
Wholesale Sales    - - -- -- -- P  -- C    C  C  P    -- --  --  --
                   - -
HEALTH & WELLNESS
Clinic or Urgent   - - -- -- -- P  P  P    P  P  --   P  --  --  P
Care               - -
Fitness Facility/  - - -- C  P  P  P  P    P  P  --   -- --  --  P
Gym                - -
Hospital - Full    - -
Service with       - - -- -- -- P  -- C    P  P  --   P  --  --  --
Emergency
Massage, Physical
Therapy, other     -
Personal           - C -- -- -- P  P  P    P  P  --   -- --  --  P
Therapeutic
Services
Standalone         - - -- -- -- P  P  C    P  P  P    P  --  --  P
Emergency Facility - -
PUBLIC
Agriculture,       P P P  P  P  P  P  P    P  P  --   P  P   --  P
Community/Urban
Cemeteries         P - C  -- -- -- -- --   -- -- --   -- P   --  --
                     -
Collection and     - - -- -- -- -- -- --   C  -- P    -- --  --  C
Recycling Facility - -
Government         P P P  P  P  P  P  P    P  P  P    P  P   P   P
Administration
Park               P P P  P  P  P  P  P    P  P  P    P  P   --  P
Public Parking     - - -- -- -- P  P  P    P  P  P    -- --  --  P
Garage             - -
Public Parking Lot C - -- -- -- C  P  P    P  P  P    C  C   --  P   10-3-27
                     -
Public Safety      C - -- -- -- P  P  P    P  P  P    C  C   --  P
Facility             -
Public Utility     - - -- -- -- P  P  P    P  P  P    C  C   --  P
Building           - -
Utility Generation C - -- -- -- C  -- --   P  C  P    C  C   --  P
Facility             -
CONGREGATE
Art Center         - P P  P  -- P  P  P    P  P  --   P  --  --  --
                   -
Community Center   - P P  P  P  P  P  P    P  P  --   P  --  --  --
                   -
Event Center       - - -- -- -- P  C  P    P  P  --   P  --  --  --
                   - -
Library            - P P  P  P  P  P  P    P  P  --   P  --  --  --
                   -
Private Club       - - -- C  C  P  C  P    P  P  --   -- --  --  --
                   - -
Religious Assembly C C C  C  P  P  C  P    P  P  C    P  --  --  --
Theater            - - -- C  C  P  C  P    P  P  --   C  – --  --
                   - -
RECREATION
Commercial         - -
Recreation -       - - -- -- -- P  C  --   P  P  P    -- P   --  --
Indoor
Commercial           -
Recreation -       P - -- -- -- P  C  --   -- P  P    -- P   --  --
Outdoor
Community Park     P P P  P  P  P  P  P    P  P  P    P  P       P
Small-scale
Commercial         - - -- -- C  P  C  P    P  P  P    -- --  --  --
Recreation -       - -
Indoor
Recreation and     - - -- -- -- C  C  --   C  C  C    -- --  --  P   10-3-33
Travel Trail Parks - -
EDUCATION & CHILDCARE
Child Care Center  - - -- C  P  P  P  C    P  C  --   P  --  --  --
                   - -
Family Child Care  P P P  P  P  P  P  P    P  C  --   P  --  --  C
Group Child Care   - P P  P  P  P  P  P    P  C  --   P  --  --  C
                   -
School - Primary   - C C  P  P  P  C  --   P  C  --   P  --  --  --
                   -
School - Secondary - C C  P  P  P  C  --   P  C  --   P  --  --  --
                   -
School - Post-     - - -- -- -- P  -- P    P  P  C    P  --  --  P
Secondary          - -
ACCESSORY
Accessory Dwelling P P P  P  P  P  P  P    P  P  P    P  --  --  --  10-3-39
Unit (ADU)
Beekeeping &       P P P  P  P  -- -- --   -- P  --   P  --  --  --  10-3-40
Apiaries
Home-based         P P P  P  P  P  P  P    P  P  --   -  --  --  --  10-3-42
Business
Keeping of         P P P  P  P  -- P  --   -- P  --   P  --  --  --  10-3-45
Chickens
Outdoor Storage    - - -- -- -- P  P  --   P  P  P    -- --  --  --  10-3-48
(screened)         - -
Private Garage     P P P  P  P  P  P  C    P  P  P    -- --  --  P
Small Farm Animal  P - C  -- -- -- -- --   -- -- --   -- P   --  P   10-3-49
Keeping              -
Solar Facility     - - C  -- -- C  C  C    -- P  P    -- C   --  C   10-3-61
                   - -
Swimming Pool      P P P  P  P  P  P  P    P  P  --   P  P   --  --  10-3-52
Walk-up / Bike-up  - - -- C  C  P  P  P    P  P  --   P  P   --  --  10-3-53
Window             - -
TEMPORARY
Camping or
Recreational       T T T  T  T  -- -- --   -- -- --   -- --  --  --  10-3-55
Vehicles
Construction       T T T  T  T  T  T  T    T  T  T    T  T   T   T
Trailer
Farmer’s Market  T T T  T  T  T  T  T    T  T  T    T  T   --  --
OTHER
Essential
Communications /   C C C  C  C  C  C  C    C  C  P    C  C   --  C   10-3-60
Telecommunications
Facility
Small Cell         C C C  C  C  C  C  C    C  C  C    C  C   --  C
Facilities
 
P = Permitted    C = Conditional   -- = Not Permitted   P2 = Permitted on the
second floor or above   C2 = Conditional on the second floor or above
(Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023; amd. Ord. 2023-9, 12-18-2023)
10-3-5: APPLICATIONS AND PERMITS:
All applications, permits, and approvals shall be obtained, and all applicable
permit fees and impact fees, as per the City of Belgrade impact fee ordinance,
shall be paid prior to construction or occupancy. Each Subsections specifies
the application, permit, and necessary approval required. (Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-
2023)
ARTICLE II: RESIDENTIAL USES
10-3-6: RESERVED:
10-3-7: RESERVED:
10-3-8: MODULAR HOME:
The meter base for incoming wiring must be attached to the exterior wall of the
modular home. The units shall be listed and assessed by the county assessor as
real or personal property. (Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023)
10-3-9: RESERVED:
10-3-10: TOWNHOUSE STANDARDS:
   A.   Development Criteria:
      1.   Lot Area: The minimum width of any townhouse lot is twenty feet
(20'). The remaining lot area normally required in the zoning district per
dwelling unit shall be incorporated into usable and accessible open space and/
or private or common vehicular access or parking area for the townhouse project
site.
      2.   Dwelling Unit Access: Each townhouse unit shall have its own
dedicated entrance and shall otherwise provide sufficient egress per the
adopted Central Valley Fire Code
      3.   Parking and Access:
         a.   Parking Spaces: For townhouses with more than two (2) bedrooms,
there shall be a minimum of one (1) parking space per bedroom required.
         b.   Location: Parking spaces may be provided on the lot of the
townhouse or in a commonly owned and maintained off- street parking bay or
facility; provided that such a parking facility is easily accessible and of a
reasonable distance from the townhouse unit it is serving (maximum of 100
feet).
            (1)   Required parking spaces shall not be in any front or side
yard except in a driveway.
            (2)   Access drives to parking areas shall be allowed in front and
side yards but shall not exceed thirty feet (30') in width at driveway throat
(34' at the outside of the driveway throat) except shared driveways may be a
maximum of forty feet (40') in width at the driveway throat (44' at the outside
of the driveway throat) if there is at least (20') to the next driveway throat.
            (3)   Construction: All permanent off-street parking spaces and
access areas thereto shall be paved. Temporary exemptions for access approaches
from the property line to the street surface may be granted based on public
street paving schedules established by the city. Individual unit parking spaces
and/or townhouse site parking bay facilities shall be designed and constructed
according to stipulations set forth in
Article 4 of this title.
         c.   Minimum Distance Between Driveway Throats:
            (1)   Driveway Throats thirty feet (30') wide or less:
               (A)   A minimum distance of ten (10) feet shall be maintained
between all driveway throats that are thirty feet (30') wide or less.
            (2)   Driveway Throats more than thirty feet (30') wide:
               (B)   A minimum distance of twenty (20) feet shall be maintained
between all driveway throats that are more than thirty feet (30') wide.
            (3)   Not more than one driveway throat shall be permitted per two
(2) townhouses.
            (4)   On corner lots, placement of driveway throats shall be at a
minimum of ten feet (10') from the property line at controlled intersections
(either signed or signal-lighted) and twenty feet (20') from the property line
at uncontrolled intersections.
            (5)   Unsafe Or Hazardous Driveway Throat Prohibited: In no case
shall any driveway throat be permitted which, in the opinions of the city
engineer and city planner, may cause an unsafe or hazardous driving condition.
      4.   Utilities And Services:
         a.   Curb Stop And Valve: Water service shall have a curb stop and
valve for each townhouse unit.
         b.   Easements: Necessary easements shall be indicated and recorded on
the townhouse plat and be of a width that is satisfactory to the city engineer.
      5.   Design Of Utility Services:
         a.   All utilities shall independent, separate utility connections on
each respective townhouse lot.
         b.   All utility services shall be designed for subdivisions that are
platted for townhouse development at the time of plat submittal.
         c.   The city engineer and/or public works director shall review said
utility plans with any necessary recommendations.
      6.   Additional Standards:
         a.   Conversion: Conversion of existing structures to a townhouse
project shall be avoided, except if all townhouse development standards, as
outlined in this chapter, and the International Residential Code can be
satisfied. If said requirements cannot be met, the conversion will be
prohibited.
         b.   Building Permit: A legal subdivision plat shall be placed on the
public records of Gallatin County prior to the issuance of any building permit
within a townhouse development.
   B.   A site plan must be prepared and submitted as specified in
10-6-18. The site plan must be processed concurrently with the conditional use
application.
   C.   Type Of Permit Required:
      1.   An applicant for a Townhouse must verify to the Community
Development Department that it will meet the standards above and the currently
adopted International Residential Code. (Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023; amd. Ord.
2023-9, 12-18-2023)
10-3-11: RESERVED:
ARTICLE III: COMMERCIAL USES
10-3-12: RESERVED:
10-3-13: RESERVED:
10-3-14: ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESSES:
   A.   Applications And Permits Required:
      1.   A Conditional Use Permit is required as specified in
10-6-12.
      2.   An adult-oriented business license issued by the city is required as
specified in
Title 2 of the City of Belgrade Codes of Ordinances.
   B.   Supplemental Regulations:
      1.   Prohibited Locations: Adult- oriented businesses that meet the
required criteria to operate may be conditionally permitted in the Industrial
(I) district;
         a.   Provided that the adult-oriented business may not be operated
within three hundred feet (300') of the following:
            (1)   Church, synagogue, mosque, temple, or building which is used
primarily for religious worship and related religious activities;
            (2)   Public or private educational facilities including, but not
limited to, childcare facilities, nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens,
elementary schools, private schools, intermediate schools, junior high schools,
middle schools, high schools, vocational schools, secondary schools, special
education schools, junior colleges, and universities; school includes the
school ground, but does not include the facilities used primarily for another
purpose and only incidentally as a school;
            (3)   Public park or recreational area which has been designated
for park or recreational activities, including, but not limited to, a park,
playground, nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field, basketball
or tennis courts, skating rink, pedestrian/ bicycle paths, wilderness areas or
another similar public land within the city which is under the control,
operation or management of the city park and recreation authorities;
            (4)   Residentially zoned lot and devoted to residential use; or
         b.   Provided that the adult-oriented business is not within eight
hundred feet (800') of another adult-oriented business.
         c.   An adult-oriented business may not be operated in the same
building, structure, or portion thereof, containing another adult-oriented
business.
      2.   Exterior Portions of Businesses:
         a.   Visibility From Outside: It shall be unlawful for an owner or
operator of an adult-oriented business to allow the merchandise or activities
of the establishment to be visible from a point outside the establishment.
         b.   Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of an
adult-oriented business to allow the exterior portion of the adult-oriented
business to have flashing lights or any words, lettering, photographs,
silhouettes, drawings or pictorial representations of any manner, except to the
extent permitted by the provisions of this chapter.
         c.   Unpainted Exterior: Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to
require the painting of an otherwise unpainted exterior portion of an adult-
oriented business.
         d.   Violation: A violation of any provision of this section shall
constitute a misdemeanor.
      3.   Signage:
         a.   Signs advertising any sexually oriented adult entertainment
establishment must conform with the requirements of
Chapter 5 of this ordinance with the exception, however, that signs shall not
depict specified sexual activities and/or specified anatomical areas as defined
in
Chapter 8 of the municipal code, and provided further that no flashing or
traveling lights may be located outside the building. The location and wording
of such sign must be shown on the site plan.
      4.   Sale, Use, Or Consumption Of Alcoholic Beverages:
         a.   Prohibited: The sale, use, consumption, or possession of
alcoholic beverages on the premises of an adult-oriented business is
prohibited.
         b.   Violation: Any violation of this section shall constitute a
misdemeanor.
      5.   Injunction:
         a.   A person who operates or causes to be operated an adult oriented
business without a valid operator’s license, or in violation of relevant
sections of this chapter, is subject to a suit for injunction as well as
prosecution for criminal violations. Each day that an adult oriented business
so operates is a separate offense or violation.
      6.   Judicial Review:
         a.   Within thirty (30) days of a denial of an initial or renewal
application by the city, or suspension or revocation of a license by the city,
the applicant or licensee may seek prompt judicial review of such action in the
district court of the eighteenth judicial district court, in and for the county
of Gallatin, state of Montana.
   C.   Conditional Use Required:
      1.   Permit And License Required: An adult-oriented business may be
operated as a conditional use in the Innovation District (ID) districts subject
to the provisions of this chapter and any other local, state, and federal laws,
rules, and regulations. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an
adult- oriented business without first obtaining a conditional use permit as
specified in
10-6-12. of this title and an adult-oriented business operator’s license
(“operator’s license”) issued by the city as hereinafter provided.
      2.   Conditions: Such conditional use permit is subject to the following:
         a.   Obtainment of a valid adult-oriented business operator’s license
issued by the city;
         b.   Any person who operates an adult-oriented business and has
employees who work and/or perform services on the premises of the adult-
oriented business must, at all times, keep a current list of all employees that
will be provided to the city as described herein; and
         c.   Any person employed with an adult-oriented business must ensure
their presence on a list of all employees to be provided to the city as
described herein.
      3.   Defense: It shall be a defense to subsections 2b and 2c of this
section if the employment is of limited duration and for the sole purpose of
repair and/ or maintenance of machinery, equipment, or the premises.
      4.   Violations: Violations of any provisions within this section shall
constitute a misdemeanor. (Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023)
10-3-15: CASINOS:
   A.   Applications And Permits Required:
      1.   A Conditional Use Permit is required as specified in
10-6-12.
      2.   A Land Use Application is required as specified in
10-6-15.
      3.   A City license issued by the city is required in accordance with
Chapter 2 Business And License Regulations.
      4.   A State License is required.
   B.   Location:
      1.   Casinos shall not be located within six hundred feet (600') from the
primary entrance, in any direction, of lots used for schools or churches as
provided by state law.
      2.   Casinos shall not be located within three hundred feet (300') from
the primary entrance, in any direction, of a lot zoned for residential uses.
      3.   Casinos shall not be located within six hundred feet (600') from the
primary entrance, in any direction, of a public park. (Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023;
amd. Ord. 2023-9, 12-18-2023)
10-3-16: COMMERCIAL KENNEL:
   A.   Applications And Permits Required:
      1.   A Conditional Use Permit is required as specified in
10-6-12.
      2.   A Land Use Application is required as specified in
10-6-15.
      3.   A City license issued by the city is required as specified in Title
2 Business and License Regulations of the City of Belgrade Codes of Ordinances.
      4.   It is unlawful to own, keep, harbor, or maintain more than (2) dogs
over six (6) months of age on one lot or tract of land within the city without
a kennel license. (Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023)
10-3-17: OVERNIGHT LODGING:
   A.   No overnight lodging shall be located in the MU district within the
Airport Influence area. (Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023)
10-3-18: GARAGE, AUTOMOTIVE/VEHICULAR REPAIR:
Repair activity shall be conducted in enclosed places or screened from public
view. (Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023)
10-3-19: RESERVED:
10-3-20: MARIJUANA BUSINESS:
   A.   Applications And Permits Required:
      1.   A Marijuana Business Permit application is required as specified in
10-6-7 and specified in
Title 2 of the City of Belgrade Codes of Ordinances.
      2.   An application for marijuana business must include a site plan,
building plans, and such other information deemed necessary by the community
development department.
         a. The applicant must submit a copy of their state license(s) for the
marijuana business.
            (1)   If the applicant does not yet have a state license,
conditional approval that the proposed marijuana business meets all other
applicable requirements of the City Code may be issued by the City.
      3.   Zoning And Land Use permits shall be obtained, and all applicable
permit fees and impact fees, as per the City of Belgrade impact fee ordinance,
shall be paid prior to construction or occupancy.
   B.   Business Permit Required:
      1.   General Applicability:
         a.   A marijuana business may not cultivate, grow, manufacture, test,
transport, dispense or otherwise produce, handle, or sell marijuana or
marijuana products without a state license and a final marijuana business
permit approved and issued by the city.
         b.   The applicant shall provide proof of insurance for the marijuana
business.
         c.   A marijuana business permit shall be valid for one specified
location only.
         d.   A marijuana business permit shall only be valid for the type or
types of marijuana business activities stated in the permit.
         e.   A marijuana business permit may not be transferred.
         f.   A marijuana business permit must be renewed annually.
      2.   Conditions of Permit:
         a.   As a condition of receiving a marijuana business permit, any
authorized city employee, including but not limited to police, fire inspectors,
building inspectors, city engineers, planning officials, zoning officials, and
other employees or officials designated by the City Manager, may without notice
during normal business hours inspect any premises under permit pursuant to this
code to determine compliance with this code, the Montana Marijuana Regulation
and Taxation Act, MCA 16-12-101 et seq., and any other state or local law,
rule, or regulation. All persons authorized herein to inspect permit holders
and marijuana businesses shall have the authority to enter, without a search
warrant, during normal business hours, premises that require a marijuana
business permit, premises holding a marijuana business permit, and premises for
which the marijuana business permit has been suspended or revoked.
         b.   The city may deny, suspend, or revoke a marijuana business permit
if the city has reasonable cause to believe the permit holder has, or the
issuance of the marijuana business permit would violate a provision of this
code or state law. The City Manager may suspend or revoke a marijuana business
permit if a permit holder’s state license(s) have been suspended or revoked. A
marijuana business permit shall remain suspended until a final adjudication on
the state license, any penalty imposed by the state has been satisfied, and the
state license has been reinstated. While a marijuana business permit or a
marijuana state license is suspended or revoked, marijuana business is
prohibited from engaging in marijuana business activities within the City of
Belgrade’s Zoning Jurisdiction. The operation of a marijuana business without a
valid marijuana business permit issued by the city is unlawful. Any person
operating a such marijuana business is subject to penalty as provided in Title
1, Chapter 4, City Code of Belgrade, and Title 45, MCA.
         c.   An applicant or permit holder may appeal any decision of the city
to deny, suspend, or revoke a marijuana business permit to the 18th Judicial
District Court. An appeal must be made by filing a complaint setting forth the
grounds form relief, and the nature of the relief demanded with the district
court within 30 days following the notice of the city’s action.
   C.   General Regulations:
      1.   State Code Compliance:
         a.   Compliance with 50-40-104 Mont. Code. Ann. (Montana Indoor Clean
Air Act) is required.
         b.   All signage associated with a marijuana business shall meet the
standards of Chapter 5 of this Title and the Montana Marijuana Regulation and
Taxation Act, MCA 16-12-101 et seq. In addition, no signage shall use the word
“marijuana”, “cannabis”, or any other word or phrase commonly understood to
refer to marijuana.
         c.   Words, phrases and expressions, not otherwise defined herein are
subject to the definitions set forth in Section 16-12-102, MCA.
      2.   Activities Prohibited On Site:
         a.   Persons under the age of 21 shall be prohibited from entering a
marijuana business.
         b.   The sale or consumption of alcohol within or on the premises of a
marijuana business is prohibited.
         c.   Consumption of marijuana within or on the property of a marijuana
business is prohibited.
         d.   Cultivation of marijuana is only permitted in marijuana
production facilities that are in physically separate detached buildings.
      3.   Building Requirements:
         a.   All marijuana products shall be in a locked cabinet except when
being accessed for distribution.
         b.   All marijuana business activities including dispensing, storage,
testing, production and cultivation shall be conducted in a building equipped
with a ventilation system that filters out the odors of the marijuana, so it is
not detectable from the exterior of the facility or from any adjoining
premises. All venting, filter, and lighting systems must comply with applicable
city and state building, fire, mechanical, and electrical codes.
         c.   A marijuana business must comply with all state and local
building, fire, electrical, food safety, and mechanical codes, rules, and
regulations.
         d.   All marijuana businesses shall be equipped with a secure safe for
storing marijuana not being actively cultivated when the facility is not open.
         e.   A marijuana business shall provide adequate security on premises.
The minimum-security requirements include the following:
            (1)   Security surveillance cameras are installed to monitor the
main entrance along the interior and exterior of the premises to discourage
crime and facilitate the reporting of criminal acts and nuisance activities.
The security video shall be preserved for at least 72 hours.
            (2)   Robbery and burglar alarm systems monitored by a proprietary
supervising station.
         f.   Product Visibility:
            (1)   Marijuana and marijuana products, accessories, and associated
paraphernalia shall not be visible from a public sidewalk, street, or right-of-
way.
   D.   Distance Measurement: For the purposes of this section, specified
distances will be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening
structures from the property line of a public or quasipublic building
(including schools), church, synagogue, or other places of worship, park, or
residence, to the property line of the marijuana business.
   E.   Prohibited Locations:
      1.   Marijuana businesses shall not be located within 500 feet of the
following:
         a.   Lots used for public or quasipublic buildings or churches as
defined by
Chapter 8 of this Title; or
         b.   Any residence, in any direction, located in R, N, RS, MR, and CL
districts; or
         c.   In any direction, of Lewis and Clark Park.
         Exception: Marijuana businesses within 500 feet of properties listed
in Section a., b., and c above may be located on Main Street between Weaver
Street and Kennedy Street. No marijuana business located on Main Street between
Weaver Street and Kennedy Street shall be located within 500 feet of an
existing marijuana business.
      2.   No marijuana business shall be allowed in the following locations:
         a.   Within a residential zoning district.
         b.   Educational and Institutional (EI) district.
         c.   A building containing residential units at the time of
establishment of the business.
         d.   A building that contains a hotel, motel, or any room for
overnight lodging at the time of establishment of the business.
   F.   Applicability To Existing Operations:
      1.   Marijuana businesses operating within the City of Belgrade’s Zoning
Jurisdiction in existence prior to the effective date of this Article, whether
or not currently in possession of a marijuana business permit, shall comply
with the provisions of this Article within six (6) months of the effective date
of this Article. Marijuana businesses operating outside of the City of
Belgrade’s Zoning Jurisdiction prior to the effective date of this Article, or
in an area that does not have underlying zoning prior to the effective date of
this Article, shall comply with the provisions of this Article within (6)
months of adoption of zoning by the city in such areas.
   G.   Nothing in this section shall be construed to create a private right of
action regarding the acquisition, possession, cultivation, manufacture,
delivery, transfer, transport, sale or dispensing of marijuana. (Ord. 2023-7,
7-17-2023; amd. Ord. 2024-1, 2-20-2024)
ARTICLE IV: INDUSTRIAL/AGRICULTURAL
10-3-21: RESERVED:
10-3-22: RESERVED:
10-3-23: RESERVED:
ARTICLE V: HEALTH AND WELLNESS
10-3-24: RESERVED:
10-3-25: RESERVED:
10-3-26: RESERVED:
ARTICLE VI: PUBLIC USES
10-3-27: PARKING GARAGE:
   A.   No parking garage, private or public shall be located on the northeast
side of Main Street/Frontage Road in the Downtown District. (Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-
2023)
10-3-28: RESERVED:
10-3-29: RESERVED:
ARTICLE VII: RECREATION
10-3-30: RESERVED:
10-3-31: RESERVED:
10-3-32: RESERVED:
10-3-33: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AND TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS:
   A.   Applications And Permits Required:
      1.   A Conditional Use Permit is required as specified in
10-6-12.
      2.   A Land Use Application is required as specified in
10-6-15.
      3.   A Building Permit is required in accordance as specified in
10-6-14 and
Title 8 Building Regulations of the City of Belgrade codes of ordinances.
      4.   A Recreational Vehicles And Travel Trailer Parks license issued by
the city is required as specified in
Title 2 Business and License Regulations of the City of Belgrade codes of
ordinances.
         a.   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, alter, or
extend any recreational vehicle and travel trailer park unless he holds
necessary valid permits issued by the division of environmental sanitation,
state department of health and environmental sciences, and the city building
inspector.
   B.   Permitted Uses:
      1.   Accessory uses related to park management and occupant need and
enjoyment and according to the following schedule: management headquarters,
recreational facilities, gift and souvenir shops, and other uses and structures
customarily incidental to the operation of recreational vehicle and travel
trailer parks.
      2.   Limitations On Other Uses:
         a.   Other uses may be allowed when approved by the city council and
in conformity with the following limitations:
         b.   Such other uses, including parking areas for such other uses,
occupy not more than ten percent (10%) of the total park area.
         c.   Such uses shall be restricted in use to occupants of the park or
so located that the use will not interfere with the park use.
         d.   The use is permitted use of the district in which the park is to
be located.
      3.   Temporary Uses: Recreational vehicle and travel trailer parks may be
used for recreational vehicles, travel trailers, equivalent facilities in or on
automotive vehicles, tents, or other short-term recreational shelter
arrangements on a temporary basis only.
      4.   No intensive recreational use shall be permitted within one hundred
feet (100') of any external boundary which adjoins or is separated only by a
boundary street from land in any residence, estate, or agricultural zone;
provided, however, that where permanent intervening open space at least one
hundred feet (100') in width exists on adjacent property, this restriction will
not apply.
   C.   Design Standards: Any person desiring to enlarge or establish a
recreational vehicle and travel trailer park shall meet or exceed the following
design standards:
      1.   Size: Minimum site size for recreational vehicle and travel trailer
parks shall be two (2) acres.
      2.   Access: All recreational vehicles and travel trailer parks shall
have access to an arterial or collector street with a right of way width of
sixty feet (60') or more which is a through route for tourist traffic.
      3.   Entrances and exits shall be designed for safe and convenient
movement of traffic into and out of the park and to minimize congestion of
free-moving traffic on adjacent streets.
      4.   Setback: All facilities for recreational vehicles, travel trailers,
or other temporary shelter apparatus shall be set back at least twenty-five
feet (25') from all property lines. The area created by such setback shall be
used for landscaping to screen recreational vehicles and travel trailer parks
from adjoining properties as directed by the city council.
      5.   Streets:
         a.   Interior Streets: Interior streets within the park shall provide
safe, convenient circulation without interference or hazard to general park
activities.
         b.   Street Widths: Street widths should be of adequate widths to
accommodate any contemplated parking and expected traffic load but, in all
cases, shall meet the following minimum requirements:
         c.   Collector streets with guest parking, thirty-six feet (36') wide,
face of curb to face of curb.
         d.   Collector streets with no parking, twenty-two feet (22') wide,
face of curb to face of curb. These collector streets shall be signed with
approved no parking signs.
         e.   Minor streets with no parking, twenty feet (20') wide, face of
curb to face of curb. These minor streets shall be signed with approved no
parking signs.
         f.   All dead-end streets shall be limited to a maximum length of five
hundred feet (500') and shall be provided with a cul-de-sac of at least one
hundred feet (100') in diameter.
         g.   Minimum access width to each manufactured home stand shall be
twelve feet (12').
         h.   Paving: All streets in a recreational vehicle and travel trailer
park shall be paved with a surface of bituminous surface mat or asphalt of
three inches (3") over a subbase of a three-fourths inch (3/4) crushed gravel
six inches (6") deep.
      6.   Service Areas: Accessory uses and service areas shall be located
centrally in the recreational vehicle and travel trailer park. Service areas
shall be provided in the following manner:
         a.   Toilet And Other Plumbing Fixtures: At least one service building
containing the necessary toilet and other plumbing fixtures specified shall be
provided in the park. Service buildings shall be conveniently located within a
radius of approximately three hundred feet (300') of all spaces to be served.
Laundry facilities shall be required in addition to the following. If
commercial laundry facilities are conveniently located near the recreational
vehicle and travel trailer park, the laundry facility requirement may be
considered for a waiver by the city council.
         b.   Storage And Disposal Of Trash: Facilities for storage and
disposal of trash and garbage in a sanitary manner shall be provided in each
park.
         c.   Street And Yard Lights: Street and yard lights, attached to light
structures approved by the city, shall be provided in sufficient number and
intensity to permit the safe movement of vehicles and pedestrians at night and
shall be effectively related to buildings, trees, walks, steps and ramps.
         d.   Parking: Parking for all uses within the recreational vehicle and
travel trailer park shall be provided in accordance with
chapter 4 of this title.
         e.   Fire Protection: The water supply system serving the recreational
vehicle and travel trailer park shall be subject to the rules and regulations
of the local fire prevention authority or the system shall meet the standards
for adequate fire protection established by the national fire protections
association standard NFPA 501 A, whichever is more stringent. Nonetheless, fire
protections systems must be approved by the fire chief.
Table 10-3-33.C
NUMBER OF      Toilets   Urinals Wash Basins (per Showers (per
DEPENDENT      Men Women Men     gender)          gender)      Other Fixtures
PARKING SPACES
Table 10-3-33.C
NUMBER OF      Toilets   Urinals Wash Basins (per Showers (per
DEPENDENT      Men Women Men     gender)          gender)      Other Fixtures
PARKING SPACES
1 - 15         1   1     1       1                1            At least one
16 - 30        1   2     1       2                1            janitor sink per
31 - 45        2   3     2       3                2            service
46 - 60        2   4     2       4                2            building. A
61 - 80        3   5     2       4                3            disposal station
                                                               is to be
81 - 100       3   5     2       4                3            provided.
 
(Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023)
ARTICLE VIII: EDUCATION AND CHILDCARE
10-3-35: RESERVED:
10-3-36: RESERVED:
10-3-37: RESERVED:
ARTICLE IX: ACCESSORY USES
10-3-38: GENERAL APPLICABLE REGULATIONS:
   A.   Accessory Uses And Structures Allowed:
      1.   Accessory uses and structures are allowed only in connection with
lawfully established principal uses and main buildings.
      2.   It is located on the same lot as the primary structure or use that
it serves.
      3.   An attached or detached garage is not considered an accessory, and
are subject to the lot and building regulations that apply to the principal
building.
   B.   Time Of Construction And Establishment: Accessory uses and structures
may be established only after the principal use of the property is in place.
   C.   Location:
      1.   Accessory uses must be located on the same lot as the principal use
to which they are accessory, except that required parking spaces may be located
off-site in accordance with the off-site parking provisions of Chapter 4 of
this Title.
      2.   Accessory structures may be located only in rear and side yards and
shall comply with the current building code.
   D.   Accessory Buildings And Structures:
      1.   At most, two (2) accessory buildings or accessory structures are
allowed on the same lot, regardless of size.
      2.   The following requirements apply if an accessory structure’s ground
floor is greater than 200 sq. ft. or when an additional accessory structure
will make the cumulative ground floor square footage greater than 200 sq. ft.
for all accessory structures located in residential district.
      3.   Applicable Regulations:
         a.   Accessory buildings and structures are subject to the same
regulations that apply to principal uses and structures on the subject lot,
unless otherwise expressly stated.
         b.   Accessory buildings attached by structures less than 24 inches in
height or less (e.g., patios, walks, pergolas, decks without railing) are not
considered part of the primary structure and are subject to accessory building
and structure regulations.
      4.   Setback: Accessory structures must be set back at least eight (8)
feet from the principal structure (this distance can be reduced as long as it
meets fire protection requirements in current adopted building code), at least
eight (8) feet from any side lot line, and least ten (10) feet from the rear
yard lot line.
      5.   Maximum Height: The accessory structure shall not be taller than the
primary structure or the maximum height permitted for the underlying zoning
district, whichever is less.
   6.   Maximum Area:
         a.   Residential Districts except Agricultural District;
         b.   Total cumulative ground floor area of accessory structures shall
not exceed 1,000 square feet.
         c.   Downtown Districts - lots less than .20 acres:
            (1)   No maximum.
         d.   Downtown Districts - larger than .20 acres:
            (1)   600 square feet.
10-3-39: ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT:
   A.   A Building Permit Is Required As Specified In
10-6-14.
      1.   The ADU must meet all applicable building-related codes enforced by
the City of Belgrade and the State of Montana Building Codes Bureau.
   B.   General Regulations:
      1.   A maximum of one accessory dwelling unit (ADU) shall be permitted
per single-family residential lot.
      2.   ADU approval shall be subject to the City’s Land Use and Building
Permit processes and policies.
      3.   If an ADU’s entrance is separate from the principal structure
entrance, the ADU entrance shall be located off the rear or side yards.
      4.   An ADU shall meet all size, height, setback, and lot coverage
requirements of the zoning district in which it will be located.
      5.   The ADU’s living space shall be equipped with a kitchen, bathroom
facilities, and a maximum of two bedrooms.
      6.   The property owner shall occupy either the primary dwelling or
accessory dwelling unit as their principal residence.
   C.   District Requirements:
      1.   Rural Zone and Suburban Residential Zone:
         a.   An ADU may be attached or detached from the main dwelling unit.
         b.   An ADU shall be limited to a maximum area of 1,000 sq. ft.
      2.   Neighborhood Zone:
         a.   An ADU shall be attached to the main dwelling unit or located
above a detached garage of a Single-Family home.
         b.   An ADU shall be limited to a maximum area of 800 sq. ft.
      3.   Mixed Use Center Zone, Commercial Corridor Zone, Downtown District,
Flex Employment Zone, and Industrial Zone
         a.   A maximum of one ADU shall be permitted per lot for use by an
owner, manager, guard, or caretaker.
         b.   A Recreational Vehicles (RV)and a camper trailer may only be used
as a caretaker’s residence ADU in commercial districts.
            (1)   RVs used in residential districts are subject to
10-3-7 Camping and RVs.
   D.   Parking: One paved off-street parking space shall be provided for the
exclusive use of the ADU, in addition to parking required for the principal
residence or business.
   E.   Garage Conversions: An ADU may be permitted to be added above an
existing garage, if structurally viable.
      1.   A garage shall not be permitted to be converted to an ADU, unless
parking minimums can be met for both units. (Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023)
10-3-40: BEEKEEPING AND APIARIES:
   A.   General Regulations:
      1.   Enclosures shall be within the rear or side yard, no closer than 10
feet from any lot line.
      2.   Any lot smaller than two (2) acres shall not exceed two (2) hives or
enclosures for beekeeping.
      3.   Individual hives or enclosures shall not exceed five (5) feet in
height and 20 cubic feet in size on any lot. (Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023)
10-3-41: FALLOUT SHELTERS:
   A.   General Regulations:
      1.   Fallout Shelters to protect human life during periods of danger may
be constructed in or under any required yard, except that if constructed in a
front yard or side yard, none of it shall protrude above the average grade of
the lot.
      2.   A subterranean fallout shelter must be constructed within the
boundaries of the property, and in the process of construction, no excavation
or fill may come within three feet of an adjacent property.
10-3-42: HOME-BASED BUSINESSES/HOME OCCUPATIONS:
   A.   Purpose: The home occupation regulations of this section are intended
to allow residents to engage in customary home-based work activities, while
also helping to ensure that neighboring residents are not subjected to adverse
operational and land use impacts (e.g., excessive noise or traffic or public
safety hazards) that are not typical of residential neighborhoods.
   B.   Applications And Permits Required:
      1.   A Home Business application is required as specified in
10-6-8.
         a.   An applicant for a Major Home Occupation must verify to the
Planning Department that the Major Home Occupation will meet the standards
below.
            (1)   The City Manager shall approve applications in compliance
with the standards below.
               (A)   The City Manager may impose reasonable conditions of
approval, such as hours of operation and number of vehicles per day accessing
the business.
               (B)   The conditions shall serve to prevent negative impacts on
nearby residential property in order to maintain the residential character of
the neighborhood.
      2.   Major Home Occupations that do not meet the standards below are
subject to a Conditional Use Permit application as specified in
10-6-12.
   C.   Home Occupations Types: Two Types Of Home Occupations Are Defined And
Regulated Under This Section.
      1.   Minor Home Occupations: Minor home occupations are those in which
household residents use their home as a place of work, with no employees,
customers or clients coming to the site.
      2.   Major Home Occupations: Major home occupation are those in which
household residents use their home as a place of work and either one non-
resident employee or customer comes to the site.
   D.   Exemptions: The Following Are Not Considered Home Occupations.
      1.   Group Living.
      2.   Family Day Care Homes.
      3.   Bed and Breakfast.
      4.   Short-Term Rentals.
   E.   General Regulations:
      1.   Home occupations shall be considered an accessory use and shall be
subject to the requirements of the district in which the use is located. In
addition, the following regulations apply to both Minor and Major Home
Occupations:
         a.   Home occupations shall be conducted only within the enclosed
dwelling unit or garage area. A maximum of 25 percent of a principal structure
or 75 percent of an accessory structure may be dedicated to the home
occupation.
      2.   No accessory building may be built, altered, or used solely for the
home occupation.
      3.   There shall be no exterior alterations that change the character of
the dwelling.
      4.   No storage or display of materials, goods, supplies, or equipment
related to the operation of a home occupation shall be visible outside any
structure on the premises.
      5.   No stock in trade shall be displayed or sold at retail on the
premises.
      6.   No use shall create smoke, odor, glare, noise, dust, vibration, fire
hazard, electrical interference, excess trash, or any nuisance not normally
associated with the usual residential use in the district.
      7.   A home occupation shall be clearly incidental to the principal
residential use of the building.
      8.   Stock in trade, including that which is provided on the premises,
shall not require receipt or delivery of merchandise, goods, and supplies other
than by United States Mail, similar parcel delivery service, or by private
vehicle similar in size and weight to the U.S. Mail/other parcel delivery
service vehicles.
      9.   No other person other than members of the family occupying the
residence may be employed in the home occupation.
   F.   Supplemental Regulations For Minor Home Occupations: Minor home
occupations are subject to all the requirements for a Home Occupation, except
as modified by and in addition to the requirements below:
      1.   Minor Home Occupations shall not have exterior evidence of a home
occupation.
   G.   Supplemental Regulations For Major Home Occupations: Major home
occupations are subject to all the requirements for a Home Occupation, except
as modified by and in addition to the requirements below:
      1.   Only one other person other than members of the family occupying the
residence may be employed in the home occupation.
      2.   Signs allowed as specified in Chapter 5 of this Title.
         a.   A larger building sign or freestanding sign may be approved as
part of a Conditional Use approval.
      3.   Parking shall be restricted to existing parking spaces on the
premises and on-street parking spaces adjacent to the premises.
      4.   The applicant shall state on the application the expected number of
vehicles per day accessing the property related to the business.
      5.   The applicant shall state on the application the hours of operation
of the business.
      6.   Retail sales of goods created or fabricated by the family residing
on the premises (other than produce grown on the property) is permitted only as
a Major Home Occupation, subject to all other requirements of the Conditional
Use Permit. (Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023)
10-3-43: RESERVED:
10-3-44: RESERVED:
10-3-45: KEEPING OF CHICKENS:
   A.   Applications And Permits Required:
      1.   A Chicken Keeping Permit is required in accordance with the
following:
         a.   An applicant for Keeping of Chickens must verify to the community
development department that the property owner will meet all requirements and
standards listed in this Section and in
4-7-1 under Title 4 Police Regulations.
   B.   General Requirements:
      1.   Keeping of Chickens shall be permitted as an accessory use on a
detached single-household parcel(s) within a residential zoning district.
   C.   The Minimum Lot Size for a residential parcel containing the accessory
use shall be 7,000 square feet.
   D.   The permitted number of chickens shall be six (6) female domestic
chickens (hens) over the age of three months, or six (6) either sex domestic
chickens under the age of three months, or any combination thereof not to
exceed a total of six (6) chickens per permit holder.
   E.   Specific Standards For Chickens:
      1.   No male chickens (roosters) over the age of three months shall be
permitted.
      2.   No chickens shall be allowed to run at large within the corporate
limits of the City of Belgrade. All chickens shall be contained within the
permittee’ s property boundary.
      3.   The permittee shall provide the chickens with a covered, predator-
proof chicken house that is thoroughly ventilated and of sufficient size to
admit free movement of the chickens. The chicken house shall be adjacent to and
provide free access to the chicken enclosure. Chicken enclosures may be
movable. Any heat source or electrical facilities installed in a chicken house
shall comply with all adopted building and electrical codes of the City of
Belgrade.
      4.   Chickens shall be secured within the chicken house from sunset to
sunrise.
      5.   Chicken enclosures and houses shall be kept in a neat and sanitary
condition at all times and shall be cleaned on a regular basis so as to prevent
offensive odors.
      6.   Chickens shall have continuous access to adequate food and water.
      7.   Stored feed shall be kept in a rodent-proof and predator- proof
container.
      8.   Chickens shall be maintained in a healthy condition. Ill chickens
shall either receive appropriate medical care or be culled.
      9.   No chicken house or chicken enclosure shall be located in a front
yard. No chicken house shall be located closer than 20 feet to any structure
inhabited by someone other than the chicken owner, custodian, or keeper; nor
closer than 10 feet to any neighbor’s property line or public alley; nor closer
than 20 feet from any property line along a public street or roadway. Chicken
houses may be movable but shall comply with all standards of this section.
      10.   No chicken shall be kept in a manner so as to create noxious odors
or noise of a loud, persistent and habitual nature.
      11.   No chickens shall be slaughtered within the public view. (Ord.
2023-7, 7-17-2023)
10-3-46: RESERVED:
10-3-47: SHORT-TERM RENTALS:
   A.   Applications And Permits Required:
      1.   A Short-Term Rental Permit is required as specified in
10-6-8.
      2.   A Short-Term Rental license issued by the city is required in
accordance with Title 2 Business and License Regulations of the City of
Belgrade codes of ordinances.
      3.   The Property owner must be registered with the Department of Revenue
(DOR).
   B.   General Regulations:
      1.   A short-term rental shall be categorized as a residential use in a
dwelling unit designed for such use for periods of time less than 30 days.
      2.   Short-term rentals may alternatively be referred to as vacation
rentals, tourist accommodation units, or resort dwelling units.
      3.   Short-term rentals shall be allowed in residential districts and
mixed- use districts within residential units.
      4.   The use of Recreational vehicles as a short-term rental shall be
prohibited. (Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023)
10-3-48: OUTDOOR STORAGE FACILITY:
   A.   The Following Regulations Shall Apply To The Approval And Operation Of
Outdoor Storage As An Accessory Use:
      1.   Outdoor storage shall only be permitted in areas identified on the
approved site plan. No such activity shall be located closer than fifty feet
(50 ft) to a residential zoning district boundary or road right-of-way abutting
any residential zoning district or within ten feet (10 ft) of any road right-
of-way. Such activities shall not occupy any required parking area or driveway;
      2.   Any outdoor storage area located closer than one hundred feet (100
ft) to a residential district shall, if determined to be visible from such
district, be screened by an opaque fence at least eight feet (8 ft) high or
other means indicated on the approved site plan;
      3.   Illumination of outdoor storage areas shall be designed to prevent
glare or direct light from the illumination source into residential areas;
      4.   Outdoor displays shall be maintained in a neat and orderly fashion.
Waste material shall be contained within a storage area completely surrounded
by a gated masonry wall six feet (6 ft) in height or other screening approved
by the Board. Such screening shall be set back from residential districts at
least six feet (6 ft) and landscaped according to the approved site plan;
      5.   The site plan submitted with an application for a conditional use
permit shall indicate the types of merchandise or materials to be stored, and,
if applicable, any seasonal changes of merchandise or materials;
      6.   Outdoor repair, preparation, cleaning, assembly, disassembly, or
other similar activities shall not be permitted unless the nature and location
of such activity is specifically identified in the application and approved by
the Planning and Zoning Administrator or the Board of Building and Zoning
Appeals. (Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023)
10-3-49: SMALL FARM ANIMAL KEEPING:
   A.   General Regulations:
      1.   The keeping of farm animals except swine on undeveloped and
unplatted property within the city limits, is allowed.
      2.   Two animal units allowed per two and one-half (2 ½) acres. One (1)
additional acre of land shall be provided for each animal unit, beyond the two
(2) units permitted on the first two and one-half acres. Notwithstanding the
acreage available for the domestic livestock uses, no more than eight (8)
individual animals shall be permitted, regardless of size, weight, or species.
         a.   The following numbers are equal to one animal unit:
         b.   One (1) horse.
         c.   One (1) cow.
         d.   Two (2) sheep.
         e.   Two (2) goats.
         f.   Eight (8) rabbits.
         g.   Six (6) larger fowl (ducks, geese, turkeys, etc.).
      3.   All animals shall be securely enclosed in a roaming or grazing area
sufficient to keep them contained, protected from predatory animals and
protected from the elements.
      4.   Perimeter of roaming and grazing areas shall include measures to
ensure that soil erosion shall not occur due to animal activity.
      5.   Setback Requirements:
         a.   The activity shall not be less than one hundred feet (100') from
any structure used for human occupancy and shall be set back not less than 50
feet (50') from any property line.
         b.   Structures and pens to house small farm animals shall be located
in rear yards, as. For a corner lot or other property where no rear yard
exists, a side yard may be used as long as the required setbacks are met. In no
case shall a structure or pen intended to house animals be placed in the front
yard.
      6.   Structures and Enclosures:
         a.   Structures and pen or pasture fencing erected for the housing of
small farm animals must meet the following requirements:
            (1)   The structure shall be enclosed on all sides and shall have a
roof and doors.
            (2)   Access doors must be able to be shut and locked at night.
            (3)   Openings, windows, and vents must be covered with predator-
and bird-proof wire of less than one (1) inch openings.
            (4)   The materials used in making the structure shall be uniform
for each element of the structure such that the walls are all made of the same
material, the roof has the same shingles or other covering, and any windows or
door openings are constructed using the same materials. The use of scrap, waste
board, sheet metal, or similar materials is prohibited. The structure shall be
well-maintained.
      7.   Fencing:
         a.   All structures and pen or pasture fencing shall be of sufficient
size to provide safe housing for those animals kept therein and be designed to
minimize trauma and maximize comfort and usage, including provision of an
adequate number of resting spaces for the number of animals on the property.
      8.   Odor:
         a.   Odor from farm animals shall not be perceptible at the property
boundaries. The Community Development Director may also require landscaping
buffering to provide odor attenuation.
      9.   Noise from the keeping of small farm animals shall be regulated by
chapter 4 of this Title.
      10.   Waste Storage and Removal shall be managed such that all stored
manure and waste material shall be covered by a fully enclosed structure with a
roof line or lid over the entire structure.
         a.   Manure and other waste material shall not be permitted to
accumulate on the premises for a period exceeding thirty (14) days.
      11.   Feed shall be contained and unavailable to rodents, pests, wild
birds and predators. Feed application and distribution for farm animals shall
not result in excessive feed on the property that can attract rodents. (Ord.
2023-7, 7-17-2023)
10-3-50: RESERVED:
10-3-51: RESERVED:
10-3-52: SWIMMING POOL:
   A.   Applications And Permits Required:
      1.   A Land Use Application is required as specified in
10-6-15.
   B.   Supplemental Regulations:
      1.   Location: No public or private swimming pool in any district shall
be located in any required front yard; however if not more than six feet (6')
in height, such use may be located in any required side yard or rear yard.
      2.   Fence Or Wall Required: In addition, all swimming pools shall be
enclosed in an area with a fence or wall not less than forty-two inches (42")
in height and no opening therein, other than doors or gates, larger than four
inches (4") in any direction. A structure of any type may be used as part of
such an enclosure.
      3.   Gates or Doors: All gates and doors opening through such enclosure
shall be kept equipped with a selfclosing and self-latching device for keeping
the gate or door securely always closed when not in actual use, except that the
door of any dwelling which forms a part of the enclosure for private
residential pools need not be so equipped.
      4.   Modifications: The building inspector may modify individual cases
upon showing good cause concerning the height, nature, or location of the
fence, wall, gates, or latches, or the necessity thereof, protected as sought
hereunder, is not reduced thereby. (Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023)
10-3-53: WALK-UP/BIKE-UP WINDOW:
   A.   Applications And Permits Required:
      1.   A Land Use Application is required as specified in
10-6-15.
         a.   An applicant for a walk-up/bike-up window must verify to the
community development director that the project will meet the standards of this
Section.
            (1)   The Community Development Director may impose reasonable
conditions of approval, such as hours of operation and buffers.
            (2)   The conditions shall serve to prevent negative impacts on
nearby residential property and avoid spillover of patrons into the public
right-of-way or adjacent properties.
         b.   Walk-up/Bike-Up windows that do not meet the standards below are
subject to a Conditional Use Permit application consistent as specified in
10-6-12.
      2.   A Building Permit is required as specified in
10-6-14.
   B.   General Regulations:
      1.   Walk-up/bike-up windows for pickup or point-of-sale transactions
shall be considered an accessory use for retail or eating and drinking (in
association with food and/or beverage pickup).
      2.   Walk-up/bike-up window approval shall be subject to the City’s Land
Use and Building Permit processes and policies.
      3.   Walk-up/bike-up windows must not be accessible by persons in
vehicles. Any take-out window with vehicular access shall not be considered a
walk-up window and shall be regulated as a drive-thru facility as specified in
10-4-4.K.
      4.   Walk-up/bike-up windows shall not operate between the hours of 11:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
      5.   Waste receptacles shall be provided and regularly emptied during
hours of operation.
      6.   Walk-up/bike-up windows must be visible from the street and oriented
away from the residential zoning district.
   C.   Location:
      1.   Walk-up/bike-up windows must be located at least 100 feet from a
residential zoning district and at least 10 feet from the public right-of-way.
      2.   The distance shall be measured by the shortest, most direct bearing
distance from the property line of the closest property within the residential
zoning district or public right-of-way to the walk-up/bike-up window location.
   D.   Design:
      1.   Walk-up/bike-up windows must be constructed with similar materials
as the principal structure they are in.
      2.   Walk-up/bike-up windows must be situated to allow for pedestrian
access and queuing outside any vehicle paths and must meet all accessibility
requirements.
   E.   Noise:
      1.   Walk-up/bike-up windows shall not have a speaker box commonly
associated with drive-thru facilities.
      2.   Within 100 ft. of residential districts, no outdoor speakers shall
be allowed.
   F.   Parking: Additional parking shall not be required for a walk-up/bike-up
window. (Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023)
ARTICLE X: TEMPORARY USES
10-3-54: RESERVED:
10-3-55: CAMPING AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES:
   A.   Applications And Permits Required:
      1.   A Special Use Permit is required as specified in
10-6-17.
   B.   Parking For Camping Purposes:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to camp or sleep in a vehicle,
motor home, camper trailer, camper or recreational vehicle, whether
selfpropelled, towed or hauled, parked on any public or private parking lot,
street or alley way, within the city except in a recreational vehicle and
travel trailer park or truck stop, unless specifically authorized by the chief
of police, city manager, or by resolution of the city council, to accommodate a
special event.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person to camp or sleep in a vehicle,
motor home, camper trailer, camper or recreational vehicle, whether
selfpropelled, towed, or hauled, parked on any private lot within the city,
except that the owner or occupant of a single family residential lot may allow
one or more persons to camp or sleep in a parked motor home, camper trailer,
camper or recreational vehicle located on the said lot on for a period not to
exceed one (1) year, provided that the use of the motor home, camper trailer,
camper or recreational vehicle is without compensation to the owner or occupant
of the lot, and provided that the owner or occupant of the lot obtain a Camping
and Recreational Vehicle Permit from the city.
         a.   No more than one (1) motor home, camper trailer, camper or
recreational vehicle shall be allowed on a single-family residential lot at one
(1) time.
         b.   No part of the motor home, camper trailer, camper or recreational
vehicle shall be parked on or extend over any public property or right of way,
including any street, alley, boulevard, sidewalk or park.
         c.   The motor home, camper trailer, camper or recreational vehicle
shall not be connected to the Belgrade City sewer system, and shall not be
allowed to release sewage or gray water upon the ground.
            (1)   The camping permit holder shall provide the city with proof
of proper disposal of sewage and gray water at least once every three (3)
months during the permit period.
      3.   A camping permit may be denied or revoked at any time for good cause
as determined by the city council following notice and public hearing.
      4.   It is not the intent of this ordinance to prevent property owners
from parking camper units upon their property for the purpose of storage of the
unit.
      5.   Recreational Vehicles shall not be used for short-term rentals.
(Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023)
10-3-56: RESERVED:
10-3-57: RESERVED:
10-3-58: RESERVED:
10-3-59: RESERVED:
ARTICLE XI: OTHER
10-3-60: WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES:
   A.   Purpose: The regulations of this section are intended to regulate
mobile service facilities to the full extent allowed and other applicable laws.
These regulations are not intended to regulate or authorize the regulation of
mobile service facilities in a manner that is preempted or prohibited or other
applicable laws.
   B.   Applications And Permits Required:
      1.   A Land Use Application is required as specified in
10-6-15.
   C.   Application Requirements: With the Land Use application, the applicant
shall list the location of every tower, building, or structure within a
reasonable proximity that could support the proposed antenna. The applicant
must demonstrate that a technically suitable location is not reasonably
available on an existing tower, building, or structure within such area. If
another tower owned by another person within such area is technically suitable,
applicant must show that an offer was made to the owner of such tower to co-
locate an antenna on a tower owned by the applicant or reciprocal terms within
the City, and the offer was not accepted. If such co-location offer has not
been attempted by the applicant, then such other tower is presumed to be
reasonably available. Community Development Director shall determine specific
application requirements from time to time. Any decision to deny a request to
place, construct or modify a wireless telecommunication facility and/or tower
shall be in writing and supported by evidence contained in a written record.
   D.   The following regulations apply to all wireless telecommunication
facilities, except for small cell facilities, located outside of the public
right-of-way. Facilities located in the public rightof-way must be consistent
with the standards and requirements contained herein related thereto. Small
cell facilities must be consistent with the standards and requirements
contained in this section.
   E.   Construction Standards: All wireless telecommunication facilities and
support structures shall be certified by an engineer licensed in the State of
Montana to be structurally sound and, at a minimum, in conformance with all
applicable building codes.
   F.   Natural Resource Protection Standards: The location of the wireless
communication facility shall comply with all-natural resource protection
standards established either in this Code or in other applicable regulations,
including those for flood plain, wetlands, ground water protection, and steep
slopes.
   G.   Color And Appearance Standards: All wireless telecommunication
facilities shall be painted a non-contrasting gray or similar color minimizing
its visibility, unless otherwise required by the Federal Communication
Commission, Federal Aviation Administration, and/or by historical or
architectural standards imposed under this Code. All appurtenances shall be
aesthetically and architecturally compatible with the surrounding environment
by the means of camouflage deemed acceptable by the City.
   H.   Advertising Prohibited: No advertising is permitted anywhere upon or
attached to the wireless telecommunication facility.
   I.   Artificial Lighting Restricted: No wireless communication facility
shall be artificially lit except as required by the Federal Aviation
Administration.
   J.   Co-Location: All wireless telecommunication facilities shall be subject
to the co-location requirements set forth in this Code.
   K.   Abandonment: All wireless telecommunication facilities shall be subject
to the abandonment requirements set forth in this Code.
   L.   Security Enclosure Required: All towers and equipment shelters shall be
enclosed either completely or individually. The City and co-locators shall have
reasonable access. No fence shall be required on top of a building or other
structure if access to the roof or top of the structure or building is secure.
   M.   Existing Vegetation And Buffer Plantings: Existing vegetation (trees,
shrubs, etc.) shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. Buffer
plantings shall be located around the perimeter of the security enclosure as
deemed appropriate by the Board. An evergreen screen may be required around the
perimeter of the property in lieu of such buffer plantings.
   N.   Access Control And Emergency Contact: “No Trespassing” signs shall be
posted around the wireless telecommunications facility, along with a telephone
number of who to contact in the event of an emergency. Contact information must
be kept current.
   O.   Jurisdictional Study Of Potential Public Sites: In order to encourage
the location of a wireless telecommunication facility on publicly owned
property, the City shall undertake an identification of publicly owned
properties that the City determines are suitable for such use. The City shall
regularly update such identification and make the results of such available to
the public.
   P.   Exemption Of Proof Of Colocation Availability: Persons locating a
wireless telecommunication facility upon a publicly owned property identified
in the study mentioned above shall be exempted from the requirements herein
regarding presentation of proof that co-location is not available. However,
persons locating a wireless telecommunication facility on publicly owned
property shall continue to be subject to the requirements (co-location design
required) below.
   Q.   Co-Location Design Required: No new tower shall be constructed in the
City unless such tower is capable of accommodating at least one additional
wireless telecommunication facility owned by another person.
   R.   Technically Suitable Space: Authorization for a tower shall be issued
only if there is not technically suitable space reasonably available on an
existing tower or structure within the geographic area to be served.
   S.   Cessation Of Use:
      1.   All providers utilizing towers shall present a report to the City
notifying it of any tower facility located in the City whose use will be
discontinued and the date the use will cease. Such report shall be filed with
the City thirty days prior to the cessation date. If at any time the use of the
facility is discontinued for one hundred and eighty days, the Community
Development Director (or their designee) may declare the facility abandoned.
The 180-day period exclude any dormancy period between construction and the
initial use of the facility. The owner/operator of the facility and of the
property will receive written notice from the City Manager (or their designee)
and be instructed to either reactivate use of the facility within 180 days or
dismantle and remove the facility. If reactivation or dismantling does not
occur, the City will either remove the facility or will contract to have the
facility removed and assess the costs to the private property owner.
      2.   The City must provide the wireless telecommunication facility owner
and the private property owner 30-day notice.
      3.   After such notice has been provided, the City shall have the
authority to initiate proceedings to either acquire the tower and any
appurtenances attached thereto at the current fair market value at that time,
or in the alternative, order the demolition of the tower and all appurtenances.
      4.   The City shall provide the wireless telecommunication facility owner
and the private property owner with the right to a public hearing before the
Zoning Hearing Board. All interested parties shall be allowed an opportunity to
be heard at the public hearing.
      5.   After a public hearing is held the City may order the abatement or
demolition of the tower. The City may require the private property owner to pay
for all expenses necessary to acquire or demolish the tower. (Ord. 2023-7, 7-
17-2023)
10-3-61: SMALL CELL FACILITIES:
   A.   Intent: These Standards Are Intended To:
      1.   Establish a clear, defined aesthetic standard for small cell antenna
facility development throughout the city;
      2.   Establish a menu of design options;
      3.   Minimize unnecessary quantities of new poles by encouraging
colocation of small cell facilities;
   B.   applicability:
      1.   These standards apply to all small cell antenna facilities for
placement on City-owned and non-City-owned poles in the public right-of-way.
   C.   Applications And Permits Required:
      1.   A Land Use Permit is required as specified in
10-6-15.
   D.   Application Requirements:
      1.   Drawings: The applicant must submit fully dimensioned site plans,
elevation drawings and structural calculations prepared, sealed, stamped and
signed by a Professional Engineer licensed and registered by the State of
Montana.
      2.   Drawings: must depict any existing wireless facilities, with all
existing transmission equipment identified; other improvements; the proposed
facility with all proposed transmission equipment and other improvements; and
the boundaries of the area surrounding the proposed facility and any associated
access or utility easements and setbacks.
      3.   Photo Simulations: For all applications, photo simulations from at
least three reasonable line-of- sight locations near the proposed project site
are required as an appendix to the application. The photo simulations must be
taken from the viewpoints of the greatest pedestrian or vehicular traffic. The
angle between the viewpoints of the photo simulations must be at least 90
degrees or greater and provide a full profile depiction.
      4.   Equipment Specifications: For all equipment depicted on the plans,
the applicant must include:
         a.   The manufacturer’s name and model number;
         b.   Physical dimensions including, without limitation, height, width,
depth, volume and weight with mounts and other necessary hardware; and
         c.   Technical rendering of all external components, including
enclosures and all attachment hardware.
      5.   Standards for All Small Cell Antenna Facilities:
         a.   Location:
            (1)   Small cell antenna facilities may be attached to existing
utility and/or light poles.
            (2)   Small cell antenna facilities may be installed as integrated
components of new poles.
            (3)   A new pole is only permitted to be installed on the public
right-of-way if more than 100 feet from any existing utility and/or light pole
or as a replacement of an existing utility and/or light pole.
            (4)   The City desires and encourages co-locations between limited
numbers of multiple separate wireless service providers on the same support
structure whenever feasible. If the applicant chooses to not colocate when
options appear available, demonstrative proof must be provided as to why co-
location is not feasible.
         b.   Obstructions: Any new small cell antenna facility and other
improvements associated with a new facility must not obstruct:
            (1)   Access to any aboveground or underground infrastructure for
traffic control, streetlight or public transportation, including, without
limitation, any curb control sign, parking meter, vehicular traffic sign or
signal, pedestrian traffic sign or signal, or barricade reflectors;
            (2)   Access to any public transportation vehicles, shelters,
street furniture or other improvements at any public transportation stop,
including, without limitation, bus stops, streetcar stops, and bike share
stations;
            (3)   Access to above-ground or underground infrastructure owned or
operated by any public or private utility agency;
            (4)   Access to any fire hydrant;
            (5)   The flow of pedestrian traffic in regards to appropriate
sidewalk spacing and applicable regulations of the Americans with Disabilities
Act;
            (6)   Access to any doors, gates, sidewalk doors, passage doors,
stoops or other ingress and egress points to any building appurtenant to the
right-of-way; and/or
            (7)   Access to any fire escape.
         c.   Antenna: The antenna must be top-mounted and concealed within a
radome that also conceals the cable connections, antenna mount, and other
hardware. GPS antennas must be placed within the radome or directly above the
radome not to exceed six inches. The radome or side-mounted antenna and GPS
antenna must be non-reflective and painted or otherwise colored to match the
existing pole.
         d.   Concealment: Applicants must conceal elements into the proposed
design. Concealment will include approved camouflage or shrouding techniques.
         e.   Utility Lines: New service lines must be routed underground
whenever possible to avoid additional overhead lines. For metal poles,
undergrounded cables and wires must transition directly into the pole base
without any external junction box.
         f.   Lights: Unless otherwise required for compliance with FAA or FCC
regulations, the facility shall not include any permanently installed lights.
Any lights associated with the electronic equipment shall be appropriately
shielded from public view. This subsection is not meant to prohibit
installations on poles also mounted by streetlights or installations of
luminaires or additional street lighting on new poles when required by the
City.
         g.   Generally Applicable Health and Safety Regulations: All
facilities shall be designed, constructed, operated, and maintained in
compliance with all generally applicable health and safety standards,
regulations, and laws, including without limitation all applicable regulations
for human exposure to electromagnetic emissions.
      6.   Standards for Small Cell Antennas Mounted on Existing Poles:
         a.   All equipment, other than the antenna(s), electric meter and
disconnect switch, must be concealed within an equipment shroud not exceed 24
inches in diameter by 60 inches in height.
         b.   The equipment shroud must be installed no lower than 15 feet
above ground level. The equipment shroud must be non-reflective and painted,
wrapped, or otherwise colored to match the existing pole.
         c.   If mounted on the crown of an existing pole, new equipment may
not cause an increase in the height of the existing pole of more than 5 feet.
         d.   It is preferred that equipment shrouds be mounted flush to the
pole, subject to the pole owner’s approval. Standoff mounts are permitted for
the equipment shroud but may not exceed 6 inches and must include metal flaps
or wings to conceal the space between the shroud and the pole.
         e.   Cabling traversing the pole shall be covered using minimum 2
inches in diameter U-guard of steel or aluminum construction. Cabling entering
and exiting the radio shroud must be adjacent to the pole.
      7.   Standards for Small Cell Antennas Mounted Within New and Replacement
Poles:
         a.   Height:
            (1)   New and/or replacement poles may have groundmounted cabinets
for small cell antenna equipment.
            (2)   New and/or replacement poles may have elevated equipment
areas.
            (3)   New and/or replacement poles shall not exceed 115% of the
height of the existing pole to be replaced, 100% of the height of adjacent
existing poles, or 39 feet, whichever is least.
            (4)   Diameter: New and replacement poles may not exceed 24 inches
in diameter.
            (5)   Poles:
               (A)   The provider shall purchase the new or replacement pole
and shall be responsible for the maintenance of the pole during the period of
occupancy by the service provider; ownership of the pole will be vested with
the City.
               (B)   New and replacement poles must match adjacent poles in
style and form (round, octagonal, fluted, tapered, etc).
               (C)   New and replacement poles must be constructed of aluminum
or steel.
               (D)   New and replacement poles should be black in color, using
Gloss Black #17038 per Federal Color Standard 595, unless another color and/or
texture better imitates the existing pole.
               (e)   New and replacement poles must include blank connections
(handholds and J-hooks) for City permitted uses, such as cameras, food truck
connections, wi-fi, and wayfinding signage or banners. Smart poles are
considered to be a suitable replacement for both ornamental and wood poles.
         (5)   Street Lighting:
            (A)   Where an existing pole includes a street lighting luminaire,
the replacement pole must include a street lighting luminaire that matches the
style of adjacent street lighting luminaires and is approved by the City.
            (B)   The replacement luminaire must direct light on the sidewalk
and/or roadway, as appropriate, and not cause nuisance glare beyond the right-
of-way.
            (C)   The lamp should be of a correlated color temperature,
brightness, and lifespan approved by the City.
Table 10-3-61
Standards Towers Antennas
Table 10-3-61
Standards              Towers                      Antennas
                                                   FE, ID, I, EI, AD-A and AD-
                                                   B (subject to FAA
                       FE, ID, I, EI, AD-A and AD- regulations); permitted on
                       B (subject to FAA           any public property in any
Zoning Districts Where regulations); also          zoning district; permitted
Permitted              permitted on a public       on any non-residential
                       property in any zoning      building in any zoning
                       district.                   district; permitted on any
                                                   residential building of four
                                                   or more stories in any
                                                   zoning district.
Permitted Types        Monopoles, lattice towers,  Roof mounted only.
                       and guyed towers.
Max. Height            120 ft                      15 ft
                       200 ft from any zoning
Min. Setback           district that has a         15 ft from the roof edge or
                       residential use as a listed building parapet wall.
                       permitted use.
                       Equipment shelter house
                       must meet all standards for
                       an accessory uses in the
Accessories            FE, ID, I, EI, AD-A and AD- None permitted
                       B (subject to FAA
                       regulations) zoning
                       districts.
                       Vehicular access to the
                       equipment shelter shall be
Access                 provided via existing       Access required to rooftop.
                       circulation system on the
                       property and be paved with
                       asphalt or concrete.
 
(Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023)
10-3-62: SOLAR ENERGY FACILITY:
   A.   Applicability:
      1.   These standards shall apply to the establishment of any new
photovoltaic or solar thermal SEF within the city. Concentrated solar power
systems shall be prohibited.
      2.   An SEF established prior to the effective date of this zoning code
shall not be required to meet the requirements of this zoning code, however:
         a.   Physical modification or alteration to an existing SEF that
materially alters the size, type or components of the SEF shall be subject to
this zoning code. Only the modification or alteration is subject to this zoning
code;
         b.   Substantial conformance review determinations shall not be
considered major amendments to a project’s existing permits; and
         c.   Routine operation and maintenance or like-kind replacements shall
not require a zoning permit.
   B.   Applications And Permits Required:
      1.   A Land Use Permit is required as specified in
10-6-15.
   C.   Tier Descriptions: Solar energy facilities shall be divided into three
(3) tiers that describe the intensity and impact of the use on the property and
adjacent properties.
      1.   Tier 1. Accessory solar energy facilities shall meet the following
criteria:
         a.   It is an accessory use on the site that provides energy primarily
for on-site use; and
         b.   It can be building-mounted or ground-mounted, including rooftop
systems, building-integrated solar (e.g., shingle, hanging solar, canopy, new
technology), or covered permanent parking or other hardscape areas.
      2.   Tier 2. Intermediate solar energy facilities shall meet the
following criteria:
         a.   It is the primary use on the site or a secondary use that exceeds
the size criteria for a Tier 1 SEF;
         b.   It provides energy for on-site or off-site use; and
         c.   It can be building-mounted or ground-mounted and may include
rooftop systems, building-integrated solar, and covered permanent parking or
other hardscape areas.
      3.   Tier 3. Large-scale solar energy facilities shall be characterized
as large-scale, primary or secondary SEFs that provide energy for on-site or
off-site use.
   D.   Standards For Ground-Mounted SEFs:
      1.   Size: The maximum footprint for a ground-mounted SEF shall be as
follows:
         a.   Tier 1:
            (1)   Residential and mixed-use districts: Two thousand (2,000)
square feet or twenty-five (25) percent of the lot size, whichever is less.
            (2)   Agricultural, commercial, and public districts: Four thousand
(4,000) square feet or twenty- five (25) percent of the lot size, whichever is
less.
         b.   Tier 2.
            (1)   Industrial Zone: Up to ten (10) acres.
         c.   Tier 3. Maximum size determined through special review process.
      2.   Height: The maximum height for a ground-mounted SEF shall be as
follows:
         a.   Residential districts: Ten (10) feet.
         b.   All other districts: Twenty (20) feet.
      3.   Setbacks: Ground-mounted SEFs shall comply with the following
setback standards:
         a.   All SEFs shall meet the setback requirements of the individual
zoning district where they are located.
         b.   Tier 2 SEFs in commercial and industrial districts shall provide
a 100-foot minimum setback between the edge of the SEF installation boundary
and any residential district.
      4.   Tier 1 and Tier 2 SEFs shall not be located between the front
building line and the street.
   E.   Standards For Building-Mounted SEFs:
      1.   Height:
         a.   Tier 1 SEFs shall be subject to the maximum height for the
associated zoning district or a maximum of five (5) feet above the height of
the roofline, whichever is less. Additional height may be requested through the
special review process.
         b.   Tier 2 SEFS shall be subject to the maximum height for the
associated zoning district or a maximum of ten (10) feet above the height of
the building, whichever is greater. Additional height may be requested through
the special review process.
   F.   Permit Required:
      1.   The following permit requirements are applicable to SEF systems.
Complete permit submission requirements and processes are provided in Chapter
6.
      2.   Submission Requirements for Tier 2 and Tier 3 SEFs: Tier 2 zoning
Land Use Permit and Tier 3 special review SEF applications shall include the
following information:
         a.   A landscape plan showing all areas occupied by the facility,
which are not utilized for access to operate and maintain the installation,
planted, and maintained with a naturalized grass or other vegetation for the
purpose of soil stabilization or other methods approved by the Building
Official.
         b.   A storm water management plan showing existing and proposed
grading and drainage demonstrating no net increase in runoff.
         c.   A maintenance plan for the continuing maintenance of the SEF,
which may include, but not be limited to, planned maintenance of vegetation or
ground cover, equipment maintenance, and plans for cleaning of solar panels if
required.
         d.   A decommissioning plan with the information required in
subsection H of this section.
      3.   Following approval, all permit holders shall be required to submit
an annual compliance statement that confirms that the system is still active
and compliant with the permit and that provides current owner and emergency
contact information. This requirement shall not preclude the city from
undertaking a separate compliance report, where confirmation of data provided
by the facility’s operator is desired.
   G.   Generally Applicable Standards:
      1.   Off-site facilities: When the SEF is located on more than one
parcel, there shall be a proper easement agreement or other approved methods
for the notification of all impacted parties.
      2.   Septic system avoidance: The SEF shall not be located over a septic
system, leach field area or identified reserve area unless approved by the
department of environmental quality;
      3.   Conformance to development standards for underlying zone. The SEF
shall be ground mounted, or when located on structures, the SEF shall conform
to the development standards for a principal structure in the zone in which
such facilities and structures are to be located, except as otherwise provided
herein.
      4.   Lighting: If lighting is required, it shall be activated by motion
sensors, and be a fully shielded and downcast type where the light does not
spill onto the adjacent parcel or the night sky.
      5.   The site shall comply with article III Landscaping in Chapter 4 of
this Title.
      6.   The facility shall be enclosed by a six-foot tall fence (eight (8)
feet if razor or barbed wire is to be used), barrier, or other appropriate
means designed to prevent or restrict unauthorized persons or vehicles from
entering the parcel(s). Fences or barriers shall incorporate wildlife friendly
design. No barrier shall be required where projects employ full-time security
guards or video surveillance.
      7.   Signs: Permanent or temporary commercial signs (including flags,
streamers, or decorative items), shall be prohibited from being displayed on
any SEF equipment. As appropriate and for emergency and safety purposes, SEF
equipment shall display identification of the manufacturer, facility owner and/
or operator, and an emergency contact number.
   H.   Abandonment:
      1.   Applicability:
         a.   An SEF, other than a Tier 1 system, that ceases to produce
electricity on a continuous basis for twelve (12) months shall be considered
abandoned, unless the property owner or facility operator demonstrates by
substantial evidence satisfactory to the city that there is no intent to
abandon the facility.
         b.   A property owner or facility operator with an abandoned system
shall follow the decommissioning plan to remove the system. If the system was
approved without a decommissioning plan, the property owner or facility
operator shall remove all equipment and facilities and restore the site to
original condition upon abandonment.
         c.   Facilities deemed by the city to be unsafe and facilities erected
in violation of this section shall also be subject to this section.
      2.   Determination Of Abandonment:
         a.   Based on the information provided in an annual compliance
statement or verified zoning complaint, the Building Official shall have the
right to request documentation, and/or affidavits from the property owner,
regarding the system’s usage and shall make a determination as to the date of
abandonment or the date on which other violation(s) occurred. The Building
Official shall submit the documentation and Building Official’s findings to the
city council, property owner, and facility operator and schedule a public
hearing for a determination of abandonment.
         b.   Upon a determination of abandonment or other violation(s), the
city shall send a notice to the property owner and facility operator,
indicating that the responsible party shall remove the SEF and all associated
facilities, and remediate the site to its approximate original condition within
a reasonable timeframe established by the city, unless the city determines that
the facilities must be removed in a shorter period to protect public safety.
Alternatively, if the violation(s) can be addressed by means short of removing
the SEF and restoration of the site, the city may advise the property owner and
facility operator of such alternative means of resolving the violation(s).
         c.   If the property owner or facility operator does not comply, the
city may remove the SEF and restore the site and may thereafter:
            (1)   Draw funds from the bond, security, or financial assurance
that was established during permitting, and
         d.   Initiate judicial proceedings or take other steps authorized by
law against the responsible parties to recover only those costs associated with
the removal of structures deemed a public hazard.
   I.   Decommissioning:
      1. A decommissioning plan, compliant with MCA 75-26-301 where applicable,
shall be prepared for Tier 2 and Tier 3 applications and submitted with Land
Use Permit or special review application. The plan shall address the following:
         a.   Defined conditions upon which decommissioning will be initiated
(e.g., end of land lease, no power production for twelve (12) months, etc.).
         b.   Removal of all non-utility owned equipment, conduit, structures,
fencing, roads, and foundations, and restoration of property to condition prior
to development of the SEF. This shall include a revegetation plan. The
applicant may propose retaining some site improvements, such as roads and
infrastructure, subject to landowner consent and city approval.
         c.   Timeframe for completion of decommissioning activities, not to
exceed one year.
         d.   Description and copy of any lease or any other agreement with
landowner regarding decommissioning.
         e.   Name and address of person or party responsible for
decommissioning.
         f.   Plans and schedule for updating this decommissioning plan.
         g.   A professional engineer’s estimated cost of decommissioning, the
financial resources to be used to accomplish decommissioning, and the escrow
agent with which the resources shall be deposited.
         h.   An agreement between the applicant and the city whereby:
            (1)   The financial resources for decommissioning shall be in the
form of a surety bond or letter of credit and shall be deposited in an escrow
account with an escrow agent acceptable to the city.
            (2)   The city shall have access to the escrow account funds for
the expressed purpose of completing decommissioning if decommissioning is not
completed by the applicant within one year of the end of project life,
inoperability of individual WECS turbine, or facility abandonment. Escrow funds
may be used for administrative fees and costs associated with decommissioning.
            (3)   The city is granted the right of entry onto the site,
pursuant to reasonable notice, to effect or complete decommissioning.
            (4)   The city is granted the right to seek injunctive relief to
effect or complete decommissioning; to seek reimbursement from applicant,
operator, or their successor(s) for decommissioning costs in excess of the
amount deposited in escrow; and to file a lien against any real estate owned by
applicant, operator, or their successor(s), or in which they have an interest,
for the amount of the excess, and to take all steps allowed by law to enforce
the lien.
            (5)   Before final electrical inspection, provide evidence that the
decommissioning plan was recorded with the Belgrade city clerk. (Ord. 2023-7,
7-17-2023)
CHAPTER 4
GENERALLY APPLICABLE STANDARDS
SECTION:
10-4-1: Fences, Hedges, And Walls
10-4-2: Lighting
10-4-3: Landscaping, Screening, And Buffering
10-4-4: Parking, Loading, And Drive-Thrus
10-4-1: FENCES, HEDGES, AND WALLS:
   A.   Applicability: Unless otherwise expressly stated, fences, hedges, and
walls provided to meet regulations of this Title are subject to the regulations
of this section.
   B.   Location:
      1.   Fences, hedges, and walls in any district shall be located on or
within the boundary lines of the property owner unless approved otherwise in
writing by the Zoning Official upon consent from the affected adjacent property
owner.
      2.   Fences or walls adjacent to a sidewalk or trail shall be set back a
minimum of three feet from the back of the sidewalk/trail or placed along the
property line, whichever distance is greater. Fences may not be located within
the vision triangle when the fences are abutting the intersection of two
streets.
      3.   It shall be unlawful for any fence, hedge, or wall to create an
unsafe or dangerous obstruction or condition on a property. This includes a
fence, hedge, or wall that obstructs reasonable access to the utility,
irrigation, or drainage equipment, structures, or facilities located within a
dedicated easement or right-of-way by persons who are entitled to gain access
to such equipment, structures, or facilities.
   C.   Height:
      1.   Fences, hedges, and walls shall not exceed six feet in height in any
side and rear yards.
      2.   Fences shall not exceed four feet in any front yard as defined in
this code. An exception to the height restrictions will be granted for fences
used in an agricultural pursuit to retain stock animals.
      3.   In the case of a fence erected on top of a retaining wall, the
height shall be measured from the top surface of the wall to the ground on the
high side of the wall.
   D.   Materials And Construction:
      1.   The finished surface of a fence shall face adjacent property owners
or the street frontage. Non-decorative elements such as fence posts and
supporting structures shall face inward when visible on one side, not outward.
      2.   Barbed wire, or any other sharp fencing material, shall be permitted
to be erected and maintained in any district in or out of the City limits for
an undeveloped and unplatted property that is used for grazing farm animals
that the City Council has approved as per exemption in Section 4-1-8 of the
Belgrade City Code. The barbed wire shall be removed when required by the City
Council.
      3.   Electrically charged fences shall be permitted only in the R, FE, or
I Districts.
      4.   When electrically charged fences are used in the R, FE, or I
Districts, such fence shall be posted with warning signs at intervals not to
exceed 150 feet where such fences are adjacent to public rights-of- way.
      5.   All fences, hedges, and walls shall be maintained in good condition
at all times. All fences and walls shall be neatly finished and repaired,
including all parts and supports. (Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023)
10-4-2: LIGHTING:
   A.   Intent: These standards shall serve to manage and/or limit outdoor
lighting in order to mitigate against light pollution, light trespass, and
glare; to conserve energy and protect natural resources; and to facilitate the
safety and security of persons and property.
   B.   Applicability:
      1.   The lighting standards herein shall apply to the following:
         a.   All exterior lighting fixtures within the city of Belgrade,
installed after the effective date of this code, regardless of zoning
classification or ownership, shall comply with the requirements of this chapter
unless expressly exempted herein.
         b.   Streetlights installed prior to adopting the ordinance from which
this title was derived shall be replaced with a compliant luminaire when the
streetlight becomes inoperable.
         c.   All exterior lighting fixtures established or permitted as of the
date of this code shall be brought into conformance with the standards herein
within one year for multifamily, commercial or industrial properties and three
years for residential properties.
   C.   Exemptions:
      1.   The following types of lighting shall be exempt from the standards
of this chapter:
         a.   Federally-funded and state- funded roadway construction projects
shall be considered exempt from the ordinance from which this title was derived
only to the extent necessary to comply with state and federal requirements.
         b.   Full cutoff street lighting, which is part of a federal, state,
or municipal installation.
         c.   Holiday lighting and other seasonal decorations shall not require
shielding provided they are not in use for more than 75 consecutive days.
         d.   Specialized lighting necessary for safety, such as navigation or
runway lighting of airports, temporary lighting associated with emergency
operations, roadway hazard warnings, etc.
         e.   Traffic control signals and devices.
         f.   Sports field lighting, subject to the provisions contained in the
general standards.
         g.   Lighting of the United States flag pursuant to U.S. Flag Code
guidelines.
         h.   Motion-activated, intermittent home security lighting within
residential zones.
   D.   General Lighting Standards: The following general standards shall apply
to all outdoor lighting fixtures and accent lighting unless otherwise exempt:
      1.   All light trespass shall be prohibited.
      2.   All area lights, including streetlights and parking area lighting,
shall be full or semi cut-off fixtures.
      3.   In all zones, except residential districts, accent lighting shall be
directed downward onto the illuminated object or area and not upward into the
sky or onto adjacent properties. Direct accent light emissions shall not be
visible above the roofline, building, or other associated structures.
      4.   Canopy lights shall be recessed sufficiently so that no light spills
onto adjacent property or rights-of-way.
      5.   Illumination levels and uniformity ratios shall be in accordance
with current recommended standards set by the Illumination Engineering Society
of North America (IESNA), and not exceeded.
      6.   The developer or builder shall be required to verify to the city in
writing that all outdoor lights were installed as described on the approved
photometric plans.
      7.   All non-essential exterior commercial and residential lighting shall
be turned off after business hours or when not in use.
      8.   Outdoor lighting fixtures and accent lighting shall not illuminate
non- navigable public bodies of water.
      9.   All radio, communication, and navigation towers that require lights
shall have dual lighting capabilities. For daytime, a white strobe light may be
used, and for nighttime, only red lights shall be used.
      10.   Uplighting is prohibited, except in cases where the fixture is
shielded by a roof overhang or similar structural shield from the sky. A
licensed architect or engineer has stamped a prepared lighting plan that
ensures that the light fixture(s) will not cause light to extend beyond the
structural shield except as specifically permitted in this chapter.
      11.   New and existing service stations shall have lighting levels no
greater than thirty footcandles, as set by the IESNA for urban service
stations.
      Existing service stations shall comply with this standard within one year
of the effective date of this code.
         a.   Illumination for outdoor recreation facilities shall conform to
the shielding requirements of this chapter, except when such shielding would
interfere with the intended activity (including but not limited to baseball,
softball, and football). For such facilities, partially shielded luminaries
shall be permitted and shall operate only with a permit from the city,
recognizing that steps have been taken to minimize glare and light trespass.
Where fully shielded luminaries are required, the light fixtures shall conform
to light trespass requirements. Illumination for outdoor recreation facilities
shall be turned off between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. (Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023)
10-4-3: LANDSCAPING, SCREENING, AND BUFFERING:
   A.   Purpose And Intent: This section comprises requirements for general
landscaping and buffer yards; parking lot landscaping; foundation landscaping;
street trees, vision clearance; and irrigation and maintenance.
      1.   The overarching purpose of this chapter is to accomplish the
following:
         a.   Improve the compatibility of different land uses by providing a
buffer between those uses of differing character;
         b.   Enhance the beauty of the city;
         c.   Protect the character and stability of different uses of
property;
         d.   Preserve the value of lands and buildings;
         e.   Diminish the spread of noxious weeds and re-establish native
plants;
         f.   Reducing the volume and rate of flow of stormwater runoff;
         g.   Improve the quality of stormwater runoff water;
         h.   Reduce urban temperatures; and
         i.   Promote more sustainable use of resources dedicated to landscape
maintenance.
   B.   Applicability: The provisions of this chapter shall apply to public and
private development on property located in all zoning districts when a building
permit is required.
   C.   Procedure:
      1.   Any person seeking a building permit for new construction or a
building or parking lot expansion of greater than 50% shall submit a
landscaping plan, which shall include the following:
         a.   The location, size, description, and quantity of landscaping
materials and areas proposed, demonstrating compliance with the requirements of
this chapter.
         b.   The location and size of any existing and proposed structures on
the lot.
         c.   The location and description of proposed buffering/screening as
required.
      2.   An applicant may request a variance from landscaping standards to
permit a variation from the requirements of this chapter. If the board of
adjustment determines that a variance is appropriate, the Board may require
alternative landscaping, architectural, or other mitigating features as deemed
appropriate under the circumstances.
      3.   No building permit or conditional use permit shall be granted or
issued until final approval of the landscaping plan.
      4.   A property occupancy certificate shall be issued once the
landscaping is completed or financially guaranteed.
         a.   For sites smaller than one-half (0.5) acre, installation of all
landscaping in compliance with the approved landscaping plan shall be confirmed
by a site visit or photo evidence of fully installed landscaping.
         b.   For sites larger than one-half (0.5) acre, assurance of
landscaping installation shall be provided in the form of:
            (1).   A bond in the amount of one hundred fifty percent (150%) of
the cost of completion of the landscaping, provided to the City. The cost of
completion of landscaping shall be determined by a professional landscaping
business approved by the City.
            (2)   The bond shall be in the form of cash, certificate of
deposit, letter of credit issued by a federally insured lending institution,
completion bond issued by an approved insurance or bonding company, or in such
other manner as shall be approved by the City. In the event that the
landscaping still needs to be completed according to the approved plan within
one year after the issuance of the certificate of occupancy, the City may
obtain the proceeds from the bond and contract to have the landscaping
completed. The applicant shall be responsible for the entire cost of completing
the landscaping, including any cost in excess of the amount of the bond.
   D.   Installation And Minimum Planting Requirements:
      1.   Drought-Tolerant Species Required: A landscape plan shall provide
75% or greater of the proposed trees and shrubs as drought-tolerant species as
defined in the latest editions of the Montana Nursery and Landscape
Association’s Drought Tolerant Plans for the Montana Landscape or on a list
adopted by the City of drought tolerant species for purposes of this section.
         a.   Lawn Area: Grassy areas shall utilize species that are well
adapted to the growing conditions of Gallatin County, Montana.
         b.   Ground Cover: In lieu of grass (native-species) of low-growing
ground cover plants, preferably drought tolerant, may be used as a more
sustainable alternative.
         c.   Trees: Trees interior to the lot shall be a minimum height of
eight (8) feet and a minimum diameter of one and one-half (1 1/2) inches at the
time of planting.
         d.   Shrubs: All shrubs shall be a minimum of eighteen (18) inches in
height at time of planting.
         e.   Except as otherwise noted in this section, at least fifty (50)
percent of landscaped areas created to meet the requirements of this section
shall be landscaped with living plant materials such as grass, wildflowers,
perennials, groundcover, or shrub plantings. Plant material used for
groundcover and shrub plantings shall be spaced to cover at least half of this
area when mature.
         f.   Remaining required landscaped areas not landscaped with living
plant materials shall be landscaped with non-living landscape materials,
including but not limited to bark, gravel, rock, decorative integrally colored
stamped concrete, brick, landscape pavers, and other similar materials.
      2.   Fences And Walls: Fences and walls utilized to meet the buffer yard
standards shall be architecturally compatible in color and design with the
structure located on the property subject to the buffer yard standards.
         a.   Fences and walls shall not exceed seven feet in height in the
side and rear yards.
         b.   Fences and walls shall not exceed four feet in any front yard.
      3.   Landscaping: Landscaping shall be permitted within the required
front, side, and rear setback areas. No landscaping shall be placed within
public rights-of-way without obtaining written approval from the City.
      4.   Landscaping Strip:
         a.   There is a minimum requirement for a fifteen-foot (15') wide
landscaping strip adjacent to and along all streets and avenues.
            (1)   Excluding driveways that may not exceed thirty feet (30') in
width in the Neighborhood Residential district; or
            (2)   Excluding driveways that may not exceed forty feet (40') in
width in the Mixed- Use Zone, Commercial Corridor, Downtown District, Flex
Employment, Industrial Zone, OPS, Mixed Residential, and Community Living.
         b.   There shall be at least 10 feet of separation between driveways
that are 30 feet (30') or less in width and at least (20') of separation
between driveway throats that are more than thirty feet (30') in width.
   E.   Foundation Landscaping Standards:
      1.   All foundations shall be wrapped by an adjacent planting strip at
least five feet in width. Plantings shall comprise native decorative long
grasses, shrubs, flowers, or edible plants planted at the minimum planting
distance.
      2.   Where the foundation immediately abuts a sidewalk, a foundation
planting strip is not required.
   F.   Street Tree Requirements:
      1.   The installation of street trees shall be required for all new
construction.
      2.   Street trees shall be provided within a five-foot wide tree lawn;
the tree lawn boulevard shall be provided either between the public street and
sidewalk with the approval of the Public Works Department or on the interior of
any lot line adjacent to a public street.
      3.   Trees shall be provided at a rate of one per 40 feet of street
frontage.
      4.   Tree plantings shall be native to Gallatin County, Montana.
      5.   Street tree plantings shall be clearly indicated on the landscape
plan.
   G.   Buffer Yard Standards:
      1.   Applicability: Buffer yards shall be required between adjoining
incompatible uses as outlined in
Table 10-4-3.G.1, except for:
         a.   Any area occupied by structures, paving, walkways, decks, or
patios;
         b.   Any portion of a lot that retains a mature tree canopy that is
undisturbed from construction or site improvement activities, as determined by
the community development department;
         c.   Where landscaping would conflict with access to utility
infrastructure; however, groundcover shall be planted provided it does not
interfere with utility infrastructure as determined by the City Engineer;
         d.   Between adjacent sites with shared parking;
         e.   Where common driveways or vehicular access easements are located
on the property line; or
         f.   Where buildings are located side-by-side or on a property line.
      2.   Location:
         a.   Buffer yards shall be located on the side and rear lot lines
extending into the yard or setback, depending on the size of the lot. Buffers
shall not extend into, or be located within, any portion of an existing public
right-of-way.
         b.   The buffer yards specified shall be provided on each lot
independent of adjoining buffers.
   H.   Parking Lot Landscaping Requirements:
      1.   All surface, off-street parking lots shall comply with the
requirements of this section.
      2.   The minimum number of trees shall be at least one per 100 square
feet of landscaped parking lot area. Trees that are part of a buffer yard shall
not count toward meeting this minimum.
      3.   Whenever possible, parking lots larger than 30,000 square feet shall
be designed to break up their visual expanse and create the appearance of
smaller parking lots. This distinction or separation can be achieved by
interspersing yard space and buildings in strategic areas and taking advantage
of natural features such as slopes, existing woodland or vegetation, drainage
courses, and retention areas.
Table10-4-3.G.1: Buffer Yard Types by Zones/Uses
      Adjacent Zone/Use
Zone/        Residential Mixed Neighborhood Commercial/ Industrial Institution
Use   Rural              Use   Residential  Industrial
      (R)    (RS) (MR)   Zone  (N)          (CC) (DD)   (I) (A)    (EI) (OSP)
             (CL)        (MU)5              (FE) (ID)
Table10-4-3.G.1: Buffer Yard Types by Zones/Uses
             Adjacent Zone/Use
             Rural Residential Mixed Neighborhood Commercial/ Industrial Institution
Zone/Use                       Use   Residential  Industrial
             (R)   (RS) (MR)   Zone  (N)          (CC) (DD)   (I) (A)    (EI) (OSP)
                   (CL)        (MU)5              (FE) (ID)
Rural (R)    --    --          B     B            C           D          B
Residential
(RS) (CL)    --    --          B     B            C           D          B
(MR)
Mixed Use    B     B           --    A            B           D          A
(MU)5
Neighborhood
Residential  B     B           A     -            B           D          A
(N)
Commercial/
Industrial   C     C           B     B            -           D          A
(CC) (DD)
(FE) (ID)
Industrial   D     D           D     D            D           --         D
(I) (A)
Institution  B     B           A     A            A           D          -
(EI) (OSP)
5 Within a mixed zone, any fully residential use located next to a full non-
residential use shall be required to maintain the same buffer yard as that between a
residential and mixed zone, i.e. buffer yard standard B.
 
 
Table 10-4-3.G.2: Buffer Yard Standards
Buffer Yard Types Buffer Yard Width Trees/Shrubs Minimum6 Permitted Substitute
                  Minimum
A                 5'                Trees: 2
                                    Shrubs: 6             A wooden or masonry
                                    Trees: 3              fence may be
B                 10'               Shrubs: 9             substituted

C                 15'               Trees: 4
                                    Shrubs: 12            An earthen berm no
                                                          less than 10 feet in
                                                          width with a rise
                                    Trees: 5              over run of 1:3 feet,
D                 20'               Shrubs: 15            planted with shrubs
                                                          and trees at the
                                                          ridge of the berm.

6 Minimum number of trees/shrubs per 100 linear feet of buffer yard
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b04b0e5ccf6b07bdb8fe5d5bf5701ac5bc51801a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2381.jpg]
Figure 5: Buffer Yard Example
      4.    One parking island shall be provided for every 40 parking spaces.
      5.   Parking islands shall be dispersed throughout the parking area. The
minimum parking island size should be 200 square feet, with one tree planting
per 200 square feet of the peninsula, with a 2' minimum distance between all
trees or shrubs and the edge of pavement where vehicles overhang and a minimum
width of 10 feet. Parking peninsulas shall be a minimum of six feet in width.
      6.   A parking peninsula with a planted bioswale, which is continuous
throughout the width of the parking lot, shall be permitted instead of a
parking island, provided at a rate of one peninsula per 60 parking spaces.
Where a peninsula with a planted bioswale is provided, a 20% reduction in the
minimum number of parking spaces shall be permitted. A landscape architect
shall design the bioswale, and a maintenance document shall be provided with
the landscaping plan when a bioswale is installed.
   I.   Vision Clearance Requirements:
      1.   All landscaped areas shall comply with the clear vision standards
for intersections and driveways, including the allowed height and placement of
fences, walls, signs, landscaping materials, and other objects within the clear
vision triangle(s).
   J.   Irrigation And Maintenance Requirements:
      1.   All newly planted and relocated temporary or permanent irrigation
systems shall water live plant cover until such time as they are established
and subsequently on an as-needed basis in compliance with existing water
restrictions.
      2.   All live plant cover in landscaped areas shall be controlled by
pruning, trimming, or other suitable methods so as not to interfere with public
utilities, restrict pedestrian or vehicular access, or otherwise constitute a
traffic hazard.
      3.   All landscaping elements shall be kept free of weeds, debris, and
litter and, whenever necessary, replaced with new landscaping to ensure
continued compliance with this chapter.
      4.   All walls and fences shall be maintained in good condition and, when
necessary, be repaired or replaced.
      5.   The property owner shall be responsible for compliance with this
chapter. (Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023; amd. Ord. 2023-9, 12-18-2023)
10-4-4: PARKING, LOADING, AND DRIVE-THRUS:
   A.   Applicability: Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided
for uses that are established, enlarged, extended, or moved onto any lot after
the effective date of these zoning regulations or of a subsequent rezoning or
other amendment establishing or increasing parking or loading requirements for
the uses. When an expanded use results in an increase of more than 20% in the
number of currently required parking spaces, additional parking shall be
provided for the additional space based on the standards of this chapter.
   B.   Parking Space Count: The minimum number of provided parking spaces
shall be provided per the table below:
   C.   Pick-Up And Drop-Off Parking Spaces:
      1.   Any use which provides delivery or pick-up of goods or services, or
fulfillment of online orders, shall designate at least one pick-up/ drop-off
parking space.
      2.   Where it is anticipated that 50% or more of sales will be generated
from pick-up orders, delivery, or the fulfillment of online orders, an
additional three pick-up and drop-off spaces shall be designated.
      3.   Pick-up and drop-off parking spaces shall be counted within the
minimum required parking, shall be striped with a different color than other
parking spaces, and shall be clearly signed and striped to state that they only
serve pick-up, drop-off, and rideshare activity.
Table 10-4-4
All Districts Parking Max Bicycle Requirements
Table 10-4-4
All Districts       Parking             Max                 Bicycle
                                                            Requirements
                    2 spaces per
Residential Uses -  dwelling unit or
Single Family       one space per                           
                    bedroom which is
                    greater
                    Minimum 2 off-
                    street spaces for a
                    townhouse unit. A
Residential Units - Townhouse with more                     
Townhouse           than 2 bedrooms,
                    requires an
                    additional space
                    per bedroom.
                    2 spaces per
                    dwelling unit.
                    Dwelling units with
                    three (3) bedrooms,
                    a minimum of two
Residential Uses -  and a half (2.5)
Multi-family and    off-street parking                       
apartments          spaces. Dwelling
                    units with more
                    than three (3)
                    bedrooms, minimum
                    of one (1) parking
                    space per bedroom
                    required.           Parking spaces
                    0.5 spaces per      shall be at most    1 bicycle parking
Commercial Uses     person at full      90% of the maximum  space per 5 car
(Including Office   capacity; or 1      per-person capacity parking spaces,
Uses)               space per 500 GFA,  of the building or  with a maximum of 5
                    whichever is less   site.               bicycle parking
                                                            spaces required.
                    1 space per
Industrial Uses     anticipated                              
                    employee
                                                            1 bicycle parking
                                                            space per 5 car
Mixed-use Building  1 space per 600 GFA                     parking spaces,
                                                            with a maximum of 5
                                                            bicycle parking
                                                            spaces required.
                    Decided per
Public Uses         administrative                           
                    approval
                                        Parking spaces      1 bicycle parking
All uses in                             shall be at most    space per 5 car
Downtown District   None required       60% of the maximum  parking spaces,
(all sub-areas)                         per-person capacity with a maximum of 5
                                        of the building or  bicycle parking
                                        site.               spaces required.
 
      4.   Pick-up and drop-off spaces shall be the closest parking spaces to
the building entrance with the exception of parking spaces for disabled
persons.
   D.   Parking Space And Driveway Dimensions:
      1.   Parking spaces shall be a minimum of 9 feet in width and 18 feet in
length.
         a.   10% of spaces shall be 10 feet in width and 20 feet in length in
order to accommodate larger passenger vehicles like trucks and camper vans.
         b.   Up to 10% of spaces may be utilized for compact cars, which shall
have a minimum dimension of 8 feet in width and 16 feet in length.
      2.   Driveways shall be a minimum of 24 feet wide and shall be long
enough so that no vehicle parked on the property extends into the right-of-
way, either the sidewalk or road.
      3.   Drive aisles shall be a minimum of 24 feet wide.
   E.   Shared Parking Spaces:
      1.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the joint use
of off-street parking for two (2) or more buildings or uses on the same parcel
of land if the total of such spaces, when used together, is not less than the
sum of the requirements for the individual uses computed separately.
      2.   A City zoning official may administratively permit shared parking,
and may also permit a reduction of the combined parking requirement by up to 25
percent where the property owner provides written evidence, such as a lease or
condominium bylaws, which limits the hours of operation of individual tenants
to ensure that peak parking demands do not exceed the number of parking spaces
present.
   F.   Location Of Parking Areas:
      1.   Townhouse:
         a.   Parking spaces may be provided on the lot of the townhouse or in
a commonly owned and maintained off-street parking bay or facility; provided
that such parking facility is easily accessible and of a reasonable distance
from the townhouse unit it is serving (maximum 100 ft.).
         b.   Required parking spaces shall be allowed in front or side yards,
but shall not exceed thirty feet (30') in width at the curb except shared
driveways may be a maximum of forty feet (40') in width if there is at least
(20') to the next driveway throat or driveway.
      2.   All Other Uses:
         a.   Parking may be located off-site as long as it is within 600 feet
of an entrance to the building or site, connected by a paved pedestrian
walkway.
         b.   If the off-site parking is not under common ownership with the
property for which the parking is provided, then a legal covenant permitting
the use of the off-site parking shall be provided to the City.
   G.   Pedestrian Access:
      1.   Walkways with a minimum unobstructed width of five (5) feet shall be
provided between any building and an adjacent parking lot.
      2.   Pedestrian pathways shall be provided through all parking areas
larger than forty (40) parking spaces to create a safe and convenient
connection to building entryways.
      3.   Pedestrian pathways in and through parking areas must be designed
and constructed to meet the following criteria:
         a.   Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) guidelines;
         b.   Limit conflict between pedestrians and vehicular traffic;
         c.   Be clearly delineated and directional using techniques such as
contrasting textured or colored material, segregation of pathway from vehicle
travel lanes, or raised pathway surfaces;
         d.   Be located a reasonable walking distance from all parking spaces
to minimize conflict with moving vehicles;
         e.   Provide functional connection between the parking area, the
building served by the parking area, and adjacent public sidewalks and rights-
of-way; and
         f.   Provide safe, convenient pedestrian access to all building
entryways open to the public.
   H.   Parking Area Surfaces:
      1.   Parking areas shall have improved surfaces that do not contribute
dust, gravel, sand, or soil to the air, water, or ground surface outside the
lot.
      2.   No required parking space shall be a yard or grassy area.
   I.   ADA Parking Requirements:
      1.   Parking spaces designated and designed for people with disabilities
shall be provided at a rate of 1 parking space per 25 standard parking spaces
provided with a minimum of 1.
      2.   Nothing in this Zoning Code shall be construed to conflict with the
regulations set forth by the Americans with Disabilities Act.
      3.   Parking spaces designated and designed for people with disabilities
shall comply with the universal parking space design set forth in the
International Building Code.
      4.   All such spaces shall be designated by free-standing signs pursuant
to the Montana Secretary of State guidelines. ARM 24.301.905
   J.   Parking Lot Landscaping:
      1.   Parking lots shall be landscaped as specified in
10-4-3.
   K.   Drive-Thru Standards:
      1.   Drive-thrus are permitted only within specific zoning districts as
specified in
 Chapter 3 Uses.
      2.   All queuing vehicles shall be located on the lot on which the drive-
thru services are being provided and shall not interfere with the movement of
vehicles or pedestrians on public rights-of-way.
      3.   All establishments with drive-thrus shall provide a bypass lane
whereby vehicles may exit the lot at any point without proceeding through the
drive-thru lane.
      4.   Menu boards may not flash or have any visible bulbs. All menu boards
shall be oriented toward the drive-thru aisle they serve.
         a.   Drive-thru speakers shall not be audible from adjacent
properties. Drive-thru speakers shall not emit outdoor music.
   L.   Loading Standards:
      1.   The requirements for commercial off-street loading facilities shall
be provided in accordance with the following standards for any new structure
which requires the receipt or distribution of materials or merchandise by
trucks or similar commercial vehicles.
         a.   All required loading berths shall be located on the same lot as
the use served.
         b.   Loading facilities shall not be located within 200 feet of a
residential structure unless the loading facility is being installed within a
mixed-use structure.
         c.   No permitted or required loading berth shall be located within 50
feet of the nearest point of intersection of any two streets.
         d.   All off-street loading berths shall be surfaced with concrete or
other appropriate material meeting the durability requirements.
         e.   Every building having over 5,000 square feet of gross floor area
shall be provided with at least one truck loading and unloading space, not less
than twelve feet in width, forty feet in length and with fourteen feet
clearance. An additional truck space of these dimensions shall be provided for
every additional 20,000 square feet or fraction thereof of gross floor area in
the building.
         f.   Loading areas may not be located closer to a street or road than
the primary structure, with the exception of loading areas on through-lots.
Loading areas facing a public street or road on a through-lot shall be fully
shielded through screening or landscaping.
         g.   Access to truck loading and unloading spaces shall be provided
directly from a public street or alley or from any right of way that will not
interfere with public convenience and that will permit the orderly and safe
movement of such trucks.
         h.   Loading space as required under this section, shall be provided
as an area additional to off-street parking spaces required and shall not be
considered as supplying off- street parking space. (Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023;
amd. Ord. 2023-9, 12-18-2023)
CHAPTER 5
SIGNS
SECTION:
10-5-1: Applicability
10-5-2: Exemptions
10-5-3: Prohibited Signs
10-5-4: General Signage Standards
10-5-5: Sign Area Measurement
10-5-6: Sign Illumination
10-5-7: Electronic Message Center (EMC) Or Changeable Copy Sign
10-5-8: Sign Classification And Sign Types
10-5-9: Permanent Signs Permitted For Residential Properties And Residential
Subdivisions
10-5-10: Permanent Signs Permitted In The R, MU, CC, FE, I, EI, CL, ID
Districts
10-5-11: Temporary Signs
10-5-12: Nonconforming Signs
10-5-13: Maintenance
10-5-1: APPLICABILITY:
   A.   It shall hereafter be unlawful to erect, place, relocate, expand,
modify, maintain, or otherwise alter a sign in the City except in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Unless otherwise provided by this chapter, all signs shall require a
zoning permit.
   C.   Unless otherwise provided, this chapter shall apply to any sign in any
zoning district visible from a public right-of-way or an adjacent property.
   D.   Any sign established before this code’s effective date and rendered
nonconforming by the provisions herein shall be subject to the nonconforming
sign regulations of specified in
10-5-12. (Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023)
10-5-2: EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   The following signs do not require a permit; however, they are still
subject to applicable regulations within this chapter.
      1.   Any sign located entirely within buildings or other structures and/
or otherwise not visible from a public right-of-way or adjacent property;
      2.   Cornerstone inscriptions or other signs that are part of masonry
facades of older buildings;
      3.   Signs of less than one (1) square foot each in the sign area, such
as religious symbols like crucifixes, security system window or door stickers,
identification of store hours, emblems of credit cards accepted, seals
indicating membership in business or trade associations, and the like;
      4.   Bulletin boards and bulletin board signs, as defined herein;
      5.   Signs and/or notices issued by any court, officer, or other people
in the performance of a public duty;
      6.   For the purposes of safety and emergency access signs indicating the
street number of a building or structure are permitted without a zoning permit
but shall not exceed three (3) square feet in sign area;
      7.   Any sign on a truck, bus or another vehicle that is used in the
normal course of a business for transportation;
      8.   Any holiday lighting, signs, or related decorations;
   B.   Painted signs, decals, or other signs located directly inside or on the
window and/or door of the ground floor of commercial use, if less than 30
percent of the area of a windowpane;
   C.   Door signs if less than three (3) square feet in total area and not
more than one sign per door;
   D.   Government-mandated signs in compliance with the manual of uniform
traffic control devices that comply with the requirements of state law for such
signs placed or required to be placed by a government entity;
   E.   Menu signs/ordering kiosks placed adjacent to a commercial drive-thru,
with a maximum of four (4) such signs per property, so long as any
groundmounted menu sign does not exceed 50 square feet and any wall-mounted
menu sign does not exceed nine (9) square feet; and
      1.   Yard Signs - Small, as defined herein;
      2.   One wall sign is permitted on each individual lot used for
residential purposes provided the sign is mounted flush to the facade of the
principal dwelling and does not exceed one square foot;
      3.   Signs for home occupations do not require a permit but are subject
to the standards of this chapter;
      4.   Flags of any fabric or bunting containing colors, patterns, or
symbols; attached to a flagpole as a freestanding structure, or a structure
attached to a building or to the roof of a building, on a parcel of record and
used for the sole purpose of displaying flags, the height of which shall be
measured from the average grade;
      5.   A-frame or T-frame sign;
      6.   Temporary banner sign for identification of a new business for up to
90 days after the business opens after which time a permanent sign must be
erected;
      7.   One neon (or LED tube or rope lighting resembling neon) window sign
at most three (3) square feet in total area per individual tenant suite. No
blinking shall be allowed. (Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023)
10-5-3: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
   A.   The following signs shall not be erected within the City of Belgrade:
      1.   Signs within the right-of-way with the exception of warning signs or
traffic safety signs required by public utility providers, by a public transit
or transportation agency;
      2.   Dilapidated signs, or signs that are not secure, including sign
structures;
      3.   Signs that do not conform to City or State building, fire, or
electrical codes;
      4.   Signs or advertising erected and maintained on trees or painted or
drawn upon rocks or other natural features;
      5.   Signs or advertising devices which attempt or appear to attempt, to
direct the movement of traffic, or which interfere with, imitate, or resemble
an official sign, signal, or device;
      6.   Vehicle signs viewed from a public road with the primary purpose of
providing signage not otherwise allowed by this code;
      7.   Vehicle signs include those attached to or placed on a vehicle or
trailer. Vehicles or trailers shall not be parked continuously in one location
to be used primarily as additional signage. This does not apply to a vehicle
parked at a driver’s residence and is the primary means of transportation to
and from his or her place of employment;
      8.   Signs that are applied to trees, bus shelters, utility poles,
benches, trash receptacles, newspaper vending machines or boxes, or any other
unapproved supporting structure or otherwise placed in the public right-of-way;
      9.   Signs which are not securely affixed to the ground or otherwise
affixed in a permanent manner to an approved supporting structure unless
specifically permitted as a temporary sign;
      10.   Signs attached to a fire escape or that obstruct any fire escape,
any means of egress or ventilation;
      11.   Signs that contain words, pictures, or obscene statements, as
defined by Section 45-8-201 of the Montana Code Annotated;
      12.   Signs that employ any parts or elements which revolve, rotate,
whirl, spin, or otherwise make use of motion to attract attention;
      13.   Animated signs;
      14.   Beacons and searchlights, except for emergency purposes; and
      15.   Except for identification signs on agricultural buildings, no sign
or billboard shall be painted or erected directly upon the roof of any building
or structure. (Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023)
10-5-4: GENERAL SIGNAGE STANDARDS:
   A.   Permanent signs shall be constructed in compliance with all applicable
regulations of the City or State’s applicable building, fire, or electrical
codes, as may be applicable;
      1.   No sign or sign structure shall be placed on private or public
property without the written consent of the owner or agent thereof;
      2.   No sign or sign structure shall be erected at any location where it
may interfere with, obstruct the view of or be confused with any authorized
traffic sign, signal or device;
      3.   No sign shall obstruct or interfere with fire ingress or egress from
any door, window, or fire escape, nor shall it obstruct or interfere with
traffic or traffic visibility, or resemble or imitate signs or signals erected
by the City or other governmental agency for the regulation of traffic or
parking;
      4.   No part of a sign shall have animation, moving parts, flashing
lights or changing colors unless specified in
10-5-6, Sign Illumination;
      5.   All signs shall be secured in such a manner as to prevent swinging
or other significant noticeable movement, not including movement related to
electronic message centers;
      6.   Unless otherwise specifically stated, all permanent signs hereafter
erected, constructed or modified shall be set back a minimum of 5 feet from all
rights-of-way and in all cases shall permit full visibility within the vision
triangle as defined herein; and
      7.   Signs, sign posts, or sign mounting hardware which are no longer
functional, or are abandoned, shall be removed in compliance with the
provisions of this code, within 90 days following such dysfunction or
abandonment. For purposes of this section, “abandoned” means the owner or user
of the sign has completely given up the use of the sign for the purpose it was
intended as ascertained by the reasonable investigation and inquiry of the
Zoning Inspector. (Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023)
10-5-5: SIGN AREA MEASUREMENT:
   A.   For signs on a background, the entire area of the framework or
background of the sign is calculated as the sign area, including any material
or color forming the sign face or background used to differentiate the sign
from the sign structure against which it is placed. (See
diagram “A”).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b04b0e5ccf6b07bdb8fe5d5bf5701ac5bc51801a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2383.jpg]
Diagram A
   B.   For signs consisting of free standing letters or features attached to a
wall, the sign area is calculated as the smallest rectangle encapsulating all
letters and symbols. Sign area does not include any supporting framework or
bracing unless such framework or bracing is part of the message or sign face
(see
diagram “B”).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b04b0e5ccf6b07bdb8fe5d5bf5701ac5bc51801a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2385.jpg]
Diagram B
   C.   For signs that are abnormal shapes, window signs, including neon window
signs, the total sign area is measured by multiplying the full width of the
overall sign copy, including the lettering, logo, and graphics, by the overall
height of the sign copy in a rectangular manner, regardless of the arrangement
of the copy (see
diagram “C”)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b04b0e5ccf6b07bdb8fe5d5bf5701ac5bc51801a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2387.jpg]
Diagram C
   D.   When two sign faces are placed back-to-back so that both faces cannot
be viewed from any one point at the same time and part of the same sign
structure, and are not more than 24 inches at its furthest distance apart, the
sign area shall be computed by the measurement of one of the faces. (Ord. 2023-
7, 7-17-2023)
10-5-6: SIGN ILLUMINATION:
   A.   The table below displays which sign illumination types are permitted
for which uses.
Table 10-5-6
Table 10-5-6
                                                            Where Permitted (by
Illumination Type                                           District or use
                                                            category)
                                                            External
                                                            Illumination is
                                                            permitted for all
                                                            sign types,
External illumination                                       provided that all
                                                            illumination is
                                                            consistent with the
                                                            standards of this
                                                            section.
Internally Lit Lettering                                    Permitted in the R,
   - Illuminated reverse-cut push-through acrylic letter N, MU, CL, CC, DD,
signs                                                       FE, I, ID, and EI
   - Illuminated front-lit channel letter signs          Districts
   - Halo or backlit signs
                                                            Permitted in MU,
Internally Lit Cabinet Signs                                CC, FE, and I
                                                            Districts
                                                            Permitted in the R,
                                                            N, MU, CL, CC, DD,
                                                            FE, I, ID, and EI
                                                            Districts. Neon
                                                            signs shall be
                                                            permitted through
                                                            an internal staff
                                                            design review,
Neon Signs                                                  which will ensure
                                                            that neon signs are
                                                            not excessively
                                                            bright or visually
                                                            dominating.
                                                            Neon signs are
                                                            permitted only for
                                                            retail, restaurant/
                                                            bar, and
                                                            entertainment.
 
   B.   General Sign Illumination Standards:
      1.   Be shielded from all adjacent residential buildings and all streets;
      2.   Not have an intensity to cause glare visible to pedestrians or
vehicle drivers, nor shall the illumination be of such brightness as to cause
reasonable objection from adjacent residential districts or adjacent
properties;
      3.   No illuminated sign shall be permitted if any part of the sign
flashes on or off, has lighting that moves or illustrates movement, or displays
changing degrees of intensity in illumination. This regulation applies to signs
located outside buildings and to window signs inside buildings that can be seen
from the outside. This prohibition on flashing, moving, or intermittent
lighting shall not apply to permitted electronic message centers as specified
in
10-5-7; and
      4.   Signs shall not be lit to obstruct traffic control or other public
information signs.
      5.   Neon lighting shall not exceed 100 nits per sign face. (Ord. 2023-7,
7-17-2023; amd. Ord. 2023-9, 12-18-2023)
10-5-7: ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTER (EMC) OR CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN:
   A.   EMCs are permitted only for gas stations and institutional uses;
   B.   An EMC or Changeable Copy Sign may not comprise more than 50% of the
permitted sign area for a given sign;
   C.   EMC’s are permitted by right only for gas stations and institutional
uses; all other EMC’s are subject to the Conditional Uses process in Section
10.6.12. Amendment recommended by staff after the Planning Board hearing.
   D.   Any electronic message center that is located within 300 feet of any
residential use must automatically turn off between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and
6:00 a.m. daily;
   E.   An electronic message sequence must be accomplished by means of fading
or dissolving but shall not scroll, travel or flash. A transition sequence must
be completed in no more than two (2) seconds;
   F.   No portion of any sign may change its message or background in a manner
or by a method of display characterized by motion, other than fading or
dissolving, or pictorial imagery or depicts action or a special effect to
imitate movement, or the presentation of pictorials or graphics displayed in a
progression of frames that give the illusion of motion or the illusion of
moving objects, moving patterns, bands of light, or expanding or contracting
shapes;
   G.   EMCs shall be designed to display a full black screen, or turn off in
the event of a malfunction;
   H.   Portable electronic message signs are prohibited except for instances
of construction or road projects;
   I.   The EMC shall come equipped with an automatic dimming photocell, which
automatically adjusts the display’s brightness based on ambient light
conditions;
   J.   No EMC shall be permitted to be included as part of any limited
duration sign;
   K.   The brightness level shall not increase by more than 0.3 foot candles
over ambient levels (or 3.23 lumens per square meter or lux) as measured using
a foot candle meter at a pre-set distance; and
   L.   The procedure and distances for measurement of brightness shall be as
established by the International Sign Association’s Recommend Nighttime
Brightness Levels for On-Premise EMCs. (Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023; amd. Ord. 2023-
9, 12-18-2023)
10-5-8: SIGN CLASSIFICATION AND SIGN TYPES:
   A.    Building Signs
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
b04b0e5ccf6b07bdb8fe5d5bf5701ac5bc51801a/ b04b0e5ccf6b07bdb8fe5d5bf5701ac5bc51801a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2389.jpg]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-2391.jpg]
Awning Sign                               Canopy Sign
 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
b04b0e5ccf6b07bdb8fe5d5bf5701ac5bc51801a/ b04b0e5ccf6b07bdb8fe5d5bf5701ac5bc51801a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2393.jpg]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-2395.jpg]
Projecting Sign                           Wall Sign
 
   B.   Freestanding Signs:
      1.   A freestanding sign is any ground-mounted sign affixed to a
freestanding base; the base of the sign shall not be a pole or multiple poles.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b04b0e5ccf6b07bdb8fe5d5bf5701ac5bc51801a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2397.jpg]
Freestanding Sign
 
(Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023)
10-5-9: PERMANENT SIGNS PERMITTED FOR RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES AND RESIDENTIAL
SUBDIVISIONS:
   A.   The following standards shall apply to all properties that are used for
residential purposes as follows: individual dwellings, multi-unit residential
buildings, and residential subdivisions. These standards do not apply to mixed-
use buildings whereby residential uses are co-located with non-residential
uses.
   B.   Institutional Uses found within residential districts shall conform to
section
10-5-10 Permanent Signs in the R, N, CL, CC, MU, DD, FE, I, EI, ID Districts.
Permitted Sign Types Number Permitted Maximum Sign Area Additional Standards
Signs Permitted for Individual Dwellings
Permitted Number    Maximum Sign
Sign      Permitted Area         Additional Standards
Types
Signs Permitted for Individual Dwellings
Wall Sign 1         1.5 square   The sign must be mounted flush to the structure’s facade. A zoning permit
                    feet         shall not be required for this type of sign.
Ground
Mounted             2 square
Sign or   1         feet         Ground-mounted signs shall not exceed three feet in height.
Window
Sign
                    1 square
                    foot for
                    each lineal
                    foot of
                    building
                    frontage
                    If the sign
          1 per     is mounted   The sign may only be illuminated through an external light source. The
Wall Sign street    on a wall at light must be shielded from public view and/or rights-of-way and directed
          frontage  the entrance solely toward the permitted signage.
                    of a
                    subdivision,
                    the sign
                    area shall
                    be no larger
                    than 30
                    square feet
                                 The sign shall be at most 8 feet in height and shall be no closer than 5
Monument  1 per     30 square    feet from the right-of-way.
Sign      street    feet         The sign may only be illuminated through an external light source. The
          frontage               light must be shielded from public view and/or public rights-of- way and
                                 directed solely toward the permitted signage.
Signs Permitted for Multi-Unit Residential Buildings and Subdivision Entrances
Permitted Number    Maximum Sign
Sign      Permitted Area         Additional Standards
Types
                    1 square
                    foot for
                    each lineal
                    foot of
                    building
                    frontage
                    If the sign
          1 per     is mounted   The sign may only be illuminated through an external light source. The
Wall Sign street    on a wall at light must be shielded from public view and/or rights-of-way and directed
          frontage  the entrance solely toward the permitted signage.
                    of a
                    subdivision,
                    the sign
                    area shall
                    be no larger
                    than 30
                    square feet
Monument  1 per     30 square    The sign shall be at most 8 feet in height and shall be no closer than 5
Sign      street    feet         feet from the right-of-way.
          frontage
                                 The sign may only be illuminated through an external light source. The
                              light must be shielded from public view and/or public rights-of- way and
                                 directed solely toward the permitted signage.
 
(Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023)
10-5-10: PERMANENT SIGNS PERMITTED IN THE R, MU, N, CC, DD, FE, I, EI, CL, ID
DISTRICTS:
   A.   Applicability:
      1.   Buildings, developments, subdivisions that are 100% residential
within a non-residential district shall be subject to the permanent sign
allowances for Section
10-5-9 Permanent Signs Permitted for Residential Properties.
      2.   The standards of this section shall apply to institutional uses
found within residential districts.
      3.   Permanent signs shall be divided into the following sign types:
 
Table 10-5-10.A: Sign Classifications
Sign Classification Signage Types                 Number of Signs Permitted
                                                  Within the DD district, one
                                                  (1) building sign is
                                                  permitted per storefront.
                                                  Properties located on a
                                                  corner lot may erect a
                    Awning Sign, Canopy Sign,     building sign on each
                    Marquee, Projecting Sign,     separate street frontage.
                    Wall Sign                     Multi-tenant properties in
Building Signs      A freestanding sign is any    all districts are permitted
Freestanding Signs  ground-mounted sign affixed   one building sign per tenant
                    to a freestanding base; the   in addition to one
                    base of the sign shall not be freestanding sign per street
                    a pole or multiple poles.     frontage for the entire
                                                  multi-tenant property.
                                                  In all other districts except
                                                  for the DD, a property is
                                                  permitted to erect two signs
                                                  per street frontage
 
   B.   Standards By Sign Type:
      1.   The table below displays standards for each individual sign type.
Table 10-5-10.B: Sign Standards by Sign Type
Building Signs Sign Dimensions Additional Standards
Table 10-5-10.B: Sign Standards by Sign Type
Building Signs         Sign Dimensions             Additional Standards
                                                   All components of the awning
                       The sign may not comprise   or canopy shall have a
Awning Sign            more than 50% of the        minimum clearance of eight
                       valance or sloping portion  feet from the sidewalk and
                       of the awning.              15 feet above any driveway
                                                   or vehicular use area.
                                                   All components of the awning
                       1 square foot for every     or canopy shall have a
Canopy Sign            lineal foot of building     minimum clearance of eight
                       frontage.                   feet from the sidewalk and
                                                   15 feet above any driveway
                                                   or vehicular use area.
                       1.5 square feet for every
                       lineal foot of building     Shall not be closer than 3
Marquee Sign           frontage, and shall not be  feet to the closest edge of
                       wider than the entrance it  a street curb
                       serves plus five feet on
                       each side thereof.
                                                   Must be attached
                                                   perpendicular to the wall to
                                                   which it is affixed no less
                       No larger than 12 square    than 9 feet above grade and
Projecting Sign        feet per sign face.         may project up to four feet
                                                   from the building wall, but
                                                   no closer than three feet
                                                   from the closest edge of a
                                                   street curb.
                       1 square foot for every     Shall not protrude more than
Wall Sign              lineal foot of building     24 inches from the wall on
                       frontage.                   which it is mounted.
Freestanding Sign      Sign Dimensions             Additional Standards
                                                   All freestanding signs shall
                                                   be set back a minimum of
                                                   five (5) feet from all
                       One square foot of signage  rights-of-way.
                       area for every one foot of  All permanent freestanding
                       linear lot frontage up to a signs shall be located in a
Freestanding Sign (not maximum of 40 square feet.  landscaped area equal to or
permitted in the DD    Sign height shall be        larger than the total sign
district)              limited to the height of    area of the applicable sign.
                       the building with the       Exposed sign foundations
                       exception of multi-tenant   shall be constructed with a
                       properties, which may have  finished material such as
                       a height up to eight feet.  brick, stone, or wood, or
                                                   another high-quality
                                                   material approved by the
                                                   planning staff.
 
(Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023; amd. Ord. 2023-9, 12-19-2023)
10-5-11: TEMPORARY SIGNS:
   A.   Standards That Apply To All Temporary Signs:
      1.   Temporary signs shall not be mounted, attached, affixed, installed,
or otherwise secured in a manner that will make the sign a permanent sign.
      2.   No temporary sign shall be mounted, attached, affixed, installed, or
otherwise secured so that it protrudes above the roofline of a structure.
      3.   Unless otherwise specifically stated, temporary signs shall not be
illuminated.
      4.   No temporary sign shall require a foundation, support, wiring,
fittings, or elements that would traditionally require a building permit or
electrical permit.
      5.   No streamers, spinning, flashing, or similarly moving devices shall
be allowed as part of or attachments to temporary signs unless approved through
a special event permit.
 
Table 10-5-11.A: Temporary Signs Permitted on a Residential Property
Temporary Signs Permitted on a Residential Property (property must be used
solely for residential purposes)
Sign Type       Number Permitted      Permitted Duration Additional Standards
                Up to 24 square feet                     No individual small
                of total sign area                       yard sign may have a
Small Yard Sign (the sum of all small 90 days            sign face larger than
                yard signs on the                        eight square feet, and
                property)                                may not be taller than
                                                         four feet.
                                                         No individual large
                One per street                           yard sign may have a
Large Yard Sign frontage on any       One year           sign face larger than
                property larger than                     16 square feet, and
                one acre                                 may not be taller than
                                                         six feet.
 
 
Table 10-5-11.B: Temporary Signs Permitted on a Non-Residential Property or
Mixed-Use Property
Sign Type           Number Permitted  Permitted Duration   Additional
                                                           Standards
                                                           No individual small
                                                           yard sign may have a
                                                           sign face larger
Small Yard Sign                       90 days              than eight square
                                                           feet, and may not be
                                                           taller than four
                                                           feet.
                                                           No individual large
                                                           yard sign may have a
                                                           sign face larger
Large Yard Sign                       One year             than 16 square feet,
                                                           and may not be
                    The sum of all                         taller than six
                    temporary signage                      feet.
                    on site shall not                      Sign shall not
                    exceed 32 square                       exceed eight square
A-Frame or T- Frame feet              Permitted during     feet and four feet
Sidewalk Signs                        property hours of    in height. Sign
(Non-Residential                      operation only       shall not be placed
Districts Only)                                            in a location that
                                                           obstructs pedestrian
                                                           or vehicle movement.
Temporary Sign -                      90 consecutive days, Each sign shall not
New Establishment                     one time per         exceed 32 square
(must be affixed to                   calendar year        feet.
building)
                                                           Any banner sign over
Banner Signs                          90 consecutive days  24 square feet shall
                                                           require a permit.
 
      6.   All temporary signs shall be secured in such a manner as to prevent
swinging or other significantly noticeable movement resulting from the wind
that could pose a danger to people, vehicles, or structures.
      7.   Mobile signs on wheels, runners, casters, parked trailers, parked
vehicles, or other temporary or movable signs shall not be permitted unless
otherwise specifically stated in this chapter.
      8.   Because of the nature of materials typically used to construct
temporary signs and to avoid the unsightliness of deteriorating signs and all
safety concerns which accompany such a condition, temporary signs shall be
removed or replaced when such sign is deteriorated as determined by the
planning staff. (Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023)
10-5-12: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
   A.   All signs that do not conform to the specific standards of this code
may be considered legally nonconforming if the sign was erected in conformance
with a valid zoning permit and complied with all applicable laws at the time of
the sign’s installation.
   B.   A sign shall lose its legal nonconforming status and must be brought
into compliance with the provisions of this chapter by an application for and
issuance of a zoning permit or by complete removal, if any of the following
occurs:
      1.   If such sign is damaged to an amount exceeding 50% of the sign’s
replacement value, as determined by at least two sign companies requested to
provide a quote;
      2.   The sign type or structure is altered in any form;
      3.   The sign is relocated;
      4.   The nonconforming sign and its structure (including support and
frame and panel) are determined by the planning staff to be unsafe or in
violation of this code and declared a nuisance.
      5.   Failure to bring a sign into compliance after loss of a legal
nonconformity status as specified in this section shall cause the sign to be
considered an illegal sign.
      6.   Minor repairs and maintenance of nonconforming signs, such as
repainting, electrical repairs and neon tubing repairs shall be permitted.
Maintenance does not include making changes in the words, symbols, or design on
the current sign unless the words and symbols are part of the changeable reader
board or removable panels on a sign cabinet.
      7.   Sign face changes where there is no change to the nonconforming sign
structure including change in sign face area, height, or alteration of the sign
cabinet, if applicable, may be made without a zoning permit and without losing
the legal nonconforming status of the sign. These actions include, but are not
limited to, replacement of a sign face, repainting of a sign face, etc. (Ord.
2023-7, 7-17-2023)
10-5-13: MAINTENANCE:
   A.   Every sign shall be maintained in a safe, presentable, and good
structural condition at all times, including the replacement of a defective
part, painting, cleaning, and other acts required for the maintenance of the
sign.
   B.   Whenever a sign is to be removed pursuant to the requirements of this
section, all parts of the sign and supporting structure (e.g., pole, monument,
cabinet structure, etc.), excluding buildings for wall, projecting, or similar
signage, shall be removed in its entirety. This section shall not require the
removal of a raceway if mounted to such structure on a building. (Ord. 2023-7,
7-17-2023)
CHAPTER 6
ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES
SECTION:
10-6-1: Community Development Director Duties
10-6-2: Building Officials’ Duties
10-6-3: Planning Board/Planning Commission
10-6-4: Board Of Adjustment/Planning Commission
10-6-5: Substantially Similar Uses
10-6-6: Review And Decision-Making Authority Table
10-6-7: Specific Uses Permit Staff Level Approval
10-6-8: Specific Uses Permit Public Hearing Required Table
10-6-9: Applications And Fees
10-6-10: Ordinance Text Amendments
10-6-11: Zoning Map Amendments
10-6-12: Conditional Uses
10-6-13: Sign Permit Required
10-6-14: Building Permits Required
10-6-15: Land Use Permits Required
10-6-16: Appeals And Variances
10-6-17: Sign Variance
10-6-18: Site Plan Review
10-6-19: Design Exceptions
10-6-20: Notice Of Hearing Requirements
10-6-21: Enforcement And Penalty
10-6-1: COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR DUTIES:
Specified in Chapter 2.03G. (Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023)
10-6-2: BUILDING OFFICIALS’ DUTIES:
   A.   Check For Compliance: The intent of this title is that the building
official checks all plans and applications for permits for compliance with this
title both before and during construction.
   B.   Noncompliance: If during this procedure, the building official deems
that the proposed plan or construction does not comply with this title, they
shall inform the applicant of the infraction and shall stop all construction of
the project until such time as the applicant, builder, or principal revises his
plan to conform to this title or obtains a variance, conditional use permit, or
zone change as set forth herein.
   C.   Notice Of Violation:
      1.   Building official shall notify, in writing, the person responsible
for such violations indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the
action necessary to correct it.
      2.   They shall order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings,
or structures; removal of illegal buildings or structures, or of illegal
additions, alterations, or structural changes; discontinuance of any illegal
work being done; or
      3.   Shall take any other action authorized by this title to ensure
compliance with or prevent violation of its provisions. (Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-
2023)
10-6-3: PLANNING BOARD/PLANNING COMMISSION:
Specified in
Chapter 2.04 of the city code of ordinances. (Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023; amd. Ord.
2023-9, 12-18-2023)
10-6-4: BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT/PLANNING COMMISSION:
   A.   Established: See
Chapter 2.04 of the city code of ordinances.
   B.   Powers and duties: The Board shall set its operating rules in
accordance with the laws of the state of Montana and shall have the following
powers:
      1.   Appeals: To hear appeals and decide appeals where it is alleged
there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by
an administrative official to enforce this title or any ordinance adopted
pursuant hereto.
      2.   Variances:
         a.   Authority To Authorize: To authorize, upon appeal in specific
cases, such variance from the terms of this title as shall not be contrary to
the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement
of the provisions of this title will result in unnecessary hardship, and so
that the spirit of this title shall be observed, and substantial justice is
done. An unnecessary hardship shall not be construed as an event or situation
caused or created by the applicant or previous property owner.
      b.   Required Vote: The concurring vote of four (4) members of the board
shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or
determination of any administrative official or to decide in favor of the
application on any matter which it is required to pass under this title, or to
affect any variation of this title.
      c.   All decisions and findings of the board of adjustment on appeals of
administrative decisions and variances are final administrative decisions and
are subject to review, as provided by law. (Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023; amd. Ord.
2023-9, 12-18-2023)
10-6-5: SUBSTANTIALLY SIMILAR USES:
   A.   Purpose: Where a specific use is proposed that is not listed or
provided for in this zoning ordinance, the Community Development Director may
make a determination that the proposed use is substantially similar to a
specific use that is listed or provided for in this zoning ordinance. If the
community development director finds that the use is substantially similar to a
specific use listed in this zoning ordinance, the substantially similar use is
deemed to be a substantially similar permitted use in those districts where the
specific use is permitted, and a substantially similar use special permit can
be approved in those districts where the specific use is specially permitted.
      1.   In determining that a proposed use is a substantially similar use,
the community development director shall follow the procedures relating to
appeals and variances as specified in this chapter. Upon making a determination
that a proposed use is substantially similar, the community development
director shall notify the city council of the decision and shall include
written findings justifying the reasoning upon which the decision is based.
   B.   Remedy By Application For Amendment: If the community development
director determines that a proposed use is not substantially similar, such a
determination may be appealed to the board of adjustments. Should the board of
adjustments also determine that the use is not substantially similar, the
appellant may seek a remedy by applying an amendment as specified in
10-6-10.
   C.   Standards For Consideration Of Substantially Similar Uses: The
following standards shall be considered by the community development director
(or, where there is an appeal of the community development director’s
determination, the board of adjustments) when making a determination that a use
is substantially similar to a permitted or a conditional use within a specific
district:
      1.   The compatibility of the proposed use with the general use
classification system as specified in this Zoning ordinance.
      2.   The nature, predominant characteristics, and intensity of the
proposed use in relation to those uses specified by this Zoning ordinance as
permitted, or in the case of a special permit use, specially permitted, in that
district.
      3.   The size, dimensional requirements, parking requirements, traffic
generation potential, and other regulatory considerations normally associated
with uses as specified in this Zoning Code.
   D.   Effect Of Determination That A Use Is Substantially Similar: Should a
use be determined to be substantially similar to a specific permitted or
specially permitted use provided for in this zoning ordinance, it shall then be
permitted in the same manner and under the same conditions and procedures as
the use is permitted to which it has been found to be substantially similar.
   E.   Record Of Substantially Similar Uses: The community development
director shall maintain as a public record a listing of all uses which have
been determined to be substantially similar. For each such use, the record
shall include the use as listed in the zoning ordinance; the use unlisted in
the zoning ordinance about which the determination of substantial similarity
was made, and the dates of any actions thereupon by the board of adjustment or
city council. This record shall also contain the same information for all uses
determined not to be substantially similar. The community development director
or their designee shall consult this record in issuing future permits. (Ord.
2023-7, 7-17-2023)
10-6-6: REVIEW AND DECISION-MAKING AUTHORITY TABLE:
The following table provides the list of permit procedures, the staff level
review and approvals. The procedure process for each procedures begins with
Section
10-6-9.
Table 10-6-6: Review & Decision Making Authority Table
procedure Receives and/or Reviews Application Approvals
          CDD PS BO CE CM CVFD                CDD CE CM BoA PB CC
Table 10-6-6: Review & Decision Making Authority Table
procedure   Receives and/or Reviews Application              Approvals
            CDD PS BO CE CM                             CVFD CDD CE CM BoA PB CC
Appeals of
Admin.      --  I  -- -- --                             --   --  -- -- DM* -- --
Decisions
Conditional
Uses -      SC  I  -- -- --                             SC   --  -- DM --  -- --
Minor
Conditional
Uses -      SC  I  -- SC --                             SC   --  -- -- --  R* DM*
Standard
Land Use
Permit -    SC  I  -- SC --                             SC   DM  -- -- --  -- --
Standard
Design
Exceptions  SC  I  --    --                             SC   DM  -- -- --  -- --
- Minor
Design
Exceptions  SC  I  -- SC --                             SC   --  -- -- --  R* DM*
- Major
Sign        SC  I  -- SC --                             --   DM  -- -- --  -- --
Permits
Master Sign SC  I  -- SC --                             --   DM  -- -- --  -- --
Plan
Site Plan   SC  I  SC SC --                             SC   DM  DM -- --  -- --
Review
Variances,  SC  I  -- SC --                             --   --  -- -- --  R* DM*
Sign
Variances,  SC  I  SC SC --                             SC   --  -- -- DM* -- --
Zoning
Zoning Map  SC  I  SC -- --                             SC   --  -- -- --  R* DM*
Amendments
Zoning Ord
Text        SC  I  SC SC --                             SC   --  -- -- --  R* DM*
Amendments
TABLE NOTES:
I   =   Intake
SC   =   Submit Comment (staff reviews & provides Approvals:
comments before transmittal to approval body)           R   =   Review and Recommendation Authority
*   =   Public Hearing                            DM   =   Final Decision-Making Authority
Staff Abbreviations:                                    Board Abbreviations:
CDD   =   Community Development Director          BoA   =   Board of Adjustment
PS   =   Planning Staff                           PB   =   Planning Board
BO   =   Building Official                        CC   =   City Council
CE   =   City Engineer
CM   =   City Manager
CVFD   =   Fire Department
 
(Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023)
10-6-7: SPECIFIC USES PERMIT STAFF LEVEL APPROVAL:
The following table provides the list of specific uses, and the corresponding
type of permit or application, and the staff level review and approvals. The
Principal Use
Table 10-3-4 provides the specific section for each specific use additional
regulations.
Table 10-6-7
              Type of Permit/Application Review    Staff Level Review/Approvals
Specific Uses Special Permit Building Land Use/CUP CDD CE BO CM CP
              Application    Permit   Application
Table 10-6-7
                   Type of Permit/Application Review      Staff Level Review/Approvals
Specific Uses      Special     Building Land Use/CUP
                   Permit      Permit   Application       CDD CE BO CM CP
                   Application
Accessory Dwelling --          X        LU                DM  -- SC -- --
Unit
Camping &
Recreational       X           --       --                --  -- -- DM SC
Vehicle
Fallout Shelters   --          X        LU                DM  -- SC -- --
Home Business      --          --       CUP               --  -- -- DM SC
Keeping of         X           --       --                --  -- SC DM SC
Chickens
Marijuana Business X           --       --                --  -- SC DM SC
Small Cell         --          --       LU                DM  SC -- -- --
Facilities
Solar Energy       --          X        LU                --  -- DM -- --
Facility
Swimming Pool      --          X        LU                DM  -- -- -- --
Townhouse          --          X        LU                --  -- DM -- --
Standards
Walk-up/Bike-up    --          X        LU                DM  -- SC -- --
Window
Wireless           --          X        LU                DM  SC SC -- --
Telecommunications
X   =   Submit Application to Community Development Staff Abbreviations:
Department                                                CDD   =   Community Development Director
CUP   =   Conditional Use Permit                    CE   =   City Engineer
LU   =    and Use Application                       BO   =   Building Official
SC   =   Review and Submit Comments                 CM   =   City Manager
DM   =   Final Decision-Making Authority            CP   =   City Police
 
(Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023)
10-6-8: SPECIFIC USES PERMIT PUBLIC HEARING REQUIRED TABLE:
The following table provides the list of specific uses, and the corresponding
type of permit or application, the staff level review and approvals, the
recommending body, and the final decision-making authority. The Principal Use
Table 10-3-4 provides the specific section for each specific use additional
regulations.
Table 10-6-8
                              Staff Level      Planning Board/
Specific Building Application Review/Approvals City Council    Additional
Uses     Permit                                Approval        Requirements
                  LU CUP      CDD CVFD         PB CC
Table 10-6-8
                                  Staff Level      Planning Board/
Specific     Building Application Review/Approvals City Council    Additional
Uses         Permit                                Approval        Requirements
                      LU CUP      CDD CVFD         PB CC

Adult-                                                             City License
Oriented     X        X  X        --  --           R* DM*          Needed
Business
                                                                   City & State
Casinos      X        X  X        --  --           R* DM*          License
                                                                   Needed
Commercial   X        X  X        --  --           R* DM*          City License
Kennel                                                             Needed
Recreational
Vehicles &                                                         City & State
Travel       X        X  X        --  --           R* DM*          License
Trailer                                                            Needed
Parks
                                                                   City License
Short-term   X**         --       X   X                            Needed, and
Rentals                                                            Register
                                                                   with DOR
**New Builds only
LU   =   Land Use Application
X   =   Submit Application tBoard Abbreviations:
Community Development Department  PB   =   Planning Board
Approvals:                        CC   =   City Council
R   =   Review and Recommend*   =   Public Hearing
Authority
DM   =   Final Decision-Making
Authority
 
(Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023)
10-6-9: APPLICATIONS AND FEES:
   A.   Applicability: This subsection’s application and fee provisions apply
to applications filed by “eligible applicants.”
   B.   Eligible Applicants: When the procedures of this chapter allow an
application to be filed by an “eligible applicant,” such application must be
submitted by, or on behalf of, a person, firm, corporation, or organization
that has one or more of the following interests that are specifically
enforceable in the land that is subject to the application:
      1.   A freehold interest;
      2.   A possessory interest entitled to exclusive possession;
      3.   A contractual interest that may become a freehold possessory
interest;
      4.   Any exclusive possessory interest; or
      5.   City property authorized for sale.
   C.   Form Of Application: Applications required under this zoning ordinance
must be submitted in a form and such numbers as specified in the specific
permit section, according to the specific permit application and checklists
provided by the community development department.
   D.   Fees And Notification Costs: All applications filed by property owners
must be accompanied by the application fee established by the city council.
Application filing fees are intended to cover the cost of providing public
hearing notices and other costs related to reviewing and processing
applications. Such fees are nonrefundable and may include late fees, penalties,
and fees for expedited processing.
   E.   Completeness, Accuracy, And Sufficiency: An application will be
considered complete and ready for processing, as specified in the specific
permit section and any specific permit checklists provided by Community
Development Department.
   F.   Conditions Of Approval: Review bodies, including staff, are authorized
to recommend conditions, and decision-making bodies approve the subject
application with conditions. Any conditions recommended or approved must
reasonably relate to a situation likely to be created or aggravated by the
proposed use or development.
   G.   Required Time-Frames For Action: Any time limit specified in this
zoning ordinance for any decision or action on behalf of a review or decision-
making body may be extended if the applicant and staff agree to an extension.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, if a review or decision-making body does not
render a decision or take action within any time period required under this
zoning ordinance and the applicant has not agreed to an extension of that time
limit, the application is deemed denied. (Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023)
10-6-10: ORDINANCE TEXT AMENDMENTS:
   A.   Authority To Initiate: Amendments to the text of this zoning ordinance
may be initiated by the city council, the planning board, the city attorney, or
the community development director.
   B.   Public Notices: Public notice of hearings on a zoning ordinance text
amendment must be published as required by state law. Public Notice shall
follow the procedures set for in Section
10-6-20.
   C.   Public Hearing Required: The Planning Board shall hold public hearings
on the matters referred to in such initiation or petition at which parties in
interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard.
   D.   Planning Board Recommendation: Proposed zoning ordinance text
amendments must be referred to the planning board for review.
      1.   The Planning Board shall cause to be made such an investigation of
facts bearing on such initiation or petition as will provide necessary
information to assure that the action of each such petition is consistent with
the intent and purpose of this title.
      2.   Following their review of the proposed text amendment, the planning
board must recommend the proposed amendment to the common council, including
approval, modification approval, referral back to staff, or denial.
   E.   Common Council Decision:
      1.   Upon receipt of the planning board’s recommendation, the common
council must take action on the proposed zoning ordinance text amendment,
including approval, approval with modifications, referral back to staff or the
plan commission, or denial.
      2.   Such amendment adopted by Council shall become effective thirty (30)
days after the date of such adoption unless within thirty (30) days after the
passage of the ordinance, there is presented to the City Clerk a petition.
(Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023)
10-6-11: ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS:
   A.   Authority To Initiate: Amendments to the official zoning map may be
initiated by the common council or filed by an eligible applicant or an
eligible applicant’s authorized agent specified in
10-6-9.
   B.   Pre-Application Meeting: Before filing a zoning map amendment
application, the applicant or the authorized agent must meet with the planning
staff to discuss the proposed amendment and the applicable procedures.
   C.   Application Filing: Zoning map amendment applications must be filed
with the planning staff.
      1.   Shall be filed with the City on forms provided by the Community
Development Department;
      2.   Shall include all required supplemental information;
      3.   Shall be submitted by the application deadline as established by the
City;
      4.   Shall be signed by the applicant and owner attesting to the truth
and exactness of all information supplied on the application; and
      5.   Public notice requirements must be met by applicant.
   D.   Public Notices: Public notice of hearings on a zoning map amendment
must be published as required by state law. Public Notice shall follow the
procedures specified in
10-6-20.
   E.   Public Hearing Required: The Planning Board shall hold public hearings
on the matters referred to in such initiation or petition at which parties in
interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard.
   F.   Planning Board Recommendation: Proposed zoning ordinance text
amendments must be referred to the planning board for review.
      1.   The Planning Board shall cause to be made such an investigation of
facts bearing on such initiation or petition as will provide necessary
information to assure that the action of each such petition is consistent with
the intent and purpose of this title.
      2.   Following their review of the proposed text amendment, the planning
board must recommend the proposed amendment to the common council, including
approval, modification approval, referral back to staff, or denial.
      3.   Protest; Required Vote. In case, however, of protest against such
changes, signed by the owners of twenty percent (20%) or more either of the
area of the lots included in such proposed change or of those lots immediately
adjacent in the rear thereof extending one hundred fifty feet (150') there from
or of those lots adjacent on either side thereof within the block or of those
directly opposite thereof extending one hundred fifty feet (150') from the
street frontage of such opposite lots, such amendment shall not become
effective except by the favorable vote of three-fourths (3/4) of all members of
the city council.
   G.   Common Council Decision:
      1.   Upon receipt of the planning board’s report and recommendation, the
common council must take action on the final action on recommendation of the
planning board. A vote to amend the recommendation must receive the three-
fourths affirmative vote of all members of Council. Whether amended or not, the
vote to adopt the recommendation of the planning board must receive a majority
vote of all members of Council.
      2.   Such amendment adopted by Council shall become effective thirty (30)
days after the date of such adoption unless within thirty (30) days after the
passage of the ordinance, there is presented to the City Clerk a petition.
   H.   Successive Application:
      1.   If the common council denies a proposed zoning map amendment, no
zoning map amendment application requesting the same or more intensive zoning
of the subject property may be filed for or accepted for processing by the city
for one year from the date of final action by the common council unless the
council expressly acts to deny the previous application without prejudice, or
the new application is substantially different from the one that was denied.
(Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023)
10-6-12:CONDITIONAL USES:
   A.   Purpose: This ordinance identifies certain uses that, because of their
unique or widely varying characteristics or their potential adverse impacts on
adjacent land uses, are not permitted as a matter of right, but that may be
approved through case-by-case review as a “conditional use.” They are subject
to conditional use regulations because they may, but do not necessarily, have
significant adverse effects on the environment, overburden public services,
change the desired character of an area, or create major nuisances. A review of
these uses is necessary due to their potential individual or cumulative impacts
on the surrounding area or neighborhood. The conditional use review provides an
opportunity to allow the use when there are minimal impacts, to allow the use
but impose mitigation measures to address specific reasonable concerns, or to
deny the use if the concerns cannot be resolved.
   B.   Authority To Initiate: Applications for approval of a conditional use
may be initiated by the common council for filed by an eligible applicant’s
authorized agent.
   C.   Pre-Application Meeting: Before filing a conditional use application,
the applicant or the authorized agent must meet with the planning staff to
discuss the proposed amendment and the applicable procedures. Staff will
determine whether the conditional use is a minor or a standard use at this pre-
application meeting.
   D.   Application Filing:
      1.   Shall be filed in accordance with the procedures in this Chapter;
      2.   Shall be filed with the City on forms provided by the Community
Development Department;
      3.   Shall include all required supplemental information;
      4.   Shall be submitted by the application deadline as established by the
City;
      5.   Shall be signed by the applicant and owner attesting to the truth
and exactness of all information supplied on the application; and
      6.   Public notice requirements must be met by applicant.
   E.   Transmittal: The application shall be transmitted to City Engineer,
Police Department, and Fire Department to review and provide comments. The
application and comments from each Department shall be transmitted to planning
staff to include in staff recommendations.
   F.   Conditional Uses-Minor Approval: The planning staff must review the
proposed conditional use and comments from other departments and provide
recommendations to the City Manager. The City Manager will either approve the
application or approve with modification with appropriate conditions and
safeguards, as specified in Section
10-6-12.H, in conformity with the zoning ordinance. Violations of such
conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the
conditional use is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this zoning
ordinance and punishable specified in
10-6-21.
   G.   Conditional Uses-Standard Approval: The planning staff must review the
proposed conditions use and prepare a recommendation for consideration by the
planning board and common council.
      1.   Public Hearing Planning Board: There shall be a hearing for each
conditional use application. Said hearing shall be held at an appointed time
and place within forty-five (45) days of the date of application. The board
shall take testimony from persons interested in said application. Public Notice
shall follow the procedures specified in section
10-6-20.
      2.   Recommendations by Planning Board:
         a.   Within thirty-five (35) days after the conclusion of the public
hearing, the planning board shall either recommend approval with or without
supplementary conditions as specified in
10-6-12.H, or denial to the City Council.
         b.   The public hearing may be extended to another date by mutual
agreement of the Planning Commission and the applicant.
      3.   Public Hearing City Council: Upon receipt of the planning board
recommendation, the city council will hold a public hearing on the said
application, at which the planning board recommendation will be read, and
additional testimony may be taken from interested parties. Notice shall follow
the procedures specified in
10-6-20.
      4.   Approval by City Council: Conditional Use Permits shall be issued
upon authorization by the city council, after review by the planning board, and
shall be based on a determination that the land use or activity complies with
specific requirements for certain land uses and activities as may be outlined
in this chapter.
         a.   If the application is approved or approved with modification, the
City Council shall direct the community development director to issue a
conditional use permit listing the specific conditions specified by the
planning board for approval. If the application is denied by the city council
the applicant may appeal the decision through the board of adjustment in
accordance with the procedures specified in
10-6-16.
         b.   Expiration. City Council shall determine if the use stays for the
life of the property or ceases if the conditional use shall cease for more than
a period of time.
   H.   Supplementary Conditions And Safeguards:
      1.   Those land uses or activities outlined in this chapter as requiring
a Conditional Use Permit are considered to be sufficiently distinctive in terms
of their nature, location, and impact on the surrounding area to warrant
special evaluation of each case. The City’s decision to approve or deny a
Conditional Use Permit must be supported by the following standards and shall
find evidence showing that such use at the proposed location:
         a.   Is in fact, a conditional use as established under the provisions
of
Chapter 3 and appears in
Chapter 3 for the applicable zoning district;
         b.   Will be harmonious with and in accordance with the general
objectives or with any specific objective of the City’s recently adopted Growth
Policy, Area Specific Plans, and/or the zoning ordinance;
         c.   Will be designed, constructed, operated, and maintained to be
harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended
character of the general vicinity and that such use will not change the
essential character of the same area;
         d.   Will not be hazardous or disturbing to existing or future
neighboring uses;
         e.   Will be served adequately by essential public facilities and
services such as highways, streets, police, and fire protection, drainage
structures, refuse disposal, water and sewer, and schools; or that the persons
or agencies responsible for the establishment of the proposed use shall be able
to provide adequately any such services;
         f.   Will not create excessive additional requirements at public cost
for public facilities and services and will not be detrimental to the economic
welfare of the community;
         g.   Will not involve uses, activities, processes, materials,
equipment, and conditions of operation that will be detrimental to any persons,
property, or the general welfare by reason of excessive production of traffic,
noise, smoke, fumes or odors;
         h.   Will have vehicular approaches to the property, which shall be so
designed as not to interfere with traffic on surrounding public thoroughfares.
      2.   In recommending any conditional use, the community development
director or planning board may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards
in conformity with this zoning ordinance. Violations of such conditions and
safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the conditional use is
granted, shall be deemed a violation of this zoning ordinance and punishable
specified in
10-6-21. (Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023)
10-6-13: SIGN PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   Permits Required: Applications for sign permits must be filed with the
planning staff. Applications must be submitted on forms provided by the
community development director and contain at least the following information:
      1.   The name and contact information of the sign owner, the property
owner where the sign is or will be located, and the sign contractor of the
proposed sign.
      2.   The following information in PDF format:
         a.   A scaled and dimensioned site plan showing:
            (1)   All buildings on the subject property;
            (2)   The location, size, and types of existing signs on the
subject property; and
         b.   Clear and legible scale drawings with:
            (1)   Description and nominal dimensions of the proposed sign; and
            (2)   The construction size, dimensions, and kind of materials to
be used in such a structure.
         c.   A time-stamped photo of the proposed sign location, with the
photo at most one-year-old.
         d.   A color rendering showing before-and-after images of the sign at
the proposed location.
      3.   Calculations or evidence showing that the structure, design, and
mounts comply with the requirements of this article for wind pressure load.
      4.   Evidence of liability, insurance policy, or bond, as required in
this article.
      5.   Such information as the sign inspector may require demonstrating
full compliance with these sign regulations and all other applicable city
regulations.
      6.   Signature of the applicant and property owner.
   B.   Signs Encroaching On Right-Of-Way: If a sign application involves the
installation of a sign that encroaches upon or over the right-of-way, a such
permit application must also include the following information:
      1.   The location of encroachment identified in drawings/renderings is
required under paragraph (A).
      2.   Acknowledgment by the property and business owner that the city may
revoke permission to encroach upon right-of-way based on public safety,
maintenance, other use, or other legitimate reasons;
      3.   Property owner agrees to hold the city harmless from any and all
injury that may occur to any party resulting from using the right-of-way. This
provision is intended to indemnify and hold harmless the city to the fullest
extent permitted by law. It includes the payment of reasonable attorney fees
for the defense of any claims brought that can fairly be said to be under the
intent and purpose of this hold harmless agreement. To secure such hold
harmless agreement, the property or business owner must maintain a general
liability insurance policy on its business operations in an amount of not less
than $1,000,000.00 per occurrence and produce a certificate of insurance
demonstrating to the satisfaction of the city that the city is entitled to
coverage thereunder under the terms and conditions of the hod harmless
agreement. A copy of the certificate of insurance must be provided and
maintained or the permission to encroach on right-of-way will be revoked.
      4.   The authority to encroach upon right-of-way does not transfer to any
new business or property owner. A new right-of-way encroachment permit is
required.
   C.   Sign Permit Issuance And Denial:
      1.   The community development director must issue a permit for the
erection, structural alteration, enlargement, or relocation of a sign within
the city when the permit application is properly completed, all required fees
have been paid, and the sign complies with all applicable regulations. If the
sign permit is denied, the community development director must give written
notice of the denial to the applicant and property owner, with a brief
statement of the reasons for the denial. The community development director’s
failure to either formally grant or deny a properly completed sign permit
application within ten (10) days of the date of application meeting the
requirements of this article constitutes cause for an appeal to the planning
board.
   D.   Sign Permit Variance: If a sign permit is denied due to the regulations
of this article causing undue or unnecessary hardship on any person, firm, or
corporation, a variance from the sign regulations may be requested as specified
in
10-6-17.
   E.   Violations And Penalties: Violations of or failure to comply with this
chapter’s provisions are declared unlawful.
      1.   Any sign erected, altered, moved, or structurally modified without a
permit or altered with a permit but in violation of the provisions of this
chapter, must be removed at the owner’s expense or brought into compliance
within five (5) days of written notification by the community development
director. If the violation is failure to obtain a permit, a permit fee is
required, and the permit fee will be two (2) times the normal fee. If the owner
does not remove the sign or bring it into compliance, the community development
director may order removal, the expenses of which will be assessed to the tax
roll of the property on which the unlawful sign is located.
      2.   This section does not preclude the city from maintaining any
appropriate action to prevent or remove a violation of this article. If the
owner does not remove or bring it into compliance, the community development
director may order the sign removed. If such a sign is not removed by the owner
within the time period specified, the city may cause removal, with the owner
being responsible for all costs. These expenses will be assessed to the tax
roll of the property on which the unlawful sign is located. (Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-
2023)
10-6-14: BUILDING PERMITS REQUIRED:
   A.   Permits Required: No buildings or other structures shall be erected,
moved, added to, or structurally altered, and no land use shall be established
or changed in use, within city limits or property outside the city limits
within the extraterritorial limits of this title, without a permit therefore,
issued by the Community Development Department.
   B.   Building Permits Approval: Within ninety (90) days after the receipt of
a complete application, the Building Official shall either approve,
conditionally approve or disapprove the application. Work shall commence within
one hundred eighty (180) days of the issuance of a building permit. (Ord. 2023-
7, 7-17-2023)
10-6-15: LAND USE PERMITS REQUIRED:
   A.   Permit Required: No buildings or other structures shall be erected,
moved, added to, or structurally altered, and no land use shall be established
or changed in use, within city limits or property outside the city limits
within the extraterritorial limits of this title, without a permit therefore,
issued by the Community Development Department.
   B.   Authority To Initiate: Applications for approval of a land use permit
may be filed by an applicant or by an eligible applicant’s authorized agent.
   C.   Pre-Application Meeting: Before filing a land use permit application,
the applicant or the authorized agent must meet with the planning staff to
discuss the proposed project and the applicable procedures.
   D.   Application Filing:
      1.   Application for review and decision by the decision-making authority
for land use permits;
         a.   Shall be filed in accordance with the procedures in this Chapter;
         b.   Shall be filed with the City on forms provided by the Community
Development Department;
         c.   Shall include all required supplemental information;
         d.   Shall be submitted by the application deadline as established by
the City;
         e.   Shall be signed by the applicant and owner attesting to the truth
and exactness of all information supplied on the application; and
         f.   Public notice requirements must be met by applicant.
      2.   The planning staff shall verify that the application is complete. If
the application still needs to be completed, the planning staff shall return
the application to the applicant and inform the applicant of the missing
information required for a complete application.
   E.   Transmittal: The application shall be transmitted to City Engineer,
Police Department, and Fire Department to review and provide comments. Each
Department will return comments to Community Development Director.
   F.   Approval: Within ninety (90) days after the receipt of a complete
application, the Community Development Director shall either approve,
conditionally approve or disapprove the application. Work shall commence within
one hundred and eighty (180) days of the issuance of a land use permit.
   G.   Conformance:
      1.   Required: No permit of any type shall be issued unless in
conformance with the regulations contained within this title. Permits issued on
the basis of plans and applications approved by the Community Development
Director authorize only the use, arrangement and construction outlined in such
approved plans and applications and no other use, arrangement, or construction.
Any use, arrangement, or construction at variance with that authorized shall be
deemed a violation of this title punishable as specified in
10-6-21.
         a.   Conditional Use Permits; Variances: Conditional use permits
approved by the city council and variances granted by the board of adjustment
shall be deemed in conformance with this title’s terms. However, building
permits or land use permits shall be issued only in accordance with the terms
outlined in the conditional use permit and variance sections of this title.
      2.   Expiration. Every permit issued by the Community Development
Director under the provisions of this chapter shall expire by limitation and
become null and void if the building or work authorized by such permit has not
commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of such permit, or
if the building or work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at
any time after the work is commenced for a period of one hundred eighty (180)
days.
         a.   New Permit Required. Before such work can be recommenced, a new
permit shall first be obtained to do so, and the fee therefor shall be one-half
(½) the amount required for the new permit for such work, provided no changes
have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for the
work; and, provided further, that such suspension or abandonment has not
exceeded one year.
      3.   Permits Issued Contrary to Title. Any authorization issued, granted,
or approved in violation of the provisions of this title shall be null and void
and of no effect without the necessity of any proceedings or revocation or
nullification thereof, and any work is undertaken or use established pursuant
to any such building permit, or other authorization shall be unlawful. (Ord.
2023-7, 7-17-2023)
10-6-16: APPEALS AND VARIANCES:
   A.   Intent: Zoning variances are intended to provide relief from
unnecessary hardships resulting from the strict application of zoning ordinance
requirements other than signs.
   B.   Applicability: Only the board of adjustment is authorized to grant
zoning variances. The city council is the final decision-making authority on
sign regulation variances.
   C.   Appeals To The Board Of Adjustment: Appeals concerning the
interpretation or administration of this zoning ordinance may be taken by any
person aggrieved or by any officer or bureau of the City affected by any
decision of the Community Development Department.
   D.   Variances. The board of adjustment may authorize upon appeal in
specific cases such variance from the terms of this zoning ordinance as will
not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a
literal enforcement of the provisions of this zoning ordinance would result in
unnecessary hardship. No nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures, or
buildings in the same district and no permitted or nonconforming use of lands,
structures, or buildings in other districts shall be considered grounds for
issuance of a variance except as specified in
Chapter 10-7. Variances shall not be granted on the grounds of convenience or
profit but only where strict application of the provisions of this zoning
ordinance would result in unnecessary hardship.
   E.   Application.
      1.   Application for review and decision by the board of adjustment for
appeals or modifications (variance):
         a.   Shall be filed in accordance with the procedures in this Chapter;
         b.   Shall be filed with the City on forms provided by the Community
Development Department;
         c.   Shall include all required supplemental information;
         d.   Shall be submitted by the application deadline as established by
the City;
         e.   Shall be signed by the applicant and owner attesting to the truth
and exactness of all information supplied on the application; and
         f.   Public notice requirements must be met by applicant.
      2.   The planning staff shall verify that the application is complete. If
the application still needs to be completed, the planning staff shall return
the application to the applicant and inform the applicant of the missing
information required for a complete application.
   F.   Transmittal: The application shall be transmitted to the board of
adjustments for review.
   G.   Investigation. The board of adjustment shall cause to be made such
investigation of facts bearing on the application as will provide necessary
information to assure that the action on each such application is consistent
with the intent and purpose of this title.
   H.   Construction To Cease During Appeal: During the time of appeal, all
construction shall cease and shall not commence until such time of approval by
the Board of adjustment.
   I.   Public Notices: Public notice of hearings on a variance must be
published as required by state law. Public Notice shall follow the procedures
specified in
10-6-20.
   J.   Public Hearing Required: There shall be a hearing for each application
of appeal or modification. Said hearing shall be held at an appointed time and
place within forty-five (45) days of the date of application. Testimony shall
be taken by the board of adjustment from persons interested in said
application.
   K.   Approval: In approving applications of appeal or modification, the
board shall designate such lawful conditions as will secure substantial
protection for the public health, safety, and general welfare, and shall find
as follows:
      1.   Consistent With Title and/or Growth Policy: Such modifications will
not be inconsistent with the intent and purpose of this title and/or any
adopted growth policy.
      2.   Unnecessary Hardship: Strict compliance with the provisions of this
title would create unnecessary hardship or unreasonable situation on a
particular property due to unusual or extreme topography, the unusual shape of
the property, or the prevalence of similar conditions in the immediate vicinity
of the property.
      3.   Adverse Effect: Such modifications will have a minimal adverse
effect on abutting properties or the permitted uses thereof.
      4.   Conditions of Approval: The lawful conditions stated in the approval
are deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety, morals, and general
welfare, which provisions may include:
         a.   A time period within which the proposed structures shall be
erected.
         b.   Requiring landscaping and maintenance thereof.
         c.   Requiring the surfacing and marking of off-street parking and
loading areas.
         d.   Any other conditions that will make possible the development of
the city in an orderly and efficient manner and conformity with the intent and
purpose specified in this section.
      5.   Appeals: Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by
any decision of the board of adjustment, or any taxpayer, or any officer,
department, board, or bureau of the municipality may present to a court of
record a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal,
in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition
shall be presented to the court within thirty (30) days after the filing of the
decision in the office of the board of adjustment.
      6.   Time Decision Effective: The decision of the board of adjustment
shall be final except as specified in this subsection, and if a building permit
or occupancy permit is not obtained for the subject property within one hundred
eighty (180) days from the date of the board of adjustment decision, the
variance shall be automatically canceled and become null and void.
   L.   Limits On Refiling Of Applications: Where the board of adjustment has
denied an application for Appeal or Variance, no new application for the same
purpose shall be filed within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date the
previous denial became final unless all of the following conditions are met in
the following order:
      1.   The applicant submits in writing to the chairperson of the board,
which rendered the original decision for denial. This request explains the
reason for refiling an application for the same purpose.
      2.   Within ten (10) working days of the submitted written request, the
chairperson of the board who rendered the original decision for denial for
causes substantially documented grants permission to do so.
      3.   The applicant submits a complete application and pays all applicable
fees by the application deadline for the next meeting date to have the request
heard by the applicable board. (Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023)
10-6-17: SIGN VARIANCE:
Requests for variances from the sign regulations of
Chapter 5 are processed following the zoning variance procedures specified in
10-6-16, except the planning board, rather than the board of adjustment, holds
the required hearing and makes the final decision. (Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023)
10-6-18: SITE PLAN REVIEW:
   A.   Purpose: This section establishes a procedure to ensure that timely,
competent review of site plans as a means of determining whether such plans
comply with the applicable regulations of this zoning ordinance and to enable
the city to plan for and review certain proposed improvements of property in
order to:
      1.   Implement community policies on physical development;
      2.   Provide for efficient, rational allocation of scarce facilities and
resources;
      3.   Promote economy and efficiency in the provision and improvement of
municipal services through the regulation of development; and
      4.   Ensure the orderliness, quality, and character of the development of
property in the city, prevent foreclosure of future development opportunities,
and facilitate coordination of land usage with planned and available facilities
and resources.
   B.   Applicability: Site Plan review is required for all multi-family,
mixed-use, and nonresidential development. Site Plan review could be required
for land use and conditional use permits. Site Plan review requirements shall
be confirmed during the pre-application meeting with planning staff.
   C.   Application:
      1.   Applications must be submitted to the planning staff. All
applications must include plans and other information necessary to allow for a
thorough review of the proposed plans, as indicated by requirements on the site
plan review submittal checklist developed by the planning staff.
         a.   Shall be filed with the City on forms provided by the Community
Development Department;
         b.   Shall include all required supplemental information as indicated
in this subsection and the checklist provided by the community development
department; including a landscaping plan as specified in
10-4-3.
         c.   Shall be submitted by the application deadline as established by
the City;
         d.   Shall be signed by the applicant and owner attesting to the truth
and exactness of all information supplied on the application; and
         e.   Public notice requirements must be met by applicant.
      2.   The planning staff shall verify that the application is complete. If
the application still needs to be completed, the planning staff shall return
the application to the applicant and inform the applicant of the missing
information required for a complete application.
   D.   Preapplication Meeting: Before filing a site plan application, the
applicant or authorized agent must meet with the planning staff to discuss the
proposed site plan and the applicable procedures.
   E.   Department And Agency Comments: Following receipt of a complete site
plan application, the zoning administrator is authorized to request comments
from any city departments and external agencies with regulatory responsibility
or related interests in the review of the proposed site plan.
   F.   Review And Decision-Making Process:
      1.   Upon receipt of a complete application for approval of a site plan,
the community development director must review the proposed site plan, obtain
any department or agency comments and share all administrative review comments
with the applicant.
      2.   To be considered for further review, the applicant must resubmit any
revised site plan and explain how each administrative comment was addressed.
Upon receipt of a complete resubmittal package, the planning staff must provide
any written administrative comments that require further revision.
      3.   The community development director must take action to approve the
proposed site plan, approve the proposed site plan subject to conditions or
deny approval of the proposed site plan within sixty (60) days of the date of
the latest site plan submittal unless the applicant waives the required
timeframe for action.
      4.   If an application for site plan approval is denied, the reasons for
denial must be stated in writing, specifying the aspects of the plan that are
not in compliance with applicable regulations. If a site plan application is
denied, a new application may be submitted for further consideration.
      5.   If a site plan is approved subject to specific conditions and all
administrative review comments, the applicant must revise the site plan in
accordance with those conditions and comments and resubmit the plan for review.
The community development director must act on all resubmitted site plans
within twenty (20) business days of their receipt.
      6.   If a site plan is approved, the applicant must submit signed and
dated digital and reproducible copies of the site plan to the planning staff,
and the community development director will issue an approval memo.
      7.   The planning staff will retain a copy of the approved site plan in
the department’s permanent files.
   G.   Effective Date Of Site Plan Approval: An approved site plan becomes
effective upon certification by the community development director. If an
appeal is filed, a site plan does not become effective until all appeals have
been decided.
   H.   Lapse Of Site Plan Approval: An approved site plan will lapse and have
no further effect one year after it is approved unless:
      1.   A building permit has been issued (if required);
      2.   The use or structure has been lawfully established; or
      3.   A different lapse of approval period or point of expiration has been
expressly established by the decision-making body.
   I.   Permits And Continuing Compliance:
      1.   No permit may be issued for any development requiring site plan
approval until a site plan has been submitted and certified approved for such
development in accordance with this section unless the community development
director determines that the site plan is in substantial conformance and phased
permits can be issued.
      2.   A permanent certificate of occupancy may be issued for such
development once all terms and conditions of the approved site plan have been
satisfactorily completed or provided for.
      3.   Construction, grading, or other development activities may be
carried out only in compliance with the certified site plan.
      4.   When a site plan has been approved for property pursuant to this
section, the property must be used and maintained in compliance with the
approved site plan. No person may use property in a manner or physical
condition that does not conform to the approved site plan for such property.
   J.   Resubmission And Amendments:
      1.   Resubmission of any site plan due to changes required or made to the
site plan as previously submitted may be made in accordance with schedule of
fees adopted by the city council.
      2.   An approved site plan may be amended in accordance with the site
plan review procedures of this section. However, the community development
director is authorized to waive applicable review and approval procedures and
fees if the community development director determines that a proposed amendment
involves only a minor change in the approved site plan. Any waiver by the
community development director must be in writing.
      3.   If a site plan is resubmitted for final approval and the planning
staff determines that the site plan does not comply with conditions imposed by
the decision-making body, the applicant may elect to either:
         a.   Revise the site plan to comply with required conditions in
accordance with the interpretation of the conditions by the planning staff; or
         b.   Submit a written request by letter or email communication that
the resubmission will be processed as an amendment to the site plan.
   K.   Appeals:
      1.   The applicant may appeal the community development director’s final
site plan decision by filing a written notice of and reasons for the appeal
with the planning staff by three (3) days after the action date from which the
appeal is sought.
      2.   All appeals of interpretations or final decisions of the zoning
administrator must be placed on the agenda of the planning board within 30 days
of the date that written notice of the appeal was filed with the planning staff
unless the applicant agrees to an extension of time for planning board action.
(Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023)
10-6-19: DESIGN EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   General: This section establishes regulations governing the granting of
requests for design exceptions to Downtown Districts Design Guidelines. These
exception regulations are divided into two (2) categories:
      1.   Minor, staff-approved design exceptions, referred to as minor design
exceptions; and
      2.   More significant design exceptions, which must be reviewed and
approved by the planning board, are referred to as major design exceptions.
   B.   Intent: The design exception provisions of this section are intended to
authorize the granting of relief from strict compliance with the regulations
when specific site features or characteristics of the subject property,
including the presence of existing buildings, create conditions that make
strict compliance with applicable regulations impractical or undesirable. The
exception provisions are also intended to recognize that alternative design
solutions may result in equal or better implementation of the regulation’s
intended purpose and consistency with the Growth Policy, and Downtown Design
Plan.
   C.   Burden Of Proof Or Persuasion: The burden is on the applicant to
demonstrate that the requested exception meets the criteria for approval or
that the exception would equal or exceed the results of strict compliance with
the subject regulation.
   D.   Applications: Requested exceptions must be noted on the required
application and plan, and the application must include a written statement
describing why the exception is necessary and all efforts to mitigate any
adverse impacts resulting from a grant of the exception.
   E.   Minor Design Exceptions: During the site plan review process, the
planning staff is authorized to approve the following as minor design
exceptions based on consideration of the general intent statement of
10-6-19.B.
      1.   Design Standards.
      2.   Building Materials.
      3.   Build-to Zone. Increase or decrease any build-to-zone requirement by
25% or 2 foot, whichever is greater.
      4.   Primary Frontage Lot Line Coverage: Decrease the minimum primary
frontage lot line coverage requirement by 15% or 3 feet, whichever is greater.
      5.   Building Setbacks: Decrease any setback by up to 15% or 1 foot,
whichever is greater.
      6.   Height: Increase the minimum or maximum height for any story by up
to 3 feet.
      7.   Occupied Space: Reduce the minimum depth of required occupied space
by up to 15% or approve unoccupied space on up to 20% of the frontage.
      8.   Transparency: Reduce minimum transparency requirements by up to 15%.
      9.   Other measurements: Reduce or increase by up to 10% any minimum
requirements of that are expressed as a dimension or distance.
   F.   Major Design Exceptions:
      1.   The planning board is authorized to approve requests for relief from
strict compliance with the Downtown Design Guidelines of Chapter 2 that are not
expressly authorized for processing as minor design exceptions and to hear and
decide appeals of the planning staff’s decision on any minor design exception.
      2.   The planning board’s decision to approve or deny a request for a
major design exception must be based on a determination of whether:
         a.   The requested design exception is consistent with the general
intent statement
10-6-19.B;
            (1)   The requested design exception is consistent with the Growth
Policy, the Downtown Design Plan, and any adopted area plan; and
            (2)   The requested design exception will not result in any adverse
impacts on other properties in the area beyond those impacts ordinarily
expected through the implementation of the regulation. (Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023)
10-6-20: NOTICE OF HEARING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Conditional Use Notice Of Hearing:
      1.   Publication. At least fifteen (15) days’ notice before the time and
place of such hearing shall be published in an official paper or paper of
general circulation in the city.
      2.   Mail. All property owners within three hundred feet (300') of the
site of the proposed district change shall be notified of the proposed change
via the United States mail at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing.
Names and addresses of adjoining property owners will be provided to the
planning office by the applicant and will be certified by the county recorder
or an authorized title company.
      3.   Posted. The project site shall be posted indicating the time and
location of the public hearing at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing
date.
   B.   Variance And Appeal Notice Of Hearing:
      1.   Publication. Notice of the hearing shall be published once in a
newspaper of general circulation within the city at least ten (10) days prior
to the hearing date.
      2.   Mail. All property owners within three hundred feet (300') of the
site of the proposed district change shall be notified of the proposed change
via the United States mail at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing.
The applicant will provide names and addresses of adjoining property owners to
the planning office and will be certified by the county recorder or an
authorized title company.
      3.   Posted. A notice will be posted on the proposed site of the variance
for ten (10) days prior to the hearing, giving notice that an application for a
variance has been filed on the property, giving the hearing date and hearing
location and a telephone number for further information.
   C.   Zoning Text Notice Of Hearing:
      1.   Publication. At least fifteen (15) days’ notice of the time and
place of such hearing shall be published in an official paper or paper of
general circulation in the city.
   D.   Zoning Map Amendments Notice Of Hearing:
      1.   Publication. At least fifteen (15) days’ notice of the time and
place of such hearing shall be published in an official paper or paper of
general circulation in the city.
      2.   Mail. All property owners within three hundred feet (300') of the
site of the proposed district change shall be notified of the proposed change
via the United States mail at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing.
Names and addresses of adjoining property owners will be provided to the
planning office by the applicant and will be certified by the county recorder
or an authorized title company.
      3.   Posted. The project site shall be posted indicating the time and
location of the public hearing at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing
date. (Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023)
10-6-21: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY:
   A.   Enforcement: This title shall be enforced by the city council and their
authorized representatives. No building permit or business or occupational use
license shall be issued except in compliance with the provisions of this title.
   B.   Violation: Whenever a violation of this title occurs or is alleged to
have occurred, any person may file a written complaint. Such complaint stating
fully the causes and basis thereof shall be filed with the building official.
They shall record such complaints properly and immediately investigate and take
action as provided in this title.
   C.   Penalties:
      1.   Misdemeanor: Violation of the provisions of this title or failure to
comply with any of its requirements, including violations of conditions and
safeguards established in connection with the grant of variances or conditional
uses or any of the requirements for conditions imposed by the city council,
shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates any of the provisions
of this title, or fails to comply with any of its requirements, shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to penalty as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this code.
      2.   Separate Offense: The owner or tenant of any building, structure,
premises, or part thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, or
other person who commits, participates in, assists, or maintains such violation
may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein
provided.
      3.   Additional Remedies: Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city
from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation. (Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023)
CHAPTER 7
NONCONFORMING LOTS, USES, AND STRUCTURES
SECTION:
10-7-1: Scope
10-7-2: Purpose
10-7-3: Nonconforming Lots Of Record
10-7-4: Nonconforming Uses Of Land
10-7-5: Nonconforming Uses Of Structures
10-7-6: Repairs And Maintenance
10-7-7: Conditional Uses
10-7-1: SCOPE:
The regulations of this chapter govern nonconformities, which are lots, uses,
and structures that were lawfully established but, because of the adoption of
new or amended regulations, no longer comply with one or more provisions of
this zoning ordinance. (Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023)
10-7-2: PURPOSE:
   A.   Occasionally, lots, uses, and structures that were lawfully established
(i.e., in compliance with all regulations in effect at the time of their
establishment) are made nonconforming because of changes, in the zoning
regulations that apply to the subject property (e.g., through zoning map
changes or amendments to the text of the zoning ordinance). The regulations of
this article are intended to clarify the effect of this “nonconforming” status
and avoid confusion with “illegal” buildings and uses (i.e., those established
in violation of applicable zoning regulations). The regulations of this article
are also intended to:
      1.   Recognize the interests of landowners in continuing to use their
property for uses and activities that were lawfully established;
      2.   Promote maintenance, reuse and rehabilitation of existing buildings;
      3.   Place reasonable limits on nonconformities that have the potential
to adversely affect surrounding properties. (Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023)
10-7-3: NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD:
   A.   Smaller Than Required: In any district, notwithstanding other
limitations imposed by this title, structures permitted in said district may be
erected on any single lot of record on the effective date of this title. A lot
of record that does not meet lot area or lot width requirements must still meet
other requirements of the district. No variance shall be granted to facilitate
the erection, construction or establishment of any structure on a nonconforming
lot of record.
   B.   Larger Than Required: Where lots are larger than required by this
title, said lots may be divided, except no parcel may be divided so as to
create a lot smaller in lot width or lot area than required by this title.
(Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023)
10-7-4: NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND:
   A.   Continued Use: Where, at the time of passage hereof, lawful use of land
exists which would not be permitted by the regulations imposed by this title,
the use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, provided:
      1.   Increase Nonconformity: No such nonconforming structure may be
altered or enlarged in any way which increases its nonconformity, but any
structure or portion thereof may be altered to decrease its nonconformity.
      2.   Destruction: Should such a nonconforming structure or nonconforming
portion of a structure be destroyed by any means to the extent of more than
fifty percent (50%) of its replacement cost at the time of destruction, it
shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this
title.
         a.   Single-Family Residences in Commercial Districts may be expanded
or may be rebuilt even if destroyed beyond fifty percent (50%) of its
replacement costs only by issuance of a conditional permit; provided, that:
            (1)   The existing character of the area in which expansion is
requested is primarily of a residential character or nature; and
            (2)   The square footage of the requested expansion is not more
than fifty percent (50%) of the total square footage of the existing
nonconforming use or structure.
   B.   Lack Of Off-Street Parking Or Loading: For the purpose of this chapter,
the lack of required off-street parking as specified in
10-4-4 of this title as applied to the Downtown District shall not render
structures as nonconforming as of the passage hereof. (Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023)
10-7-5: NONCONFORMING USES OF STRUCTURES:
   A.   Continued Use: If lawful use of a structure or of structures and
premises, exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment hereof that
would not be allowed in the district under the terms of this title, the lawful
use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful; providing, that:
      1.   Enlarged, Extended, Constructed, Or Structurally Altered: No
existing structure devoted to a nonconforming use shall be enlarged, extended,
constructed, or structurally altered unless the use is changed to a permitted
use.
      2.   Extended To Another Part Of Building: Any nonconforming use may be
extended to any other part of a building designed for such use, but no such use
may be extended in any way to occupy land outside the building.
      3.   Superseded By Permitted Use: Any structure or structure and land, in
or on which a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use shall
thereafter conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located,
and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed.
      4.   Cease In Use: Whenever a nonconforming use of a structure or
premises ceases for ninety (90) days, the structure or premises shall not
thereafter be used except in conformance with the regulations of the district
in which it is located. The term “ceases” as used in this subsection shall mean
that the activity in question has not been in operation for a period of ninety
(90) days.
      5.   Status Applies To Both Use And Land: Where nonconforming use status
applies to both structure and land, the removal or destruction of the structure
shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land.
   B.   Lack Of Off-Street Parking Or Loading: For the purpose of this chapter,
the lack of required off-street parking as specified in
10-4-4 of this title as applied to the Downtown District shall not render
structures as nonconforming as of the passage hereof. (Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023)
10-7-6: REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE
On any nonconforming structure or portion of the structure containing a
nonconforming use, work may be done on ordinary repairs and fixtures, wiring,
plumbing, or repair or replacement of nonbearing walls, to an extent not
exceeding ten percent (10%) of the replacement value of the building in any one
year; provided, that such work does not increase the cubic content of the
building. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening
or restoring to a safe condition of any building or portion thereof declared to
be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order
of such official. (Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023)
10-7-7: CONDITIONAL USES:
Conditional uses provided for under
Chapter 6 of this title shall not be deemed a nonconforming use in the district
in which it is permitted. (Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023)
CHAPTER 8
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
10-8-1: Meanings And Intent
10-8-2: Organization
10-8-3: General Definitions
10-8-4: Use Definitions
10-8-5: Signage Definitions
10-8-1: MEANINGS AND INTENT:
   A.   Words and terms expressly defined in this zoning ordinance have
specific meanings assigned unless the context indicates another meaning.
   B.   Words that are not expressly defined in this zoning ordinance must be
interpreted as having their plain meaning unless such an interpretation would
have an unintended result. (Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023)
10-8-2: ORGANIZATION:
   A.   General definitions are specified in 10.8.3.
   B.   Use definitions are specified in 10.8.4.
   C.   Sign definitions are specified in 10.8.5. (Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023)
10-8-3: GENERAL DEFINITIONS:
   A.   TERMS BEGINNING WITH “A”:
ABUT OR     To touch or share a contiguous boundary or border.
ABUTTING:
ACCESS      See definition Driveway, Access.
(DRIVEWAY):
            A subordinate structure detached from but located on the same lot as a
ACCESSORY   principal building. The use of an accessory structure must be identical
STRUCTURE:  and accessory to the use of the principal building. Accessory structures
            include sheds and decks. This definition excludes detached garages,
            carports, children’s playhouse equipment, screening, and fencing.
            Conducted or located on the same zoning lot as the principal building or
ACCESSORY   use served, except as may be specifically provided elsewhere in this
USE:        ordinance; clearly incidental to, subordinate in purpose to, and serves
            the principal use.
            A minor public street that is used primarily for vehicular service
ALLEY:      access to the back or the side of properties having principal frontage
            on another Street.
ALTERATION: Any change, addition, or modification in construction or occupancy.
            Items expressing creative skill or imagination in a visual form, such as
ART/PUBLIC  painting, graphic art, murals, and sculpture, intended to beautify or
ART:        provide aesthetic influences to public areas or areas visible from
            public areas.
            A roof-like covering consisting of fabric, plastic or structural
            protective cover that projects from the wall of a building that
AWNING:     generally serves the purpose of shielding a doorway, entrance, window,
            or outdoor service area from the elements or to provide decorative
            distinction.
 
   B.   TERMS BEGINNING WITH “B”:
 
BERM:               A vegetated, elongated earthen mound.
                    A land area required under the provisions of this ordinance
BUFFER YARD:        to separate different classifications of land uses from
                    each other.
BUILDING:           Any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure of
                    persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind.
                    The maximum vertical dimension measured from the average
                    finished lot grade at the front of the principal building
                    to the highest point of the roof. For accessory buildings,
BUILDING HEIGHT:    the height shall be measured from the lowest point of grade
                    elevation adjacent to any wall of the structure to the
                    highest point of the roof or the mean point between the
                    eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs. Amendment
                    recommended by staff after the Planning Board hearing.
                    That official designated by the city council as the
                    official responsible for accepting, reviewing and
BUILDING INSPECTOR: approving, or rejecting plans for buildings and
                    applications for building and land use permits and for
                    interpretation and enforcement of ordinances related
                    thereto.
 
   C.   TERMS BEGINNING WITH “C”:
 
CONDITIONAL USE: See definition Use, Conditional.
 
   D.   TERMS BEGINNING WITH “D”:
DENSITY:    The total number of dwelling units allowed per gross acre of land.
DEVELOP:    The act of constructing buildings or installing site improvements.
DEVELOPABLE Land that may be subdivided and utilized in accordance with the
LAND:       comprehensive plan of the city and other city policies.
DIAMETER AT
BREAST      The diameter of a tree trunk measured at a point 4.5 feet above ground level
HEIGHT      at the base of the tree.
(DBH):
DRIVEWAY    A hard surface for motor vehicles that leads from a public way to a
(OR DRIVE): residential garage or other building.
            The means by which vehicles enter and exit the required off-street parking
DRIVEWAY,   spaces between the street right of way/property line and the off-street
ACCESS:     parking space. Access (driveway) shall be surfaced in the same manner as the
            off-street parking area that it serves to a minimum width of nine feet (9').
            A depression in the curb for the purpose of accommodating a driveway, which
DRIVEWAY    provides vehicular access between private property and the street or
THROAT:     easement. Where there is no curb, the point at which the driveway meets the
            roadway pavement shall be considered the curb-cut.
           [https://export.amlegal.com/media/b04b0e5ccf6b07bdb8fe5d5bf5701ac5bc51801a/
            IMAGES/0-0-0-2447.jpg]
            A container with a capacity of more than 1.5 cubic yards or a height of more
DUMPSTER:   than 4.5 feet designed to receive, transport, and deposit waste materials
            produced by uses on the subject site. Dumpsters are typically designed to be
            hoisted and emptied into a garbage truck.
DWELLING:   A building or portion thereof, but not a lodging use, designed or used
            exclusively for residential occupancy.
DWELLING    One or more rooms are arranged, designed and used as living quarters for one
UNIT:       household. Individual bathroom(s) and complete kitchen facilities,
            permanently installed, must always be included for each “dwelling unit.”
 
   E.   TERMS BEGINNING WITH “E”:
 
             Any area of land reserved for public utilities, sanitation, or other specific
EASEMENT:    uses having limitations, the title to that must remain in the property owner’s
             name, subject to the right of use designated in the reservation of servitude.
             Any vehicle licensed and registered for operation on public and private
ELECTRIC     highways, roads, and streets; either, partially or exclusively, on electrical
VEHICLE:     energy from the grid or an off-board source that is stored on-board via a
             battery. “Electric vehicle” includes: (1) battery electric vehicles; and (2)
             plug-in hybrid electric vehicles.
ELECTRIC
VEHICLE (EV) A public or private parking space that is served by battery charging station
CHARGING     equipment.
STATION:
ELECTRIC
VEHICLE      An EV charging station that is not available to the general public. Examples
CHARGING     include electric vehicle charging stations that serve residential homeowners or
STATION,     renters, executive parking areas, designated employee parking areas and fleet
PRIVATE      parking areas.
(RESTRICTED-
ACCESS):
ELECTRIC
VEHICLE      An EV charging station that is accessible to and available by the general
CHARGING     public.
STATION,
PUBLIC:
ELECTRIC
VEHICLE      Any parking space clearly identified to be used exclusively for parking an
PARKING      electric vehicle.
SPACE:
 
   F.   TERMS BEGINNING WITH “F”:
 
             An enclosure or barrier, such as wooden posts, wire, iron, etc.,
FENCE:       used as a boundary, means of protection, privacy screening or
             confinement, but not including hedges, shrubs, trees, or other
             natural growth.
             The total number of square feet of floor space within the exterior
FLOOR AREA:  walls of a building (floor areas of basements shall not apply as
             part of the required minimum floor area of buildings).
             A measure of illumination, the amount of light falling onto a
FOOT-CANDLE: surface. One lumen of light, shining evenly across one square foot
             of surface, illuminates that surface to one foot-candle.
 
   G.   TERMS BEGINNING WITH “G”:
                               An enclosed building for the storage of motor
GARAGE, ATTACHED:              vehicles that is connected to a structure by a
                               common wall.
                               Enclosed building space accessory to a single-
GARAGE, PRIVATE (RESIDENTIAL): household of two household use for the storage
                               of motor vehicles.
                               The sale of personal household goods on a
                               residential property. The term garage sale
                               includes rummage sales, lawn sales, yard sales,
GARAGE SALE:                   attic sales, moving sales, and the like;
                               provided, however, that rummage sales are
                               allowed on a residential property no more than
                               three times per calendar year with a maximum
                               duration of 3 consecutive days.
                               The average level of the finished surface of the
GRADE:                         ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the
                               building or structure.
                               The vertical location of the ground or pavement
GRADE, FINISHED:               surface after site grading work is completed in
                               accordance with an approved plan.
                               An extension of an above-grade building roof
GREEN ROOF:                    that includes at least a waterproof membrane, a
                               root
                               repellent system, a drainage system, a filtering
                              layer, soil with a minimum depth of 3 inches and
                               native or naturalized plants. Also commonly
                               referred to as a “vegetated roof.”
GROUND COVER:                  Herbaceous broad leaf plants that do not exceed
                               2 feet in height.
                               That level of a building on a site that has its
GROUND FLOOR:                  floor line at or not more than 3 feet above the
                               grade of its principal discharge.
                               A person who occupies or has the right to occupy
GUEST:                         a lodging room as an overnight or temporary
                               residence.
                               any document or portion of any document duly
GROWTH POLICY:                 adopted by the city council intended to guide
                               the growth and development of the area.
 
   H.   TERMS BEGINNING WITH “H”:
 
HEDGE:                 A row of closely planted shrubs, bushes, or any plant
                       forming a boundary or fence.
HOMEOWNER ASSOCIATION: See Property owner association.
 
   I.   TERMS BEGINNING WITH “I”:
   J.   TERMS BEGINNING WITH “J”:
   K.   TERMS BEGINNING WITH “K”:
   L.   TERMS BEGINNING WITH “L”:
                           An area that includes plantings of grass, ornamental
                           shrubs, trees, or other ornamental ground covers
LANDSCAPE STRIP:           that are intended to provide a visual separation
                           between different uses, including, but not limited
                           to, parking areas, buildings, and sidewalks.
                           The placement of ornamental fixtures such as
                           fountains, ornamental walls, fences, and benches,
LANDSCAPING:               along with vegetative planting of trees, shrubs,
                           grasses, flowers, etc. This definition shall also
                           include the designing of the placement of such
                           materials.
                           An area of a pervious surface within an off-street
LANDSCAPING ISLAND:        parking lot that is intended for the placement of
                           vegetation or stormwater run-off management devices.
                           A use, structure, lot or sign (as the context
LAWFULLY ESTABLISHED:      indicates) that was established in conformance with
                           all applicable zoning code regulations in effect at
                           the time of its establishment.
                           Light emitted by a luminaire that shines beyond the
LIGHT TRESPASS:            boundaries of the property on which the luminaire is
                           located.
                           An off-street space or berth on the same lot with a
LOADING BERTH, OFF-STREET: principal building for parking a commercial vehicle
                           while loading or unloading merchandise and which has
                           direct access from a public street or alley.
                           A parcel or plot of land shown as an individual unit
LOT:                       of ownership on the most recent plat or other
                           records of subdivision.
                           The total horizontal area within the boundary lines
                           of a lot. Except as herein provided, no alley,
LOT AREA:                  public way, public land or area proposed for future
                           street purposes shall be included within the area of
                           a lot.
                           A lot situated at the intersection of two or more
LOT, CORNER:               streets, having an angle of intersection of not more
                           than 135 degrees.
LOT COVERAGE:              The total area covered by the principal and
                           accessory buildings.
                           The horizontal distance between the front and rear
LOT DEPTH:                 lot lines, measured along the median between the two
                           side lot lines.
LOT, INTERIOR:             A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINES:                 The lines bounding a “lot” as defined herein.
LOT, THROUGH:              A lot, other than a corner lot, having frontage on
                           two or more streets.
                           The horizontal distance between the side lot lines,
LOT WIDTH:                 as measured along a line parallel with the front
                           street line.
 
   M.   TERMS BEGINNING WITH “M”:
 
             A factory-built or manufactured transportable residential structure more than
             thirty-two (32) body feet in length and eight feet (8') or more in width, and
             built on one or more permanent chassis for towing to the point of use, and
             designed to be used without a permanent foundation as a dwelling unit when
             connected to sanitary facilities, and which bears an insignia issued by a state
MANUFACTURED or federal regulatory agency indicating that the manufactured home complies with
HOME:        all applicable construction standards of the United States department of housing
             and urban development definition of manufactured home. The phrase “without
             permanent foundation” indicates that the support system is constructed with the
             intent that the manufactured home placed thereon can be moved from time to time
             at the owner’s convenience. A commercial coach, recreational vehicle, and motor
             home is not a manufactured home.
MECHANICAL   All air conditioning units, cooling towers, heaters, ventilators, compressors,
EQUIPMENT:   flues, stacks, chimneys, and similar items are exposed to view outside of a
             building.
MEZZANINE:   An intermediate story between the floor and ceiling of a main story and extending
             over only part of the main floor.   
             meets the following: A factory-fabricated structure designed primarily for human
             occupancy to be used by itself or to be incorporated with similar units at a
             building site into a structure on a permanent foundation and which complies with
             the Belgrade adopted building, plumbing, electrical, and mechanical construction
             codes and the rules and regulations for modular housing or the building code
             division of the Montana department of administration. The term is intended to
MODULAR      apply to major assemblies. It does not include prefabricated panels, trusses,
HOME:        plumbing, trees, and other prefabricated sub-elements to be incorporated into a
             structure at the site.
             The meter base for incoming wiring is attached to the exterior wall of the
             modular home, whereas, for a manufactured home, the meter base must be attached
             to a pole or support that is isolated from the structure. The county assessor
             will list and assess the units as real or personal property.
             Modular homes which meet the international building code will be considered the
             same as conventional homes for the purposes of this title.
MOTOR        Any licensed passenger vehicle, truck, truck-trailer, trailer, or semitrailer
VEHICLE:     propelled or drawn by mechanical power.
 
   N.   TERMS BEGINNING WITH “N”:
 
                                 A use or structure that lawfully occupied
                                 a building or land at the time this title
NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURE OR USE: or any amendments become effective and
                                 does not conform with the use regulations
                                 of the district in which it is located.
                                 A nonconforming lot, nonconforming use,
NONCONFORMITY:                   nonconforming structure, nonconforming
                                 development feature or nonconforming
                                 sign.
NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICT OR       Any zoning district other than an R
NONRESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICT:  (residential) district.
 
   O.   TERMS BEGINNING WITH “O”:
 
                  An area or portion of a lot, or an area of water or
                  combination thereof, that is sought to be reserved in its
OPEN SPACE:       natural state or for agriculture, outdoor recreation use or
                  for, scenic purposes, or for the enjoyment of the inhabitants
                  of a dwelling unit.
OUTLOT:           A parcel of land other than a lot or block, a remnant parcel
                  of land not used for building purposes.
                  Any passenger vehicle, truck, truck trailer, trailer, semi-
                  trailer, or any vehicle propelled or drawn by mechanical
OPERABLE VEHICLE: power, or heavy equipment machinery that is licensed for the
                  current year and/or can be operated in a manner consistent
                  with the user’s manual.
                  A zoning district that overlays one or more base zoning
OVERLAY DISTRICT: districts and imposes requirements in addition to those of
                  the base district or modifies the regulations otherwise
                  applicable in the base zoning district.
 
   P.   TERMS BEGINNING WITH “P”:
                                  A structure or an area, other than a public
                                  street or alley, designed or used for the
PARKING LOT:                      temporary parking of motor vehicles and
                                  available for public use, whether free, for
                                  compensation, or accommodation for customers
                                  or clients.
                                  A space located off any public right of way
                                  which is at least nine feet by eighteen feet
                                  (9' x 18') in size for parking any motor
PARKING SPACE, OFF-STREET:        vehicle, with room to get out of either side
                                  of the vehicle, with adequate maneuvering
                                  space, and with access to public streets or
                                  alleys.
PEDESTRIAN WAY:                   A right-of-way designed for the purpose of
                                  providing pedestrian access.
PERSON:                           A living human body.
PHILANTHROPIC:                    A charitable institution.
                                  A freestanding structure, exclusively for the
PLAYHOUSE, CHILDREN’S:          use of children, with a maximum height of 12
                                  feet and an area not to exceed 120 square
                                  feet.
                                  An area maintained in a natural condition or
                                  covered by a natural material that permits
                                  infiltration or percolation of water into the
                                  ground. To include surface that use grid
PERVIOUS SURFACE:                 systems with vegetation in between and paver
                                  systems that allow water to infiltrate or
                                  percolate through at ninety percent (90%).
                                  Pervious pavers cannot be used to cover more
                                  than the twenty-five percent (25%) of
                                  required pervious area.
                                  A building or combination of buildings of
PRINCIPAL BUILDING:               chief importance or function on a lot. In
                                  general, the principal use is carried out in
                                  the principal building.
                                  A use or activity or combination of which are
                                  of chief importance on the lot; one of the
PRINCIPAL USE:                    main purposes for which the land, buildings
                                  or structures are intended, designed or
                                  ordinarily used.
                                  A detached accessory or portion of a main
PRIVATE GARAGE:                   building housing the automobiles of the
                                  occupants of the premises, but not commercial
                                  buildings.
                                  In specific districts, prohibited uses are
                                  those uses not specifically enumerated as
                                  permitted uses. Prohibited uses are listed in
                                  this title for the purposes of clarity and
PROHIBITED USES:                  emphasis only. Prohibited uses include, but
                                  are not limited to, the enumerated prohibited
                                  uses. No use of any property or structure in
                                  any district shall be permitted or
                                  conditionally permitted that is in violation
                                  of federal, state, or local law.
                                  Also called a homeowner association (HOA), a
                                  POA is a non-profit entity operating under
                                  recorded land agreements in a subdivision,
                                  planned community, or condominium building
PROPERTY OWNER ASSOCIATION (POA): governed by internal by-laws that make and
                                  enforce rules for properties, residents,
                                  guests, and common areas. Members pay dues,
                                  which are enforced through liens for non-
                                  payment.
                                  Include public, semipublic, and private
                                  elementary schools, high schools, civic
                                  buildings, community buildings and uses,
                                  museums, art galleries, firehouses, post
PUBLIC AND QUASI PUBLIC BUILDING: offices, police stations, reservoirs, senior
                                  and youth centers, libraries, parks,
                                  hospitals, sanatoriums, institutions for
                                  philanthropic or charitable purposes other
                                  than correctional, essential services and
                                  similar uses.
PUBLIC WAY:                       Any sidewalk, street, alley, highway, or
                                  other public thoroughfare.
 
   Q.   TERMS BEGINNING WITH “Q”:
   R.   TERMS BEGINNING WITH “R”:
 
RECREATIONAL a self-propelled or towed vehicle designed as a temporary dwelling for travel,
VEHICLE      recreation, and vacation uses. Towed recreational vehicles shall not be more
(RV):        than eight feet (8') in body width.
             A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more
RESIDENTIAL: persons, including permanent living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation
             provisions. This includes manufactured homes.
             A strip of land occupied, or intended to be occupied, for a public or quasi-
             public use. Rights-of-way intended for streets, crosswalks, water mains,
             sanitary sewers, storm drains, or any other use involving maintenance by a
RIGHT-OF-    public agency, must be dedicated to public use by the maker of the plat on that
WAY:         such right-of-way is established. The usage of the term “right-of- way” for land
             platting purposes means that every right-of-way hereafter established and shown
             on a final plat is to be separate and distinct from other lots or parcels
             adjoining such right-of-way and not included within the dimension or areas of
             such lots or parcels.
 
   S.   TERMS BEGINNING WITH “S”:
SCREENED:                            Concealed or cut off from direct visual
                                     contact.
                                     The horizontal distance required between
                                     any structure and a lot line. This
                                     distance is to be measured at right
SETBACK:                             angles to the lot line. The setback line
                                     shall be parallel with the lot line. See
                                     10-1-6 for Interpretation and
                                     Measurements.
                                     A group of retail commercial
                                     establishments involved in the sale of a
                                     general line of clothing apparel and
                                     accessories, home furnishings, major and
                                     minor household appliances, hardware,
                                     toys, electronic goods, eating
SHOPPING CENTER:                     establishments, and other consumer
                                     products and services that are planned
                                     and developed as a unit with a minimum
                                     of 50,000 square feet of gross floor
                                     area and off-street parking provided on
                                     the lot or parcel on that the shopping
                                     center is located.
                                     That portion of a street right-of-way or
SIDEWALK:                            cross walkway, paved or otherwise
                                     surfaced, intended for pedestrian use
                                     only.
                                     A system intended to convert solar
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM:                 energy into thermal, mechanical or
                                     electrical energy.
                                     A solar energy system that is an
                                     integral part of a principal or
                                     accessory building, rather than a
                                     separate mechanical device, replacing or
                                     substituting for an architectural or
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, BUILDING-       structural part of the building.
INTEGRATED:                          Building- integrated systems include,
                                     but are not limited to, photovoltaic or
                                     hot water systems that are contained
                                     within roofing materials, windows,
                                     skylights, shading devices and similar
                                     architectural components.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, STRUCTURE-      A solar energy system that is mounted on
MOUNTED:                             the facade or roof of either a principal
                                     or accessory structure.
                                     A solar energy system that is mounted
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, FLUSH-MOUNTED:  flush with a finished building surface,
                                     at no more than 6 inches in height above
                                     that surface.
                                     A solar energy system mounted on the
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, GROUND-MOUNTED: ground and not attached to any other
                                     structure other than structural
                                     supports.
                                     A group of photovoltaic cells assembled
SOLAR PANEL:                         on a panel. Panels are assembled on-site
                                     into solar arrays.
                                     An temporary event or group of related
                                     temporary events typically involving a
                                     mass gathering of people on public
SPECIAL EVENT:                       right-of-way or public property; or on
                                     private property in a manner that
                                     significantly impacts public property or
                                     right-of-way.
                                     Building or premises used primarily for
                                     sale of fruit or produce from a service
STAND, FRUIT OR PRODUCE:             window, counter, or exterior area of a
                                     building; and major display of goods in
                                     an exterior or semi-enclosed area
                                     associated with a building.
                                     Also called ground floor. The story
STORY, GROUND:                       closest to the ground level that does
                                     not meet the definition of a basement.
                                     Inventory held by a business for sale in
STOCK-IN-TRADE:                      the ordinary course of business or the
                                     equipment, materials, and tools required
                                     for the performance of a trade.
STREET LOT LINE:                     A line dividing a lot from a public
                                     right-of-way.
                                     The area behind the back of curb
                                     designed for pedestrian travel,
STREETSCAPE AREA:                    including the sidewalk and buffer zone
                                     between the sidewalk and street for
                                     street planting and/or street
                                     furnishings.
                                     The portion of the building facade that
STREETWALL:                          is located generally parallel and facing
                                     the street right-of-way line.
                                     A public or private right-of-way that
                                     affords a primary means of vehicular
                                     access to abutting property, whether
STREET:                              designated as a street, avenue, highway,
                                     road, boulevard, lane, thruway, or
                                     however otherwise designated, but does
                                     not include driveways to buildings.
                                     A major high capacity street designed to
STREET, ARTERIAL:                    carry large volumes of traffic between
                                     major activity areas of the city.
                                     A street that provides moderate speed
                                     movement within major activity areas and
                                     collects and distributes traffic between
STREET, COLLECTOR:                   arterials and local streets. Included
                                     would be principal entrance and traffic
                                     movement streets within a residential
                                     development.
                                     A street designed for low speed travel
                                     and generally low traffic volumes that
STREET, LOCAL (MINOR):               provides land access from neighborhoods
                                     and minor activities to the collector
                                     and arterial systems.
                                     Any change, other than incidental
                                     repairs, that would prolong the life of
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION:               the supporting members of a building,
                                     such as the addition, removal, or
                                     alteration of bearing walls, columns,
                                     beams, girders, or foundations.
                                     Anything constructed, the use of that
STRUCTURE:                           requires location on the ground or
                                     attachment to something having location
                                     on the ground.
                                     Any structure, other than a building
                                     constructed or installed on a zoning
                                     lot, the principal purpose of that is to
STRUCTURE, DECORATIVE:               provide a decoration or architectural
                                     accent, including, but not limited to,
                                     arbors and trellises, flagpoles,
                                     approved free-standing signs and light
                                     posts.
                                     Any change in the shape or size of any
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION:               portion of a building or of the
                                     supporting members of the girders, floor
                                     joist, or roof joist.
                                     That which is built or constructed, an
                                     edifice or building of any kind, or any
STRUCTURE:                           piece of work artificially built up or
                                     composed of parts joined together in
                                     some definite manner.
                                     The increase in floor area occupied by
SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT:             the business by more than twenty-five
                                     percent (25%), as the floor area existed
                                     as of the date hereof.
 
   T.   TERMS BEGINNING WITH “T”:
                                  Any temporary structure or enclosure, the
                                  roof of that and/or one-half or more of the
TENT:                             sides are constructed of silk, cotton,
                                  canvas, fabric, or a similar pliable
                                  material.
TRANSITION:                       A visual effect used on an electronic message
                                  sign to change from one message to another.
                                  A mode of message transition on an electronic
TRAVEL:                           message sign in which the message appears to
                                  move horizontally across the display surface.
                                  means and includes any of the following:
                                  The sale, lease, or sublease of the business.
                                  The transfer of securities that form a
                                  controlling interest in the business, whether
                                  by sale, exchange, or similar means; or The
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL: establishment of a trust, gift, or other
                                  similar legal device that transfers the
                                  ownership or control of the business, except
                                  for transfer by bequest or other operation of
                                  law upon the death of the person possessing
                                  the ownership or control. (Amended Ord. 86-1;
                                  amd. Ord. 2004-17, 2-7-2005; 2009 Code).
                                  For the purposes of this zoning ordinance,
TRANSPARENCY, STOREFRONT:         transparency is the measurement of the
                                  percentage of a facade that contains highly
                                  transparent, low- reflectance glass.
                                  Storefront - When transparency is required
                                  separately for primary street ground-story
                                 facades, glass must have a minimum of 60%
                                  transmittance factor and a reflectance factor
                                  of less than 0.25, unless specified for a
                                  specific district.
                                  All Other Windows - Transparency for all
                                  window and door glass, or other storefront
                                 glass must have a minimum of 50%
                                  transmittance factor and a reflectance factor
                                  of less than 0.25, unless specified for a
                                  specific district.
 
   U.   TERMS BEGINNING WITH “U”:
 
                                 Any purpose for which a building or other
                                 structure or a tract of land may be designed,
                                 arranged, intended, maintained, or occupied,
USE:                             or any activity, occupation, business, or
                                 operation carried on or intended to be carried
                                 on in a building or other structure or on a
                                 tract of land.
                                 Uses, other than permitted uses, that may be
                                 allowed in a specific district but require
USE, CONDITIONAL:                additional safeguards or conditions to
                                 maintain and assure the health, safety,
                                 morals, and general welfare of the community
                                 and the character of the district.
                                 A use that may be lawfully established in a
USE, PERMITTED:                  particular district or districts, provided it
                                 conforms with all requirements, regulations,
                                 and standards of such district.
                                 The primary use of land or buildings, as
USE, PRINCIPAL:                  distinguished from a subordinate or accessory
                                 use.
                                 An energy production facility that produces
UTILITY-SCALE ENERGY PRODUCTION: electric energy for widespread distribution
                                 through the electric power grid.
 
   V.   TERMS BEGINNING WITH “V”:
 
                     In the application of a zoning ordinance, a reasonable
                     deviation from those provisions regulating the shape,
                     size, or area of a lot or parcel of land, or the size,
                     height, area, bulk, or location of a building or structure
                     when the strict application of the ordinance would
VARIANCE:            unreasonably restrict the utilization of the property, and
                     such need for a variance would not be shared generally by
                     other properties and provided such variance is not
                     contrary to the purpose of the ordinance. It shall not
                     include a change in use, which shall be accomplished by
                     rezoning or conditional zoning.
                     A triangular-shaped area of land abutting a highway or
                     private road that must be kept free of obstructions
                     (heights limited to four feet) that could impede the
VISIBILITY TRIANGLE: vision of a pedestrian or the driver of a motor vehicle
                     exiting onto or driving on the highway or private road.
                     The Visibility Triangle is measured from the edge of
                     pavement at the intersection, forty feet (40 ft) back in
                     each direction (see diagram below).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b04b0e5ccf6b07bdb8fe5d5bf5701ac5bc51801a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2495.jpg]
   W.   TERMS BEGINNING WITH “W”:
 
                         The extent to which the built environment is safe and
WALKABLE OR WALKABILITY: inviting for pedestrians and for the presence of
                         people living, shopping, visiting, enjoying or
                         spending time in an area.
                         A clearly defined path for nonmotorized movement
WALKWAY:                 between buildings, structures, destinations, or other
                         walkways on or adjacent to a sit.
 
   X.   TERMS BEGINNING WITH “X”:
 
XERISCAPE: Landscaping design requiring efficient irrigation or other
           maintenance with drought tolerant plants native to the area.
 
   Y.   TERMS BEGINNING WITH “Y”:
 
             A yard extending across the full width of the lot, between the
             nearest principal building and the front lot line. The depth of
YARD, FRONT: the required front yard shall be measured horizontally from the
             nearest part of the principal building to the nearest point of the
             front line.
             A yard extending across the full width of the lot, between the
             nearest rear principal building and the rear lot line. The depth
YARD, REAR:  of the required rear yard shall be measured horizontally from the
             nearest part of the principal building to the nearest part of the
             rear lot line.
             Aa yard between a principal building and the side lot line,
             extending from the front yard, or front lot line, where no front
YARD, SIDE:  yard is required, to the rear yard. The width of the required side
             yard shall be measured horizontally from the nearest point of the
             side line toward the nearest part of the principal building.
 
   Z.   TERMS BEGINNING WITH “Z”:
 
               The relaxation of the strict application of side yard
               requirements where two (2) adjoining lot owners agree to the
ZERO LOT LINE: side yard reduction. (Amended Ord. 86-1; amd. Ord. 97-8, 11-3-
               1997; 2009 Code; Ord. 2010-4, 7-6-2010; Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023;
               Ord. 2023-9, 12-18-2023; Ord. 2024-06, 11-18-2024).
 
10-8-4: USE DEFINITIONS:
   A.   TERMS BEGINNING WITH “A”:
               Accessory Dwelling Units (ADUs), also referred to as accessory apartments,
ACCESSORY,     second units, caretaker’s residences, or granny flats, are additional living
ACCESSORY      quarters on single-family lots that are independent of the primary dwelling
DWELLING UNIT: unit. The separate living space has a kitchen, bathroom, and a maximum of two
               bedrooms. ADUs can be attached or detached from the principal dwelling unit.
ACCESSORY,     An accessory use incidental to an establishment where customers may walk up/
BIKE-UP        bike-up to the window to purchase goods rather than entering the structure or
WINDOW:        using a drive-through. Examples are walk-up/bike-up eating establishments and
               walk-up/bike-up pharmacies.
ACCESSORY,     The use of a dwelling or accessory structure in a residential area as an
HOME-BASED     office, studio, or workroom for occupations at home shall be divided into two
BUSINESS:      (2) categories, minor home occupations, and major home occupations. Such
               categories shall be defined as follows:
ACCESSORY,
HOME-BASED     See definition of Accessory, Home-Based Business.
OCCUPATION:
ACCESSORY,     A parking area on the surface of a lot that is the principal use on the lot
PRIVATE        and which is operated by a public entity, whether for profit or not, for use
PARKING LOT:   by the owners or tenants of the lot and their invited guests and/or the
               general public.
ACCESSORY,     The keeping of four or more domesticated animals such as rabbits, chickens,
SMALL FARM     ducks, turkeys, and similar fowl and animals which are kept for personal or
ANIMAL         agricultural use or raised for sale and profit.
KEEPING:
ACCESSORY,     An installation or combination of solar panels or plates, including a canopy
SOLAR          or array, that captures and converts solar radiation to produce electricity
FACILITY:      and includes flat plate, focusing solar collectors, or photovoltaic solar
               cells that:
ACCESSORY,     A swimming pool used and intended solely by the owner, operator, or lessee
SWIMMING POOL  thereof and his family and by guests invited to use it without payment of any
FAMILY:        fee or consideration.
ACCESSORY,
WALK-UP        See definition of Accessory, Bike-Up Window.
WINDOW:
ADULT-ORIENTED An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion
BUSINESS:      picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, or sexual
               encounter center.
ADULT-USE      A premises from which a licensed adult-use provider or adult-use marijuana-
DISPENSARY:    infused products provider dispenses marijuana or marijuana-infused products to
               a consumer.
               Farming; ranching; algaculture; aquaculture; apiculture; horticulture;
               viticulture; animal husbandry, including, but not limited to, the care and
AGRICULTURE:   raising of livestock, equine, and fur-bearing animals; poultry husbandry and
               the production of poultry and poultry products; dairy products; the production
               of field crops, tobacco, fruits, vegetables, nursery stock, ornamental shrubs,
               ornamental trees, flowers, sod, or mushrooms; timber and pasturage.
AGRICULTURE,   Land within the defined urban development boundary used for small-scale
COMMUNITY      farming activities and the cultivation of crops for own consumption or sale in
(URBAN):       neighboring markets.
               Any area of land or water, or any manmade object or facility located thereon,
               which is used, or intended for use, for the landing and takeoff of aircraft,
AIRPORT:       and any appurtenant areas that are used, or intended for use, for airport
               buildings or other airport facilities or rights-of-way, together with all
               airport buildings and facilities located thereon.
ANTIQUE SHOP:  The sale of items belonging to, made in, or typical of an earlier period of
               time.
               A non-profit, public, or commercial facility for preserving and exhibiting
               artistic, historical, scientific, natural, or man-made objects of interest,
ART CENTER:    which may include the sale of the objects collected and memorabilia, the sale
               of crafts work and artwork, boutiques, and the holding of public and private
               meetings and social events.
ART STUDIO:    Workspace for one or more artists or artisans, including the accessory private
               sale of art produced on the premises, and shall not be open to the public.
ARTISAN        The on-site production of goods by hand manufacturing conducted wholly within
MANUFACTURING: an enclosed building of less than 5,000 square feet of gross floor, which
               involves using of hand tools and small- scale equipment.
AUTOMOBILE     The use of any lot, portion of a lot, or tract of land for the storage,
WRECKING YARD: keeping, sale, or abandonment of automobiles or other motor vehicles.
 
   B.   TERMS BEGINNING WITH “B”:
 
                                       An establishment where beer, malt
                                       beverages or spirits are made on the
BEVERAGE BREWING AND DISTILLING:       premises and then sold or distributed
                                       either by wholesale or retail, which may
                                       include incidental on-premises
                                       consumption.
                                       A facility at which beer, fermented on
BEVERAGE BREWING AND DISTILLING, SMALL the premises, is bottled and sold. The
SCALE:                                 volume of production of such facility
                                       may not exceed 200 gallons a day.
                                       A facility for storage and wholesale
BEVERAGE DISTRIBUTION:                 distribution of alcoholic beverages, but
                                       not including retail sales.
                                       An establishment for the sale of beer,
                                       wine and general alcoholic beverages,
                                       including the sale of distilled spirits
                                       or hard liquor, for off-premises
BEVERAGE SALES, LIQUOR, BEER OR WINE   consumption, but not including the
STORE:                                 incidental sale of convenience items
                                       such as, without limitation, pre-
                                       packaged snacks, non-alcoholic
                                       beverages, personal care items,
                                       clothing, household items and/or
                                       cigarettes.
 
   C.   TERMS BEGINNING WITH “C”:
                                   A facility, whether automatic, semi-
CAR WASH:                          automatic or manual, for washing
                                   vehicles.
                                   A commercial facility where patrons wager
CASINO:                            money on the outcome of a game, including
                                   but not limited to a card game or slot
                                   machine.
                                   Land used for the burial of the dead and
                                   dedicated for cemetery purposes,
CEMETERY:                          including columbarium, mausoleums and
                                   mortuaries when operated in conjunction
                                   with and within the boundary of the
                                   cemetery.
                                   Any place that is not the permanent
                                   residence of the licensee or
                                   administrator in which childcare is
CHILDCARE CENTER:                  provided, with or without compensation,
                                   for seven to twelve children at one time,
                                   or any place in which childcare is
                                   provided for thirteen or more children at
                                   one time.
                                   Any establishment where human patients
                                   are examined and are treated by or under
CLINIC OR URGENT CARE:             the care and supervision of doctors,
                                   dentists or other medical practitioners,
                                   but where patients are not hospitalized
                                   overnight.
                                   An establishment where animals are
                                   examined and treated by veterinarians,
CLINIC, VETERINARY:                and which may include kennels for
                                   temporary boarding of animals during
                                   treatment.
                                   Buildings and facilities owned and
                                   operated by a corporation, association,
                                   person, or persons for a social,
CLUBS (FRATERNAL LODGES):          educational, or recreational purpose, but
                                   not primarily for profit or to render a
                                   service which is customarily carried on
                                   as a business.
                                   A center for the collection and/or
                                   processing of recyclable materials, but
                                   not including storage containers located
COLLECTION AND RECYCLING FACILITY: on a residentially, commercially, or
                                   industrially designated site used solely
                                   for the recycling of material generated
                                   on the site.
                                   Any lot, premises, structure, or building
COMMERCIAL KENNEL:                 where six (6) or more dogs or six (6) or
                                   more cats of at least six (6) months of
                                   age are kept.
                                   Motor vehicles including but not limited
                                   to trucks, recreational vehicles, buses,
COMMERCIAL, LARGE VEHICLES AND     boats, and heavy equipment, and similar
EQUIPMENT:                         size vehicles which have gross vehicle
                                   weights greater than 10,000 pounds, but
                                   excluding airplane or aircraft.
                                   A facility where activities are
                                   programmed for children, adults, or
COMMUNITY CENTER:                  seniors by a public or not-for-profit
                                   entity. Activities must be community-
                                   oriented and may be located indoors or on
                                   associated playfields.
                                   An impermanent structure erected or
                                   placed only at a construction site for
CONSTRUCTION TRAILER:              the purposes of administration and
                                   management of the construction
                                   activities.
 
   D.   TERMS BEGINNING WITH “D”:
 
           A retail establishment that sells prescription drugs, patient
DRUGSTORE: medicines, surgical and sickroom supplies and which also may sell
           cosmetics, household goods and a limited selection of food products.
 
   E.   TERMS BEGINNING WITH “E”:
 
EMERGENCY       An emergency room facility that accepts patients by ambulance and other
FACILITY,       vehicular means and provides emergency medical services and is not contained
STANDALONE:     within or physically connected to a full-service hospital.
                This entails wireless services federally licensed commercial mobile service as
ESSENTIAL       defined in the “Telecommunications Act of 1996,” 110 Stat. 61, 151, 153, 47
COMMUNICATIONS  U.S.C. 332(d) and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47
(TELE-          C.F.R. 20.3. Under division (A)(19) of this section, commercial mobile radio
COMMUNICATIONS) service is specifically limited to mobile telephone, mobile cellular telephone,
FACILITY:       paging, personal communications services, and specialized mobile radio service
                provided by a common carrier in this state and excludes fixed wireless service.
EVENT CENTER:   A facility that accommodates small-scale events, conferences, or weddings.
 
   F.   TERMS BEGINNING WITH “F”:
             A private residence in which supplemental parental care is provided for
FAMILY       compensation to three (3) to six (6) children, no more than three (3) children
CHILDCARE:   under two (2) years of age, from separate families on a regular basis,
             including the provider’s own children who are less than six (6) years of age.
             An occasional or periodic market held in an open area or in a structure where
FARMER’S   groups of individual sellers offer for sale to the public such items as fresh
MARKET:      produce, seasonal fruits, fresh flowers, arts and crafts items, and food and
             beverages (but not to include second-hand goods) dispensed from booths located
             on-site.
             Any building, property, or activity of which the principal use or primary
FINANCIAL    purpose is the provision of financial services, including, but not limited to,
INSTITUTION: banks, facilities for automated teller machines (ATMs), credit unions, savings
             and loan institutions and mortgage companies.
FITNESS      A commercial establishment where physical exercise or training is conducted on
FACILITY OR  an individual basis, using exercise equipment or open floor space with or
GYM:         without one-to-one instruction with a personal trainer
FOOD SALES,  A retail establishment with a gross floor area greater than 5,000 square feet
LARGE        which primarily sells food but also may sell other convenience and household
GROCERY:     goods. A section for fresh fruits and vegetables no less than 60 square feet
             must be visible within the retail area of the establishment.
FOOD SALES,  A retail establishment with a gross floor area of less than 5,000 square feet
SMALL        which primarily sells food but also may sell other convenience and household
GROCERY:     goods. A section for fresh fruits and vegetables no less than 30 square feet
             must be visible within the retail area of the establishment.
FOOD SERVICE An establishment primarily engaged in the retail sale of baked products for
COMMISSARY   consumption offsite that may be prepared either on or off-site and may include
OR BAKERY:   incidental food service.
FOOD         An establishment where food is sold for consumption off-premises. No counters
SERVICE,     or tables for on-premises food consumption are provided but exclude groceries
DELI:        and supermarkets.
             A building or part thereof used for human funeral services. Such building may
FUNERAL      contain space and facilities for (a) embalming and the performance of other
HOME:        services used in the preparation of the dead for burial; (b) the performance of
             autopsies
             and other surgical procedures; (c) the storage of caskets, funeral urns, and
            other related funeral supplies; (d) the storage of funeral vehicles; and (e)
             facilities for cremation Where a funeral home is permitted, a funeral chapel
             shall also be permitted.
 
   G.   TERMS BEGINNING WITH “G”:
 
GARAGE,         Any building or premises used for the major repair of motor vehicles as a
AUTOMOTIVE      commercial business, but not including auto wrecking or storage of wrecked
(VEHICULAR)     motor vehicles. Repair activity shall be conducted in enclosed places or
REPAIR:         screened from public view.
GARAGE,         A building or portion of a building used for the storage of motor vehicles
PRIVATE:        and other permitted uses that are accessory to a dwelling.
                An establishment where retail and wholesale products and produce are sold
                directly to the consumer, and which may include a nursery and/or greenhouse,
GARDEN CENTER:  and which may include plants, nursery products and stock, potting soil,
                hardware, power equipment and machinery, hoes, rakes, shovels, and other
                garden and farm variety tools and utensils, and where outdoor storage is
                incidental to the sale of goods.
GASOLINE        Any building or portion thereof and the land upon which it is situated used
SERVICE         for supplying fuel and/or oil for motor vehicles at retail direct to the
STATION:        consumer and/or making minor vehicle repairs.
GOVERNMENT      Any building which hosts offices for personnel either directly employed or
ADMINISTRATION: contracted to provide a government administrative function.
GROUP           A private residence in which supplemental parental care is provided to seven
CHILDCARE:      (7) to twelve (12) children on a regular basis including the provider’s own
                children who are less than six (6) years of age.
 
   H.   TERMS BEGINNING WITH “H”:
 
          An establishment which has an organized medical staff and provides
          equipment and services primarily for inpatient care to persons who
HOSPITAL: require definitive diagnosis or treatment, or both, for injury,
          illness, pregnancy or other disability, but not including narcotics
          addiction or those found to be criminally insane.
 
   I.   TERMS BEGINNING WITH “I”:
 
                         A personal storage building that is subdivided by
                         permanent partitions into individual spaces, and each
                         space has an independent entrance within an enclosed
                         building under the exclusive control of the tenant,
INDOOR STORAGE FACILITY: with one or more exterior entrances to the building,
                         and which is used for storage of personal belongings
                         and not for any commercial or industrial purpose, and
                         that may include outdoor storage of recreational
                         vehicles.
 
   J.   TERMS BEGINNING WITH “J”:
   K.   TERMS BEGINNING WITH “K”:
   L.   TERMS BEGINNING WITH “L”:
 
LIBRARY: A public facility for using, but not selling, literary, musical,
         artistic, or reference materials.
 
   M.   TERMS BEGINNING WITH “M”:
                                    The manufacture of products, the process of
                                    which generates fumes, gases, smokes,
                                    vapors, vibrations, noise or glare, or
MANUFACTURING, HEAVY:               similar nuisance factors which have a high
                                    probability of occurring and which may
                                    cause adverse effects to the users of
                                    adjacent land.
                                    Manufacturing products, the process of
                                    which does not create and emit fumes,
MANUFACTURING, LIGHT:               gases, smokes, vapors, vibrations, noise or
                                    glare, or other factors regarded as
                                    nuisances that would cause adverse effects
                                    to the users of adjacent land.
                                    A cultivator, manufacturer, adult-use
                                    dispensary, medical marijuana dispensary,
                                    combined- use marijuana licensee, testing
MARIJUANA BUSINESS:                 laboratory, marijuana transporter, or any
                                    other marijuana related business or
                                    function that is licensed by the state and
                                    the city.
MARIJUANA DISPENSARY:               Both an adult-use dispensary and/or a
                                    medical marijuana dispensary.
                                    Any property or structure used by a
                                    Cultivator to plant, cultivate, grow,
                                    harvest, or dry marijuana, or to package
                                    and re-label marijuana produced at the
                                    location in a natural or naturally dried
                                    form that has not been converted,
MARIJUANA PRODUCTION FACILITY:      concentrated, or compounded for sale
                                    through a licensed dispensary, or used by a
                                    Manufacturer to convert or compound
                                    marijuana into marijuana products,
                                    marijuana concentrates, or marijuana
                                    extracts and package, repackage, label, or
                                    re-label marijuana products as allowed
                                    under state law and this article.
                                    A premises from which a registered
MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY:       cardholder may obtain marijuana or
                                    marijuana products.
                                    A premises from which a qualified person
                                    licensed by the state provides testing of
                                    representative samples of marijuana and
MARIJUANA TESTING LABORATORY:       marijuana products; and provides
                                    information regarding the chemical
                                    composition and potency of a sample, as
                                    well as the presence of molds, pesticides,
                                    or other contaminants in a sample.
MASSAGE, PHYSICAL THERAPY AND OTHER An establishment that provides therapeutic
PERSONAL THERAPEUTIC SERVICES:      or medical massage of a non-sexual nature
                                    provided by a licensed practitioner.
MOTEL:                              See definition of Hotel.
 
   N.   TERMS BEGINNING WITH “N”:
   O.   TERMS BEGINNING WITH “O”:
 
                                      A building containing the office or
                                      offices of a business or businesses
                                      engaged in providing professional
                                      services, including, but not limited to,
                                      the following: accounting; auditing and
                                      bookkeeping services; advertising
                                      agencies; architectural, engineering,
                                      planning, and surveying services;
                                      attorneys; counseling services; court
                                      reporting services; data processing and
                                      computer services; detective agencies and
                                      similar services; educational,
OFFICES, BUSINESS, AND PROFESSIONAL:  scientific, and research organizations;
                                      employment, stenographic, secretarial,
                                      and word processing services; government
                                      offices including agency and
                                      administrative office facilities;
                                      management, public relations, and
                                      consulting services; photography and
                                      commercial art studios; writers and
                                      artists offices outside the home, but not
                                      including medical offices or offices that
                                      are incidental and accessory to another
                                      business or retail sales activity in the
                                      building.
                                      The storage of any material for a period
                                      greater than 24 hours, including items
OUTDOOR STORAGE FACILITY:             for sale, lease, processing, and repair
                                      (including vehicles) not in an enclosed
                                      building.
                                      A detached residential dwelling where
                                      lodging and breakfast are only provided
OVERNIGHT LODGING, BED AND BREAKFAST: to transient guests for compensation
                                      according to specific development
                                      standards and where the owner-operator
                                      permanently resides on the property.
                                      A small-scale hotel in a historic
                                      structure, or a structure with a facade
                                      made of a high- quality material such as
OVERNIGHT LODGING, BOUTIQUE HOTEL:    wood, brick, masonry, tile, stone,
                                      granite, limestone, or another natural
                                      material, that has fewer than 30 rooms
                                      accessed from an interior hallway.
                                      Any structure consisting of one or more
                                      buildings containing any combination of
                                      more than five guestrooms that meet the
                                      requirements for transient sleeping rooms
                                      or extended stay temporary residence
                                      dwelling units where all rooms/ units are
                                      accessed from an interior hallway or as
                                      having features of such sleeping rooms
                                      and dwelling units within the same room,
                                      and such structure is specifically
                                      constructed, kept, used, maintained,
OVERNIGHT LODGING, HOTEL:             advertised, and held out to the public to
                                      be a place where transient sleeping
                                      accommodations or temporary residence is
                                      offered for pay to persons, but the such
                                      structure does not otherwise meet the
                                      definition of Overnight Lodging, Bed and
                                      Breakfast, and does not include
                                      agricultural labor camps, apartment
                                      houses, apartments or other similar
                                      places of a permanent personal residence,
                                      lodging houses, rooming houses, or
                                      hospital or college dormitories.
OVERNIGHT LODGING, MOTEL:             See definition for Overnight Lodging,
                                      Hotel.
 
   P.   TERMS BEGINNING WITH “P”:
 
                         An area of land for the enjoyment of the public,
                         having facilities for rest and/ or recreation, owned
PARK:                    and/or managed by a city, county, state, federal
                         government, or metropolitan park district, not
                         including trails.
                         An open or enclosed facility for temporary off-street
PARKING GARAGE:          parking of five or more motor vehicles located on
                         publicly or privately owned property.
                         A parking area on the surface of a lot that is the
                         principal use on the lot and which is operated by a
PARKING LOT:             public entity, whether for profit or not, for use by
                         the owners or tenants of the lot and their invited
                         guests and/or the general public.
                         An establishment that accommodates two or more clients
                         at one time providing nonmedically related services,
PERSONAL SERVICES:       including, but not limited to, beauty salons, barber
                         shops and tanning salons by licensed professionals,
                         which may also include accessory retail sales of
                         products related to the services provided.
                         A public, commercial, or non-profit establishment that
                         provides membership for participating in, or using,
PRIVATE CLUB:            shared space, programming, or social activities and
                         may not include any form of the adult entertainment
                         business or retail sales.
                         A government facility for public safety and emergency
PUBLIC SAFETY FACILITY:  services, including a facility that provides police,
                         fire protection, and/or emergency medical services and
                         related administrative and training facilities.
                         Any administrative, maintenance or service building
PUBLIC UTILITY BUILDING: operated by a public utility or any transmission
                         facility of a public utility that does not meet the
                         definition of an “essential service.”
 
   Q.   TERMS BEGINNING WITH “Q”:
   R.   TERMS BEGINNING WITH “R”:
                                        An enterprise operated by other than a
                                        public entity for profit for indoor
RECREATION, COMMERCIAL RECREATION,      recreation and/ or leisure activities,
INDOOR:                                 including dance studios, health and/or
                                        fitness clubs, martial arts, and
                                        gymnasiums.
                                        Indoor commercial recreation uses
                                        include, but are not limited to,
RECREATION, COMMERCIAL RECREATION,      fitness centers, bowling alleys, dance
INDOOR, SMALL-SCALE:                    halls, skating rinks, indoor commercial
                                        swimming pools, and racquet and tennis
                                        clubs.
                                        Public or private swimming pools,
                                        tennis courts, go-cart courses, or
                                        mechanical rides that are not enclosed
RECREATION, COMMERCIAL RECREATION,      in buildings and are operated on a
OUTDOOR:                                commercial or membership basis
                                        primarily for the use of persons who do
                                        not reside on the same lot as that on
                                        which the recreation use is located.
                                        Property owned by the City of Belgrade,
                                        the State of Montana, Gallatin County,
RECREATION, COMMUNITY PARK:             a conservation nonprofit, or the
                                        Belgrade School District devoted to
                                        open space and public recreation.
                                        Any area or tract of land rented or
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE AND TRAVEL TRAILER held out for rent to one or more
PARK:                                   persons or users for parking or
                                        placement of temporary recreational
                                        vacation housing.
                                        A use located in a permanent building
                                        and providing regular organized
                                        religious worship and related
                                        incidental activities, except child day
RELIGIOUS ASSEMBLY:                     care center, primary, secondary,
                                        college/ university, vocational
                                        schools, Community Facility, Active and
                                        Outdoor Recreation, and Enterprise,
                                        Indoor, and Outdoor.
                                        A building or group of buildings for
                                        scientific research, investigation,
RESEARCH (LABORATORY) FACILITY:         testing, or experimentation, but not
                                        facilities for manufacturing or selling
                                        products.
RESIDENTIAL, CARE FACILITY:             See State of Montana definition.
                                        An agency, other than a foster family
RESIDENTIAL, GROUP CARE FACILITY:       home, which is maintained and operated
                                        for the care of a group of children on
                                        a twenty-four- hour basis;
                                        A residence or facility that provides
                                        accommodations and supervision to six
RESIDENTIAL, GROUP HOME:                to sixteen unrelated adults, at least
                                        three of whom require personal care
                                        services.
RESIDENTIAL, PERMANENT SUPPORTIVE       Community-based, long-term housing and
HOUSING:                                supportive services, as appropriate,
                                        for individuals with disabilities.
                                        One to two dwelling units that are the
                                        only dwelling units on a lot, other
                                        than accessory dwelling units, and
                                        which share a common wall or roof on
RESIDENTIAL, RESIDENTIAL (1 UNIT):      one or more adjacent lots, provided
                                        that the attached one-unit dwelling has
                                        a separate and distinct entrance from
                                        the units with which it shares a common
                                        wall or roof.
                                        Two to five dwelling units that are the
                                        only dwelling units on a lot, other
RESIDENTIAL, RESIDENTIAL (2-4 UNITS):   than accessory dwelling units, and
                                        which share common walls or roofs on
                                        one or more adjacent lots.
                                        Six or more dwelling units which are
RESIDENTIAL, RESIDENTIAL (5+ UNITS):    the only dwelling units on a lot and
                                        which share common walls or roof on one
                                        or more adjacent lots.
                                        A residential facility licensed in the
                                        State of Montana is used for the
                                        reception and care of elderly
RESIDENTIAL, SENIOR ASSISTED LIVING     individuals who, by reason of illness
FACILITY                                or physical or mental impairment
                                        require skilled nursing care and of
                                        individuals who require personal care
                                        services but not skilled nursing care.
                                        A housing arrangement designed
                                        exclusively for older adults, generally
RESIDENTIAL, SENIOR INDEPENDENT LIVING  those aged 55 and over, whereby some
FACILITY:                               facilities or services may be shared,
                                        however, residents have independent
                                        living quarters.
                                        Any dwelling or portion thereof that is
                                        available for use or is used for
RESIDENTIAL, SHORT-TERM RENTAL:         accommodations or lodging of guests
                                        paying a fee or other compensation for
                                        a period of less than 30 consecutive
                                        days.
                                        A residential home whereby residents
                                        require procedures or care that require
                                        technical skills and knowledge beyond
RESIDENTIAL, SKILLED CARE FACILITY:     those the untrained person possesses
                                        and that are commonly employed in
                                        providing for the physical, mental, and
                                        emotional needs of the ill or otherwise
                                        incapacitated.
                                        Ownership of a parcel of land with an
                                        attached single-family dwelling unit
                                        that is connected with other similar
RESIDENTIAL, TOWNHOUSE:                 dwelling units but separated from the
                                        other similar dwelling units by a
                                        common party wall having no doors,
                                        windows, or other provisions for human
                                        passage or visibility.
                                        Housing and supportive services are
                                        provided to homeless individuals and
RESIDENTIAL, TRANSITIONAL DWELLING:     families for no longer than twenty four
                                        months, to enable them to obtain and
                                        maintain independent, permanent
                                        housing.
                                        A food service establishment with
                                        incidental alcohol consumption whereby
RESTAURANT, FULL SERVICE:               servers bring food and beverages that
                                        are prepared in a kitchen or at a bar
                                        on-site, which may have a liquor
                                        license issued by the State of Montana
                                        A self-service food service
                                        establishment whereby meals are served
                                        at a faster rate than a full-service
RESTAURANT, LIMITED SERVICE:            restaurant and food offerings are more
                                        extensive in variety than a fast food
                                        restaurant, which may have a liquor
                                        license issued by the State of Montana.
                                        A food service establishment devoted to
                                        the preparation and offering of food
                                        and beverage for sale to the public for
                                        consumption via a counter or drive-
RESTAURANT, QUICK SERVICE:              through on or off the premises
                                        generally in disposable containers, and
                                        which offers standardized menus,
                                        ingredients, food preparation, decor,
                                        uniforms, architecture, or similar
                                        standardized features.
                                        A facility associated with the sale of
                                        gasoline products that also offers for
                                        sale of prepackaged food items and
                                        tangible consumer goods, primarily for
RETAIL GASOLINE AND CONVENIENCE:        self-service by the consumer, which may
                                        include the sale of hot beverages,
                                        fountain-type beverages, beer, and
                                        pastries, and shall not have a retail
                                        liquor license other than for the sale
                                        of beer.
                                        A commercial establishment selling
RETAIL STORE:                           consumer goods, clothing, and other dry
                                        goods.
 
   S.   TERMS BEGINNING WITH “S”:
 
           A post-secondary institution, licensed by the State of Ohio, for higher
SCHOOL,    learning that grants associate or bachelor’s degrees and may also have
POST-      research facilities and/or professional schools that grant master and doctoral
SECONDARY: degrees, which may also include community colleges that grant associate or
           bachelor’s degrees or certificates of completion in business or technical
           fields.
SCHOOLS,   A place of instruction operated by a public or religious organization, having
PRIMARY:   regular sessions, with regularly employed instructors and meeting all of the
           Ohio Department of Education requirements for providing primary education.
SCHOOLS,   A place of instruction operated by a public or religious organization, having
SECONDARY: regular sessions, with regularly employed instructors and meeting all of the
           Ohio Department of Education requirements for providing secondary education.
SMALL CELL A collection of interrelated small cell facilities designed to deliver
FACILITY:  personal wireless services.
 
   T.   TERMS BEGINNING WITH “T”:
 
         A public, private, or non-profit indoor or outdoor theater or stage
THEATER: used for theatrical, musical, or artistic live productions attended by
         an audience.
 
   U.   TERMS BEGINNING WITH “U”:
 
                             A facility that converts one or more energy
                             sources, including but not limited to water power,
                             fossil fuels, nuclear power, or solar power, into
                             electrical energy or steam, which may also perform
                             either or both of the following functions: (a)
UTILITY GENERATION FACILITY: operation of a transmission system that conveys
                             the energy or steam from the generation facility
                             to a power distribution system; (b) operation of a
                             distribution system that conveys energy or steam
                             from the generation facility or the transmission
                             system to final consumers.
 
   V.   TERMS BEGINNING WITH “V”:
 
                               The replacement of any part or repair of any
                               part that does not require removal of the engine
                               head or pan, engine transmission or
VEHICLE (EQUIPMENT) REPAIR:    differential, incidental body and fender work,
                               minor painting and upholstering service to
                               automobiles and trucks not in excess of 7,000
                               pounds gross weight.
                               Any vehicle used or designed to be used for
                               business or commercial purposes including but
                               not limited to: buses, concrete trucks, dump
                               trucks, garbage trucks, box trucks, stake bed
                               trucks, flatbed trucks, semi tractors, semi
                               trailers, step vans, tack trucks, tar trucks,
VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT, LARGE: and tow trucks; whether used for business,
                               commercial or personal purposes. Pickup trucks,
                               panel trucks, or light trucks which have the
                               operating characteristics similar to those of a
                               passenger car are not considered commercial
                               vehicles unless they are used for business or
                               commercial purposes.
                               An establishment for the storage and displays
                               for sale of more than two passenger vehicles and
VEHICLE SALES:                 where repair or body work is incidental to the
                               operation of the new or used vehicle sales,
                               which include motor vehicle retail or wholesale
                               sales.
 
   W.   TERMS BEGINNING WITH “W”:
 
WAREHOUSE:               An enclosed storage facility used to store goods or
                         parts or for any part of the shipping process.
WHOLESALE ESTABLISHMENT: An establishment for the sale of goods and merchandise
                         for resale instead of direct consumption.
                         An establishment engaged in selling merchandise to
                         retailers, contractors, or other users, typically in
WHOLESALE SALES:         bulk; the gross floor area of the building is often
                         devoted to warehousing for the distribution of
                         material or items displayed in a showroom.
 
   X.   TERMS BEGINNING WITH “X”:
   Y.   TERMS BEGINNING WITH “Y”:
   Z.   TERMS BEGINNING WITH “Z”:
10-8-5: SIGNAGE DEFINITIONS:
              Any emblem, painting, banner, pennant, placard, design, identification,
              description, illustration or device, illuminated or nonilluminated, to advertise,
              identify, convey information or direct attention to a product, service, place,
SIGN:         activity, person, institution, business, or solicitation, including any permanently
              installed or situated merchandise. For the purpose of removal, signs also include
              all sign structures. Signs as defined herein do not include temporary holiday
              decorations or landscape features that do not display a commercial message.
              A sign that no longer correctly advertises a bona fide business, lessor, owner,
ABANDONED:    product or activity conducted, or product available on the premises where the sign
              is displayed or elsewhere for a period of 6 months.
ADDRESS       A sign that identifies the street number and/or street name for identification
NAMEPLATE:    purposes, as designated by the United States Postal Service.
ART:          See definition “Art/Public Art.”
AWNING:       Any sign attached to or constructed in, on, or under an awning.
              A sign that has a source of copy illumination designed to project lighting against
BACKLIT/HALO: the surface behind the copy. Sign, Banner. A sign of lightweight fabric or similar
              non-ridged material that is mounted with no enclosing framework.
BILLBOARD:    Same as “off-premise sign.”
BUSINESS      A sign identifying the entrance to a business center and/or the names of the
CENTER:       businesses located within the business center.
              A temporary sign displayed on a lot during an active local, state or federal
CAMPAIGN:     campaign for public office or ballot issue or referenda, generally intended to
              promote the ultimate exercise of voting by the general public.
CANOPY:       Any sign attached to or constructed in, on, or under a canopy.
CHANGEABLE    A sign upon which the message can be readily modified by changing letters and/or
COPY          symbols by other than electronic means.
(MANUAL):
CONSTRUCTION: A temporary sign located on a lot upon which building or construction is actively
              occurring.
DIRECTIONAL   A sign located near a driveway entrance from a street or near an internal site
(DRIVEWAY):   driveway or drive aisle.
DOUBLE-FACED: A sign with copy on two parallel faces that are back to back, facing in opposite
              directions.
              A sign capable of displaying words, symbols, figures or images that can be
ELECTRONIC    electronically or mechanically changed by remote or automatic means. (See also
MESSAGE       following terms principally associated with electronic message signs: display time,
(EMS):        dissolve, dynamic frame effect, fade, frame, frame effect, scroll, transition,
              travel).
              A sign whose characters are engraved or etched onto the exterior wall of a building
ENGRAVED:     or onto a plaque mounted on the exterior wall of a building or onto a plaque
              mounted on the exterior wall of a building.
EXTERNALLY    A sign illuminated by or exposed to artificial lighting by lights on the sign or
ILLUMINATED:  directed toward the sign.
FEATHER:      A lightweight, portable sign mounted along one edge on a single, vertical, flexible
              pole the physical structure of which may resemble a sail, bow, or teardrop.
              A generally rectangular or triangular sign or part of a sign made of fabric or
FLAG:         other pliant material attached to a flagpole only along one side and which
              predominately displays distinctive colors, images, shapes or designs rather than
              legible words, letters, numbers or other linguistic characters.
              Any sign that contains an intermittent or flashing light source, or that includes
FLASHING/     the illusion of intermittent or flashing light by means of animation, or an
STROBE:       externally mounted intermittent light source, not including changeable message
              signs.
FREESTANDING: A sign that is part of a self-supporting structure, other than a building or
              portion of a building. Sometimes referred to as a “ground sign.”
GOVERNMENT:   A sign installed by or on behalf of the city or other branch of government,
HOLIDAY       A displays erected on a seasonal basis in observance of religions, national or
DISPLAY:      state holidays that are not intended to be permanent in nature and that contain no
              commercial message.
INFLATABLE:   A sign whose shape or structure is provided by inflation or by the affect of forced
              air.
              A sign mounted or located in the interior of a building that is legible by a person
INTERIOR:     with 20/20 vision when standing at ground level from outside the lot on which the
              subject building is located.
INTERNALLY    A sign lighted by or exposed to artificial lighting by lights in the sign.
ILLUMINATED:
MARQUEE:      Any sign attached to or constructed in, on, or under a marquee.
MENU BOARD
(DRIVE-       A sign located on the site of an allowed drive-through use.
THROUGH):
MESSAGE       A sign with a fixed or changing display/message composed of a series of lights that
BOARD:        may be changed through electronic means.
              A sign supported primarily by an internal structural framework or integrated into
MONUMENT:     landscaping or solid structural features other than support poles. Monument sign
              also means ground sign.
              A sign that advertises goods, products, facilities, events or services not on the
OFF-PREMISE:  premises where the sign is located, or directs persons to a different location from
              where the sign is located.
MURAL OR      Signs painted directly onto a building wall.
GHOST:
              Meets the following:
OUTDOOR       •   Includes: Any card, paper, cloth, metal, wooden or other display or device of
ADVERTISING   any kind or character, including, but not limited to, any poster, bill printing,
DISPLAY:      painting or other advertisement of any kind whatsoever, including statuary, placed
              for outdoor advertising purposes or on the ground or any tree, wall, rock, fence,
              building, structure, or thing.
             •   Does Not Include: Official notices issued by any court or public body or
              officer;
             •   Notices posted by any public officer in performance of a public duty or by any
              person in giving legal notice;
             •   Directional, warning or informational structure required by or authorized by
              law or by federal, state, county, or city authority.
POLE:         A freestanding sign that is affixed, attached, or erected on a pole that is not
              itself an integral part of or attached to a building or structure.
PORTABLE:     Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or a building.
              A sign, normally double-faced, that is attached to, and projects from, a structure
PROJECTING:   or building facade. Awning, canopy and marquee signs are not considered projecting
              signs.
ROOF:         A sign erected upon, against or above a roof.
SANDWICH      A portable sign that is generally temporary in nature and that is freestanding.
BOARD:
SEARCHLIGHT:  A light source and a reflector for projecting a high-intensity beam of light into
              the sky or surrounding area.
SIGN          Any person, partnership or corporation engaged, in whole or in part, in the
CONTRACTOR:   erection or maintenance of signs, excluding the business that the sign advertises.
SIGN          Any device or material that supports, has supported, or is capable of supporting, a
STRUCTURE:    sign in a stationary position, including decorative covers.
SPECIAL       A sign approved in connection with a special event permit approved by the common
EVENT:        council.
SWINGING:     A sign installed on an arm or mast or spar that is not, in addition, permanently
              fastened to an adjacent wall or upright pole.
              A banner, pennant, poster or advertising display that is not permanently attached
              to a building or the ground and that is intended to be displayed for a limited
TEMPORARY:    period of time only. Sign, Wall. A sign attached to the wall of a building with the
              face in a parallel plane to the plane of the building wall. Sign, Window (or Door).
              A non-illuminated sign that is placed inside the glass of a window or door and that
              is visible from the exterior of the window or door. (Ord. 2023-7, 7-17-2023)
 
TITLE 11
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
11-1-1: Title
11-1-2: Authority
11-1-3: Jurisdiction
11-1-4: Purpose; Intent
11-1-5: Severability Clause
11-1-6: Conditions
11-1-7: Definitions
11-1-1: TITLE:
These regulations shall be known as BELGRADE CITY SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS.
(Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
11-1-2: AUTHORITY:
Authorization for adopting these regulations is the Montana subdivision and
platting act, Montana Code Annotated title 76, chapter 3. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-
2004)
11-1-3: JURISDICTION:
These regulations govern the division of land within the city limits. (Ord.
2004-1, 4-5-2004)
11-1-4: PURPOSE; INTENT:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of these regulations is to promote the public
health, safety, and general welfare by regulating the subdivision of land;
prevent the overcrowding of land; lessen congestion in the streets and
highways; provide adequate light, air, water supply, sewage disposal, parks and
recreation areas, ingress and egress, and other public improvements; to require
development in harmony with the natural environment; to protect the rights of
property owners; and to require uniform monumentation of land subdivisions and
transferring interests in real property by reference to a plat or certificate
of survey 1 .
   B.   Intent: Further, to support the purposes of Montana Code Annotated
section 76-3-102, these regulations are intended to promote and to provide for
the:
      1.   Orderly development of the city.
      2.   Coordination of roads within subdivided land with other roads, both
existing and planned.
      3.   Dedication of land for roadways and for public utility easements.
      4.   Improvement of roads.
      5.   Adequate open spaces for travel, light, air and recreation.
      6.   Adequate transportation, water, drainage, and sanitary facilities.
      7.   Avoidance or minimization of congestion.
      8.   Avoidance of unnecessary environmental degradation.
      9.   Encouragement of subdivision development in harmony with the natural
environment.
      10.   Avoidance of danger or injury by reason of natural hazard or the
lack of water, drainage, access, transportation or other public services.
      11.   Avoidance of excessive expenditure of public funds for the supply
of public services.
      12.   Manner and form of making and filing of plats for subdivided lands.
      13.   Administration of these regulations, by defining the powers and
duties of approving authorities, including procedures for the review and
approval of all subdivision plats. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
 
Notes
1 1. MCA § 76-3-102.
11-1-5: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
Where any word, phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section, or other part
of these regulations is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such
judgment shall affect only that part held invalid. Insofar as these regulations
are more restrictive than any other local law, these regulations shall be
controlling, and if any other law is more restrictive, it shall take precedence
over these regulations. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
11-1-6: CONDITIONS:
Regulation of the subdivision of land and the attachment of reasonable
conditions to land subdivision is an exercise of valid police power delegated
by the state of Montana to the city. Subdividers have the duty of complying
with reasonable conditions for design, dedication, improvement, and restrictive
use of the land so as to conform to the physical and economic development of
the city and to the safety and general welfare of the future subdivision lot
owners and of the community at large. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
11-1-7: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words or phrases appear in this text, they shall have
the meanings assigned to them by this section. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense shall include the future; the singular
shall include the plural, and the plural the singular; the word "shall" is
always mandatory, and the word "may" indicates use of discretion in making
decisions.
ACT: Montana subdivision and platting act.
AGRICULTURAL WATER USER FACILITY: Any part of an irrigation system used to
produce an agricultural product on property used for agricultural purposes as
defined in Montana Code Annotated section 15-7-202.
ALIQUOT PART: An equal division of a government section as described by the
"Manual For The Survey Of The Public Lands Of The United States".
BLOCK: A piece or tract of land entirely surrounded by public highways, roads,
waterways, railways, rights of way, parks, etc., or a combination thereof. A
group of lots, tracts or parcels within well defined and fixed boundaries.
CENTRAL SEWAGE SYSTEM: A "public sewage system" as defined in Montana Code
Annotated section 75-6-102 and ARM 16.16.101.
CENTRAL WATER SYSTEM: A "public water supply system" as defined in Montana Code
Annotated section 75-6-102 and ARM 16.16.101.
CERTIFICATE OF SURVEY: A drawing of a field survey prepared by a registered
land surveyor for the purpose of disclosing facts pertaining to boundary
location.
CITY: City of Belgrade.
CITY ATTORNEY: City of Belgrade attorney.
CITY ENGINEER: City of Belgrade engineer.
CLERK AND RECORDER: Gallatin County clerk and recorder.
CONDOMINIUM: A form of individual ownership with unrestricted right of disposal
of one or more units in a multiple unit project, with the land and all other
parts of the project held in common ownership or use with owners of the other
units.
CONTIGUOUS TRACT: A parcel of land next to, abutting, adjacent to, adjoining or
touching another individual parcel of land, including tracts which are
separated by public rights of way.
COUNCIL: The city council of the city of Belgrade, Montana.
COVENANT: An agreement or restriction, in writing, of two (2) or more parties
by which any of the parties pledge to the others that something is done or
shall be done.
DATE OF SUBMISSION: The date at which the plat and all required supplementary
information is received and certified as complete by the planning department.
DEDICATION: The deliberate appropriation of land by an owner for any general
and public use, reserving no rights which are incompatible with the full
exercise and enjoyment of the public use to which the property has been
devoted.
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS: City of Belgrade director of public works.
DISTRICT COURT: Gallatin County district court.
DIVISION OF LAND: The segregation of one or more parcels of land from a larger
tract held in single or undivided ownership by transferring, or contracting to
transfer, title to or possession of a portion of the tract or properly filing a
certificate of survey or subdivision plat establishing the identity of the
segregated parcels pursuant to these subdivision regulations and the Montana
subdivision and platting act; provided, that where required by these
regulations and the act, the land upon which an improvement is situated has
been subdivided in compliance with the regulations and the act, the sale, rent,
lease, or other conveyance of one or more parts of a building, structure, or
other improvement situated on one or more parcels of land is not a division of
land and is not subject to the terms of these regulations and the act.
DWELLING UNIT: Any building or portion thereof providing complete, independent
and permanent living facilities for one family.
EASEMENT: A grant by a property owner to specific persons or to the public of a
right to use land for a specific purpose or purposes, in which said property
owner agrees not to build, create or construct any obstruction, building,
engineering works or other structures over, under, or that would interfere with
said use.
ENGINEER (REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER): A person licensed in conformance
with the Montana professional engineers registration act (Montana Code
Annotated sections 37-67-101 through 37-67-332) to practice engineering in the
state of Montana (engineer).
GOVERNING BODY: The Belgrade city council.
GROWTH POLICY: A "master plan" as defined in Montana Code Annotated section 76-
1-103.
HEALTH AUTHORITIES: The Montana department of environmental quality, local
health officer, local sanitarian, or other authorized representative.
HEALTH DEPARTMENT: Gallatin County city-county environmental health department.
IRREGULARLY SHAPED TRACT OF LAND: A parcel of land other than an aliquot part
of the United States government survey section or a United States government
lot, the boundaries or areas of which cannot be determined without a survey or
trigonometric calculation.
LIMITED ACCESS: A way or means of allowing physical entrance to land at
controlled locations or points. A "no access" strip or line may be placed on a
plat as a means of limiting access.
LIMITED ACCESS ROADWAY: A road especially designed for through traffic over
which abutting landowners have no right to direct access.
LOT: A parcel, plot or other land area created by subdivision for sale, lease,
or rent.
LOT MEASUREMENTS:
   Lot Area: The area of a lot determined exclusive of highway, alley, road, or
other right of way.
   Lot Depth: The average distance from the front lot line to the rear lot
line.
   Lot Frontage: The width of the front lot line.
   Lot Width: The average distance between side lot lines.
LOT TYPES:
   Corner Lot: A lot located at the intersection of two (2) roads.
   Double Frontage Lot: A lot with both front and rear lot lines abutting a
road.
   Interior Lot: A lot with frontage on only one road.
MDEQ: Montana department of environmental quality.
MINOR SUBDIVISION: A subdivision containing five (5) or fewer parcels where
proper access to all lots is provided and where no land in the subdivision will
be dedicated to public use for parks or playgrounds.
MOBILE HOME: Any dwelling unit over thirty two feet (32') long and eight feet
(8') wide which is either wholly or substantially manufactured at an off site
location, without permanent foundation, and is constructed to be towed on its
own chassis. This includes a portable dwelling composed of a single unit or one
or more components that can be retracted for towing purposes and subsequently
expanded for additional capacity or two (2) or more units separately towable
but designed to be joined into one integral unit.
MOBILE HOME LOT: A designated portion of a mobile home park designed for the
accommodation of one mobile home and its accessory buildings or structures for
the exclusive use of the occupants.
MOBILE HOME PARK: A tract of land providing two (2) or more mobile home lots
for lease or rent to the general public.
MOBILE HOME STAND: That area of a mobile home lot which has been prepared for
the placement of a mobile home.
MONUMENT (PERMANENT MONUMENT): Any structure of masonry, metal or other
permanent material placed in the ground which is exclusively identifiable as a
monument to a survey point, expressly placed for surveying reference (ARM
8.94.3001).
NRCS: Natural resources conservation services.
OPEN SPACE: A land or water area devoid of buildings and other physical
structures except where accessory to the provision of recreation.
ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK: The line that water impresses on land by covering it
for sufficient periods to cause physical characteristics that distinguish the
area below the line from the area above it. Characteristics of the area below
the line include, when appropriate, but are not limited to, deprivation of the
soil of substantially all terrestrial vegetation and destruction of its
agricultural vegetative value. A floodplain adjacent to surface waters is not
considered to lie within the surface waters' high water marks (Montana Code
Annotated section 23-2-301).
PHYSICAL ACCESS: Either a public road, maintained by Gallatin County; or a road
built to the standards of section
11-7-9, tables 1 and 2 of this title.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD): A land development project consisting of
residential clusters, industrial parks, shopping centers, office buildings,
parks, or any combination thereof which comprises a planned mixture of land
uses built in a prearranged relationship to each other and having open space
and community facilities in a common ownership or use.
PLANNING BOARD: Belgrade city-county planning board.
PLAT: A graphic representation of a subdivision showing the division of land
into lots, parcels, blocks, roads, and alleys, and other divisions and
dedications.
PROPERTY OWNER: Any person, firm, corporation or other entity shown as being
the legal owner of a tract, parcel or lot in the records of the county clerk
and recorder.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT: Any structure or facility constructed to serve the
residents of a subdivision or the general public such as parks, roads,
sidewalks, curbs, gutters, sewage disposal and drainage.
PUBLIC ROAD: A dedicated right of way or public road easement.
PUBLIC SEWAGE SYSTEM: A system for collection, transportation, treatment and
disposal of sewage designed to serve either ten (10) or more living units for
at least sixty (60) days out of the calendar year, or twenty five (25) or more
persons at least sixty (60) days out of the calendar year (Montana Code
Annotated section 76-4-101 and ARM 16.16.101).
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM: A system for the provision of water for human
consumption from any community well, water hauler for cisterns, water bottling
plant, water dispenser or other water that is designed to serve ten (10) or
more living units for at least sixty (60) days out of the calendar year, or
twenty five (25) or more persons at least sixty (60) days out of the calendar
year (Montana Code Annotated section 76-4-101 and ARM 16.16.101).
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK: A place used for public camping where persons can
rent space to park individual camping trailers, pickup campers, motor homes,
travel trailers or automobiles for transient dwelling purposes.
REGULATIONS: Belgrade city subdivision regulations.
RIGHT OF WAY: A strip of land dedicated or acquired for use as a public way.
ROAD TYPES: For the purposes of these regulations, road types are defined as
follows (terms "street" and "road" may be used interchangeably):
   Alley: A road used primarily for vehicular access to the rear of properties
which abut on and are served by public roads.
   Arterial: A road having the primary function of moving traffic with emphasis
on a high level of mobility for through movement and the secondary function of
providing limited access to adjacent land.
   Cul-De-Sac: A road having only one outlet for vehicular traffic and
terminating in a turnaround area.
   Dead End Roads: A road having only one outlet for vehicular traffic.
   Frontage Access (Service Road): A local or minor collector road, usually
parallel and adjacent to an arterial or major collector road, which provides
access to abutting properties and control of traffic access to arterials or
collectors.
   Half Road: A portion of the width of a road, usually along the outside
perimeter of a subdivision, where the remaining portion of the road must be
located on adjacent property.
   Loop: A local road which begins and ends on the same road, generally used
for access to properties and controls traffic access to arterials or
collectors.
   Major Collector: A road that carries more than three hundred (300) trips per
day having the equally important functions of moving traffic and providing
access to adjacent land, including the principal and secondary entrance roads
of a residential development and roads for circulation within a development.
   Minor Collector: A road that carries more than one hundred (100) trips per
day but less than three hundred (300) trips per day having the equally
important functions of providing access to adjacent land and moving traffic,
including roads for circulation within a development and entrance roads of a
residential development.
   Minor Roads: A road that carries less than one hundred (100) trips per day
having the primary function of serving abutting properties, and the secondary
function of moving traffic, including direct access to abutting properties and
roads for circulation within a development.
ROADWAY: That portion of the road right of way which is improved or is proposed
to be improved to carry traffic and provide for the on road storage of
automobiles; where curb is provided, the roadway is measured from face of curb
to face of curb.
STRUCTURE: A combination of materials to form a construction for use,
occupancy, or ornamentation whether installed on, or below the surface of land
or water.
SUBDIVIDER: Any person, firm, or corporation, or other entity who causes land
to be subdivided or who proposes a subdivision of land.
SUBDIVISION: A division of land, or land so divided, which creates one or more
parcels containing less than one hundred sixty (160) acres that cannot be
described as a one-fourth (1/4) aliquot part of a United States government
section, exclusive of public roadways, in order that the title to or possession
of the parcels may be sold, rented, leased, or otherwise conveyed, and shall
include any resubdivision; and shall further include any condominium or area,
regardless of its size, which provides or will provide multiple space for
recreational camping vehicles, or mobile homes. A subdivision shall comprise
only those parcels less than one hundred sixty (160) acres which have been
segregated from the original tract, and the plat thereof shall show all such
parcels whether contiguous or not. Provided, however, condominiums constructed
on land previously divided in compliance with the Montana subdivision and
platting act are exempt from the provision of these regulations and the act.
SURVEYOR (REGISTERED LAND SURVEYOR): A person licensed in conformance with the
Montana professional engineers' registration act (Montana Code Annotated
sections 37-67-101 through 37-67-332) to practice surveying in the state of
Montana.
SWALE: A drainage channel or shallow depression designed to direct surface
water flow.
TRACT: Land area proposed to be subdivided.
TRACT OF RECORD: A parcel of land, irrespective of ownership, that can be
identified by legal description, independent of any other parcel of land, using
documents on file in the records of the county clerk and recorder's office.
TREASURER: Gallatin County treasurer.
USGS: United States geological survey.
WATER CONVEYANCE FACILITY: Agricultural water user facilities and other
facilities that convey water for agriculture, stock, domestic, fish and
wildlife, industrial, irrigation, mining, municipal, power, recreation, aquifer
recharge or mitigation, and all other beneficial uses set forth in section 85-
2-101 et seq., Montana Code Annotated. These facilities include, but are not
limited to, ditches, canals, pipelines, flumes, wells, infiltration galleries,
diversion structures, headgates, pumps, blowoffs, swales, and associated
infrastructure. This term is not intended to include a "watercourse" as defined
in this title or any manmade structure the primary purpose of which is to
convey stormwater.
WATERCOURSE: Any natural stream, river, creek, drainage, waterway, gully,
ravine or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and
has a definite channel, bed and banks, and includes any area adjacent thereto
subject to inundation by reason of overflow. The term watercourse shall not be
construed to mean any facility created exclusively for the conveyance of
irrigation water.
WEED DEPARTMENT: Gallatin County weed control department. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-
2004; amd. 2009 Code; Ord. 2011-2, 5-16-2011)
CHAPTER 2
GENERAL PROCEDURES
SECTION:
11-2-1: Construction Timing
11-2-2: Transfers Of Title
11-2-3: Permission To Enter
11-2-4: Appeals
11-2-1: CONSTRUCTION TIMING:
The subdivider shall not proceed with any construction work on the proposed
subdivision, including grading and excavating, relating to improvements, until
the council has given preliminary plat approval and only if the construction is
in accordance with the conditions of preliminary plat approval. (Ord. 2004-1,
4-5-2004)
11-2-2: TRANSFERS OF TITLE:
After a preliminary subdivision plat has been approved or conditionally
approved, the subdivider may enter into contracts to sell lots in the proposed
subdivision if all of the following conditions are met:
   A.   Escrow Agent: Under the terms of the contracts, the purchasers of lots
in the proposed subdivision shall make any payments to an escrow agent which
must be a bank or savings and loan association chartered to do business in the
state of Montana.
   B.   Distribution Of Payments: Under the terms of the contracts and the
escrow agreement, the payments made by lot purchasers in the proposed
subdivision may not be distributed by the escrow agent to the subdivider until
the final plat of the subdivision is filed with the clerk and recorder.
   C.   Failure To File Final Plat: The contracts and the escrow agreement
provide that if the final plat of the proposed subdivision is not filed with
the clerk and recorder within two (2) years of the preliminary plat approval,
the escrow agent shall immediately refund, to each purchaser, any payment made
under the contract.
   D.   Real Property Taxes: The treasurer has certified that no real property
taxes assessed and levied on the land to be divided are delinquent.
   E.   Required Language: The contracts shall contain the following language
conspicuously set out therein:
The real property which is the subject hereof has not been finally platted, and
until a final plat identifying the property has been filed with the clerk and
recorder, title to the property cannot be transferred in any manner.
   F.   Instruments Which Transfer Title: Under Montana Code Annotated section
76-3-302, the clerk and recorder shall not record any instrument which purports
to transfer title to or possession of a parcel or tract of land which is
required to be surveyed by the act unless the required certificate of survey or
subdivision plat has been reviewed, approved and filed with the clerk and
recorder and the instrument or transfer describes the parcel or tract by
reference to the filed certificate or plat. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
11-2-3: PERMISSION TO ENTER:
The council or its designated agents may conduct such investigations,
examinations and site evaluations as they deem necessary to verify information
supplied. The submission of material or a plat for review shall constitute a
grant of permission to enter the subject property. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
11-2-4: APPEALS:
   A.   Definition: For the purposes of this section, "aggrieved" means a
person who can demonstrate a specific personal and legal interest, as
distinguished from a general interest, who has been or is likely to be
specifically and injuriously affected by the decision.
   B.   Time Limitation: A party who is aggrieved by a decision of the council
to approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove a proposed preliminary plat or
final subdivision plat may, within thirty (30) days after the decision, appeal
to the district court. The petition must specify the grounds upon which the
appeal is made.
   C.   Who May Appeal: The following parties may appeal under the provisions
of this section:
      1.   The subdivider.
      2.   A landowner with a property boundary contiguous to the proposed
subdivision or a private landowner within the county where the subdivision is
proposed, if that landowner can show a likelihood of material injury to the
landowner's property or its value.
      3.   The county commissioners.
      4.   Municipalities:
         a.   A first class municipality, if a subdivision is proposed within
three (3) miles of its limits.
         b.   A second class municipality, if a subdivision is proposed within
two (2) miles of its limits.
         c.   A third class municipality, if a subdivision is proposed within
one mile of its limits. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
CHAPTER 3
REVIEW PROCEDURES FOR MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS
SECTION:
11-3-1: General
11-3-2: Presubmittal Meeting
11-3-3: Preapplication Plan
11-3-4: Concurrent Review
11-3-5: Preliminary Plat
11-3-6: Final Plat
11-3-1: GENERAL:
Subdivisions containing six (6) or more lots, and subdivisions containing five
(5) or fewer lots that do not qualify as first minor subdivisions, shall be
reviewed under the procedures of this chapter. This procedure is a four (4)
step process: presubmittal meeting, preapplication plan, preliminary plat and
final plat. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
11-3-2: PRESUBMITTAL MEETING:
The subdivider shall meet with the planning department prior to submitting a
plan or plat. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss these regulations and
standards, to familiarize the subdivider with the goals and objectives of
applicable plans, regulations and ordinances, and to discuss the proposed
subdivision as it relates to these matters. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
11-3-3: PREAPPLICATION PLAN:
   A.   Presubmittal Meeting: After the requirement for a presubmittal meeting
has been satisfied and prior to submittal of a preliminary plat, the subdivider
shall submit an application for preapplication review, the appropriate fee, and
all required preapplication information as set forth in these regulations.
   B.   Planning Department Review:
      1.   Number Of Copies: Six (6) copies of the preapplication materials are
required.
      2.   Time For Review: The planning department shall review the
preapplication plan, and within fifteen (15) working days, advise the
subdivider as to whether the plans and data meet the goals and objectives of
applicable city approved plans and these regulations.
   C.   Optional Planning Board Review:
      1.   Request; Number Of Copies: The subdivider may request, in writing,
that the planning board review preapplication plans. The letter of request and
fourteen (14) copies of the preapplication materials are required.
      2.   Time For Review: The request should be received at least eighteen
(18) days prior to the planning board meeting at which it is to be considered.
A copy of the approved minutes of the planning board meeting will be forwarded
to the subdivider. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
11-3-4: CONCURRENT REVIEW:
The subdivider has the option of submitting a MDEQ/local government joint
application form in the place of a preliminary plat application form, and to
request concurrent subdivision review by the MDEQ and the city 1 . (Ord. 2004-
1, 4-5-2004)
 
Notes
1 1. MCA § 76-4-129.
11-3-5: PRELIMINARY PLAT:
   A.   Required:
      1.   Compliance Required: After the requirement for preapplication review
has been satisfied, the subdivider shall submit a preliminary plat. Preliminary
plats are submitted to the planning department and must conform to the
requirements of these regulations. The preliminary plat shall be prepared by a
surveyor licensed to practice in Montana.
      2.   Time For Review: The council shall approve, conditionally approve,
or disapprove the preliminary plat within sixty (60) days of the submission of
a completed application, unless the subdivider consents, in writing, to an
extension of the review period.
   B.   Application:
      1.   Submittal: The subdivider shall submit an application for
preliminary plat review, the appropriate fee, and all required preliminary plat
information and supplementary information as set forth in these regulations.
      2.   Number Of Copies: Within the jurisdictional area of the planning
board: Fifteen (15) copies.
      3.   Affected Agencies: The planning department may submit copies of the
preliminary plat and supplementary information to the affected utilities and
public agencies for review and comment. Review by public agencies or utilities
shall not delay the council consideration of the preliminary plat beyond the
statutory sixty (60) day review period.
   C.   Submittal: All applications should be submitted to the appropriate
planning department at least thirty one (31) days prior to the next available
planning board meeting. The planning department shall review the application
within three (3) working days to determine if it is complete. The review period
shall begin on the date that the planning department determines the application
is complete. An application is complete only if it contains all of the
information required by these regulations. If the application is incomplete,
the application, review fee and a written deficiency notice will be returned to
the subdivider.
      1.   Public Hearing Notice: Notice of the time and date of the
preliminary plat public hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the city not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the date of
the hearing. The subdivider, each property owner of record, and each recorded
purchaser under contract for deed immediately adjoining the land included in
the plat shall be notified of the hearing by certified mail not less than
fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing.
      2.   Planning Board Review: The planning board shall conduct a public
hearing and review the proposed subdivision.
         a.   The planning board shall consider:
            (1)   Relevant evidence relating to the public health, safety, and
welfare.
            (2)   The environmental assessment.
            (3)   Other regulations in effect in the area of the proposed
subdivision.
            (4)   Whether the preliminary plat conforms to the provisions of:
(Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
               (A)   Any officially adopted growth policy for the area
involved. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004; amd. 2009 Code)
               (B)   Applicable zoning regulations.
               (C)   The Montana subdivision and platting act.
               (D)   Subdivision regulations.
         b.   Within ten (10) days of the public hearing and planning board
review, the planning board shall submit, in writing, to the council:
            (1)   Its advice regarding the items under subsection C2a of this
section.
            (2)   A recommendation for approval, conditional approval, or
disapproval of the plat, or no official recommendation.
   D.   Approval: The council shall conduct a public hearing and review the
proposed subdivision. The council shall approve, conditionally approve, or
disapprove the preliminary plat within sixty (60) days of determination that
the application is complete, unless there is a written extension from the
subdivider.
      1.   Basis For Decision: The basis for the council's decision shall be
whether or not the preliminary plat, environmental assessment, planning board
advice and recommendation, and additional information demonstrate that
development of the subdivision would meet the requirements of the act. The
council may not deny approval of a subdivision based solely on the
subdivision's impact on educational services.
      2.   Findings Of Fact:
         a.   Criteria Discussed: The council shall issue a written findings of
fact that discusses and weighs the following criteria pursuant to Montana Code
Annotated section 76-3-608:
            (1)   Effect on agriculture, agricultural water user facilities,
local services, the natural environment, wildlife and wildlife habitat, and the
public health and safety.
            (2)   Compliance with the survey requirements of the act.
            (3)   Compliance with these local subdivision regulations and the
review process of these regulations.
            (4)   The provision of easements for the location and installation
of any necessary utilities.
            (5)   The provision of legal and physical access to each parcel
within the subdivision and the notation of that access on the applicable plat
and any instrument transferring the parcel.
         b.   Written Findings: The written findings of fact shall include:
            (1)   The reason for the denial or condition imposition.
            (2)   The evidence that justifies the denial or condition
imposition.
            (3)   Information regarding the appeal process for the denial or
condition imposition.
      3.   Mitigation: The council may require the subdivider to design the
subdivision to reasonably minimize potentially significant adverse impacts
identified through the review required by these regulations. The city council
shall issue written findings to justify the reasonable mitigation required by
these regulations.
         a.   In reviewing a subdivision under this section and when requiring
mitigation under this subsection, the council may not unreasonably restrict a
landowner's ability to develop land, but it is recognized that in some
instances the unmitigated impacts of a proposed development may be unacceptable
and will preclude approval of the plat.
         b.   When requiring mitigation under this subsection, the council
shall consult with the subdivider and shall give due weight and consideration
to the expressed preference of the subdivider.
      4.   Subdivision Proposed In Master Plan Area: When a subdivision is
proposed in an area where a master plan has been adopted pursuant to Montana
Code Annotated section 76-1-101 et seq., and the proposed subdivision will
comply with the master plan, the subdivision is exempt from the review criteria
contained in these regulations but is subject to applicable zoning regulations.
         a.   In order for a master plan to serve as the basis for the
exemption provided in this subsection, the plan must, at a minimum, contain:
            (1)   Housing, transportation, and land use elements sufficient for
the council to protect public health, safety and welfare.
            (2)   A discussion of physical constraints on development that
exist within the area encompassed by the proposed subdivision.
   E.   Approval Period: Upon approving or conditionally approving a
preliminary plat, the council shall provide the subdivider with a dated and
signed statement of approval. This approval shall be in force for not more than
three (3) calendar years or less than one calendar year. At the end of this
period, the council may, at the request of the subdivider, extend its approval
for no more than one calendar year, except that the council may extend its
approval for a period of more than one year if that approval period is included
as a specific condition of a written subdivision improvements agreement between
the city and the subdivider.
   F.   Additional Conditions After Approval: After the preliminary plat is
approved, the council may not impose any additional conditions as a
prerequisite to final plat approval, providing said approval is obtained within
the original or extended approval period as provided in this title. (Ord. 2004-
1, 4-5-2004)
11-3-6: FINAL PLAT:
   A.   Required: After the conditions of preliminary approval and the
requirements for the installation of improvements have been satisfied, the
subdivider shall cause to be prepared a final plat.
      1.   The final plat shall conform to the uniform standards for final
subdivision plats.
      2.   All certificates, with the exception of council and clerk and
recorder, shall be complied with, signed and notarized. This shall include the
treasurer's certification that all real property taxes and special assessments
assessed and levied on the land to be subdivided have been paid.
      3.   Plans and data shall be prepared under the supervision of a
registered surveyor as licensing laws allow.
      4.   One signed cloth backed copy, one signed reproducible copy on a
stable base polyester film or equivalent, one digital copy of the survey on
three and one-half inch (31/2") DS/DD disk, and six (6) copies shall be
submitted.
      5.   The horizontal scale shall not be less than two hundred feet to the
inch (200' =1"), and the lengths of all lines shall be shown to at least tenths
of a foot and all angles and bearings to at least the nearest minute.
   B.   Review:
      1.   Review Of Abstract And Covenants: The certificate of a licensed
title abstractor, a copy of the covenants, and the conditions of preliminary
approval shall be submitted to the city attorney's office at least thirty (30)
days prior to scheduling a hearing for final plat approval.
      2.   Final Plat Submittal: The final plat and all supplementary documents
shall be submitted to the planning department at least thirty (30) days prior
to the expiration of preliminary plat approval or any extension thereto, and no
less than ten (10) days prior to the date of the final plat shall be presented
to the council for approval. The submittal shall include an application for
final review, the appropriate fee, and all required information, and a written
explanation of how each of the conditions of preliminary plat approval has been
satisfied.
      3.   Review By Planning Department: The planning department shall then
review the final plat to ascertain that all other conditions and requirements
for final approval have been met.
   C.   Approval:
      1.   Approval By Council: The council shall examine every final plat and,
within thirty (30) days of the date of submission to the planning department,
shall approve it if it conforms to the conditions of preliminary approval and
the terms of these regulations.
         a.   If the final plat is approved, the council shall so certify in a
printed certificate on the plat.
         b.   If the final plat is disapproved, the council shall write the
subdivider a letter stating the reasons therefor.
      2.   Filing: The subdivider shall file the approved, signed final plat
and all other required certificates and documents with the clerk and recorder
within sixty (60) days of the date of final approval. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
CHAPTER 4
SUMMARY REVIEW PROCEDURES FOR MINOR SUBDIVISIONS
SECTION:
11-4-1: General
11-4-2: First Minor Subdivision
11-4-3: Subsequent Minor Subdivisions
11-4-1: GENERAL:
Subdivisions containing five (5) or fewer lots in which proper access to all
lots is provided and in which no land is to be dedicated to public use for
parks and playgrounds, shall be reviewed under the procedures of this chapter.
(Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
11-4-2: FIRST MINOR SUBDIVISION:
For a first minor subdivision created from a tract of record, the requirements
for a public hearing and preparation of an environmental assessment do not
apply.
   A.   Time For Review: The council shall approve, conditionally approve, or
disapprove the first minor subdivision from a tract of record within thirty
five (35) days of the submission of a completed application, unless the
subdivider consents, in writing, to an extension of the review period.
   B.   Presubmittal Meeting: To provide assistance in the minor subdivision
review process, the planning department is available to meet with the
subdivider prior to submitting a subdivision application. The purpose of this
meeting is to discuss the regulations and design standards; familiarize the
subdivider with the subdivision review process; identify goals and objectives
of applicable plans, regulations, and ordinances; and discuss the proposed
subdivision as it relates to these matters. If necessary, the planning
department will assist the subdivider in obtaining copies of available surveys
and/or plats from the clerk and recorder's office.
   C.   Preapplication Plan: It is highly recommended that prior to submittal
of a preliminary plat, the subdivider submit an application for preapplication
review. The application for preapplication review should provide all of the
information as set forth in these regulations. Six (6) copies of the
preapplication materials should be submitted. The planning department shall
review the preapplication plan and, within fifteen (15) working days, advise
the subdivider as to whether the plans and data meet the goals and objectives
of applicable city approved plans and these regulations.
   D.   Application: The subdivider shall submit an application for minor
subdivision review, the appropriate fee, and all required preliminary
information as set forth in these regulations. Fifteen (15) copies of the
application materials are required.
   E.   Submittal:
      1.   Determination Of Completeness: All minor subdivision applications
should be submitted to the planning department at least eighteen (18) days
prior to the next regular planning board meeting. The planning department shall
review the application within three (3) working days to determine if it is
complete. The review period will begin on the date that the planning department
determines the application is complete. The application shall be heard by the
planning board at its next regular meeting following the determination of the
completeness of the application. If the application is determined to be
incomplete, the application, review fee and a written deficiency notice will be
returned to the subdivider.
      2.   Planning Board Review: The planning board shall review the proposed
subdivision.
         a.   The planning board shall consider whether the preliminary plat
conforms to the provisions of: (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
            (1)   Any officially adopted growth policy for the area involved.
(Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004; amd. 2009 Code)
            (2)   Applicable zoning regulations.
            (3)   The Montana subdivision and platting act.
            (4)   Subdivision regulations.
         b.   Within ten (10) days after the planning board review, the
planning board shall submit, in writing, to the council:
            (1)   Its advice regarding the items under subsection E2a of this
section.
            (2)   A recommendation for approval, conditional approval or
disapproval of the plat, or no official recommendation.
   F.   Approval: The council shall approve, conditionally approve, or
disapprove the preliminary plat of a first minor subdivision within thirty five
(35) days of determination that the application is complete, unless there is a
written extension from the subdivider.
      1.   Basis For Decision: The basis for the council decision shall be
whether the preliminary plat, planning board advice and recommendation, and
additional information demonstrate that development of the subdivision meets
the requirements of the act. The council may not deny approval of a subdivision
based solely on the subdivision impacts on educational services.
      2.   Findings Of Fact:
         a.   Criteria Weighed: The council shall issue written findings of
fact that weigh the following criteria:
            (1)   The effect on agriculture, agricultural water user
facilities, local services, the natural environment, wildlife and wildlife
habitat, and public health and safety.
            (2)   Compliance with the survey requirements of the act.
            (3)   Compliance with these local subdivision regulations and the
review process of these regulations.
            (4)   The provision of easements for the location and installation
of any necessary utilities.
            (5)   The provision of legal and physical access to each parcel
within the subdivision and the required notation of that access on the
applicable plat and any instrument transferring the parcel.
         b.   Written Findings: The written findings of fact shall include:
            (1)   The reason for the denial or condition imposition.
            (2)   The evidence that justifies the denial or condition
imposition.
            (3)   Information regarding the appeal process for the denial or
condition imposition.
      3.   Mitigation: The council may require the subdivider to design the
subdivision to reasonably minimize potentially significant adverse impacts
identified through the review required by these regulations. The council shall
issue written findings to justify the reasonable mitigation required by these
regulations.
         a.   In reviewing a subdivision under this chapter and when requiring
mitigation under this subsection, the council may not unreasonably restrict a
landowner's ability to develop land, but it is recognized that in some
instances the unmitigated impacts of a proposed development may be unacceptable
and will preclude approval of the plat.
         b.   When requiring mitigation under this subsection, the council
shall consult with the subdivider and shall give due weight and consideration
to the expressed preference of the subdivider. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
      4.   Subdivision Proposed In Growth Policy Area: When a minor subdivision
is proposed in an area where a growth policy has been adopted pursuant to
Montana Code Annotated section 76-1-101, et seq., and the proposed subdivision
will comply with the master plan; the subdivision is exempt from the review
criteria contained in these regulations but is subject to applicable zoning
regulations. In order for a growth policy to serve as the basis for the
exemption provided in this subsection, the policy must, at a minimum, contain:
(Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004; amd. 2009 Code)
         a.   Housing, transportation, and land use elements sufficient for the
council to protect public health, safety and welfare.
         b.   A discussion of physical constraints on development that exist
within the area encompassed by the proposed subdivision.
   G.   Approval Period: Upon approving or conditionally approving a
preliminary plat, the council shall provide the subdivider with a dated and
signed statement of approval. This approval shall be in force for not more than
three (3) calendar years nor less than one calendar year. At the end of this
period, the council may, at the request of the subdivider, extend its approval
for no more than one calendar year, except that the council may extend its
approval for a period of more than one year if that approval period is included
as a specific condition of a written subdivision improvements agreement between
the council and the subdivider.
   H.   Additional Conditions After Approval: After the preliminary plat is
approved, the council may not impose any additional conditions as a
prerequisite to final plat approval, providing said approval is obtained within
the original or extended approval period as provided above.
At the request of the subdivider and with the concurrence of the subdivider,
the council may modify a condition of preliminary plat approval consistent with
these regulations at a regularly scheduled meeting of the council
   I.   Final Plat: The final plat shall follow the requirements of the major
subdivision section. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
11-4-3: SUBSEQUENT MINOR SUBDIVISIONS:
   A.   Requirements And Procedures: For second or subsequent minor
subdivisions from a tract of record, the requirements for a public hearing and
environmental assessment apply. The procedures of the major subdivision section
apply to a second or subsequent minor subdivision.
   B.   Time For Review: The council shall approve, conditionally approve, or
disapprove the second or subsequent minor subdivision from a tract of record
within sixty (60) days of the submission of a completed application, unless the
subdivider consents, in writing, to an extension of the review period. (Ord.
2004-1, 4-5-2004)
CHAPTER 5
PLAN AND PLAT INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
11-5-1: Submittal
11-5-2: Preapplication Plan
11-5-3: Preliminary Plat
11-5-4: Preliminary Plat Supplements
11-5-5: Final Plat
11-5-1: SUBMITTAL:
All applications and supplemental material shall be bound in sets ready for
distribution. All copies of plats, other maps and/or supplemental material,
shall be folded to approximately eight and one-half inches (81/2") to nine
inches by eleven inches (9"x11") or eight and one-half inches (81/2") to nine
inches by fourteen inches (9"x14") in sets ready for distribution. (Ord. 2004-
1 4-5-2004)
11-5-2: PREAPPLICATION PLAN:
The preapplication plan may be a freehand sketch, legibly drawn, showing
approximate boundaries, dimensions, areas and distances. The plan may be drawn
directly on a print of a topographic survey required for the preliminary plat
and shall include:
   A.   Sketch Map: A sketch map showing:
      1.   The name of adjoining subdivisions and numbers of adjoining
certificates of survey.
      2.   Location, name, width and owner of existing roads and easements
within the proposed subdivision; within adjacent subdivisions and tracts; and
which road provides access from the nearest public road to the proposed
subdivision.
      3.   Location of any existing structures, including buildings, railroads,
power lines, towers, and improvements inside and within one hundred feet (100')
of the proposed subdivision.
      4.   Zoning classification within the proposed subdivision and adjacent
to it. Proposed zoning for the subdivision if a change is contemplated.
   B.   Topographic Features: Topographic features of the proposed subdivision
and adjacent tracts of land, including:
      1.   A current USGS topographic map at the largest scale available with
the subdivision clearly outlined.
      2.   Embankments, watercourses, drainage channels, areas of seasonal
water ponding, areas within the designated floodway, marsh areas, rock
outcrops, wooded areas and areas of active faults. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
      3.   Location of water conveyance facilities and documentation of water
rights. (Ord. 2011-2, 5-16-2011)
   C.   Utilities: The existing and proposed utilities located on and adjacent
to the proposed subdivision including:
      1.   Location, size, and depth of sanitary and storm sewers, water mains
and gas lines.
      2.   Location of fire hydrants, electric lines, telephone lines, sewage
and water treatment, and storage facilities.
   D.   Subdivision Layout: The proposed layout of the subdivision showing the
approximate:
      1.   Subdivision blocks, tracts, and lots, with numbers, dimensions, and
areas for each.
      2.   Road location, right of way width, and name.
      3.   Easement location, width and purpose.
      4.   Sites to be dedicated or reserved as park, common open space or
other public areas; with boundaries, dimensions and areas.
      5.   Sites for commercial centers, churches, schools, industrial areas,
condominiums, mobile home parks, and uses other than single-family residences.
   E.   Development Plan: An overall development plan indicating future
development of the remainder of the tract if the tract is to be developed in
phases.
   F.   Name And Location: A title block indicating the proposed name, quarter
section, township, range, principal meridian, and county of subdivision.
   G.   Notations: Scale, north arrow, name and addresses of owners and
subdividers and date of preparation.
   H.   Variances: A list of variance requests which will be submitted with the
application for preliminary plat approval. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
   I.   Notice Requirements Concerning Water Conveyance Facilities:
      1.   Where water conveyance facilities are present on site, within five
hundred feet (500') of the exterior boundaries of the proposed subdivision, or
on an adjoining property, the subdivider shall provide written notice to the
applicable water users and/or water conveyance facility's authorized
representatives of the proposed subdivision, provide them with a copy of the
proposed subdivision layout, provide a description of any anticipated adverse
effects to the water conveyance facility, provide a description of any
mitigation proposed to remedy such adverse effects, and provide forty five (45)
calendar days for the water users and/or water conveyance facility's authorized
representatives to submit written comments.
      2.   Notice to the water users and/or water conveyance facility's
authorized representatives shall be as follows:
         a.   In the event the water conveyance facility conveys water for an
incorporated or otherwise organized group of water users such as a ditch or
canal company, and the water users have officially elected or otherwise
appointed a representative or group of representatives, written notice shall be
to the water conveyance facility's authorized representatives.
         b.   In the event the water conveyance facility conveys water for
water users that have not organized or officially elected or otherwise
appointed a representative, the subdivider shall give written notice to all
water users.
         c.   In the event the water conveyance facility conveys water in a
combination of the scenarios described in subsections I2a and I2b of this
section, the subdivider shall give written notice to the water conveyance
facility's authorized representatives, and any water users not represented by
the water conveyance facility's authorized representatives.
         d.   The Montana department of natural resources and conservation is
the agency that maintains the official records for water rights. The Belgrade
city-county planning department and the Gallatin County planning department
have some contact information for ditches and canals in Gallatin County.
      3.   The preapplication shall include a sworn statement from the
subdivider listing the names and contact information for the water users and
water conveyance facility's authorized representatives that were provided with
written notice, and the date they were provided written notice.
      4.   If the water users and/or water conveyance facility's authorized
representatives have provided the applicant with written comments, those
comments shall be submitted with the preapplication.
      5.   If there are changes to the project between the preapplication and
preliminary plat application stage that would result in additional impacts to
the water conveyance facility, or the subdivision did not require a
preapplication, the subdivider shall comply with the notice and documentation
requirements described above to be submitted with the preliminary plat
application. (Ord. 2011-2, 5-16-2011)
11-5-3: PRELIMINARY PLAT:
The preliminary plat shall be legibly drawn at the horizontal scale of not less
than two hundred feet (200') to the inch; and may show approximate boundaries,
dimensions, distances and areas, unless specifically noted. The plat shall be
on one or more sheets of twenty four inches by thirty six inches (24"x36").
Where accurate information is required, surveying and engineering data shall be
prepared under the supervision of a registered engineer or registered land
surveyor as their respective licensing laws allow. The plat submittal shall
include the following:
   A.   Preapplication Information: All information required with the
preapplication plan.
   B.   Subdivision Information: Name and location of the subdivision, scale,
scale bar, north arrow, date of preparation, lots and blocks (designated by
number or letter), and the dimensions and area of each lot.
   C.   Roads And Grades: All roads, alleys, avenues, highways, and easements
and the width of the rights of way, grades and curvature of each; existing and
proposed road names, and proposed location of intersections for any subdivision
requiring access to arterial or collector highways.
   D.   Adjoining Subdivisions: The names of adjoining platted subdivisions and
numbers of adjoining certificates of survey.
   E.   Perimeter Survey: An approximate survey of the exterior boundaries of
the platted tract with bearings, distances, and curve data indicated outside of
the boundary lines. When the plat is bounded by an irregular shoreline or a
body of water, the bearings and distances of a closing meander traverse shall
be given.
   F.   Section Corner: The approximate location of all section corners or
legal subdivision corners of sections pertinent to the subdivision boundary.
   G.   Contours: Ground contours shall be provided for the tract according to
the following requirements:
 
Where Average Slope Is            Contour Intervals Shall Be
Under 10 percent                  2 feet (If lots are over 1 acre in size, 5
                                  feet intervals may be used)
Between 10 percent and 15 percent 5 feet
Between 15 percent and 25 percent 10 feet
25 percent or greater             A reasonable contour for the lot sizes
 
   H.   Phased Improvements: If the improvements required are to be completed
in phases after the final plat is filed, the approximate area of each phase
shall be shown on the plat. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
11-5-4: PRELIMINARY PLAT SUPPLEMENTS:
The following supplemental information shall be submitted with the preliminary
plat:
   A.   Environmental Assessment, Community Impact And Flood Hazard
Evaluations: Environmental assessment, community impact and flood hazard
evaluations are to be submitted as required in these regulations.
   B.   Area Map: A map showing all adjacent sections of land, subdivision,
certificates of survey, and roads.
   C.   Subdivision Map: Map of entire subdivision on either an eight and one-
half inch by eleven inch (81/2"x11") or an eleven inch by seventeen inch
(11"x17") sheet.
   D.   Variances: A written statement describing the requested variance(s) and
the facts of hardship upon which the request is based.
   E.   Property Owners: Certified list of adjoining property owners and
addresses, and property description. List of adjoining property owners and
addresses on self-adhesive address labels; one list for first minor
subdivisions and three (3) lists for all other subdivisions, including those
across public rights of way and/or easements.
   F.   Documents And Certificates: Draft or copy of the following documents
and certificates to be printed on or accompany the preliminary plat:
      1.   Covenants, restrictions and articles of incorporation for the
homeowners' association.
      2.   Encroachment permits or a letter indicating intention to issue a
permit where new roads, easements, rights of way or driveways intersect state,
county, or city highways or roads.
      3.   A letter of approval from the council or other appropriate authority
where a zoning change is necessary.
      4.   A draft of such other appropriate certificates.
      5.   Provision for maintenance of all roads (including emergency access),
parks, and other required improvements.
      6.   Drafts of public improvements agreement and guarantee.
   G.   Profile Sheets: Profile sheets for road grades greater than five
percent (5%).
   H.   Application Form: Completed preliminary plat application form.
   I.   Fee: The required fee according to the fee schedule in these
regulations.
   J.   Weed Management And Revegetation Plan: A noxious weed management and
revegetation plan approved by the weed control district for control of noxious
weeds upon preliminary plat approval and during the construction of
improvements. Prior to final plat approval, a memorandum of understanding shall
be entered into by the weed control district and the subdivider. (Ord. 2004-1,
4-5-2004)
   K.   Important Land Features: Important land features shall be shown and
clearly labeled on the preliminary plat. Important land features include, but
are not limited to, the following: watercourses, water conveyance facilities
(in the case of irrigation ditches, canals, or pipelines, the centerline shall
be shown on the plat), drainage ditches or channels, wetlands or other areas of
seasonal water ponding, areas within the designated floodplain, marsh areas,
and areas of geologic hazards as described by section 
11-9-4 of this title.
   L.   Documentation Of Existing Easements, Including Those For Water
Conveyance Facilities: Where the water users and/or water conveyance facility's
authorized representatives have provided the subdivider with written comments,
those comments shall be submitted with the preliminary plat application. (Ord.
2011-2, 5-16-2011)
11-5-5: FINAL PLAT:
   A.   Compliance With Preliminary Plat; Real Property Taxes: A final
subdivision plat may not be approved by the council nor filed by the clerk and
recorder unless all conditions of preliminary plat approval and all subdivision
regulations as required by the council have been met. This shall include the
treasurer's certificate that all real property taxes and special assessments
assessed and levied on the land to be subdivided have been paid.
   B.   Compliance With Uniform Standards: A final subdivision plat may not be
approved by the council nor filed by the clerk and recorder unless it complies
with the following uniform standards for final subdivision plats requirements:
      1.   Final subdivision plats shall be legibly drawn with permanent ink or
printed or reproduced by a process guaranteeing a permanent record and shall be
twenty four inches by thirty six inches (24"x36") overall to include a one and
one-half inch (11/2") margin on the binding side.
      2.   One signed cloth backed or opaque mylar copy and one signed
reproducible copy on a stable based polyester film or equivalent shall be
submitted.
      3.   Whenever more than one sheet must be used to accurately portray the
land subdivided, each sheet must show the number of that sheet and the total
number of sheets included. All certifications shall be shown or referenced on
one sheet.
      4.   Changes to a filed subdivision plat must be filed with the clerk and
recorder as an amended plat. An amended plat may not be filed unless it meets
the filing requirements for a final subdivision plat specified in these rules,
except that approval by the council is not required where waived by Montana
Code Annotated subsection 76-3-207(1) for relocation of common boundary lines
or aggregation of five (5) or fewer lots.
   C.   Required Information: The final plat submitted for approval shall show
or contain on its face or on separate sheets referenced on the plat:
      1.   A title block indicating the quarter section(s), section, township,
range, principal meridian, and county of the subdivision. The title of the plat
shall contain the words "plat" and "subdivision".
      2.   Name(s) of the owner(s) of the land surveyed and the name(s) of any
adjoining platted subdivision and numbers of any adjoining certificates of
survey previously recorded and ties thereto.
      3.   North point.
      4.   Scale bar (scale shall be sufficient to legibly represent the
required data on the plat submitted for filing).
      5.   All monuments found, set, reset, replaced, or removed describing
their kind, size, location and giving other data relating thereto.
      6.   Witness monuments, basis of bearing, bearings and lengths of lines.
      7.   The bearings, distances and curve data of all perimeter boundary
lines shall be indicated. When the subdivision is bounded by an irregular
shoreline or body of water, the bearings and distances of a meander traverse
shall be given.
      8.   Data on all curves sufficient to enable the reestablishment of the
curves on the ground. The data shall include:
         a.   Radius of curve.
         b.   Arch length.
         c.   Notation of nontangent curves.
      9.   Lengths of all lines shall be shown to at least tenths of a foot,
and all angles and bearings shown to at least the nearest minute.
      10.   The location of all section corners or legal subdivision corners of
sections pertinent to the subdivision boundary.
      11.   All lots and blocks in the subdivision, designated by number or
letter, the dimensions of each lot and block, the area of each lot, and the
total acreage of all lots. (Excepted parcels shall be marked "Not Included In
This Subdivision" or "Not Included In This Plat", as appropriate, and the
boundary completely indicated by bearings and distances.)
      12.   All streets, alleys, avenues, roads and highways; their widths,
bearings; the width and purpose of all rights of way; and the names of all
streets, roads and highways.
      13.   The location, dimensions and areas of all parks, common areas, and
all other grounds dedicated for public use.
      14.   Acreage of the subdivision, gross and net.
      15.   A metes and bounds legal description of the perimeter boundary of
the tract surveyed.
      16.   All monuments to be of record must be adequately described and
clearly identified on the plat. Where additional monuments are to be set
subsequent to the filing of the plat, the location of such additional monuments
shall be shown by a distinct symbol noted on the plat. All monuments or other
evidence found during retracements that would influence the position of any
corner or boundary indicated on the plat must be clearly shown.
      17.   The signature and seal of the registered land surveyor responsible
for the survey. The affixing of his seal constitutes a certification by the
surveyor that the final plat has been prepared in conformance with the act 1 ,
and the regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
      18.   Memorandum of oaths administered pursuant to Montana Code Annotated
section 76-3-405.
      19.   Certification by the council that the final subdivision plat is
approved, except where the plat shows changes to a filed subdivision plat which
are exempt from local government review under Montana Code subsection 76-3-207
(1). Where an amended plat qualifies for such a waiver, the plat must contain a
statement that pursuant to Montana Code Annotated subsection 76-3-207(1),
approval by the council is not required for relocation of common boundary lines
or for aggregation of lots.
   D.   Certifications: The following original documents shall be on the face
of the approved final plat when filed with the clerk and recorder. All
documents shall be properly notarized or sealed where applicable:
      1.   Certification of dedication of roads, parks or playgrounds, or other
public improvements, or of cash donation in lieu of dedication, when
applicable.
      2.   Certification by the subdivider indicating which required public
improvements have been installed and any subdivision improvements agreement
securing the future construction of any additional public improvements to be
installed.
      3.   Certification by the council expressly accepting any dedicated land
and improvements. Acceptance of dedication shall be ineffective without such
certification.
      4.   Certification of examining land surveyor, where applicable.
      5.   Treasurer's certificate that all real property taxes and special
assessments assessed and levied on the land to be subdivided have been paid.
   E.   Additional Documents; Recording Required: The following original
documents shall accompany and be recorded with the approved final plat when
filed with the clerk and recorder. All documents shall be properly notarized or
sealed where applicable:
      1.   Certification by a licensed title abstractor showing the names of
the owners of record of land to be subdivided and the names of any lien holders
or claimants of record against the land. Certificate shall be accompanied by
city attorney's certificate.
      2.   Covenants or deed restrictions required by the council.
      3.   Certification by the MDEQ that it has approved the plans and
specifications for sanitary facilities, when required.
      4.   Articles of incorporation and bylaws for any property owners'
association. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
 
Notes
1 1. MCA §§ 76-3-101 - 76-3-625.
CHAPTER 6
DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS, GENERAL
SECTION:
11-6-1: General Standards
11-6-2: Lots
11-6-3: Blocks
11-6-4: Easements
11-6-5: Fire Protection Requirements
11-6-6: Grading And Drainage
11-6-7: Park Requirements
11-6-8: Sanitary Sewers
11-6-9: Utilities
11-6-10: Water Supply System
11-6-11: Mail Delivery
11-6-12: Noxious Weeds
11-6-1: GENERAL STANDARDS:
   A.   Conformance: The design and development of a subdivision shall conform
with adopted growth policies, zoning ordinances and other resolutions and
regulations. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004; amd. 2009 Code)
   B.   General Design: The design and development of the subdivision shall
minimize adverse impacts to agriculture water conveyance facilities, local
services, the natural environment, wildlife and wildlife habitat, and public
health and safety. Where a subdivision is expected to have an adverse impact on
any of the above, the preliminary plat application shall describe such impacts
and propose mitigation. (Ord. 2011-2, 5-16-2011)
   C.   Lands Unsuitable For Subdivision: Land which the council has found to
be unsuitable for subdivision because of potential hazards such as flooding,
landslides, excessive slopes, rockfalls, snow avalanches, subsidence, high
water tables, polluted or nonpotable water; or because of unreasonable burdens
on the general public such as requirements for the excessive expenditure of
public funds, environmental degradation, and congestion in the roads, shall not
be subdivided for building or residential purposes unless the hazards or
excessive public burdens are eliminated or will be overcome by appropriate
design and construction plans.
   D.   Revegetation: All areas disturbed during construction shall be reseeded
with vegetation types approved by the weed control supervisor.
   E.   Watercourse Mitigation: Where a subdivision is crossed by or adjacent
to a watercourse, the subdivider shall mitigate the impacts of the subdivision
on the watercourse. This mitigation may not be less restrictive than the
requirements of any applicable floodplain regulations or applicable zoning
regulations.
      1.   Setback: The subdivider shall provide the following setbacks, which
parallel the ordinary high water mark of the watercourse. A one hundred foot
(100') setback shall be provided between the ordinary high water mark and any
residential or commercial structure.
      2.   Watercourse Mitigation Plan: The subdivider shall submit a plan and
propose measures to mitigate the impacts of the subdivision on the watercourse.
The plan shall evaluate the potential effects of the proposed subdivision on
the watercourse; to include consideration of wildlife and fish habitat, water
quality, vegetation, and watercourse health. The mitigation measures might
include setbacks, building envelopes, landscaping, type and/or location of
septic systems, streambank stabilization, etc. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
   F.   Mitigation Of Impacts On Water Conveyance Facilities:
      1.   Mitigation Of Adverse Impacts: Where a water conveyance facility is
located on or adjacent to property proposed for subdivision, the subdivider
shall mitigate adverse impacts of the subdivision on the water conveyance
facility. Mitigation shall include the requirements of subsection F1a or F1b of
this section, and any other methodology necessary to mitigate adverse impacts
on the water conveyance facility. Mitigation shall be reasonable, based on site
specific conditions, and shall address any comments received from the water
users and/or water conveyance facility's authorized representatives.
         a.   Establishment of water conveyance facility noninterference
setbacks as described in subsection F2 of this section is required in the event
water conveyance facilities exist or will be established on the property being
subdivided and such facilities convey water through the property being
subdivided to lands adjacent to or beyond the subdivision. Water conveyance
facility noninterference setbacks may also be required on the property being
subdivided when a water conveyance facility is located on land adjacent to the
proposed subdivision.
         b.   Establishment of water conveyance facility easements as described
in subsection
11-6-4C of this chapter is required in the event water conveyance facilities
exist or will be established on the property being subdivided and such
facilities provide water for use on land within the subdivision, and do not
convey water through the property being subdivided to lands adjacent to or
beyond the subdivision.
      2.   Water Conveyance Facility Noninterference Setbacks:
         a.   The preliminary and final plats shall show the water conveyance
facility noninterference setback as set forth in subsection F1 of this section.
This setback shall be reasonable and of sufficient width to provide for the
unobstructed passage and delivery of water, unobstructed access, inspection,
use, routine maintenance, repair, and construction related to the water
conveyance facility, and shall be based on site specific conditions and shall
address comments from the water users and/or water conveyance facility's
authorized representatives. This setback shall extend on both sides of the
water conveyance facility and shall be measured from the centerline along a
horizontal plane.
         b.   To assure noninterference with water conveyance facilities, no
livestock grazing shall take place, nor shall any new structures (other than
structures for the maintenance and operation of the water conveyance facility),
fences, landscaping (other than grass), or roads be installed, or erected
within the water conveyance facility noninterference setback, except where
agreed to in writing by the water users and/or water conveyance facility's
authorized representatives.
      3.   Disagreement With Mitigation Requested Or Comments Not Received:
Where the subdivider has not received comments from the water users or water
conveyance facility's authorized representatives, or where the subdivider is
not in agreement with the mitigation requested by water users or water
conveyance facility's authorized representatives, the following shall take
place:
         a.   The preliminary plat shall show a default fifty foot (50') water
conveyance facility noninterference setback as described in subsection F2a of
this section, or required water conveyance facility easements as described in
subsection
11-6-4C of this chapter; and
         b.   If the subdivider, water users, or water conveyance facility's
authorized representatives are of the opinion that, based on site specific
conditions, the water conveyance facility noninterference setback should be
different than the default setback, a written request justifying the proposed
alternate setback shall be submitted with the preliminary plat application, and
a copy of the written request shall be sent to the other applicable parties;
and
         c.   At the hearing on the preliminary plat application, the city
council:
            (1)   Shall consider the site specific conditions and any
information entered into the record regarding the water conveyance facility;
            (2)   May impose conditions of preliminary plat approval as
necessary to adequately mitigate adverse impacts on the subject water
conveyance facility; and
            (3)   May require the width of the water conveyance facility
noninterference setback to be greater than or less than the default width if
site specific conditions so warrant.
      4.   Written Agreement: Any mitigation of water conveyance facilities
required as a condition of preliminary plat approval shall be agreed to in
writing by the subdivider prior to issuance of final plat approval. Such
written agreement shall be filed with the Gallatin County clerk and recorder
when the final plat is recorded and shall include language to assure the
mitigation requirements are binding upon all successors in interest and remain
in effect until such time that the water conveyance facility is abandoned in
accordance with the requirements of Montana law or alternative requirements are
agreed to in writing by all applicable parties.
      5.   Secondary Easement: Water conveyance facility noninterference
setbacks do not eliminate any secondary easement for maintenance and repair of
the water conveyance facility as described by section 70-17-112, Montana Code
Annotated. Subdividers shall consider the specific terms and requirements of
any such secondary easement(s) when designing a subdivision to ensure a
buildable location on each developable lot.
      6.   Written Permission: Before any maintenance, improvements, or
modifications are performed on any water conveyance facility, written
permission must be obtained from the water users and/or water conveyance
facility's authorized representatives. (Ord. 2011-2, 5-16-2011)
11-6-2: LOTS:
See figure 1 of this section.
   A.   Dimensions And Orientation: Lot size, width, shape, and orientation
shall be appropriate for the location and contemplated use of the subdivision.
Lot designs with irregular shapes, narrow necks, points and flag shapes shall
be permitted only when the subdivider can demonstrate that the proposed lot
designs are necessary due to topography or other physical constraints. Each lot
shall contain a satisfactory building site and shall conform to zoning codes
and growth policies where officially adopted, and to the regulations of MDEQ.
Slopes in excess of twenty five percent (25%) shall be presumed unsuitable for
building sites unless otherwise proved by the subdivider. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-
2004; amd. 2009 Code)
   B.   Division By Rights Of Way: No single lot shall be divided by a
dedicated right of way or easement which would reduce the buildable area to a
size less than required by these and other adopted regulations.
   C.   Double Frontage: Double frontage lots shall be avoided except where
essential to:
      1.   Provide separation of residential development from arterial roads.
      2.   Provide access to development adjacent to limited access roads.
      3.   Overcome topography or other physical conditions.
      4.   Overcome specific disadvantages of existing design and orientation.
   D.   Corner Lots: Corner lots shall have sufficient width to permit
appropriate building setback from both roads and provide acceptable visibility
for traffic safety.
   E.   Width: Lots shall have a width sufficient to allow normal construction
without the construction encroaching on property lines.
   F.   Depth: No lot shall have an average depth greater than three (3) times
its average width.
   G.   Side Lot Lines: Side lot lines shall be, whenever practical, at right
angles or radial to road lines.
   H.   Frontage On Public Roads: Each lot shall have a minimum of thirty feet
(30') of frontage on a public road or on a public road easement to provide
enough room for snow removal along the lot access (driveway) and utility
easements.
FIGURE 1
SUBDIVISION LOT TERMS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b04b0e5ccf6b07bdb8fe5d5bf5701ac5bc51801a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-31.png]
 
(Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
   I.   Location In Regard To Water Conveyance Facilities:
      1.   No developable lot may be created in which any portion of a water
conveyance facility is located.
      2.   The city council may waive this standard at the request of the
subdivider without need for a variance where such action is agreed to in
writing by the water users and/or water conveyance facility's authorized
representatives. Where such agreement cannot be reached, the subdivider may
request a variance in accordance with the requirements of chapter 13 of this
title. (Ord. 2011-2, 5-16-2011)
11-6-3: BLOCKS:
See section
11-6-2, figure 1 of this chapter.
   A.   Size And Orientation: Blocks shall be designed to assure traffic safety
and ease of traffic control and circulation, to accommodate the special needs
of the use contemplated, and to take advantage of the limitations and
opportunities of the topography.
   B.   Block Length: Block length shall not be designed, unless otherwise
impractical, to be more than one thousand three hundred feet (1,300') or less
than three hundred fifty feet (350') in length.
   C.   Block Width: Blocks shall be wide enough to allow for two (2) tiers of
lots except where essential to provide separation of residential development
from a traffic arterial or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and
orientation.
   D.   Rights Of Way For Pedestrians: Rights of way for pedestrian walks, not
less than ten feet (10') wide, shall be required where deemed essential to
provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers,
transportation and other community facilities. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
11-6-4: EASEMENTS:
   A.   Required Easements: Where determined to be necessary, the council shall
require that easements be provided for utilities, drainage, vehicular or
pedestrian access, and planting screens. All easements shall be shown on the
plat.
   B.   Utility Easements: Utility easements shall meet the following
standards:
      1.   Utility easements shall be centered along side and rear lot lines
wherever possible, and, if placed in the road, be located between the roadway
and the right of way line, or in a location requested by and agreed upon, in
writing, by all of the appropriate utilities.
      2.   Utility easements shall be twenty feet (20') wide; except the
council may require easements for sanitary sewer, storm sewer, and water lines
to be thirty feet (30') wide.
      3.   Where a utility is to be located in an existing, dedicated right of
way, an encroachment permit must be obtained from the local or state road
department having jurisdiction.
      4.   The following statement shall appear on the final plat:
The undersigned hereby grants unto each and every person, firm, or corporation,
whether public or private, providing or offering to provide telephone,
telegraph, electric power, gas, cable television, water or sewer service to the
public, the right to the joint use of an easement for the construction,
maintenance, repair and removal of their lines and other facilities, in, over,
under and across each area designated on this plat as "Utility Easement" to
have and to hold forever.
(Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
   C.   Easements For Water Conveyance Facilities:
      1.   Where easements have been filed, recorded, or otherwise officially
established for water conveyance facilities that convey water through the
property being subdivided to lands adjacent to or beyond the subdivision, such
easements shall be shown on the preliminary and final subdivision plats in
addition to the water conveyance facility noninterference setback described in
subsection
11-6-1F of this chapter.
      2.   Where water conveyance facilities exist or will be established on
the property being subdivided and such facilities provide water for use on land
within the subdivision, and do not convey water through the property being
subdivided to lands adjacent to or beyond the subdivision, easements shall be
established that:
         a.   Are in locations of appropriate topographic characteristics and
sufficient width to allow for the physical placement and unobstructed
maintenance of water conveyance facilities for the delivery of water to persons
and lands legally entitled to the water under an appropriated water right or
permit of an irrigation district or other private or public entity formed to
provide for the use of the water right on the subdivision lots;
         b.   Are sufficient distance from the centerline of the ditch to allow
construction, repair, maintenance, and inspection of the ditch; and
         c.   Prohibit the placement of structures or the planting of
vegetation other than grass within the ditch easement without the written
permission of the ditch owner.
      3.   Establishment of easements as described in subsection C2 of this
section is not required if:
         a.   The average lot size is one acre or less and the subdivider
provides for disclosure, in a manner acceptable to the commission, that
adequately notifies potential buyers of lots that are classified as irrigated
land and may continue to be assessed for irrigation water delivery even though
the water may not be deliverable; or
         b.   The water rights are removed or the process has been initiated to
remove the water rights from the subdivided land through an appropriate legal
or administrative process and if the removal or intended removal is denoted on
the preliminary plat. If removal of water rights is not complete upon filing of
the final plat, the subdivider shall provide written notification to
prospective buyers of the intent to remove the water right and shall document
that intent, when applicable, in agreements and legal documents for related
sales transactions.
      4.   Interference with canal or ditch easements is prohibited as
described by section 70-17-112, Montana Code Annotated. The subdivision shall
be designed to maintain or enhance access to any such easements. (Ord. 2011-2,
5-16-2011)
   D.   Avigation Easement: An avigation easement shall accompany and be filed
at the Gallatin County clerk and recorder with the final plat for the entire
subdivision. The required avigation easement language is attached to the
ordinance codified herein as appendix F. (Ord. 2006-2, 6-5-2006)
11-6-5: FIRE PROTECTION REQUIREMENTS:
All subdivisions shall provide adequate fire protection in accordance with
National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) standards for hydrant systems and
city standards (see appendix A adopted by reference in section
11-15-1 of this title). All fire protection requirements must be reviewed and
approved by the fire chief and the director of public works prior to final plat
approval. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
11-6-6: GRADING AND DRAINAGE:
   A.   Plan Required: The subdivider shall provide a complete grading and
drainage plan with accurate dimensions, courses and elevations, showing the
proposed grades of roads and drainage improvements.
   B.   Drainage System And Facilities: The drainage system and facilities
required for any surface runoff affecting the subdivision shall meet the
minimum standards of MDEQ, as required by Montana Code Annotated title 76,
chapter 4, and all regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and are subject to the
approval of the council.
      1.   Drainage systems shall not discharge into any sanitary sewer
facility.
      2.   The subdivider shall provide suitable drainage facilities for any
surface runoff affecting the subdivision; these facilities shall be located in
road rights of way or in perpetual easements of appropriate widths and are
subject to approval by the council. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
      3.   Unless there is written consent from the appropriate water users
and/or water conveyance facility's authorized representatives, the subdivision
shall be designed and developed so stormwater, snowmelt runoff, water from
dewatering activities, or other water originating from within the boundaries of
the subdivision, does not run into or become captured by any water conveyance
facility. (Ord. 2011-2, 5-16-2011)
11-6-7: PARK REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Dedications: Except as provided in subsections B, C, and F of this
section, a subdivider shall dedicate to the city a cash or land donation equal
to:
      1.   Eleven percent (11%) of the area of the land proposed to be
subdivided into parcels of one-half (1/2) acre or smaller.
      2.   Seven and one-half percent (7.5%) of the area of the land proposed
to be subdivided into parcels larger than one-half (1/2) acre and not larger
than one acre.
      3.   Five percent (5%) of the area of the land proposed to be subdivided
into parcels of one acre or larger but not larger than three (3) acres.
      4.   Two and one-half percent (2.5%) of the area of the land proposed to
be subdivided into parcels of three (3) acres or larger but not larger than
five (5) acres. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
   B.   Power Of Council To Establish: When a subdivision is located totally
within an area for which density requirements have been adopted pursuant to a
growth policy under Montana Code Annotated title 76, chapter 1, or pursuant to
zoning regulations under Montana Code Annotated title 76, chapter 2, the
council may establish park dedication requirements based on the community need
for parks and the development densities identified in the plans or regulations.
Park dedication requirements established under this subsection are in lieu of
those provided in subsection A of this section and may not exceed three-
hundredths (0.03) acre per dwelling unit. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004; amd. 2009
Code)
   C.   Dedication Not Required: A park dedication may not be required for:
      1.   A minor subdivision.
      2.   Land proposed for subdivision into parcels larger than five (5)
acres.
      3.   Subdivision into parcels that are all nonresidential.
      4.   A subdivision in which parcels are not created, except when that
subdivision provides permanent multiple spaces for recreational camping
vehicles, mobile homes, or condominiums.
      5.   A subdivision in which only one additional parcel is created.
   D.   Location Of Parks And Playgrounds: The council, in consultation with
the subdivider and the planning board or park board that has jurisdiction, may
determine suitable locations for parks and playgrounds and, giving due weight
and consideration to the expressed preference of the subdivider, may determine
whether the park dedication must be a land donation, cash donation, or a
combination of both. When a combination of land donation and cash is required,
the cash donation may not exceed the proportional amount not covered by the
land donation.
      1.   A "cash donation" is the fair market value of the unsubdivided,
unimproved land.
      2.   Where cash has been accepted in lieu of land dedication, the amount
of cash donation shall be stated on the final plat.
      3.   Where cash has been accepted in lieu of land dedication, the council
shall record in the minutes of the meeting upon the proposed subdivision why
the dedication of land for parks and playgrounds was undesirable.
      4.   The subdivider shall provide a current appraisal of the fair market
value by a certified real estate appraiser of their choosing. The appraisal fee
shall be the responsibility of the subdivider.
   E.   Residential Subdivisions: All subdivisions shall be considered to be
residential subdivisions and park dedication requirements shall be satisfied
unless there are adopted zoning restrictions which prohibit residential
development or it can be shown that the subdivider has immediate plans for
nonresidential development.
   F.   Criteria For Waiver: The council shall waive the park dedication
requirement if:
      1.   The preliminary plat provides for a planned unit development or
other development with land permanently set aside for park and recreation uses
sufficient to meet the needs of the persons who will ultimately reside in the
development, and the area of the land and any improvements set aside for park
and recreational purposes equals or exceeds the area of the dedication
required.
      2.   The preliminary plat provides long term protection of critical
wildlife habitat; cultural, historical, or natural resources; agricultural
interests; or aesthetic values; and the area of the land proposed to be
subdivided, by virtue of providing long term protection provided above, is
reduced by an amount equal to or exceeding the area of the required dedication.
      3.   The area of the land proposed to be subdivided, by virtue of a
combination of the provisions of subsections F1 and F2 of this section, is
reduced by an amount equal to or exceeding the area of the dedication required.
   G.   Park Fund:
      1.   The council shall use the dedicated money or land for development,
acquisition, or maintenance of parks to serve the subdivision.
      2.   The council may use the dedicated money to acquire, develop, or
maintain, within its jurisdiction, parks or recreational areas or for the
purchase of public open space or conservation easement only if:
         a.   The park, recreational area, open space, or conservation easement
is within reasonably close proximity to the proposed subdivision.
         b.   The council has formally adopted a park plan that establishes the
needs and procedures for use of the money.
      3.   The council may not use more than fifty percent (50%) of the
dedicated money for park maintenance. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
11-6-8: SANITARY SEWERS:
The subdivider shall install complete sanitary sewer system facilities in
accordance with the requirements of the city and MDEQ. The subdivider shall
submit plans and specifications for the proposed facilities to the director of
public works and to MDEQ, and shall obtain their approvals prior to undertaking
any construction. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
11-6-9: UTILITIES:
Underground utilities, if placed in the road right of way, shall be located
between the roadway and the right of way line to simplify location and repair
of lines. Such underground facilities shall be installed or utility culverts
provided before the road is surfaced to eliminate the necessity of disturbing
the road surface when connecting individual services. Overhead utility lines
shall be located at the rear property lines where practical. Utility facilities
shall be designed by utility firms in cooperation with the subdivider, subject,
however, to all applicable laws and rules and regulations of any appropriate
regulatory authority having jurisdiction over such facilities. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-
5-2004)
11-6-10: WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM:
The subdivider shall install complete water system facilities in accordance
with the requirements of the city and MDEQ. The subdivider shall submit plans
and specifications for the proposed facilities to the director of public works
and to MDEQ, and shall obtain their approval prior to undertaking any
construction. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
11-6-11: MAIL DELIVERY:
If mail delivery will not be to each individual lot within the subdivision, the
subdivider shall provide an off road area for mail delivery within the
subdivision in cooperation with the United States postal service. It shall not
be the responsibility of the city to maintain or plow any mail delivery area
constructed within a city road right of way. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
11-6-12: NOXIOUS WEEDS:
Noxious weeds shall be controlled as directed by the weed control district in
accordance with the Montana county noxious weed control act.
   A.   Noxious Weed Control And Revegetation Plan: Prior to application for
preliminary plat approval, the subdivider shall design a noxious weed control
and revegetation plan, and the subdivider shall submit the plan to the district
for approval. This plan ensures the control of noxious weeds upon preliminary
plat approval and the revegetation of any land disturbed during the
construction of subdivision improvements.
   B.   Submission Of Plan: The subdivider shall submit the approved plan at
the time of application for preliminary plat approval.
   C.   Memorandum Of Understanding: Prior to application for final plat
approval, the subdivider shall enter into a memorandum of understanding (MOU)
with the weed district. The MOU shall be signed between the weed district and
the subdivider prior to final plat approval.
   D.   Submission Of MOU: The subdivider shall submit the signed MOU at the
time of application for final plat approval.
   E.   Covenant: The subdivider shall ensure that after final plat approval
the property owner(s) and/or property owners' association shall be responsible
for the control of county declared noxious weeds by placing a covenant on the
property. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
CHAPTER 7
DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS, ROADS
SECTION:
11-7-1: General Design
11-7-2: Road Dedications
11-7-3: Intersections
11-7-4: Names
11-7-5: Definitions And Design Standards
11-7-6: Primary Access Road Standards
11-7-7: Lot Access Standards
11-7-8: Paving Requirements
11-7-9: Improvement Standards
11-7-1: GENERAL DESIGN:
   A.   Roads: The arrangement, type, extent, width, grade, and location of all
roads shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned roads,
topographical conditions, public convenience and safety, and the proposed uses
of the land to be served by such roads.
   B.   Relation To Unsubdivided Areas:
      1.   When a new subdivision adjoins unsubdivided land and access to the
unsubdivided land must pass through the new subdivision, the subdivider shall
provide rights of way and construct roads so as to allow suitable access to the
unsubdivided land.
      2.   This requirement may be waived by the public works department if one
of the following criteria is met:
         a.   Topography or other physical condition would make it
impracticable to provide access to adjacent unsubdivided property.
         b.   Adequate public access is otherwise available to the adjacent
unsubdivided property.
         c.   When the adjoining unsubdivided property is under a conservation
easement, public ownership, or other legally restrictive covenants.
      3.   The public works department must review and approve all proposed
waivers.
   C.   Relation To Subdivided Areas: The subdivider shall arrange the roads to
provide for the continuation of roads between adjacent subdivided properties
when such continuation is necessary for the convenient movement of traffic,
effective provision of emergency services, and efficient provision of
utilities.
   D.   Separation Of Through And Local Traffic: Where a subdivision abuts or
contains an existing or proposed arterial or collector road, the subdivider may
be required to provide frontage roads, reverse frontage with a reservation
prohibiting access along the rear property line, screen planting, or such other
treatment as may be necessary for protection of residential properties and to
afford separation of through and local traffic.
   E.   Distance Between Parallel Rights Of Way: Where a subdivision borders on
or contains a railroad, limited access highway, canal, ditch, or stream right
of way, the subdivider may be required to provide a road approximately parallel
to and on each side of such right of way at a distance suitable to allow for
the appropriate use of the intervening land. Such distances shall also be
determined with due regard for the requirements of approach grades and future
grade separation.
   F.   Dead End Roads:
      1.   No dead end roads shall be permitted without an approved turn
around. Where streets terminate, the subdivider shall provide either a cul-de-
sac or "T" turnaround at the terminus. Cul-de- sacs and "T" turnarounds must
conform to the design specification of section
11-7-9, table 1 of this chapter. Where it is planned that a dead end road will
be extended in the future, a temporary cul-de-sac or "T" turnaround shall be
provided.
      2.   "T" turnarounds shall include two (2) straight backup lengths of
thirty feet (30') each, shall have an inside turning radius of twenty six feet
(26'), and shall have an outside turning radius of thirty eight feet (38').
   G.   Half Roads: Half roads may be permitted only when it is shown they are
beneficial to the city and are approved by the public works department.
   H.   Second Or Emergency Access: To facilitate traffic, the provision of
emergency services, and the placement of utility easements, the subdivider
shall provide all subdivisions with six (6) or more lots with a second means of
access. If, in the judgment of the council, a second dedicated right of way
cannot be provided for reasons of topography or other physical conditions, the
subdivider shall provide an emergency access, built to the standards in these
regulations. The subdivider may be required to provide a second or emergency
access for minor subdivisions if the maximum cul-de-sac length standard is
exceeded or if topography or physical conditions so warrant.
   I.   Road Design Standards, General: The design standards contained in these
regulations shall apply to all construction, reconstruction, and paving of
roads dedicated to the public or within the city maintained road system, and to
roads improved through the special improvement district process. The variance
procedure and standards of these regulations shall apply to the above roads.
   J.   Bridges: Bridges shall be provided and installed by the subdivider
where drainage channels intersect any road rightsof way.
      1.   Bridges shall be built to water load standards and approved by the
public works department.
   K.   Culverts: Culverts shall be provided and installed by the subdivider
where drainage channels intersect any road rights of way.
      1.   All culverts shall, at a minimum, extend across the entire improved
width of the road cross section. The size and length of the culvert and the
amount of backfill over the culvert shall be determined by a registered
engineer, when determined necessary by the public works department.
      2.   Each culvert or other drainage facility shall be large enough to
accommodate potential runoff from upstream drainage areas. The minimum capacity
of a culvert shall be equivalent to a circular diameter of fifteen inches
(15").
   L.   Encroachment Permits: The subdivider shall be required to obtain
encroachment permits for all access to county roads and state highways. (Ord.
2004-1, 4-5-2004)
11-7-2: ROAD DEDICATIONS:
All roads within or providing access to the proposed subdivision shall be
dedicated to the public or, if the criteria of this section are met, by a
public road easement. Roads dedicated to the public are accepted for public
use.
   A.   The easement shall be approved by the city attorney.
   B.   The easement shall be recorded with the clerk and recorder.
   C.   The easement shall clearly grant to the public an unrestricted right of
ingress and egress from a public road to the property to be subdivided.
   D.   Documented proof of maintenance of the easement must be provided. (Ord.
2004-1, 4-5-2004)
11-7-3: INTERSECTIONS:
The following requirements apply to road intersections:
   A.   The intersection of more than two (2) roads at one point shall be
avoided.
   B.   Roads shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at
right angles and no road shall intersect any other road at less than a seventy
five degree (75°) angle.
   C.   Two (2) roads meeting a third road from opposite sides shall meet at
the same point, or their centerline shall be offset at least two hundred feet
(200'). (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
11-7-4: NAMES:
The following requirements apply to road names:
   A.   Existing Roads: New roads aligned with existing roads shall have the
same name as the existing roads.
   B.   Approval Required: All road names must be approved by the public works
department prior to preliminary plat approval in order to avoid duplication and
confusion with names of existing roads. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
11-7-5: DEFINITIONS AND DESIGN STANDARDS:
ARTERIAL ROADS: A road having the primary function of moving traffic with
emphasis on a high level of mobility for through movement and the secondary
function of providing limited access to adjacent land. Generally, arterials are
secondary state highways. Primary and community arterial roads shall have a
minimum eighty foot (80') wide right of way and meet such other design
standards as may be required by the council.
MAJOR COLLECTORS: Roads that carry more than three hundred (300) trips per day,
and have the equally important function of moving traffic and providing access
to adjacent land. (See section
11-7-9, table 1 of this chapter.)
MINOR COLLECTORS: Roads which carry more than one hundred (100) trips per day
but less than three hundred (300) trips per day, and have the equally important
functions of providing access to adjacent land and moving traffic. (See section
11-7-9, table 1 of this chapter.)
MINOR ROADS: Local roads, which carry less than one hundred (100) trips per
day. The primary function of a minor road is to serve abutting property, with a
secondary function of moving traffic. (See section
11-7-9, table 1 of this chapter.)
MOUNTAINOUS ROADS: Roads located on mountainous terrain. Mountainous terrain
has a cross slope exceeding fifteen percent (15%).
NONMOUNTAINOUS ROADS: Roads not located on mountainous terrain. Mountainous
terrain has a cross slope exceeding fifteen percent (15%).
PRIMARY ACCESS: The major access to a subdivision. The major access generally
carries the most traffic as determined by the traffic engineering study. (Ord.
2004-1, 4-5-2004)
11-7-6: PRIMARY ACCESS ROAD STANDARDS:
All off site roads providing primary access to the proposed subdivision shall
meet the following standards:
   A.   Right Of Way Width And Construction Standards: Right of way width and
construction standards contained in this regulation shall apply.
   B.   Access Roads Dedicated To Public: Access roads shall be dedicated to
the public or shall have a public easement which meets the criteria of this
regulation.
   C.   Primary Access Roads And Interior Subdivision: Primary access roads and
interior subdivision roads shall be paved. Paving shall be done in accordance
with the standards in these regulations and the city specifications (design
standards and specifications adopted in section
11-15-1 of this title). (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
11-7-7: LOT ACCESS STANDARDS:
Lot accesses shall comply with title 10 of this code. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
11-7-8: PAVING REQUIREMENTS:
All roads within the subdivision shall be built to the paving standards in
these regulations and city specifications (design standards and specifications
adopted by reference in section
11-15-1 of this title) and in accordance with the timing requirements below.
Trips per day will be calculated based on an average of eight (8) trips per day
per household. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004; amd. 2009 Code)
   A.   Timing Requirements: The subdivider shall meet one of the following
requirements for completion of paving. The option shall be specified in the
preliminary plat submittal. If the option in subsection A2 of this section is
chosen, the subdivider shall enter into an improvement agreement as set forth
below:
      1.   The subdivision roads shall be paved prior to final plat approval;
or
      2.   Paving shall be completed within three (3) years of the date of
final plat approval of the subdivision, or within one year of homes being built
on fifty percent (50%) of the lots within the subdivision, whichever occurs
first.
   B.   Paving Improvement Agreements: The purpose of improvement guarantees is
to ensure the paving requirements of this section are met.
      1.   If the timing requirement in subsection A2 of this section is
chosen, the council shall require an improvements agreement as a condition of
final plat approval. The improvements agreement shall meet the following
standards:
         a.   The length of time of the agreement shall not exceed three (3)
years from the date of final plat approval.
         b.   Security in the amount equal to one hundred twenty five percent
(125%) of the cost of the paving shall be included. Such security shall be in
the form of a certificate of deposit, letter of credit, cash, or other
reasonable security approved by the council.
         c.   The required security shall not be reduced or paid out until all
paving requirements are met.
         d.   The agreement and security shall be satisfactory to the city
attorney as to form and manner of execution.
      2.   The subdivider shall do either of the following to meet the paving
requirement:
         a.   Pave according to the requirements of these regulations; or
         b.   Initiate a special improvement district (SID) to meet the paving
requirements of these regulations. If the SID fails, the subdivider shall
comply with subsection B2 of this section. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
11-7-9: IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Road Construction Standards: All roads shall meet the following
standards and standards contained in appendix A adopted by reference in section
11-15-1 of this title. Any deviation from these standards must be designed by a
licensed engineer and approved by the city engineer and the public works
department.
TABLE 1
STREET DESIGN STANDARDS
         Major/Minor Collectors Minor Roads
Terrain1 Ordinary Mountainous   Ordinary Mountainous
                             Major/Minor Collectors     Minor Roads
Terrain1                     Ordinary       Mountainous Ordinary    Mountainous
Right of way width           60 to 100 feet -           60 feet     -
Centerline radius on curves  300 feet       -           150 feet    -
Tangent length between       100 feet       -           50 feet     -
reverse curves
Stopping sight distance      300 feet       -           200 feet    -
Angle of intersecting        75 degrees     -           75 degrees  -
centerlines
Curb radius at intersections 25 feet        -           15 feet     -
Length of cul-de-sac         -              -           1,000 feet2 -
Outside radius on cul-de-sac -              -           50 feet     -
ROW
Grade, maximum               7 percent      -           10 percent3 -
Grade, minimum               0.5 percent    -           0.5 percent -
Maximum grade within 150
feet of intersecting         3 percent      -           -           -
centerlines
Maximum grade within 75 feet -              -           3 percent   -
of intersecting lines
 
Notes:
All standards are minimum standards unless noted.
   1.   "Mountain terrain" is defined as terrain that has a cross slope
exceeding 15 percent.
   2.   Cul-de-sac roads that provide access to unsubdivided land may exceed
this length.
   3.   Grades of over 10 percent shall not exceed 100 feet in length.
TABLE 2
PAVING AND STREET WIDTH STANDARDS
Average Daily Trips Finished Gravel Width Paving Width
Average Daily Trips            Finished Gravel Width Paving Width
Nonmountainous terrain:
    8                       -                     28 feet
    16                      -                     28 feet
    24                      -                     28 feet
    32to99                  -                     28 feet
    100+                    -                     28 feet
Major collectors and arterials -                     As approved by the council
 
   B.   Road Signs: Road signs of the size, shape, and height as approved by
the public works department, shall be placed at all intersections by the
subdivider.
   C.   Road Sign Standards: Location of road signs shall be designated on road
plans, which are submitted for review and approval.
      1.   Posts: See the city specifications (design standards and
specifications adopted by reference in section
11-15-1 of this title).
      2.   Signs: See the city specifications (design standards and
specifications adopted by reference in section
11-15-1 of this title). (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
CHAPTER 8
IMPROVEMENT PROCEDURES
SECTION:
11-8-1: Improvements
11-8-2: Approval Of Improvement Plans And Specifications
11-8-3: Acceptance Of Improvements
11-8-4: Bonding Requirements To Ensure Completion
11-8-1: IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   General: It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to comply
with the following procedures and standards for the installation of subdivision
improvements.
   B.   Plans And Specifications: Engineering and survey plans, specifications
and reports required in connection with public improvements and other elements
of the subdivision required by the council shall be prepared by an engineer or
a registered land surveyor as their respective licensing laws allow.
   C.   Scope Of Work:
      1.   The intent of these regulations is to provide standards by which the
contractor and the subdivider shall execute their respective responsibilities
and guarantee proper construction and completion in every detail of the work in
accordance with the plans, specifications and terms set forth under these
regulations.
      2.   The subdivider shall furnish the plans, specifications and typical
section for approval by the city engineer and public works department. It shall
be understood that the work to be done will not necessarily be limited to
within the right of way boundaries.
      3.   The council shall have authority to make or cause to be made any
reasonable changes, alternations, amendments and additions to the standard
specifications for subdivision roads and roads not to exceed twenty five
percent (25%) of the cost of the work. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
11-8-2: APPROVAL OF IMPROVEMENT PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS:
   A.   Improvement Procedure: After the preliminary plat has received approval
or conditional approval and before the final plat is submitted, the following
procedure for approval of improvement plans and specifications shall be
completed:
      1.   Submittal: Engineering plans and specifications for all improvements
required by these regulations shall be submitted to the public works department
and to MDEQ, if appropriate.
      2.   Review: Plans and specifications shall be locally reviewed by the
public works department and city engineer, to ascertain that the engineering
plans and specifications meet the requirements of this regulation and other
adopted rules and regulations. And, when determined by the public works
department to be necessary, by:
         a.   Planning department to ascertain that there have been no
significant deviations from the preliminary plat as approved.
         b.   Other affected local agencies and utilities.
      3.   Comments And Recommendations: Written comments and recommendations
from the local reviewing agencies shall be forwarded to the public works
department within fifteen (15) days of submission.
      4.   Approval: After comments and recommendations have been received from
local agencies and a certificate of approval of sanitary facilities has been
received from MDEQ, the director of public works shall either approve the plans
and specifications or shall inform the subdivider, in writing, as to what
additional requirements must be met to receive approval.
      5.   Preconstruction Meeting: Prior to beginning construction of required
road or pathway improvements, the subdivider or a representative, the
subdivider's engineer, and the contractor who will install the improvements
shall meet with the public works department to ensure that improvements will be
installed in accordance with approved plans and specifications.
      6.   Completion Of Improvements: Improvements shall be installed, in
accordance with the approved plans and specifications, by the subdivider and
certified by an engineer and accepted by the public works department prior to
the approval of the final plat or in accordance with the terms of an executed
improvements agreement.
      7.   Improvement Agreement: All improvement agreements shall meet the
following standards:
         a.   The length of time of the agreement shall not exceed three (3)
years from the date of final plat approval.
         b.   Security in the amount equal to one hundred twenty five percent
(125%) of the cost of the improvement shall be included. The council has the
discretion to require a second estimate of the cost of improvements. The cost
of obtaining the second estimate shall be borne by the subdivider. Such
security shall be in the form of a certificate of deposit, letter of credit,
cash, or other reasonable security approved by the council.
         c.   The agreement and security shall be satisfactory to the city
attorney as to form and manner of execution.
         d.   Security for improvements, other than internal subdivision roads,
shall be reduced only upon recommendation of the director of public works and
approval by the council, upon request by the subdivider. Requests for partial
release of security shall only be in amounts such that the security will always
equal one hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the value of the uncompleted
work, as determined by the city engineer, and such that not more than ninety
percent (90%) of the security is released prior to completion of improvements.
         e.   The improvements agreements and, when needed, the security shall
be placed in the keeping of the director of finance.
   B.   Design Standards:
      1.   Roads: All road improvements shall be designed by and constructed
under the supervision of an engineer and shall meet or exceed the standards for
the type of road and subdivision required. All road improvements shall be
reviewed and approved by the city engineer and the public works department.
         a.   Construction materials specified may be substituted with other
appropriate materials with the approval of the city engineer.
         b.   Roads within mobile home and recreational vehicle parks shall
meet or exceed the standards with the exception of the roadway width
requirements.
         c.   Following the completion of all required improvements, the
subdivider shall have an as built plan prepared. The as built plan shall be
drawn in permanent ink on the original construction plan and profile. The as
built plan shall show the actual location of all improvements as installed, and
shall clearly designate any and all changes from the approved plans and
specifications, and shall bear the signature and seal of the engineer who
prepared it.
      2.   Emergency Access Standards:
         a.   All emergency access roads shall be built to the standard
specified with the exception that the minimum width shall be fourteen feet
(14'), and a minimum of nine inches (9") of pit run shall be required.
         b.   All plans shall be submitted to the public works department for
review and approval.
         c.   Provisions for maintenance of the emergency access shall be
included.
   C.   Protection Of Existing Improvements: The subdivider, his contractors,
and suppliers shall be jointly and severally responsible that existing
improvements are not damaged or rendered less useful by the operation of the
subdivider, his contractors, or suppliers. This provision is intended to
preclude damage to existing roads and drainage systems. The council may
instruct the subdivider as to the roads to be used for access by construction
equipment, and the subdivider shall be responsible for enforcement of this
instruction upon his contractors and their suppliers. The council may require
the subdivider to post a surety to guarantee repair of damages.
   D.   Control Of Work; Requirements Of Engineer: During the course of
construction, at the completion of each phase of the project, the engineer will
be required to submit a statement that the improvements have been inspected and
found to have been constructed in accordance with plans and specifications
approved by the city engineer and public works department. The engineer shall
notify and receive written approval or disapproval from the city engineer for
any changes in approved plans or specifications.
   E.   Conformity With Plans And Specifications: All work performed and all
materials furnished shall be in substantial conformity with lines, grades,
cross sections, dimensions, and material requirements. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
11-8-3: ACCEPTANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   Acceptance Of Subdivision Roads And Bridges To City Road System:
      1.   City Standards: Before any subdivision road or bridge can be
accepted into the city road system by the council, it shall be built to meet or
exceed the standards set by the city. Existing roads or bridges shall be
improved to meet or exceed the standards set by the city.
      2.   Maintenance Of Roads: If a public subdivision road has been built to
a paved standard approved by the public works department, the city will then
accept responsibility for maintenance and snow removal of that subdivision
road. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
11-8-4: BONDING REQUIREMENTS TO ENSURE COMPLETION:
   A.   Completion Required: The subdivider shall complete required
improvements within the subdivision prior to the approval of final plat, except
as provided in these regulations.
   B.   Bond: In lieu of the completion of the construction of any public
improvements prior to the approval of a final plat, the subdivider shall
provide, or cause to be provided, a bond or other reasonable security, in an
amount and with surety and conditions satisfactory to the council, providing
for and securing the construction and installation of the improvements within a
period specified by the council and expressed in the bonds or other security.
The council shall reduce bond requirements commensurate with the completion of
improvements, subject to these regulations. The bond shall be placed in the
keeping of the city director of finance.
   C.   Incremental Payment Or Guarantee Plan: In lieu of requiring a bond or
other means of security for the construction or installation of all the
required public improvements, the council may approve an incremental payment or
guarantee plan. The improvements in a prior increment must be completed or the
payment or guarantee of payment for the costs of the improvements incurred in a
prior improvement must be satisfied before development of future increments.
(Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
CHAPTER 9
ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
SECTION:
11-9-1: Responsibility To Submit
11-9-2: Exemptions
11-9-3: Environmental Assessment
11-9-4: Contents Of Environmental Description Contents
11-9-5: Summary Of Probable Impacts Criteria
11-9-6: Community Impact Report Contents
11-9-1: RESPONSIBILITY TO SUBMIT:
It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to submit the information
required by this chapter with the preliminary plat. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
11-9-2: EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   Criteria For Waiver: The requirement for preparing an environmental
assessment pursuant to Montana Code Annotated subsection 76-3-504(1), shall be
waived when:
      1.   The proposed subdivision is totally within an area covered by a
growth policy adopted pursuant to Montana Code Annotated section 76-1-606.
      2.   City zoning pursuant to a growth policy has been adopted pursuant to
Montana Code Annotated sections 76-2-301 through 76-2-328.
      3.   A long range development program of the public works projects has
been adopted pursuant to Montana Code Annotated subsection 76-1-601(4).
      4.   The proposed subdivision is the first minor subdivision from a tract
of record.
   B.   Criteria For Granting Variance: The planning board may grant a variance
to exempt the subdivider from the completion of all or any portion of the
environmental assessment when:
      1.   The proposed subdivision is in an area covered by a growth policy
adopted pursuant to Montana Code Annotated sections 76-1-101 through 76-1-606
and the proposed subdivision will be in compliance with the policy.
      2.   The subdivision will contain fewer than ten (10) parcels and less
than twenty (20) acres.
         a.   The subdivider may request the variance for an exemption as a
part of the preapplication process.
         b.   When such variance for an exemption is granted, the planning
board shall prepare and certify a written statement of the reasons for granting
the variance for an exemption. A copy of this statement shall accompany the
preliminary plat of the subdivision when it is submitted for review. (Ord.
2004-1, 4-5-2004; amd. 2009 Code)
11-9-3: CONTENTS OF ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT:
The environmental assessment must accompany the preliminary plat and must
include the required information.
   A.   Major Subdivision: An environmental assessment must accompany the
preliminary plat and must include the following information:
      1.   A description of every body or stream of surface water that may be
affected by the proposed subdivision, together with available ground water
information, and a description of the topography, vegetation, and wildlife use
within the area of the proposed subdivision as required under the environmental
description contents.
      2.   A summary of the probable impacts of the proposed subdivision based
on the criteria described in Montana Code Annotated section 76-3-608.
      3.   A community impact report containing a statement of anticipated
needs of the proposed subdivision for local services, including education and
business; roads and maintenance; water, sewage, and solid waste facilities;
fire and police protection.
      4.   Additional relevant and reasonable information related to the
applicable regulatory criteria adopted under Montana Code Annotated section 76-
3-501.
   B.   Second Or Subsequent Minor Subdivision: An environmental assessment
must accompany the preliminary plat and must include the following information:
      1.   A summary of the probable impacts of the proposed subdivision based
on the criteria described in Montana Code Annotated section 76-3-608.
   C.   First Minor Subdivision From Tract Of Record: The first minor
subdivision from a tract of record is exempt from any environmental assessment
requirement 1 . (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
 
Notes
1 1. MCA § 76-3-609(3).
11-9-4: ENVIRONMENTAL DESCRIPTION CONTENTS:
   A.   Surface Water:
      1.   Mapping: Locate on a plat overlay or sketch map all surface waters
and the delineated floodways which may affect or be affected by the proposed
subdivision, including:
         a.   Natural water systems such as streams, lakes, rivers, or marshes.
         b.   Artificial water systems such as canals, ditches, aqueducts,
reservoirs, irrigation or drainage systems.
      2.   Description:
         a.   Describe all surface waters which may affect or be affected by
the proposed subdivision including name, approximate size, present use, and
time of year when water is present.
         b.   Describe proximity of proposed construction (such as buildings,
sewer systems, roads) to surface waters.
      3.   Water Body Alteration: Describe any existing or proposed stream bank
or shoreline alterations or any proposed construction or modification of lake
beds or stream channels. Provide information on location, extent, type, and
purpose of alteration. A 310 permit from the Gallatin conservation district
shall be required for any alterations to perennial streams.
      4.   Wetlands: When the soil survey maps indicate hydric soils are
present, the subdivider shall provide a wetlands investigation completed by a
certified consultant, using the U.S. army corps of engineers' wetlands manual.
If the investigation indicates the presence of wetlands, a wetlands delineation
shall be shown on the final plat. If any construction or changes are proposed
which require a 404 permit, the subdivider shall provide evidence of such
permit to the planning department.
   B.   Ground Water:
      1.   Depth: Establish the seasonal minimum and maximum depth to the water
table, dates on which these depths were determined, and the location and depth
of all known aquifers which may be affected by the proposed subdivision. The
high water table shall be determined from tests taken during the period of
major concern as specified, in writing, by the health department. Specific
locations for test holes may also be determined by the health department.
      2.   Steps To Avoid Degradation: Describe any steps necessary to avoid
the degradation of ground water and ground water recharge areas.
   C.   Geology; Soils; Slopes:
      1.   Geologic Hazards: Identify geologic hazards affecting the proposed
subdivision which could result in property damage or personal injury due to
rock falls or slides; land, mud or snow slides; surface subsidence (e.g.,
settling or sinking); and seismic activity.
      2.   Protective Measures: Explain what measures will be taken to prevent
or materially lessen the danger of future property damage or injury due to any
of the hazards referred to above.
      3.   Unusual Features: Provide a statement describing any unusual soil,
topographic or geologic conditions on the property which limit the capability
for building or excavation using ordinary and reasonable construction
techniques. The statement should address conditions such as shallow bedrock,
high water table, unstable or expansive soil conditions, and slope. On a map
identify any slopes in excess of fifteen percent (15%) grade.
      4.   Soils Map: The subdivision shall be overlaid on the Gallatin County
soil survey maps obtained from the NRCS. The maps are one to twenty four
thousand (1:24,000) scale. These maps may be copied without permission.
However, enlargement of these maps could cause misunderstanding of the detail
of mapping. Soils were mapped using a minimum delineation of five (5) acres.
Soils reports were intended to alert subdividers to possible problems and the
need for a more detailed on site investigation. The subdivider shall provide
the following soil reports which can be obtained from the NRCS:
         a.   The physical properties and engineering indexes for each soil
type.
         b.   Soil limitations for sanitary facilities, building site
development, and water features for each soil type.
         c.   Hydric soils report for each soil type. If hydric soils are
present, the subdivider shall provide a wetlands investigation by a certified
consultant, using the U.S. army corps of engineers' wetlands manual.
         d.   The subdivider shall provide any special design methods planned
to overcome the above limitations.
      5.   Cuts And Fills:
         a.   Describe the location and amount of any cut or fill three (3) or
more feet in depth. These cuts and fills should be indicated on a plat overlay
or sketch map.
         b.   Where cuts or fills are necessary, describe any plans to prevent
erosion and to promote revegetation such as replacement of topsoil and grading.
   D.   Vegetation:
      1.   Vegetation Map: On a plat overlay or sketch map:
         a.   Indicate the distribution of the major vegetation types such as
marsh, grassland, shrub, coniferous forest, deciduous forest, mixed forest.
         b.   Identify critical plant communities such as stream bank or
shoreline vegetation; vegetation on steep, unstable slopes; vegetation on soils
highly susceptible to wind or water erosion.
         c.   The subdivider shall have any noxious weeds identified and their
location mapped by a person with experience in weed management and
knowledgeable in weed identification.
      2.   Protective Measures: Describe measures to preserve trees and
critical plant communities (e.g., design and location of roads, lots and open
spaces).
   E.   Wildlife:
      1.   Species: Describe species of fish and wildlife which use the area
affected by the proposed subdivision.
      2.   Critical Areas: Identify on a plat overlay or sketch map of the
proposed subdivision any known critical or "key" wildlife areas, such as big
game winter range, waterfowl nesting areas, habitat for rare or endangered
species, wetlands.
      3.   Protective Measures: Describe any proposed measures to protect or
enhance wildlife habitat or to minimize degradation (e.g., keeping building and
roads back from shorelines; setting aside marshlands as undeveloped open
space).
      4.   Department Of Fish, Wildlife And Parks: The subdivider shall discuss
the impact of the proposed development on fish and wildlife with the department
of fish, wildlife and parks (FWP). The subdivider shall provide a written
statement outlining any recommendation of FWP and any mitigation planned to
overcome any adverse impacts.
   F.   Historical Features:
      1.   Affected Areas: Describe and locate on a plat overlay or sketch map
any known or possible historic, paleontological, archeological or cultural
sites, structures, or objects which may be affected by the proposed
subdivision.
      2.   Protective Measures: Describe any plans to protect such sites or
properties.
      3.   Impact Discussion: The subdivider shall discuss the impact of the
proposed development on any historic features, and the need for inventory,
study and/or preservation with the state historic preservation office (SHPO).
The subdivider shall provide a written statement outlining any recommendations
of SHPO and any plans for inventory, study and/or preservation and any
mitigation planned to overcome any adverse impacts.
   G.   Visual Impact: Describe any efforts to visually blend development
activities with the existing environment (e.g., provisions for appropriate
building materials, colors, road design, and underground utilities and
revegetation or earthworks). (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
11-9-5: SUMMARY OF PROBABLE IMPACTS CRITERIA:
   A.   Agriculture: The effect on agriculture and proposed mitigation of
impacts.
      1.   Number of acres in type of production.
      2.   Agricultural operations in the vicinity.
      3.   Additional information as needed. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
   B.   Agricultural Water: The effect on agricultural water user facilities
and other water conveyance facilities and proposed mitigation of adverse
impacts. The terms "agricultural water user facility" and "water conveyance
facility" are defined in chapter 1 of this title.
      1.   Type, description, ownership, and users of facilities.
      2.   Describe conflicts the subdivision would create with agricultural
water user facilities and water conveyance facilities (e.g., residential
development creating problems for operating and maintaining irrigation systems)
and whether such facilities would be more subject to vandalism or damage
because of the subdivision.
      3.   Describe possible nuisance problems that the subdivision would
generate with regard to agricultural water user facilities and water conveyance
facilities (e.g., safety hazards to residents or water problems from irrigation
ditches, headgates, siphons, sprinkler systems, or other agricultural water
user facilities or water conveyance facilities).
      4.   Where the water users and/or water conveyance facility's authorized
representatives have provided the subdivider with written comments, those
comments shall be submitted with the preliminary plat application.
      5.   Additional information as needed. (Ord. 2011-2, 5-16-2011)
   C.   Local Services: The effect on local services and proposed mitigation of
impacts.
      1.   Methods of water supply and sewage disposal.
      2.   Provision of law enforcement services and fire protection services,
and projected costs to providers.
      3.   Costs of upgrading or extending off site public roads. Costs of
annual road maintenance.
      4.   Provision of educational services and projected costs to providers.
      5.   Current amount of local property taxes, projected amount land and
improvements will pay in local property taxes.
      6.   Provision of utilities and easements.
      7.   Additional information as needed.
   D.   Natural Environment: The effect on the natural environment and proposed
mitigation of impacts.
      1.   Road drainage and erosion.
      2.   Terrain and surface runoff effects.
      3.   Grading and drainage plan.
      4.   Effects on native vegetation, soils, quality or quantity of surface
or ground waters.
      5.   Weed control.
      6.   Additional information as needed.
   E.   Wildlife And Wildlife Habitat: The effect on wildlife and wildlife
habitat and proposed mitigation of impacts.
      1.   Proximity to area of significant wildlife habitat or critical
wildlife areas.
      2.   Expected effects of pets and human activity on wildlife.
      3.   Effects on fisheries.
      4.   Effects on public access to public lands, trails, hunting or fishing
areas.
      5.   Additional information as needed.
   F.   Public Health And Safety: The effect on public health and safety and
proposed mitigation of impacts.
      1.   Potential natural hazards, i.e., flooding, snow or rock slides, high
winds, wildfire, excessive slopes, etc.
      2.   Potential manmade hazards, i.e., high voltage power lines, high
pressure gas lines, nearby industrial or mining activity, high traffic volumes,
lack of fire protection, inadequate traffic safety, etc.
      3.   Additional information as needed. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
11-9-6: COMMUNITY IMPACT REPORT CONTENTS:
   A.   Water Supply:
      1.   Description Of Use: Describe how water will be provided for
household use and fire protection.
      2.   Capacity: Indicate the number of gallons per day of water the
proposed subdivision will require and whether the water supply is sufficient to
meet the needs of the anticipated, final population of the subdivision. Are
there any anticipated effects on existing water systems or wells within the
area?
      3.   State Standards: Indicate whether the plans for water supply meet
the standards of MDEQ for quality, quantity and construction criteria.
      4.   Existing Public System: If the subdivider proposes to connect to an
existing water system:
         a.   Identify and describe that system.
         b.   Provide written evidence that permission to connect to that
system has been obtained.
         c.   State the approximate distance to that system.
         d.   State the cost of extending or improving the existing water
system to service the proposed development.
         e.   Show that the existing water system is adequate to serve the
proposed subdivision.
      5.   New Public System: If a separate public water system is to be
installed, discuss:
         a.   Who is to install that system and when it will be completed.
         b.   Who will administer and maintain the system at the beginning of
subdivision development and when subdivision is completed.
         c.   Provision of evidence that the water supply is adequate in
quantity, quality, and dependability.
      6.   Individual System: If individual water systems are to be provided,
describe the adequacy of supply of the ground water for individual wells or
cisterns and how this was determined.
   B.   Sewage Disposal:
      1.   Method: Describe the proposed method of sewage disposal.
      2.   Capacity: Indicate the number of gallons of effluent per day which
will be generated by the proposed subdivision at its full occupancy, whether
the proposed method of sewage disposal is sufficient to meet the anticipated
final needs of the subdivision and whether it meets the standards of MDEQ.
      3.   Existing System: If the development will be connected to an existing
public sewer system, include:
         a.   A description of that system and approximate distance from
proposed subdivision.
         b.   Written evidence that permission to connect to that system has
been obtained.
      4.   New System: If a new public sewage disposal system is to be
installed, discuss:
         a.   When the system will be completed, and how it will be financed.
         b.   Who is to administer and maintain the proposed system at the
beginning of subdivision development and when development is completed.
   C.   Solid Waste Disposal:
      1.   Collector System: Describe the proposed system of solid waste
collection and disposal for the subdivision including:
         a.   Evidence that existing systems for collection and facilities for
disposal are available and can handle the anticipated additional volume.
         b.   A description of the proposed alternative where no existing
system is available.
         c.   Whether the proposed method of solid waste disposal meets the
standards of MDEQ.
   D.   Roads:
      1.   Description: Describe any proposed new public or private access
roads or substantial improvements of existing public or private access roads.
      2.   Access To Arterial: Discuss whether any of the individual lots or
tracts have access directly to arterial roads; and if so, the reason access was
not provided by means of a road within the subdivision.
      3.   Modification Of Existing Roads: Explain any proposed closure or
modification of existing roads.
      4.   Dust: Describe provisions considered for dust control on roads.
      5.   Pollution And Erosion: Explain how road maintenance will be provided
to meet MDEQ guidelines for prevention of water pollution and erosion.
      6.   Installation And Maintenance: Indicate who will pay the cost of
installing and maintaining dedicated and private roadways.
      7.   Traffic Generation: Discuss how much daily traffic will be generated
on existing local and neighborhood roads and main arterials, when the
subdivision is fully developed.
      8.   Capacity: Indicate the capacity of existing and proposed roads to
safely handle any increased traffic. Describe any anticipated increased
maintenance that will be necessary due to increased traffic and who will pay
the cost of maintenance.
      9.   Year Round Access: Explain whether year round access by conventional
automobile will be available over legal rights of way to the subdivision and to
all lots and common facilities within the subdivision.
      10.   Private Access: Indicate ownership of any private access to the
subdivision.
   E.   Utilities:
      1.   Affected Utilities: Indicate whether the subdivision preliminary
plat has been submitted to affected utilities for review; if so, include a copy
of response.
      2.   Furnishing, Placement Of Utilities: Include a description of:
         a.   The method of furnishing electric, natural gas or telephone
service, where provided.
         b.   The extent to which these utilities will be placed underground.
         c.   Estimated completion of each utility installation.
         d.   The subdivider shall provide a written statement from the utility
companies that the proposed subdivision can be provided with service.
   F.   Emergency Services:
      1.   Describe the emergency services available to the subdivision such
as:
         a.   Fire protection. Is the proposed subdivision in an urban or rural
fire district? If not, will one be formed or extended? In absence of a fire
district, what fire protection procedures are planned?
         b.   Police protection.
         c.   Ambulance service.
         d.   Medical services.
      2.   Give the estimated response time of the above services.
      3.   Can the needs of the proposed subdivision for each of the above
services be met by present personnel and facilities?
         a.   If not, what additional expense would be necessary to make these
services adequate?
         b.   At whose expense would the necessary improvements be made?
         c.   Indicate whether the subdivision preliminary plat has been
submitted to affected above agencies; if so, include copy of response.
         d.   The subdivider shall discuss the impact of the proposed
development on the provision of emergency services with each of the providers.
The subdivider shall provide a written statement outlining the recommendations
of the providers and any mitigation planned to overcome any inability to
provide services or adverse impacts.
   G.   Schools:
      1.   Available Facilities: Describe the available educational facilities
which would service this subdivision.
      2.   Schoolchildren: Estimate the number of schoolchildren that will be
generated from the proposed subdivision.
      3.   Accommodation Of Concerns; Mitigation: The subdivider shall discuss
the impact of the proposed development on the provision of educational services
with the administrator(s) of the appropriate school system(s). The subdivider
shall provide a written statement outlining whether the increased enrollment
can be accommodated by the present personnel and facilities and by the existing
school bus system, any recommendations of the administrator(s), and any
mitigation planned to overcome any adverse impacts of the proposed development
on the provision of educational services.
   H.   Land Use:
      1.   Planning: Describe comprehensive planning and/or land use
regulations covering the proposed subdivision or adjacent land and if located
near the jurisdictional area of an incorporated city or town, whether
annexation is proposed.
      2.   Public Lands: Describe how the subdivision will affect access to any
public lands. Where public lands are adjacent to or near the proposed
development, describe present and anticipated uses for those lands (e.g.,
grazing, logging, recreation, etc.).
      3.   Adjacent Land Use: Describe the effect of the subdivision on
adjacent land use.
      4.   Hazards: Describe any health or safety hazards on or near the
subdivision, such as mining activity or potential subsidence, high pressure gas
lines, dilapidated structures or high voltage power lines. Any such conditions
should be accurately described and their origin and location identified. List
any provisions that will be made to mitigate these hazards.
      5.   Nuisance: Describe any on site or off site land uses creating a
nuisance, such as unpleasant odors, unusual noises, dust or smoke.
   I.   Housing:
      1.   Indicate the proposed use(s) and number of lots or spaces in each:
         a.   Residential, single-family.
         b.   Residential, multiple-family. Types of multiple-family structures
and numbers of each (e.g., duplex, fourplex).
         c.   Planned unit development (number of units).
         d.   Condominium (number of units).
         e.   Mobile home park.
         f.   Recreational vehicle park.
         g.   Commercial or industrial.
         h.   Other (please describe).
      2.   Is the subdivision planned as a second home or recreational
subdivision?
   J.   Parks And Recreation Facilities: Describe park and recreation
facilities to be provided within the proposed subdivision and other
recreational facilities which will serve the subdivision.
   K.   Taxation:
      1.   Acreage: Include a list of the number of acres in each land
assessment classification prior to subdivision.
      2.   Existing Taxes: Describe any existing tax and existing or proposed
special assessments which will affect the subdivision.
      3.   Anticipated Taxes: Estimate the increased amount of taxes that will
be generated by the subdivision at full development using existing valuations
and mill levies.
   L.   Accessibility Of Service Systems And Facilities: Provide total
distances over road types to each of the following:
 
                    Unimproved Graded Graveled Paved Total Town Where Located
Fire protection
Police protection
Hospital facilities
Elementary schools
High school
 
   M.   Effects On Agriculture: Supply the following information:
      1.   The number of acres in production of crops.
      2.   The productivity of the land.
      3.   Whether or not the property is part of a viable farm unit. Was the
property under production during the last regular season?
      4.   The other uses of land in the general locality.
      5.   What measures will be taken, if any, to control family pets.
      6.   Describe any existing fence lines around the subdivision boundary
which protect agricultural lands under an ownership other than that of the
subdivider, and describe any measures which will be taken to ensure that the
owners of the subdivision will share with the owner of the agricultural lands
in the continued maintenance of the fence.
   N.   Effects On Agricultural Water User Facilities:
      1.   Type, description of facility.
      2.   Ownership, users of facility. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
CHAPTER 10
FLOOD HAZARD EVALUATION 1
SECTION:
11-10-1: Use Restricted
11-10-2: Procedure
11-10-3: Waiver Of Requirement
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 12 of this code.
11-10-1: USE RESTRICTED:
Land subject to being flooded by a "flood of 100-year frequency" as defined by
Montana Code Annotated title 76, chapter 5, or land deemed to be subject to
flooding by the council, shall not be subdivided for building or residential
purposes, or other uses that may increase or aggravate flood hazards to life,
health or welfare, or that may be prohibited by state or local floodplain or
floodway regulations. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
11-10-2: PROCEDURE:
   A.   Evaluation Required: If any portion of a proposed subdivision is within
two thousand (2,000) horizontal feet and less than twenty (20) vertical feet of
a watercourse draining an area of twenty five (25) square miles or more, and no
official floodplain or floodway delineation (study) of the stream has been
made, the subdivider shall provide, in detail, the calculated 100-year
frequency water surface elevations and/or 100-year floodplain boundaries. This
detailed information shall be performed by a licensed professional engineer
experienced in this field of work.
   B.   Submission Of Report: This information shall be submitted at the time
of preliminary plat application. This information may be submitted, upon the
request of the commission, to the floodplain management section, water
resources division, department of natural resources and conservation (DNRC) for
review and concurrence.
   C.   Detailed Information: The detailed information to be submitted, shall
include the following:
      1.   Certification: Certification by a registered professional engineer.
      2.   Overall Plan View: An overall scaled plan view (project map) with
identified scale for vertical and horizontal distance showing the following:
         a.   Watercourse.
         b.   Floodplain boundaries.
         c.   Location of property.
         d.   Contours.
         e.   Cross sections.
         f.   Bridges or other contractions in the floodplain.
         g.   USGS gauging stations, if any.
      3.   Bench Marks: The location and elevation of temporary bench mark
established within the subdivision and referenced to mean sea level with
appropriate elevation adjustment.
      4.   Cross Sectional Information 1 :
         a.   Cross section elevations and stations should be determined at
points representing significant breaks in ground slope and at changes in the
hydraulic characteristics of the floodplain (e.g., points where ground cover,
soil, or rock conditions change). Elevations must be reported in NAVD 88 or
NGVD 29 datum.
         b.   Each cross section shall cross the entire floodplain. The cross
section alignment should be perpendicular to the general flow of the
watercourse (approximately perpendicular to contour line). Occasionally, wide
floodplains require a dogleg alignment to be perpendicular to the anticipated
flow lines. Shots should be taken at the water's edge and measurement taken (if
elevation shots cannot be taken) to determine the channel bottom shape. Cross
sections shall be accurately located on a USGS seven and one-half (71/2) minute
quad sheet.
         c.   The number of cross sections needed and the distance between
cross sections will vary depending on the site, the slope of the watercourse,
the slope of the channel, and the hydraulic characteristics of the reach. A
minimum of four (4) cross sections are required over the entire reach with at
least two (2) cross sections at the property where the elevations are desired.
Additional cross sections must be taken at bridges, control structures, or
natural constrictions in topography.
      5.   Bridges: Descriptions and sketches of all bridges within the reach,
showing unobstructed waterway openings and elevations.
      6.   Water Surface: Elevation of the water surface is to be determined by
survey as part of each valley cross section.
      7.   Supporting Documentation: Engineering report of computer
computations, calculations, and assumptions that may include:
         a.   Hydrology (research of published hydrology or calculations
showing how hydrology was derived).
         b.   Input files (hard copy and on diskette).
         c.   Output files (diskette only). (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
 
Notes
  1. Photogrammetric methods may be used in lieu of cross sections whenever
1 appropriate, and when the use has been reviewed and approved in advance by
  the city engineer.
11-10-3: WAIVER OF REQUIREMENT:
The council shall waive this requirement where the subdivider contacts the
water resources division, NRCS, and that agency states, in writing, that data
indicates that the proposed subdivision is not in the "flood hazard area" as
defined in this chapter. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
CHAPTER 11
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD)
SECTION:
11-11-1: Intent
11-11-2: Procedure And Submittal
11-11-3: PUD Criteria
11-11-1: INTENT:
The intent of this chapter is to provide flexibility in certain of the design
and improvement standards. By using a planned unit development (PUD) which
clusters development, subdivisions may be planned so as to promote creativity
in subdivision design; to provide economies in the supply of public services;
to enhance and preserve open space and unique natural features; and to enable
the planning of a tract for a single use or for a harmonious combination of
uses, such as a mixture of residential and commercial. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
11-11-2: PROCEDURE AND SUBMITTAL:
The requirements of these regulations and title 10, chapter 4 of this code
shall be followed, with the addition of the following information:
   A.   Preapplication Plan:
      1.   A layout plan showing the proposed location and use of lots and
structures and the location and number of parking spaces, if appropriate.
      2.   A description of measures to be taken to assure permanence and
maintenance of open space and other facilities to be under common ownership.
      3.   A description of all proposed waivers or modifications from the
design and improvement standards.
      4.   Any additional, reasonable information.
   B.   Preliminary Plat:
      1.   A schedule showing the time when improvements required by these
regulations will be completed where a plan calls for a development time of
eighteen (18) months or more for improvements.
      2.   If common property is to be deeded to a property owner's
association, the subdivider shall establish a property owner's association and
submit a draft of all covenants and legal documents which will govern the
association.
      3.   A description of all proposed waivers or modifications from the
design and improvement standards.
      4.   Any additional information found to be necessary during
preapplication plan review. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
11-11-3: PUD CRITERIA:
The council may establish or approve a PUD and waive or modify the design and
improvement standards for lots, blocks, roads, and parks, if the following
criteria are met or exceeded 1 :
   A.   Conformance Required: The plan shall conform to the intended purposes
of these regulations, the special intent of this chapter, and one or more of
the following:
      1.   Preserve, to the maximum extent possible, the natural
characteristics of the land; including topography, vegetation, streams and
other bodies of water.
      2.   Preserve productive agricultural land.
      3.   Protect important historic sites or structures or areas of important
wildlife habitat.
      4.   Provide economies in the provision of roads and public improvements.
   B.   Site Size: The total site size, as measured by the boundary perimeter
of the PUD, shall be appropriate to the proposed area and design.
   C.   Open Space: Each PUD shall provide an area for dedicated park or common
open space appropriate in size to the proposed development and design; however,
such area shall not be less than the amount of land required to be dedicated
under these regulations for the area of the subdivision, exclusive of all other
dedications.
   D.   Landscaping: Landscaping may be required between building sites or on
the PUD perimeter where the council deems it necessary to provide buffer
screening between different land uses.
   E.   Parking Areas: Adequate parking areas shall be required for the
proposed uses of the development, as determined appropriate by the council.
      1.   Collector roads designed to furnish access to adjacent areas are
dedicated.
      2.   Adequate responsibility for the improvement and maintenance of
private roads is assumed by the property owners' association.
      3.   Road improvement specifications are met in compliance with these
regulations.
   F.   Other Regulations: Where there are other ordinances or regulations
which require compliance to PUD or other minimum standards, this chapter does
not authorize the council to waive or modify such ordinances or regulations.
(Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 10, chapter 4 of this code.
CHAPTER 12
SUBDIVISIONS CREATED BY RENT OR LEASE AND CONDOMINIUMS
SECTION:
11-12-1: Survey Requirements; Review And Approval
11-12-2: Procedure
11-12-3: Plans And Data
11-12-4: Standards For Mobile Home Parks And Recreational Vehicle Parks
11-12-5: Standards For Condominiums
11-12-1: SURVEY REQUIREMENTS; REVIEW AND APPROVAL:
Subdivisions created by rent or lease (e.g., mobile home parks) and
condominiums are exempt from the survey requirements of these regulations, but
must be submitted for review and be approved before possession of any portion
thereof may be conveyed in any manner. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
11-12-2: PROCEDURE:
The procedures as outlined in the major subdivision chapter and title 10,
chapter 8 of this code shall be followed except as follows:
   A.   Final Approval Procedure:
      1.   The subdivider shall submit an original and three (3) copies of the
plan, with required revisions, together with all signed certificates and
documents as required.
      2.   Before any portion of a rental or lease subdivision may be rented or
leased, the subdivider shall have installed all required improvements.
Preliminary plans, profiles, tentative grades and specifications for proposed
improvements shall be submitted to the public works department for approval
prior to the construction of improvements. The council may provide for
inspection of all required improvements in order to assure conformance with the
approved construction plans and specifications.
      3.   The planning department shall review the plan to ascertain that all
conditions of preliminary approval have been met.
      4.   The council shall examine the plan within thirty (30) days of the
date of submission and shall approve it if it conforms to the conditions set
forth on the preliminary plan and the terms of this title. If approved, the
council shall so certify in a printed certificate on the plan and provide the
subdivider with one copy thereof. The original shall be filed with the public
works department and one copy of the approved plan shall be retained in the
planning department. If disapproved, the council shall write the subdivider a
letter stating the reasons therefor. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
11-12-3: PLANS AND DATA:
Plans and supplemental information required in these regulations and title 10,
chapter 8 of this code shall be submitted with the following exemptions and
additions:
   A.   Boundary Lines: All plans may show approximate boundary, lot, right of
way, or other lines including the plan submitted for final approval.
   B.   Documents And Certificates: Only the following documents and
certificates shall be submitted with or shown on the preliminary plan (draft or
copy) and the plan submitted for final approval (final form and signed):
      1.   Covenants, restrictions, or lease and rental agreements.
      2.   Encroachment permits or a letter indicating intent to issue a permit
where new roads, easements, and other subdivision improvements intersect or are
located within city, county, or state highways or roads.
      3.   Certificates of installation of improvements by engineer.
      4.   Certificate of the council.
      5.   A letter of approval from the council where a zoning change is
necessary (with plan for final approval only).
      6.   Certificate of approval by MDEQ (with plan for final approval only).
(Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
11-12-4: STANDARDS FOR MOBILE HOME PARKS AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS:
The design and improvement standards of the regulations of title 10, chapter 8
of this code shall be complied with. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
11-12-5: STANDARDS FOR CONDOMINIUMS:
   A.   Condominium Developments: Condominium developments shall meet the
minimum standards of the MDEQ, adopted pursuant to Montana Code Annotated
sections 76-4-101 through 76-4-128.
   B.   Design And Improvement Standards: The design and improvement standards
of these regulations shall be complied with, except where noted below.
   C.   Exemptions: Subdivision review and approval requirements shall not
apply where:
      1.   Condominium buildings are being constructed on land divided in
compliance with the act.
      2.   An adopted zoning ordinance permits multiple-family use of the
density proposed in the growth policy.
   D.   Unit Ownership Act: Condominium development shall comply with all
provisions of the unit ownership act, Montana Code Annotated sections 70-23-102
through 70-23-703, and all regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
   E.   Other Requirements: The subdivider shall comply with all other
standards and requirements of these regulations and other local and state
regulations, including title 10 of this code. Condominium applications shall
show the proposed location of buildings, snow storage, parking, and internal
access. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
CHAPTER 13
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
SECTION:
11-13-1: Variances
11-13-2: Amendments
11-13-3: Administration
11-13-4: Fees
11-13-5: Corrections, Amendments Or Vacation Of Recorded Final Plats
11-13-6: Inaccurate Or Incomplete Information
11-13-7: Changes To Conditions After Approval
11-13-8: Additional Conditions After Approval
11-13-9: Waivers
11-13-1: VARIANCES:
   A.   Hardship: The council may grant reasonable variances from these
regulations where it is found that strict compliance would result in undue
hardship and such strict compliance is not essential to the public health,
safety, and general welfare.
   B.   Procedure: The subdivider shall include with the submission of the
preliminary plat a written statement describing the requested variance and the
facts of hardship upon which the request is based. The council shall then
consider each variance at the public hearing on the preliminary plat.
   C.   Conditions: In granting variances, the council may require such
conditions as will, in its judgment, secure the objectives of these
regulations.
   D.   Statement Of Facts: When any such variance is granted, the motion of
approval of the proposed subdivision shall contain a statement describing the
variance and the facts and conditions upon which the issuance of the variance
is based.
   E.   Planned Unit Development: Where the standards and requirements of these
regulations may be modified by the council in the case of a planned unit
development, no application for a variance shall be necessary. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-
5-2004)
11-13-2: AMENDMENTS:
   A.   Power To Amend: For the purpose of providing for the public health,
safety, and general welfare, the council may amend the provisions of these
regulations.
   B.   Hearing: Provided further, that such amendments shall not become
effective until after a public hearing has been held before the council, legal
notice of which shall have been given in a newspaper of general circulation in
the city not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than thirty (30) days prior
to the date of hearing.
   C.   Amendments To Act: The council may hold a public hearing for amendments
to these regulations because of amendments to the act and the administrative
rules of Montana. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
11-13-3: ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Violation: Any person, firm, corporation or other entity who shall
violate the provisions of this title shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   B.   Penalties: Any violation of the provisions of this title is an offense
punishable by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisonment in the county jail for not
more than three (3) months, or by both fine and imprisonment. Each sale or
transfer, or offer of sale or transfer, of each separate parcel of land in
violation of any provision of this title shall be deemed a separate and
distinct offense.
   C.   Enforcement:
      1.   Every final plat must be filed for record with the clerk and
recorder before title to the subdivided land can be sold or transferred in any
manner or offered for sale or transfer.
      2.   If illegal transfers or offers of any manner are made, the city
attorney shall commence action to enjoin further sales or transfers or offers
of sale or transfer and to compel compliance with all provisions of these
regulations, the cost of such action being imposed against the person or entity
committing the illegal act. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
11-13-4: FEES:
Review fees shall be paid to the planning department for each subdivision plat
reviewed according to the fee schedule in these regulations (see appendix
adopted by reference in section
11-15-1 of this title). (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
11-13-5: CORRECTIONS, AMENDMENTS OR VACATION OF RECORDED FINAL PLATS:
   A.   Correction Of Errors:
      1.   Corrections of errors that, in the council's opinion, will not
materially alter the plat may be made by the submission of a corrected final
plat for the council's approval. The plat may be filed under the procedures for
first minor subdivision plats.
      2.   The plat shall be entitled "amended plat of the (name of
subdivision) subdivision" and the reason for the correction shall be stated on
the face of the plat.
   B.   Material Alterations:
      1.   Amendments that materially alter the final plat or any portion
thereof, shall be made by the filing of an amended plat showing all
alterations. The amended plat shall be approved by the council under the major
or minor subdivision procedure as is appropriate. Prior to such approval, the
amended plat shall be reviewed by the planning department. The council may not
approve an amendment which will place the plat in nonconformance with the
standards contained herein unless a public hearing is held on the plat and a
written variance from the standards issued pursuant to procedures contained
herein for such variances.
      2.   The plat shall be entitled "amended plat of (the name) subdivision",
and the reason for the amendment shall be stated on the face of the plat.
   C.   Vacating Recorded Plats:
      1.   Any plat prepared and recorded as provided herein required may be
vacated, either in whole or in part, as provided by Montana Code Annotated
sections 7-5-2501, 7-5-2502, 7-14-2617 and 7-14-4115; and subsections 7-14-2616
(1) and (2), and 7-14-4114(1) and (2). Upon vacation, the council or the
district court, as provided in Montana Code Annotated section 7-5-2502, shall
determine to which properties the title to the streets and alley of the vacated
portions shall revert. The council or the district court, as provided in
Montana Code Annotated section 7-5-2502, shall take into consideration the
previous platting; the manner in which the right of way was originally
dedicated, granted, or conveyed; the reasons stated in the petition requesting
the vacation; the parties requesting the vacation; and any agreements between
the adjacent property owners regarding the use of the vacated area. The title
to the streets and alleys of the vacated portions may revert to one or more of
the owners of the properties within the platted area adjacent to the vacated
portions.
      2.   When any pole line, pipeline, or any other public or private
facility is located in a vacated street or alley at the time of the reversion
of the title to the vacated street or alley, the owner of the public or private
utility facility has an easement over the vacated land to continue the
operation and maintenance of the public utility facility. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-
2004)
11-13-6: INACCURATE OR INCOMPLETE INFORMATION:
The council may withdraw approval of a preliminary plat if they determine that
information provided by the subdivider, and upon which approval of the
preliminary plat was based, is inaccurate or incomplete.
   A.   Submission Of Information And Proof: Within thirty (30) days following
approval or conditional approval of a preliminary plat, any person or agency
which claims that information which was provided by the subdivider is
inaccurate or incomplete may submit the information and proof to the planning
department.
   B.   Investigation Of Claim: The planning department shall investigate the
claim, the accompanying information and proof, and make a report to the
council.
   C.   Council Consideration; Hearing: Within fifteen (15) days after receipt
of the information, the planning department shall present the report to the
council at a regular meeting of the council. Notice of the meeting shall be
given to the claimant and the subdivider. At the meeting, the council shall
consider the information and proof. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
11-13-7: CHANGES TO CONDITIONS AFTER APPROVAL:
Upon written request of the subdivider, the council may amend conditions of
preliminary plat approval where it can be found that errors or changes beyond
the control of the subdivider have rendered a condition unnecessary, impossible
or illegal.
   A.   The written request shall be submitted to the planning department.
   B.   The council shall conduct a public hearing on the request.
   C.   Notice of the public hearing shall be given in accordance with these
regulations.
   D.   The council may approve the requested change if it meets the criteria
set forth in these regulations, except that written findings of fact are not
required. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
11-13-8: ADDITIONAL CONDITIONS AFTER APPROVAL:
After the preliminary plat is approved, unless inaccurate or incomplete
information has been found or a change to a condition has been requested, the
council may not impose any additional conditions as a prerequisite to final
plat approval, providing said approval is obtained within the original or
extended approval period as provided in these regulations. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-
2004)
11-13-9: WAIVERS:
   A.   Power To Grant: In planned unit developments, the council may grant
reasonable waivers from these regulations where it is found that these
regulations allow a waiver to be requested and granted.
   B.   Procedure: The subdivider shall include with the submission of the
preliminary plat a written statement describing the requested waiver and the
reasons upon which the request is based. The council shall then consider each
waiver on the preliminary plat. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
CHAPTER 14
SUBDIVISION EXEMPTIONS
SECTION:
11-14-1: Purpose
11-14-2: Procedures And General Requirements
11-14-3: Exemptions As Gift Or Sale To Member Of Immediate Family
11-14-4: Agricultural Exemption
11-14-5: Relocation Of Common Boundary Lines
11-14-6: Aggregation Of Lots And/Or Relocation Of Common Boundaries Within
Platted Subdivision
11-14-7: Security For Construction Financing
11-14-8: Court Order
11-14-9: Correction Of Errors
11-14-10: Uniform Standards For Certificate Of Survey
11-14-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   The state of Montana provides that certain divisions of land, which
would otherwise constitute subdivisions, are exempt from local subdivision
review and approval, unless the transactions are an attempt to evade the act,
Montana Code Annotated section 76-3-101 et seq.
   B.   The following procedures, criteria and requirements shall be used to
review an exemption from subdivision review and to determine whether the
division of land is for the purpose of evading the act. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
11-14-2: PROCEDURES AND GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Designation As Agent: The council designates the planning department as
its agent for purposes of these regulations. All certificates of survey
claiming an exemption shall be submitted to the planning department. The
procedures and requirements of these regulations are limited to the exemptions
specified in these regulations.
   B.   Claim For Exemption: A claimant seeking an exemption under the act and
these regulations shall submit a claim on the appropriate application form,
including a signed certificate of exemption, together with evidence to support
the claim and any other information required by these regulations to the
planning department. Four (4) paper copies of the certificate of survey shall
be submitted with the claim and shall be folded to fit in a standard eight and
one-half inch (81/2") to nine inch by eleven inch (9"x11") or eight and one-
half inch (81/2") to nine inch by fourteen inch (9"x14") folder.
   C.   Hearing: If a hearing is required, the claimant or the claimant's
representative shall be notified of the date and time of the hearing provided
for in these regulations.
   D.   Review Of Claim For Exemption: The planning department, the clerk and
recorder, and the city attorney's office shall review the claimed exemption.
The planning department shall make a report to the city manager who may approve
exemptions on behalf of the council (city). The claimant and/or the city
manager may request that the exemption be reviewed by the council at a
regularly scheduled council meeting.
   E.   Time Limitation: The city shall allow or disallow the exemption within
thirty (30) days of its submission to the planning department unless the
claimant has requested an extension, in which case, this time limit shall not
apply.
   F.   Rebuttable Presumption: Where a rebuttable presumption is declared in
this title, the presumption may be overcome by the claimant with evidence
contrary to the presumption. If the city concludes that the evidence overcomes
the presumption and that, from all the circumstances, the exemption is
justified, the city will allow the exemption. On the other hand, if the city
concludes that the presumption is not overcome and, that from all the
circumstances, the exemption is not justified, the city will disallow the
exemption.
   G.   Evaluation Of Circumstances: In assessing the claimant's purpose, the
city will evaluate all relevant circumstances including the nature of the
claimant's business, the prior history of the particular tract in question and
the proposed configuration of the tract if the proposed exempt transactions are
completed.
   H.   Allowance Of Claim: If the exemption is allowed, the city shall so
certify, in a printed certificate, on the certificate of survey.
   I.   Disallowance Of Claim: If the exemption is disallowed, the city shall
provide written notification of its decision to the person claiming the
exemption and the clerk and recorder.
   J.   Certificate Of Survey: A certificate of survey of a division of land
which is exempted from review may not be filed by the clerk and recorder unless
it bears the certificate of the person having a recorded interest claiming the
exemption stating that the division of land is exempted from review as a
subdivision and citing the applicable exemption.
   K.   Certificate Required: Each newly created parcel less than one hundred
sixty (160) acres, shall have a certificate of exemption.
   L.   Exceptions: This title shall not be applicable to deeds, contracts,
leases or other conveyances executed prior to July 1, 1974.
   M.   Payment Of Taxes And Special Assessments Required: An exemption may not
be made under this section, except for security for construction financing and
court orders, unless the treasurer has certified that all real property taxes
and special assessments assessed and levied on the land to be divided have been
paid. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
11-14-3: EXEMPTIONS AS GIFT OR SALE TO MEMBER OF IMMEDIATE FAMILY:
   A.   Definitions: A "member of the immediate family" is the spouse of the
grantor, or, whether by blood or adoption, a son, daughter, mother, or father
of the grantor.
   B.   Proper Use Of Exemption: The proper use of the exemption as a gift or
sale to a member of the immediate family is to convey one parcel of land
outside of a platted subdivision to each member of the landowner's family;
providing, that the use of the exemption creates no more than one additional
parcel of less than one hundred sixty (160) acres in size. The parcel involved
in the division must be outside of a platted subdivision. Each exemption under
this section will be reviewed by the city under this title.
   C.   Certificate Of Survey: A certificate of survey for a family transfer
may include more than one exempt parcel providing all parcels meet the criteria
of this section.
   D.   Creation Of New Parcels: Certificates of survey showing the creation of
new parcels of land pursuant to this exemption as a gift or sale to a member of
the immediate family must be accompanied by a copy of the deed transferring
interest in the parcel being created or a statement detailing where the deed is
in escrow, how long it will be in escrow and authorization to contact the
escrow agent for verification.
   E.   Rebuttable Presumption: The city makes a rebuttable presumption that a
family transfer is adopted for the purpose of evading the act if it is
determined that one or more of the following conditions exist:
      1.   The exempted parcel would leave more than one additional parcel of
less than one hundred sixty (160) acres.
      2.   The member of the landowner's immediate family would have received
more than one exempted parcel in Gallatin County. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
11-14-4: AGRICULTURAL EXEMPTION:
   A.   Definition: An "agricultural exemption" is a division of land made
outside of a platted subdivision by gift, sale or agreement to buy and sell in
which the parties to the transaction enter a covenant running with the land,
revocable only by mutual consent of the city and the transferee/property owner,
that the divided land will be used exclusively for agricultural purposes.
   B.   Building Or Structure Requiring Water Or Sewer Prohibited: No building
or structure requiring water or sewer facilities shall be utilized on such a
parcel.
   C.   Located Outside Subdivision: The parcel involved in the division must
be outside of a platted subdivision.
   D.   Change In Use: A change in use of the land for anything other than
agricultural purposes subjects the division to these regulations. (Ord. 2004-1,
4-5-2004)
11-14-5: RELOCATION OF COMMON BOUNDARY LINES:
   A.   Proper Use Of Exemption: The proper use of the exemption for relocating
common boundary lines is to:
      1.   Establish a new boundary between adjoining parcels of land, without
creating an additional parcel; or
      2.   Establish a new common boundary line between a single lot within a
platted subdivision and adjoining land outside a platted subdivision. A
restriction or requirement on the original platted lot or original unplatted
parcel continues to apply to those areas.
   B.   Certificate Of Survey: A certificate of survey for the relocation of
common boundary lines may include five (5) or fewer parcels and/or lots.
   C.   Additional Documents Required: Certificates of survey showing the
relocation of common boundary lines must be accompanied by:
      1.   A deed exchanging recorded interest from every person having a
recorded interest in adjoining properties for the entire newly described parcel
(s) that is acquiring additional land; and
      2.   Documentation showing the need or reason for the relocation, i.e.,
structure encroachment, surveyor error or enhancement of the configuration of
the property.
   D.   Rebuttable Presumption: The city makes a rebuttable presumption that a
proposed relocation of common boundary lines is adopted for the purpose of
evading the act, if the city determines that the documentation submitted
according to this chapter does not support the stated reason for relocation or
created an additional parcel. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
11-14-6: AGGREGATION OF LOTS AND/OR RELOCATION OF COMMON BOUNDARIES WITHIN
PLATTED SUBDIVISION:
   A.   Proper Use Of Exemption: The proper use of the exemption for
aggregation of lots and/or relocation of common boundaries is to rearrange and/
or aggregate five (5) or fewer lots within a platted subdivision and does not
increase the total number of lots. The plat shall contain the title "amended
plat" and must be filed with clerk and recorder.
   B.   Additional Documents Required: The amended plat showing the aggregation
of lots and/or relocation of common boundary within a platted subdivision must
be accompanied by:
      1.   A deed exchanging recorded interest from every person having a
recorded interest in adjoining properties for the entire newly described parcel
(s) that are acquiring additional land; and
      2.   Documentation showing the need or reason for the relocation, i.e.,
structure encroachment, surveyor error or enhancement of the configuration of
the property.
   C.   Rebuttable Presumption: The city makes a rebuttable presumption that a
proposed aggregation of lots and/or relocation of common boundaries within a
platted subdivision is adopted for the purpose of evading the act if it
determines that six (6) or more lots are affected by the proposal.
   D.   Review And Approval Required: Any division of lots which results in an
increase in the number of lots or which redesigns or rearranges six (6) or more
lots must be reviewed and approved by the council prior to the filing of the
final plat. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
11-14-7: SECURITY FOR CONSTRUCTION FINANCING:
   A.   Proper Use Of Exemption: The proper use of the exemption is to provide
security for construction mortgages, liens, or trust indentures, when a survey
of the parcel has been required.
   B.   Rebuttable Presumption: The city makes a rebuttable presumption that a
division of land that is created to provide security is adopted for the purpose
of evading the act under the following conditions:
      1.   If the division of land is created for the purpose of conveyance; or
      2.   The financing is for construction on land other than on the exempted
parcel.
   C.   Additional Documents Required: When the security for construction
financing exemption is to be used, the landowner shall submit, in addition to
such other documents as may be required, a written statement explaining:
      1.   How many parcels within the original tract will be created by use of
the exemption.
      2.   Who will have title to and possession of the remainder of the
original parcel.
      3.   A signed and notarized statement from a lending institution that the
creation of the exempted parcel is necessary to secure a construction loan for
buildings or other improvements on the parcel.
   D.   Filing Of Written Statement And Instruments: The written statement and
the instruments creating the security shall be filed at the same time with the
clerk and recorder. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
11-14-8: COURT ORDER:
The proper use of this exemption is when the division of land is created by
order of any court of record in this state or by operation of law or which, in
the absence of agreement between the parties to the sale, could be created by
an order of any court in this state pursuant to the law of eminent domain, when
a survey of the parcel has been required. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
11-14-9: CORRECTION OF ERRORS:
Corrections of errors may be made by the submission of a corrected certificate
of survey for city approval. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
11-14-10: UNIFORM STANDARDS FOR CERTIFICATE OF SURVEY:
A certificate of survey may not be filed by the clerk and recorder unless it
complies with the following requirements:
   A.   Size: Certificates of survey shall be legibly drawn with permanent ink
or printed or reproduced by a process guaranteeing a permanent record and shall
be eighteen inches by twenty four inches (18"x24") overall to include a one and
one-half inch (11/2") margin on the binding side.
   B.   Required Copies: One signed cloth backed or opaque Mylar copy and one
signed reproducible copy on a stable base polyester film or equivalent, and one
digital copy of the survey on a three and one-half inch (31/2") DS/DD disk
shall be submitted.
   C.   Additional Sheets: Whenever more than one sheet must be used to
accurately portray the land subdivided, each sheet must show the number of that
sheet and the total number of sheets included. All certification shall be shown
or referenced on one sheet.
   D.   Required Information On Face: The certificate of survey shall show or
contain on its face or on separate sheets referenced on its face the following
information only:
      1.   A title block including the quarter section, section, township,
range, principal meridian and county of the surveyed land. Space shall be
provided on the certificate of survey for clerk and recorder filing
information. A certificate of survey shall not bear the title "plat",
"subdivision", or any other title other than "certificate of survey".
      2.   Name(s) of the owner(s) of the land surveyed and the names of any
adjoining platted subdivisions and numbers of any adjoining certificates of
survey previously recorded and ties thereto.
      3.   Date survey was completed and a brief description of why certificate
of survey was prepared, such as creation of a new parcel, retracement of
section line, retracement of existing tract of land.
      4.   North point.
      5.   Scale bar (scale shall be sufficient to legibly represent the
required data on the certificate of survey submitted for filing).
      6.   All monuments found, set, reset, replaced or removed describing
their kind, size, location and giving other data related thereto.
      7.   The location of any corners of sections or divisions of sections
pertinent to the survey.
      8.   Witness monuments, basis of bearing, bearings and length of lines.
      9.   The bearings, distances and curve data of all perimeter boundary
lines shall be indicated. When the parcel surveyed is bounded by an irregular
shoreline or a body of water, the bearings and distances of a meander traverse
shall be given.
      10.   Data on all curves sufficient to enable the reestablishment of the
curves on the ground. This data shall include:
         a.   Radius of curve.
         b.   Arc length.
         c.   Notation of nontangent curves.
      11.   Lengths of all lines shown to at least tenths of a foot, and all
angles and bearings shown to at least the nearest minute.
      12.   A legal description of the perimeter boundary of the tract
surveyed.
      13.   All parcels created by the survey, designated by number or letter,
and the dimensions and area of each parcel. (Excepted parcels shall be marked
"not included in this survey".)
      14.   The signature and seal of the registered land surveyor responsible
for the survey. The affixing of his seal constitutes a certification by the
surveyor that the certificate of survey has been prepared in conformance with
the act 1 , and the regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
      15.   Memorandum of oaths administered pursuant to Montana Code Annotated
section 76-3-405.
   E.   Procedures For Divisions Of Land Exempted From Public Review As
Subdivision: Certificates of survey for divisions of land meeting the criteria
set out in Montana Code Annotated section 76-3-207, must meet the following
requirements:
      1.   Certificates of survey of a division of land which would otherwise
be a subdivision but which is exempted from public review under Montana Code
Annotated section 76-3-207, may not be filed by the clerk and recorder unless
it bears the acknowledged certificate of the property owner stating that the
division of land in question is exempted from review as a subdivision and
citing the applicable exemption.
      2.   Where the exemption relied upon requires that the property owner
enter into a covenant running with the land, the certificate of survey may not
be filed unless it bears a signed and acknowledged copy of the covenant.
      3.   For an exemption as a gift or sale to a member of the immediate
family, the certificate of survey must also indicate the name of the grantee,
the relationship of the grantee to the landowner, and the parcel to be conveyed
to the grantee.
      4.   For an exemption as a relocation of a common boundary line, the
certificate of survey must bear the signatures of all landowners whose parcels
are changed by the relocation. The certificate of survey must show that the
exemption was used only to change the location of a boundary line dividing two
(2) parcels, and must clearly distinguish the prior boundary location, i.e.,
shown by a dashed or broken line or a notation, from the new boundary, i.e.,
shown by a solid line or notation.
   F.   Procedures For Filing Certificates Of Survey Of Divisions Of Land
Entirely Exempted From Requirements Of Act: The divisions of land described in
Montana Code Annotated sections 76-3-201, 76-3-205, and 76-3-209, are not
required to be surveyed nor must a certificate of survey or subdivision plat
thereof be filed with the clerk and recorder. A certificate of survey of such a
division may, however, be filed with the clerk and recorder if it meets the
requirements for form and content for certificates contained in this chapter
and bears a certificate of the surveyor performing the survey stating the
applicable exemption from the act. (Ord. 2004-1, 4-5-2004)
 
Notes
1 1. MCA §§ 76-3-101 - 76-3-625.
CHAPTER 15
DESIGN STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS POLICY
SECTION:
11-15-1: Adoption
11-15-1: ADOPTION:
The "city of Belgrade design standards and specifications policy, 2004",
adopted as appendices to ordinance 2004-1, is hereby incorporated by reference
as fully as if set forth in full and at length. Copies are on file in the city
office. (2009 Code)
CHAPTER 16
CONDITIONS AND COVENANTS
SECTION:
11-16-1: Intent
11-16-2: Water Conveyance Facilities
11-16-1: INTENT:
The following conditions and covenants are commonly required as part of the
subdivision review and approval process in the city of Belgrade. The primary
purpose of this chapter is to give applicants an idea of some of the conditions
and covenants that may be attached to the approval of their project. While the
planning department attempts to utilize standard conditions, please be aware
that these conditions and covenants are likely to change as the subdivision
review process evolves, and as site specific conditions may warrant. (Ord.
2011-2, 5-16-2011)
11-16-2: WATER CONVEYANCE FACILITIES:
   A.   Conditions Related To Water Conveyance Facilities:
      1.   Water conveyance facilities and the required water conveyance
facility noninterference setback shall be shown on the final plat and clearly
labeled. Plats shall depict irrigation ditches, canals, or pipelines by their
centerline.
      2.   The following note shall appear on the final subdivision plat:
Any water conveyance facility non-interference setback or easement shown on the
subdivision plat does not eliminate any secondary easement described by Section
70-17-112, MCA.
      3.   Unless there is written consent from the appropriate water users
and/or water conveyance facility's authorized representatives, stormwater,
snowmelt runoff, water from dewatering practices, or other water originating
from within the boundaries of the subdivision shall not discharge into or
otherwise be directed into any irrigation ditch, canal, pipeline, or other
water conveyance facility.
      4.   The subdivider shall not undertake any activity that would result in
the interference or obstruction in the transmission of water in any water
conveyance facility. Before any maintenance, improvements, or modifications are
performed on any water conveyance facility, written permission must be obtained
from the water users and/or water conveyance facility's authorized
representatives. Upon completion of maintenance, improvements, or modifications
to any water conveyance facility, the subdivider shall provide written notice
to the water users and/or water conveyance facility's authorized
representatives and allow them an opportunity to inspect such work.
   B.   Covenants Related To Water Conveyance Facilities:
      1.   No water may be removed from any irrigation ditch, canal, or other
water conveyance facility without a water right, permit, or written water lease
agreement with the appropriate water users and/or water conveyance facility's
authorized representatives.
      2.   Unless there is written consent from the appropriate water users
and/or water conveyance facility's authorized representatives, stormwater,
snowmelt runoff, water from dewatering practices, or other water originating
from within the boundaries of the subdivision shall not discharge into or
otherwise be directed into any irrigation ditch, canal, pipeline, or other
water conveyance facility.
      3.   The owners' association shall remove any trash or debris that
originated from within the subdivision and has accumulated in the water
conveyance facilities passing through their subdivision by no later than April
1 of each year. If the owners' association fails to remove the trash or debris
as described above, the water users and/or water conveyance facility's
authorized representatives may cause the trash or debris to be removed and bill
the owners' association for such efforts. Until such time that the owners'
association assumes responsibility for the requirements described herein, such
requirements shall be the responsibility of the developer.
      4.   Lot owners are hereby notified of the water users, water conveyance
facility's authorized representatives, and/or their designee's right to access
the property to maintain and repair the water conveyance facility (this
includes, but is not limited to, placement of excavated material, removal of
vegetation and debris along the water conveyance facility); to install, repair,
and/or adjust headgates and other diversion structures; and to carry out other
normal means of repair and maintenance related to the ditch/canal.
      5.   To assure noninterference with water conveyance facilities, no
livestock grazing shall take place, nor shall any new structures (other than
structures for the maintenance and operation of the water conveyance facility),
fences, landscaping (other than grass), or roads, may be installed or erected
within the water conveyance facility noninterference setback, except where
agreed to in writing by the water users and/or water conveyance facility's
authorized representatives. (Note: Where the water users and/or water
conveyance facility's authorized representatives agree to something else as
part of the subdivision review process, this covenant would need to be amended
to reflect those changes.)
      6.   Neither the owners' association nor any lot owners shall undertake
any activity that would result in the interference or obstruction in the
transmission of water in the water conveyance facility. Before any maintenance,
improvements, or modifications are performed on any water conveyance facility,
written permission must be obtained from the water users and/or water
conveyance facility's authorized representatives prior to commencing such work.
Upon completion of maintenance, improvements, or modifications to any water
conveyance facility, the person responsible for such work shall provide written
notice to the water users and/or water conveyance facility's authorized
representatives and allow them an opportunity to inspect such work.
      7.   Lot purchasers are hereby notified that Montana law provides
specific protections in regards to liability and nuisance claims for
agricultural operations and irrigators. Those specific protections include, but
are not limited to, Montana Code Annotated sections 85-7-2211, 85-7-2212 and
27-30-101. (Ord. 2011-2, 5-16-2011)
TITLE 12
FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
TITLE AND PURPOSE
SECTION:
12-1-1: Title
12-1-2: Findings
12-1-3: Purpose
12-1-1: TITLE:
These regulations shall be known and cited as CITY OF BELGRADE FLOODPLAIN
REGULATIONS. These regulations are promulgated under the authority of the laws
of the state of Montana and relevant federal law. Authorization for these
regulations is contained in the floodplain and floodway management act, title
76, chapter 5 Montana Code Annotated. Flood hazard areas specifically adopted
herein have been delineated and designated by the DNRC or FEMA pursuant to 76-
5-201 Montana Code Annotated. Other authority for municipalities to adopt
floodplain hazard mitigation regulations appears in section 76-5-101 through
406 Montana Code Annotated. (Ord. 2011-5, 10-17-2011)
12-1-2: FINDINGS:
   A.   Recurrent flooding of a portion of the city of Belgrade's land
resources causes loss of life, damage to property, disruption of commerce and
governmental services, and unsanitary conditions; all of which are detrimental
to the health, safety, welfare, and property of occupants of flooded lands and
the people of Belgrade; and
   B.   The public interest necessitates management and regulation of flood
prone land and waters in a manner consistent with sound land and water use
management practices which will prevent and alleviate flooding threats to life
and health and reduce private and public economic losses. (Ord. 2011-5, 10-17-
2011)
12-1-3: PURPOSE:
To promote the public health, safety and general welfare, to minimize flood
losses in areas subject to flood hazards and to promote wise use of the
floodplain. These regulations have been established with the following purposes
intended:
   A.   To guide development within the floodplain areas inside the corporate
limits of the city of Belgrade:
      1.   Recognizing the right and need of watercourses to periodically carry
more than the normal flow of water;
      2.   Participating in coordinating efforts of federal, state and local
management activities for floodplains; and
      3.   Maintain regulations and minimum standards, insofar as possible,
that balance the greatest public good with the least private injury.
   B.   Specifically it is the purpose of these regulations to:
      1.   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety or
property in times of flood, or cause increased flood heights or velocities;
      2.   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities
which serve such uses, be provided with flood protection at the time of initial
construction;
      3.   Identify lands unsuitable for certain development purposes because
of flood hazards;
      4.   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
      5.   Support the provisions of 36.15.204(2)(g) administrative rules of
Montana, which require disclosure to potential buyers of property within a
floodplain and subject to the provisions of these regulations; and
      6.   Inform those who occupy floodplains that they are responsible for
their actions. (Ord. 2011-5, 10-17-2011)
CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
12-2-1: Terms Defined
12-2-1: TERMS DEFINED:
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in these regulations
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give these regulations their most reasonable application. Additional
definitions for terms commonly used for floodplain management purposes are
provided by FEMA and DNRC. Such terms and definitions may be utilized by the
floodplain administrator for the purposes of administering these regulations
where the term is defined by FEMA or DNRC and is not in conflict with a
definition included in these regulations.
ACT: Montana floodplain and floodway management act, title 76, chapter 5,
Montana Code Annotated.
ALTERATION(S): Any change or addition to an artificial obstruction that either
increases the size of the artificial obstruction or increases its potential
flood hazard. Maintenance of an artificial obstruction is not an alteration.
APPEAL: A request for a review by the Belgrade city council of the decision of
the floodplain administrator.
ARTIFICIAL OBSTRUCTION: Any obstruction which is not natural and includes any
dam, diversion, wall, riprap, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment,
projection, revetment, excavation, channel rectification, bridge, conduit,
culvert, building, refuse, automobile body, fill or other analogous structure
or matter in, along, across or projecting into any floodplain which may impede,
retard or alter the pattern of flow of water, either in itself or by catching
or collecting debris carried by the water, or that is placed where the natural
flow of water would carry the same downstream to the damage or detriment of
either life or property.
BASE FLOOD (100-YEAR FLOOD): A flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year. A base flood is the same as a flood of
100-year frequency.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION: The elevation above sea level of the base flood in
relation to North American vertical datum of 1988 unless another datum is
otherwise specified in the flood insurance study.
CHANNELIZATION PROJECT: Excavation or construction or both of an artificial
channel for the purpose of diverting the entire flow of a stream from its
established course.
COUNCIL: The Belgrade city council.
DNRC: Montana department of natural resources and conservation.
DECISION: The action rendered by the floodplain administrator: a) on an
application for a permit; or b) on a request for interpretation of a floodplain
boundary.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
ESTABLISH: To construct, place, insert or excavate.
FEMA: The federal emergency management agency.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP: The map on which FEMA has delineated the 100-year
floodplain, the base flood elevations (BFE) and risk premium zones.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: The report in which FEMA has provided flood profiles, as
well as the flood boundary/floodway map and the water surface profiles.
FLOOD OR FLOODING: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry lands from the overflow of a stream, or the unusual
and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPLAIN: The areas subject to these regulations, generally adjoining a
stream, which would be covered by floodwater of a base flood except for
designated sheet flood areas that receive less than one foot (1') of water per
occurrence which are considered "zone B" by FEMA. The floodplain consists of a
floodway and floodway fringe. The floodplain is delineated according to where
the base flood elevation intersects surveyed elevations of natural ground.
FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR: The person authorized under subsection
12-4-1A of this title to administer these regulations.
FLOODWAY: The channel of a stream and those portions of the floodplain
adjoining the channel that must be reserved in order to discharge a base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one-half
foot (1/2').
FLOODWAY FRINGE: That portion of the floodplain outside the limits of the
floodway.
LEVEE: A manmade embankment, usually earthen, designed and constructed in
accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the
flow of water to provide protection from temporary flooding.
LEVEE SYSTEM: A flood protection system that consists of a levee, or levees,
and associated structures, such as drainage and closure devices, which are
constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). Any floor used for living purposes which includes working, storage,
sleeping, cooking and eating, or recreation or any combination thereof. This
includes any floor that could be converted to such a use such as a basement or
crawl space. (An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor.) The lowest floor is
a determinate for the flood insurance premium for a building, home, or
business.
LOWEST FLOOR ELEVATION: The elevation of the lowest floor reported in the North
American vertical datum of 1988, unless another datum is otherwise specified in
the flood insurance study.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure that is transportable in one or more sections,
built on a permanent chassis, and designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. This term also
includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a
site for greater than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel or contiguous parcels of land
divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL: The North American vertical datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum
to which base flood elevations are referenced.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: Any structure for which the start of construction,
substantial improvement or alteration commences on or after the effective date
of these regulations.
NONCONFORMING USES: Uses, artificial obstructions, development, and structures
that existed prior to adoption of floodplain regulations by the city of
Belgrade on May 12, 1997, but that are not in conformance with the requirements
of these regulations. To be considered a valid nonconforming use, the
floodplain administrator may require documentation to demonstrate the
nonconforming use met the requirements of all applicable laws at the time it
was established.
100-YEAR FLOOD: A 100-year flood is the same as the base flood.
PERMIT(S): A floodplain development permit.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK OR CAMPGROUND: A parcel or contiguous parcels of land
divided into two (2) or more recreational vehicle spaces for rent or sale.
REGULATIONS: These city of Belgrade floodplain regulations.
RIPRAP: Stone, rocks, concrete blocks or analogous material that is placed
along the banks or bed of a stream for the purpose of alleviating erosion.
SHEET FLOOD AREA: Areas subject to 100-year flooding with depths less than one
foot (1'), removed from the main stem channel, and identified as zone B by
FEMA.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Commencement of clearing, grading, filling, or
excavating to prepare a site for construction.
STRUCTURE: A walled and roofed building, manufactured home, (or) a gas or
liquid storage tank, bridge, culvert, dam, diversion, wall, revetment, dike, or
other projection that may impede, retard, or alter the pattern of flow of
water.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage sustained by a structure where the cost of restoring
the structure to its condition before damage would equal or exceed fifty
percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the
market value of the structure either:
   A.   Before the improvement or repair is started, or
   B.   If the structure has been damaged, and is being restored, before the
damage occurred.
For the purposes of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to
occur when the first construction to any wall, ceiling, floor or other
structural part of the building commences. A substantial improvement differs
from the alteration of a structure in that it is not qualified by affecting the
external dimensions of the structure. The term also does not include either:
   A.   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
   B.   Any alteration of a structure listed on the national register of
historic places or state inventory of historic places.
SUITABLE FILL: Fill material which is stable, compacted, well graded, pervious,
generally unaffected by water and frost, devoid of trash or similar foreign
matter, and tree stumps or other organic material; and is fitted for the
purpose of supporting the intended use or a permanent structure.
VARIANCE: A grant of relief from the requirements of these regulations which
would permit construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by
these regulations.
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with these regulations. (Ord. 2011-5, 10-17-2011)
CHAPTER 3
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
12-3-1: Jurisdictional Area
12-3-2: Floodplain District Establishment
12-3-3: Floodplain Administrator
12-3-4: Rules For Interpretation Of Floodplain District Boundaries
12-3-5: Compliance
12-3-6: Abrogation And Greater Responsibility
12-3-7: Regulation Interpretation
12-3-8: Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability
12-3-9: Severability
12-3-10: Disclosure Provision
12-3-1: JURISDICTIONAL AREA:
These regulations shall apply to lands within the corporate limits of the city
of Belgrade, Montana (city), and shown on the official floodplain maps as being
located within a floodplain district (the "floodplain district"). See section
12-3-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 2011-5, 10-17-2011)
12-3-2: FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT ESTABLISHMENT:
The floodplain district is based on the FEMA "Flood Insurance Study For
Gallatin County, Montana And Incorporated Areas", dated September 2, 2011 (the
"flood insurance study"), and the accompanying flood insurance rate maps (the
"official maps"). The flood insurance study and official maps are on file in
the Belgrade city-county planning office. The floodplain district includes all
lettered and numbered flood zone designations and the definitions of those
designations as provided on the official maps or otherwise provided by FEMA.
(Ord. 2011-5, 10-17-2011)
12-3-3: FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR:
As provided in section
12-4-1 of this title, the Belgrade city manager has been appointed the
floodplain administrator by the Belgrade city council, and has the
responsibility of such position as outlined in these regulations. (Ord. 2011-5,
10-17-2011)
12-3-4: RULES FOR INTERPRETATION OF FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
The boundaries of the floodway shall be determined by scaling distances on the
official maps, and using the floodway data table contained in the flood
insurance study.
The official maps may be used as a guide for determining the floodplain
boundary, but the exact location of the floodplain boundary shall be determined
where the base flood elevation, as detailed in the flood insurance study,
intersects surveyed elevations of the natural ground. Elevations of the natural
ground shall be determined by a level survey completed by a professional
Montana engineer or registered land surveyor. See sections
12-5-5 and
12-5-6 of this title for clarification about determining the floodplain
boundary for unnumbered A zones and AO zone floodplains.
Upon written request, submittal of relevant supporting documentation, and
payment of applicable fees, the floodplain administrator will make floodplain
district boundary interpretations. (Ord. 2011-5, 10-17-2011)
12-3-5: COMPLIANCE:
No new development or alteration to existing development may commence without
full compliance with the provisions of these regulations and other applicable
regulations. These regulations meet the minimum floodplain development
requirements as set forth by the Montana board of natural resources and
conservation and the national flood insurance program. Any development that
fails to fully comply with the requirements of these regulations shall be
presumed to be a violation until proven otherwise. (Ord. 2011-5, 10-17-2011)
12-3-6: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESPONSIBILITY:
These regulations are not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants, deed restrictions or underlying zoning. However, where
these regulations impose greater restrictions, the provisions of these
regulations shall prevail. (Ord. 2011-5, 10-17-2011)
12-3-7: REGULATION INTERPRETATION:
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of these regulations
shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed and
shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by law.
(Ord. 2011-5, 10-17-2011)
12-3-8: WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
These regulations do not imply that areas outside the floodplain boundaries or
permitted land uses within such areas will always be free from flooding or
flood damages. These regulations shall not create liability on the part of, or
a cause of action against the city, or any officer or employee thereof for any
flood damages that may result from reliance upon these regulations. (Ord. 2011-
5, 10-17-2011)
12-3-9: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, clause, provision or portion of these regulations is adjudged
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder
of these regulations shall not be affected thereby. (Ord. 2011-5, 10-17-2011)
12-3-10: DISCLOSURE PROVISION:
All owners of property in an identified floodplain as indicated on the official
maps must notify potential buyers or their agents that such property is subject
to the provisions of these regulations. (Ord. 2011-5, 10-17-2011)
CHAPTER 4
ADMINISTRATION
SECTION:
12-4-1: Floodplain Administrator Authority
12-4-2: Permit Applications
12-4-3: Emergency Waiver
12-4-4: Review; Variances; Appeals
12-4-5: Fees
12-4-6: Compliance
12-4-7: Penalties
12-4-8: Emergency Preparedness Planning
12-4-9: Amendments
12-4-10: Extensions To Duration Of Approved Floodplain Development Permits
12-4-1: FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR AUTHORITY:
   A.   Appointment: The Belgrade city council (council) appoints and
authorizes the Belgrade city manager as the Belgrade floodplain administrator.
The city manager may subsequently designate an individual with requisite
knowledge and training to act as floodplain administrator. The city manager may
also designate individuals with requisite knowledge and training to assist the
floodplain administrator. The responsibilities of the floodplain administrator
are outlined in these regulations.
   B.   Authority: The floodplain administrator is hereby appointed with the
authority to review applications for floodplain development permits (permits)
and proposed uses or construction to determine compliance with these
regulations, and is required to assure all necessary permits have been received
from other governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal and
state laws and local codes, including section 404 of the federal water
pollution control act of 1972, 33 USC 1334, and provisions of the natural
streambed and land preservation act.
      1.   Additional Factors: Permits shall be granted or denied by the
floodplain administrator on the basis of whether the applicant proposes to
establish or proposes an alteration or substantial improvement of an artificial
obstruction or nonconforming use which meets the requirements of these
regulations. Additional factors that shall be considered for every permit
application are:
         a.   The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights,
increased floodwater velocities or alterations in the pattern of flood flow
caused by encroachments;
         b.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands or
downstream to the injury of others;
         c.   The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability
of these systems to prevent disease, contamination and unsanitary conditions,
and whether septic systems will be located to avoid impairment or contamination
during flooding;
         d.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effects of such damage on the individual owner;
         e.   The importance of the services provided by the facility to the
community;
         f.   The proposed development will be reasonably safe from flooding;
         g.   The drainage at the site is adequate to reduce exposure to flood
hazards;
         h.   The requirement of the facility for a waterfront location;
         i.   The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding
for the proposed use;
         j.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development
and anticipated development in the foreseeable future;
         k.   The relationship of the proposed use to any adopted growth policy
or other plans covering the project area;
         l.   The safety of access to property in times of flooding for
ordinary and emergency services; and
         m.   Such other factors as are in harmony with the purposes of these
regulations, the Montana floodplain and floodway management act and the
national flood insurance program.
   C.   Decision On Permit Application: In accordance with section 76-5-405(2)
Montana Code Annotated, unless the floodplain administrator has requested
additional information from the applicant, a decision on an application for a
permit shall be made within sixty (60) days of receipt of a complete
application. The floodplain administrator may approve, conditionally approve,
or deny applications for permit.
   D.   Administrative Procedures: The floodplain administrator shall adopt
such administrative procedures as may be necessary to efficiently administer
the provision of these regulations.
   E.   Maintain Files And Records: The floodplain administrator shall maintain
such files and records as may be necessary to document nonconforming uses, base
flood elevations, floodproofing and elevation certifications, fee receipts, the
issuance of permits, agendas, minutes, records of public meetings, and any
other matters relating to floodplain management in Gallatin County. Such files
and records shall be open for public inspection.
   F.   Copies Of Permits Granted: Copies of all permits granted must be sent
to the Montana department of natural resources and conservation.
   G.   Additional Information: The floodplain administrator may require
whatever additional information is necessary to determine whether the proposed
activity meets the requirements of these regulations. Additional information
may include hydraulic calculations assessing the impact on base flood
elevations or velocities; level survey; or certification by a Montana licensed
land surveyor, professional engineer or architect that the requirements of
these regulations are satisfied.
   H.   Notice: Upon receipt of an application for a permit, the floodplain
administrator shall prepare a notice containing the facts pertinent to the
application and shall publish the notice at least once in a newspaper of
general circulation in the area. Notice shall also be served by first class
mail upon adjacent property owners and provided to the DNRC floodplain
management section. The notice shall provide a reasonable period of time, not
less than fifteen (15) days, for interested parties to submit comments on the
proposed activity. The notice requirements for variances or appeals shall be
the same, except notice to adjoining property owners shall be through certified
mail.
   I.   Flood Carrying Capacity Maintained: The flood carrying capacity within
the altered or relocated portion of any stream must be maintained. Erosion
control measures shall be incorporated to ensure stability of altered channels
and stream banks. Prior to any alteration or relocation of a stream in riverine
situations, notification by the floodplain administrator must be made to
adjacent local governments, the floodplain management section (DNRC), and the
federal emergency management agency. (Ord. 2011-5, 10-17-2011)
12-4-2: PERMIT APPLICATIONS:
   A.   Activities or uses which require the issuance of a permit, including
the expansion, substantial improvement or alteration of such uses, shall not be
initiated, established or undertaken until a permit has been issued by the
floodplain administrator.
   B.   Applicants for permits may be required to furnish such of the following
as is deemed necessary by the floodplain administrator for determining the
suitability of the particular site for the proposed use:
      1.   Plans in duplicate drawn to scale with dimensions shown, showing the
nature, location and elevation of the lot, existing and proposed structure
locations, fill, storage or materials sites, floodproofing measures, first
floor of proposed structures in mean sea level elevation and location of the
channel;
      2.   A plan view of the proposed development indicating external
dimensions of structures, street or road, finished grade elevations, well
locations, individual sewage treatment and disposal sites, excavation, fill
quantity estimates, site plan and construction plans; and
      3.   Specifications for floodproofing, filling, excavating, grading,
riprapping, storage of materials and utilities location.
      4.   In evaluating a proposed use within a floodplain for which no
floodway has been designated, the floodplain administrator may require the
applicant to submit the following:
         a.   Cross Sections: A minimum of four (4) surveyed valley cross
sections by a Montana licensed land surveyor according to the following field
survey instructions:
            (1)   The surveys required are cross sections of stream channels
and the floodplain on both banks.
            (2)   One cross section shall be taken at a point on the stream
from which it could be extended through the site. For projects involving a
structure, this cross section should be located at the upstream end of the
structure. For projects that do not involve structures, this cross section
should be taken at the upstream end of the property.
            (3)   Three (3) cross sections shall be taken downstream from the
site, each approximately one thousand feet (1,000') apart. In no case, however,
should the fall in the base flood elevation between two (2) sections exceed
five feet (5.0'). Cross sections should also be taken at all bridge locations
in the reach. The cross section farthest downstream should be located at a
natural constriction or at a bridge crossing. Cross sections shall be taken at
any bridge location between site and lowest cross section. All bridges in the
reach should be described and sketched showing unobstructed waterway openings
and elevations.
            (4)   Distances between cross sections are to be determined by
stadia, and these distances and locations of cross sections shall be shown on
the location map.
            (5)   The overbank cross sections are to be extended to obtain a
vertical rise of fifteen feet (15') above the water surface.
            (6)   If a U.S. geological survey river gauging station is within
the reach of the stream under study, the elevation of any convenient foot mark
shall be surveyed and clearly indicated on the location map.
            (7)   Elevations of the water surface determined by survey as part
of each valley cross section.
            (8)   Cross sections should be plotted on ten (10) divisions to the
inch cross section paper, using any convenient, identified scale for vertical
and horizontal distance.
               (A)   Elevation Of High Water Mark: The elevation of any known
high water mark shall be identified and included in the survey.
               (B)   Profile: A profile sheet shall be prepared by a Montana
licensed land surveyor or civil engineer on cross section paper of ten (10)
divisions to the inch, showing the observed water surface profile, location of
cross sections, site boundaries, riverbank profile, and thalweg (lowest point
of the channel bottom along the reach of stream).
               (C)   Reference: All surveyed elevations shall be tied to mean
sea level datum and the benchmark used shall be identified.
      5.   Instructions for field surveys for flood hazard elevations are
available in the flood administrator's office.
      6.   A Montana licensed professional engineer's or architect's design
calculations and certification that the proposed activity has been designated
to be in compliance with these regulations.
      7.   Certification of floodproofing or elevation or both shall be
provided on a standard form available from the floodplain administrator.
   C.   The floodplain administrator may require applicants who have received
permits to furnish the following upon completion of a project, to determine
that the permit specifications and conditions have been complied with:
      1.   Certification by a Montana licensed professional engineer or land
surveyor of the actual mean sea level elevation of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all new, altered or substantially improved structures.
      2.   If floodproofing techniques were utilized for the above described
structures, then the mean sea level elevation to which the floodproofing was
accomplished must be similarly certified.
      3.   Certification shall also be required, for artificial obstructions
and development other than buildings, to verify that the activity was
accomplished in accordance with these regulations and the design plans
submitted with the application for the permit activity, and the conditions of
permit approval. This certification may be waived by the floodplain
administrator if it can be clearly ascertained by a site inspection or other
suitable documentation that the activity was accomplished in accordance with
these regulations.
      4.   Certification of floodproofing or elevation or both shall be
provided on a standard form available from the floodplain administrator. (Ord.
2011-5, 10-17-2011)
12-4-3: EMERGENCY WAIVER:
   A.   Emergency repair or replacement of severely damaged public
transportation facilities, public water and sewer facilities, flood control
works and private projects are subject to the permit requirement of these
regulations.
The provisions of these regulations are not intended to affect other actions
that are necessary to safeguard life or structures, during periods of
emergency.
      1.   Prior to any action being taken, the property owner or person
responsible for taking emergency action shall notify the floodplain
administrator. Within five (5) days of the emergency action being taken, the
person responsible for taking emergency action shall provide the floodplain
administrator with a written description of the action taken; and
      2.   Within thirty (30) days of initiating the emergency action, a person
who has undertaken an emergency action must submit an application for a permit,
and along with the standard permit submittal requirements, describe the work
that took place during the emergency and any additional work that may be
necessary to bring the project into compliance with the requirements of these
regulations. (Ord. 2011-5, 10-17-2011)
12-4-4: REVIEW; VARIANCES; APPEALS:
   A.   The council may, by variance, grant a permit that is not in compliance
with the minimum standards contained in these regulations according to the
following procedures.
   B.   All applications for a variance shall be accompanied by the variance
application fee. The application must clearly state the facts and circumstances
on which any variance is requested.
      1.   In order to have FEMA review and approve the technical basis of the
proposed variance prior to the variance being considered by the council,
variance requests involving any of the circumstances described below require
approval of a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) by FEMA prior to
submission of the variance application to the floodplain administrator:
         a.   A project in the floodway that would result in any increase
(greater than or equal to 1/100 of 1 foot) in base flood elevations after
considering allowable encroachments into the floodway fringe;
         b.   A project that would increase the base flood elevation greater
than one-half foot (1/2') in an area where base flood elevations have been
specified but no floodway has been designated; and
         c.   A project that would increase the base flood elevation greater
than one-half foot (1/2') in an unnumbered zone A floodplain.
      2.   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         a.   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
         b.   A determination that refusal of a variance would, because of
exceptional circumstances, cause a unique or undue hardship on the applicant or
community involved;
         c.   A determination that the granting of a variance will not increase
flood hazard either upstream or downstream in the area of insurable building,
present additional threats to public safety, be an extraordinary public
expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or
conflict with existing laws or ordinances;
         d.   A determination that a proposed use would be adequately
floodproofed;
         e.   A determination that a reasonable alternative location outside
the floodplain is not available;
         f.   A determination that the variance requested is the minimum
necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and
         g.   Approval of DNRC, upon request from the city prior to formally
approving any permit application which is in variation to these regulations.
      3.   Variances shall be issued in writing from the Belgrade city council
who shall notify the applicant that:
         a.   A specific variance is granted, and that certain conditions may
be attached,
         b.   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the
base flood elevation will result in increased premium rates, and
         c.   Such construction below the base flood elevation increases risks
to life and property.
The floodplain administrator shall maintain the records of variance
notification, variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and
forward copies of all variance actions to the Montana department of natural
resources and conservation and the federal emergency management agency.
      4.   Upon approval of a variance, the applicant shall be required to
obtain a permit to document compliance with the conditions of the variance and
all other applicable requirements of these floodplain regulations. A separate
application fee shall be required for the permit.
   C.   An aggrieved person may appeal any decision of the floodplain
administrator to the council by filing a notice of appeal no more than thirty
(30) days after the date of the decision. An appeal shall allege the floodplain
administrator's decision was an erroneous interpretation or application of
these regulations or relevant state or federal laws. The notice of appeal shall
be in writing and be served in person or by mail upon the floodplain
administrator. The appellant shall have an additional thirty (30) days after
providing a notice of appeal to submit a formal appeal request which shall set
forth the decision appealed from, document the basis for the appeal and be
accompanied by the appropriate application fee. The council shall hold a public
hearing on the appeal, and shall take testimony and enter findings of fact and
conclusions and shall make such findings and conclusions available to the
appellant within a reasonable time. (Ord. 2011-5, 10-17-2011)
12-4-5: FEES:
Fees for all floodplain related applications (permits, variances, appeals,
etc.) are established by the council and available from the floodplain
administrator on a fee schedule. All required fees shall be paid at the time of
submittal of the relevant floodplain related application. (Ord. 2011-5, 10-17-
2011)
12-4-6: COMPLIANCE:
Any use, arrangement or construction not in compliance with that authorized
shall be deemed a violation of these regulations and punishable as provided in
section
12-4-7 of this chapter. An applicant may be required to submit certification by
a licensed Montana professional engineer, architect, land surveyor or other
qualified person designated by the floodplain administrator that finished fill
and building floor elevations, floodproofing or other flood protection measures
were accomplished in compliance with regulations. (Ord. 2011-5, 10-17-2011)
12-4-7: PENALTIES:
Violation of the provisions of this title or failure to comply with any of the
requirements shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this title
or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof,
be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not
more than six (6) months or both. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the
Gallatin County from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent
or remedy any violation. (Ord. 2011-5, 10-17-2011)
12-4-8: EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS PLANNING:
In formulating community development goals, the community shall consider the
development of a plan for evacuating residents of all manufactured home parks
or subdivisions located within flood prone areas. This plan should be
developed, filed with, and approved by appropriate community emergency
management authorities. (Ord. 2011-5, 10-17-2011)
12-4-9: AMENDMENTS:
These regulations may be amended by the council whenever the public necessity
and convenience and general welfare require such amendment. (Ord. 2011-5, 10-
17-2011)
12-4-10: EXTENSIONS TO DURATION OF APPROVED FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMITS:
When a permit has been approved by the floodplain administrator for a specific
period of time, the applicant may, prior to expiration of the approved permit,
request the floodplain administrator extend the duration of the approval. Such
requests shall be in writing and accompanied by the relevant fee; shall justify
the need for the extension; and shall document that any work completed to date
has been in compliance with the requirements of the approved permit. Extension
requests do not require public notification. Approvals to extension requests
shall be issued in writing upon a determination by the floodplain administrator
that:
   A.   All work completed to date is in compliance with the requirements of
the approved permit;
   B.   The size, scope, and details of the project have not been expanded from
those included in the approved permit; and
   C.   The requested extension provides a reasonable time frame to complete
the project. Extensions shall not be of greater duration than the original
permit approval period (for example, if a permit was granted for one year, no
extension may exceed one year). Multiple extension requests are discouraged,
but allowed upon showing of good cause. (Ord. 2011-5, 10-17-2011)
CHAPTER 5
SPECIFIC STANDARDS
SECTION:
12-5-1: Application
12-5-2: Floodway
12-5-3: Floodway Fringe
12-5-4: Floodplain Areas With Base Flood Elevations And No Delineated Floodway
12-5-5: Floodplain Areas Without Base Flood Elevations Or Delineated Floodways
(Zone A)
12-5-6: Shallow Flooding (Zone AO)
12-5-1: APPLICATION:
The minimum standards listed in this section apply to the floodplain district
established by section
12-3-2 of this title.
   A.   All development within the floodplain district shall:
      1.   Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
      2.   Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood
damage; and
      3.   Use construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant
to flood damage.
   B.   All new construction and substantial improvements shall:
      1.   Prevent Flotation, Collapse, Or Lateral Movement: Be designed or
modified and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads;
and
      2.   Constructed With Service Facilities To Prevent Flooding: Be
constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding.
      3.   Openings In Enclosures Below The Lowest Floor: For all new
construction and substantial improvements, fully enclosed areas below the
lowest floor that are subject to flooding shall be designated to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry
and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be
certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or
exceed the following minimum criteria:
         a.   A minimum of two (2) openings;
         b.   Openings shall have a total net area of not less than one square
inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
         c.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters. (Ord. 2011-5, 10-17-2011)
12-5-2: FLOODWAY:
   A.   Uses Allowed Without Permits: The following open space uses shall be
allowed without a permit anywhere within the floodway, provided that such uses
conform to the provisions of chapter 6 of this title, are not prohibited by any
other ordinance, resolution or statute and do not require fill, excavation,
permanent storage of materials or equipment or structures other than portable
structures:
      1.   Agricultural uses;
      2.   Accessory uses such as loading or parking areas, or emergency
landing strips associated with industrial-commercial facilities;
      3.   Private and public recreational uses such as golf courses, driving
ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps, parks, wildlife
management and natural areas, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves,
target ranges, trap and skeet ranges, hunting and fishing areas, and hiking or
horseback riding trails;
      4.   Forestry, including processing of forest projects with portable
equipment;
      5.   Residential uses such as lawns, gardens, parking areas and play
areas;
      6.   Irrigation and livestock supply wells, provided that they are
located at least five hundred feet (500') from domestic water supply wells;
      7.   Fences, except permanent fences crossing channels; and
      8.   Storage of recreational vehicles provided that they be on the site
for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days, or be fully licensed
and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if
it is on its wheels or jacking system with wheels intact, is attached to the
site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no
permanently attached additions.
   B.   Uses Requiring Permits: The following artificial obstructions and
nonconforming uses may be permitted in the floodway subject to the issuance of
a permit by the floodplain administrator if the cumulative effect of such uses
combined with allowable floodway fringe encroachments does not result in any
increase (greater than or equal to 1/100 of 1 foot) to the unobstructed
elevation of the base flood:
      1.   Excavation of material from the pits and pools provided that:
         a.   A buffer strip of undisturbed land of sufficient width to prevent
flood flows from channeling into the excavation is left between the edge of the
channel and edge of the excavation;
         b.   The excavation meets all applicable laws and regulations of other
local and state agencies; and
         c.   Excavated material is stockpiled outside the floodway, and if
reasonably attainable, outside the floodplain.
      2.   Stream crossings provided the crossings are designed to offer
minimal obstruction to flood flow. Stream crossings shall not increase the base
flood elevation nor cause a significant increase in velocities of the base
flood.
      3.   Limited filling for transportation related embankments not
associated with stream crossings, provided that:
         a.   Reasonable alternative transportation routes outside the
designated floodway are not available; and
         b.   Such floodway encroachment is located as far from the stream
channel as possible and shall not result in a cumulative increase in base flood
elevations, after allowable encroachments into the floodway fringe, exceeding
one-half foot (1/2').
      4.   Buried or suspended utility transmission lines, provided that:
         a.   Suspended utility transmission lines are designed such that the
lowest point of the suspended line is at least six feet (6') higher than the
base flood elevation;
         b.   Towers and other appurtenant structures are designed and placed
to withstand and offer minimal obstruction to flood flows; and
         c.   Utility transmission lines carrying toxic or flammable materials
are buried to a depth at least twice the calculated maximum depth of scour for
the base flood. The maximum depth of scour may be determined from any of the
accepted hydraulic engineering methods, but the final calculated figure shall
be subject to approval by the floodplain administrator.
      5.   Storage of materials and equipment, provided that:
         a.   The material or equipment is not subject to major damage by
flooding and is properly anchored to prevent flotation or downstream movement;
or
         b.   The material or equipment is readily removable within the limited
time available after flood warning. Storage of flammable, toxic or explosive
materials shall not be permitted.
      6.   Domestic water supply wells, provided that:
         a.   They are driven or drilled wells located on ground higher than
the surrounding ground to assure positive drainage from the well;
         b.   Well casings are watertight to a distance of at least twenty five
feet (25') below the ground surface;
         c.   Water supply and electrical lines have a watertight seal where
the lines enter the casing;
         d.   All pumps, electrical lines and equipment are either of the
submersible type or are adequately floodproofed; and
         e.   Check valves are installed on main water lines at wells and all
building entry locations.
      7.   Buried and sealed vaults for sewage disposal in recreational areas,
provided that they meet applicable laws and standards administered by the city
of Belgrade, Montana department of environmental quality or the Gallatin city-
county environmental health department.
      8.   Public or private campgrounds, and recreational vehicle parks or
campgrounds provided that:
         a.   Access roads require only limited fill and do not obstruct or
divert floodwaters; and
         b.   Recreational vehicles and travel trailers are not in place more
than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days and are licensed and ready for
highway use. They are ready for highway use if on wheels or jacking system with
wheels intact, are attached to the site with only quick disconnect type
utilities and securing devices, and have no permanently attached additions.
      9.   Structures accessory to the uses permitted in this section such as
boat docks, marinas, sheds, picnic shelters, tables and toilets, provided that:
         a.   The structures are not intended for human habitation;
         b.   The structures, because of their type, construction, and use will
have minimal potential to be damaged by a flood;
         c.   The structures will, insofar as possible, be located on ground
higher than the surrounding ground and as far from the channel as possible;
         d.   The floodproofing standards of chapter 6 of this title are met;
and
         e.   The structures will be constructed and placed so as to offer a
minimal obstruction to flood flows and are anchored to prevent flotation.
      10.   Substantial improvements to any structure provided that the
provisions of subsection
12-5-3B5 or B6 of this chapter are met. In the floodway the structure must be
floodproofed or elevated on a permanent foundation rather than on fill.
      11.   All other artificial obstructions, substantial improvements or
nonconforming uses not specifically listed in, or prohibited by, these
regulations.
   C.   Permits For Flood Control Works: Flood control works shall be allowed
within floodways subject to the issuance of a permit by the floodplain
administrator if the proposed project combined with allowable floodway fringe
encroachments does not result in any increase (greater than or equal to 1/100
of 1 foot) to the unobstructed elevation of the base flood, and with the
following conditions:
      1.   Levees and floodwalls are permitted if:
         a.   The proposed levee or floodwall is designed and constructed to
safely convey the base flood; and
         b.   The cumulative effect of the levee or floodwall combined with
allowable floodway fringe encroachments does not increase the unobstructed
elevation of the base flood. With concurrence of the Montana department of
natural resources and conservation, and after the issuance of a CLOMR by FEMA
and a variance by the council, the floodplain administrator may issue a permit
authorizing a higher permissible increase in the base flood elevation for
individual levee projects. In issuing such a permit, the floodplain
administrator shall consider the following criteria:
            (1)   The estimated cumulative effect of other reasonable
anticipated future permissible uses; and
            (2)   The type and amount of existing flood prone development in
the affected area.
         c.   The proposed levee or floodwall, except those to protect
agricultural land only, are constructed at least three feet (3') higher than
the base flood elevation.
      2.   Bank stabilization, including riprap and stream restoration
projects, if:
         a.   The project materials are designed to withstand the base flood;
         b.   The project does not increase the base flood elevation; and
         c.   The project will not increase erosion upstream, downstream, or
adjacent to the project site.
      3.   Channelization and channel alteration projects if they do not
significantly increase the magnitude, velocity of the base flood in the
proximity of the project.
      4.   Dams, provided that:
         a.   They are designed and constructed in accordance with the Montana
dam safety act approved safety standards; and
         b.   They will not increase flood hazards downstream, either through
operational procedures or improper hydrologic design.
   D.   Permits For Water Diversions: Permits for the establishment of a water
diversion or change in place of diversion shall not be issued if:
      1.   The proposed project combined with allowable floodway fringe
encroachments results in any increase (greater than or equal to 1/100 of 1
foot) to the unobstructed elevation of the base flood;
      2.   The proposed diversion is not designed and constructed to minimize
potential erosion from the base flood; and
      3.   Any permanent diversion structure crossing the full width of the
stream channel is not designed and constructed to safely withstand the base
flood.
   E.   Prohibited Uses: The following artificial obstructions and alterations
to nonconforming uses are prohibited within the floodway:
      1.   New construction and alterations of any residential, commercial, or
industrial structure;
      2.   Encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway that
would result in erosion of embankment, obstruction of the natural flow of
waters, or increase in flood elevations within the community during the
occurrence of the base flood;
      3.   The construction or permanent storage of an object subject to
flotation or movement during flooding;
      4.   Solid and hazardous waste disposal, water distribution systems, and
sewage treatment or disposal systems, except as allowed or approved under the
laws and standards administered by the city of Belgrade, Montana department of
environmental quality sciences or the Gallatin city-county environmental health
department;
      5.   Storage of highly toxic, flammable or explosive materials;
      6.   Alterations of structures unless it can be shown the alteration will
not raise flood heights; and
      7.   Manufactured homes. (Ord. 2011-5, 10-17-2011)
12-5-3: FLOODWAY FRINGE:
   A.   Uses Allowed Without Permits: All uses allowed in the floodway,
according to the provisions of subsection
12-5-2A of this chapter, shall also be allowed without a permit in the floodway
fringe. In addition, individual or multiple-family subsurface sewage disposal
systems are allowed only when they are reviewed and approved under laws and
regulations administered by the city of Belgrade, Montana department of
environmental quality or the Gallatin city-county environmental health
department.
   B.   Uses Requiring Permits: All uses allowed in the floodway subject to the
issuance of a permit, according to the provisions of subsections
12-5-2B through D of this chapter, shall also be allowed by permit within the
floodway fringe. Where the requirements of section
12-5-2 of this chapter prohibit any increase in the base flood elevation in the
floodway, those requirements shall be interpreted to allow up to one-half foot
(1/2') increase in the base flood elevation in the floodway fringe, unless the
flood insurance study describes a lower allowable encroachment at a given
location. In addition, new construction, substantial improvements and
alterations to structures, including, but not limited to, residential,
commercial and industrial construction and suitable fill shall be allowed by
permit from the floodplain administrator subject to the following conditions:
      1.   Compatible With Other Laws: Such structures or fill must not be
prohibited by any other statute, regulation, ordinance or resolution, and must
be compatible with any adopted growth policy or applicable law;
      2.   Enclosures: If a structure includes any fully enclosed area below
the lowest floor (other than a basement, which are prohibited), use of this
space shall be limited to parking, loading areas, building access, and storage
of equipment or materials not appreciably affected by floodwaters. Walls shall
be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic forces by allowing for entry
and exit of floodwaters. The location, number, and design of any required
openings to allow for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters shall be
certified by a Montana professional engineer as meeting the minimum
requirements of the national flood insurance program;
      3.   Floodproofing Standards: Such structures are designed and built in
accordance with the floodproofing standards of chapter 6 of this title;
      4.   Minimal Obstruction To Flood Flows: Such structures are placed and
constructed so as to offer minimal obstruction to flood flows and are anchored
to prevent flotation;
      5.   Lowest Floor Elevation: The new construction, alterations and
substantial improvements of residential structures including manufactured homes
must be constructed such that the lowest floor elevation, including basements,
is a minimum of two feet (2') above the base flood elevation in accordance with
one of the below options. If built with a crawl space, the lowest finished
interior grade of the crawl space shall be at or above the base flood
elevation.
         a.   The structure is built on suitable fill placed at an elevation
greater than or equal to the base flood elevation, and extending at least
fifteen feet (15'), at that minimum elevation, beyond the structures in all
directions; or
         b.   The structure is elevated on a backfilled permanent foundation;
      6.   Commercial And Industrial Structures Floodproofed: The new
construction, alterations and substantial improvement of commercial and
industrial structures must be either constructed as specified in subsection B5
of this section, or be adequately floodproofed to an elevation no lower than
two feet (2') above the base flood elevation. Floodproofing shall be
accomplished in accordance with chapter 6 of this title and shall further
include impermeable membranes or materials for floor and walls, watertight
enclosures for all windows, doors, and other openings, and be certified by a
licensed Montana professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing
methods are adequate to withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities,
impact and uplift forces associated with the base flood:
         a.   Structures whose lowest floors are used for a purpose other than
parking, loading, or storage of materials resistant to flooding shall be
floodproofed to an elevation no lower than two feet (2') above the base flood
elevation. Floodproofing shall include impermeable membranes or materials for
floors and walls and watertight enclosures for all windows, doors, and other
openings. The floors and walls shall be designed and constructed of materials
resistant to flooding to an elevation no lower than two feet (2') above the
base flood elevation. These structures shall also be designed to withstand the
hydrostatic, hydrodynamic, and buoyancy effects of the base flood.
         b.   Floodproofing of electrical, heating, and plumbing systems shall
be accomplished in accordance with chapter 6 of this title;
      7.   Anchoring Of Manufactured Homes: All manufactured homes placed in
the floodway fringe must have the chassis securely anchored to a foundation
system that will resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of
anchoring may include, but are not limited to, over the top or frame ties to
ground anchors. The following conditions also apply:
         a.   When a manufactured home: 1) undergoes alterations, 2) is
replaced because of substantial damage as a result of a flood, or 3) is
replaced on an individual site, the lowest floor must be elevated at least two
feet (2') above the base flood elevation. The home can be elevated on suitable
fill or raised on a permanent foundation of reinforced concrete, reinforced
mortared block, reinforced piers, or other foundation elements of at least
equivalent strength.
         b.   Replacement or substantial improvements of manufactured homes in
an existing manufactured home park or subdivision must be raised on a permanent
foundation. The lowest floor must be elevated at least two feet (2') above the
base flood elevation. The foundation must consist of reinforced concrete,
reinforced mortared block, reinforced piers, or other foundation elements of at
least equivalent strength.
         c.   Manufactured homes proposed for use as commercial or industrial
structures must be elevated and anchored, rather than floodproofed;
      8.   Fill: Suitable fill placed in the floodway fringe must be stable,
compacted (a minimum compaction rate of 95 percent is recommended), well
graded, pervious, generally unaffected by water and frost, devoid of trash or
similar foreign matter, devoid of tree stumps or other organic material, and
appropriate for the purpose of supporting the intended use and/or permanent
structure;
      9.   Transportation Related Improvements: Transportation related
improvements such as roads, streets, highways, and rail lines shall be designed
to minimize increase in flood heights. Where failure or interruption of
transportation facilities would result in danger to the public health or
safety, the facility shall be located two feet (2') above the base flood
elevation;
      10.   Agricultural Structures: Agricultural structures that have a low
damage potential, such as sheds, barns, shelters, and hay or grain storage
structures must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation or collapse; and
all electrical facilities shall be placed above the base flood elevation; and
      11.   Recreational Vehicles: Recreational vehicles, if they are on the
site for more than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days are not ready for
highway use, must meet the elevation requirements of subsection B5 of this
section.
   C.   Prohibited Uses: The following artificial obstructions and
nonconforming uses are prohibited within the floodway fringe:
      1.   Solid and hazardous waste disposal; and
      2.   Storage of highly toxic, flammable, or explosive materials. Storage
of petroleum products may be allowed by permit if stored on compacted suitable
fill at least two feet (2') above the base flood elevation and anchored to a
permanent foundation to prevent downstream movement. (Ord. 2011-5, 10-17-2011)
12-5-4: FLOODPLAIN AREAS WITH BASE FLOOD ELEVATIONS AND NO DELINEATED FLOODWAY:
   A.   A development proposed for a floodplain, where base flood elevations
are available but no floodway is delineated, may not significantly increase
flood velocities of depths or generally alter patterns of flood flow. The
provisions of section
12-5-3, "Floodway Fringe", of this chapter shall apply to these areas. The
floodplain administrator may require a permit applicant to furnish additional
hydraulic data before acting on a permit application for such a floodplain. The
data may include, but are not limited to, any of the following:
      1.   A hydraulic study documenting probable effect on upstream,
downstream, or adjacent property owners caused by the proposed development; or
      2.   The calculated increase in the base flood elevation caused by the
proposed development.
   B.   Permits for such proposed development may be modified or denied if the
additional information shows that the proposed use would cause an additional
flood hazard to adjacent property or significantly increase flood heights. A
significant increase in flood heights is one-half foot (1/2') unless existing
or anticipated development in the area dictates a lesser amount of allowable
increase. (Ord. 2011-5, 10-17-2011)
12-5-5: FLOODPLAIN AREAS WITHOUT BASE FLOOD ELEVATIONS OR DELINEATED FLOODWAYS
(ZONE A):
The following requirements apply to the floodplains delineated by approximated
methods and identified as zone A on the official maps:
   A.   Uses Allowed Without Permits: All uses allowed in a floodway, according
to the provisions of subsection
12-5-2A of this chapter shall also be allowed without a permit in zone A.
   B.   Uses Requiring Permit: The requirements of subsection
12-5-3B of this chapter shall also apply to zone A floodplains. Since there are
no base flood elevations computed for a zone A, the following conditions also
shall apply:
      1.   Base flood elevations shall be provided for subdivision proposals
and other proposed developments which contain at least fifty (50) lots or five
(5) acres (whichever is less) and those base flood elevations shall be used in
applying these regulations;
      2.   The floodplain administrator may obtain, review, and reasonably use
any base flood elevation or floodway data available from a federal, state, or
other source, until such data has been provided by the federal emergency
management agency to enforce these regulations;
      3.   Historical flood elevations may be used by the floodplain
administrator in determining suitable fill or floodproofing elevations to be
achieved, and used to enforce these regulations;
      4.   If historical flood evidence is not available, then the floodplain
administrator shall determine, from a field review at the proposed development
site, an appropriate fill or floodproofing elevation or both to be utilized in
applying these regulations. In the absence of depth or elevation, a minimum two
foot (2') flood depth shall be used; and
      5.   Proposed structures must be anchored to prevent flotation or
collapse and must be located as far from stream channels as practicable.
   C.   Prohibited Uses: Those uses prohibited in the floodway fringe, in
accordance with subsection
12-5-3C of this chapter, shall also be prohibited within the zone A boundaries.
   D.   Floodplain Boundary Interpretation: The floodplain administrator shall
make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the zone A
boundary when there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and
actual field conditions. (Ord. 2011-5, 10-17-2011)
12-5-6: SHALLOW FLOODING (ZONE AO):
   A.   Shallow flooding areas are delineated as zone AO on the official maps.
The provisions of section
12-5-3, "Floodway Fringe", of this chapter shall apply to zone AO. The flooding
depth of 100-year frequency is indicated as the depth number on the official
maps and shall be referenced to the crown of the nearest street or stream flow
line in determining fill or floodproofing heights or both which are to be
utilized in applying the provisions of subsection
12-5-3B of this chapter. In the absence of depth or elevation information, a
minimum two foot (2') flood depth shall be used.
      1.   Floodplain Boundary Interpretation: The floodplain administrator
shall make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of a zone AO
boundary when there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and
actual field conditions. (Ord. 2011-5, 10-17-2011)
CHAPTER 6
FLOODPROOFING REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
12-6-1: Certification
12-6-2: Conformance
12-6-1: CERTIFICATION:
If the following floodproofing requirements are to be applied to a proposed
structure, as stipulated by the floodplain administrator in accordance with
these regulations, the methods used must be certified as adequate by a licensed
Montana professional engineer or architect. (Ord. 2011-5, 10-17-2011)
12-6-2: CONFORMANCE:
Permitted floodproof systems shall conform to the conditions listed below and,
for commercial and industrial structures, the floodproofing standards listed in
subsection
12-5-3B6 of this title.
   A.   Electrical Systems:
      1.   All incoming power service equipment, including all metering
equipment, control centers, transformers, distribution and lighting panels and
all other stationary equipment must be located at least two feet (2') above the
base flood elevation;
      2.   Portable or movable electrical equipment may be placed below the
base flood elevation, if the equipment can be disconnected by a single plug and
socket assembly of the submersible type;
      3.   The main power service line shall have automatically operated
electrical disconnect equipment or manually operated electrical disconnect
equipment located at an accessible remote location outside the floodplain and
above the base flood elevation; and
      4.   All electrical wiring systems installed at or below the base flood
elevation shall be suitable for continuous submergence and may not contain
fibrous components.
   B.   Heating Systems:
      1.   Float operated automatic control valves must be installed in supply
lines to gas furnaces so that the fuel supply is automatically shut off when
floodwaters reach the floor level where the furnaces are located;
      2.   Manually operated gate valves that can be operated from a location
above the base flood elevation also shall be provided in gas supply lines;
      3.   Electric heating systems must be installed in accordance with the
provisions of subsection A of this section.
   C.   Plumbing Systems:
      1.   Sewer lines, except those to be buried and sealed in vaults, must
have check valves installed to prevent sewage backup into permitted structures;
      2.   All toilet stools, sinks, urinals and drains must be located such
that the lowest point of possible water entry is at least two feet (2') above
the base flood elevation, unless dry floodproofing is used. (Ord. 2011-5, 10-
17-2011)
TITLE 13
FRANCHISES
CHAPTER 1
MONTANA POWER COMPANY 1
SECTION:
13-1-1: Franchise Granted
13-1-2: Extension Of Mains And Pipes
13-1-3: Supply Of Gas
13-1-4: Discontinuance Of Gas Distribution
13-1-5: Work To Be Done In Workmanlike Manner
13-1-6: City To Be Held Harmless
13-1-7: Assignment Of Franchise
13-1-8: Duties Of City
13-1-9: Franchise Not Exclusive
13-1-10: Forfeiture Of Franchise
 
Notes
1 1. This franchise was transferred to Northwest Energy.
13-1-1: FRANCHISE GRANTED:
There is hereby granted to the Montana Power Company, a corporation, its
successors and assigns (hereinafter called the "grantee"), the right, privilege
and franchise for the full period of fifty (50) years from and after September
21, 1980 and thereafter until and unless otherwise provided by ordinance to
construct, equip, lay, maintain and operate in, under, upon, over and across
the streets, avenues, alleys, highways, bridges, easements and other public
places in the city, as now or hereafter constituted, mains, pipes, conduits,
manholes, reducing and regulating stations and all other appurtenances and
accessories for the purpose of transporting, conveying, distributing, supplying
and selling natural gas or artificial gas, or a mixture of natural and
artificial gas for light, heat, power and other purposes, at rates fixed and
allowed by the public service commission of Montana, and grantee agrees to file
with the city clerk, the schedule of rates thus fixed and allowed. (1983 Code §
13.02.010)
13-1-2: EXTENSION OF MAINS AND PIPES:
The grantee shall extend its gas mains and pipes to such parties of said city
as the consumption of gas shall justify. (1983 Code § 13.02.020)
13-1-3: SUPPLY OF GAS:
The grantee, at all times during the existence of this franchise, shall use its
best efforts to obtain and supply a continuous, sufficient and adequate
quantity of gas for use by said city and its inhabitants, provided; however,
that grantee shall in nowise be liable to said city or to its inhabitants
because of the interruption or discontinuance of the supply of gas by causes
beyond the reasonable control of grantee. (1983 Code § 13.02.030)
13-1-4: DISCONTINUANCE OF GAS DISTRIBUTION:
Grantee shall not discontinue the distribution of gas through its distributing
system, or any portion thereof, for an unreasonable length of time for the
purpose of making repairs and extensions, but grantee shall not be liable to
the city or to any consumers for damages caused by such temporary
discontinuance or interruption of the delivery of gas; provided, that such
repairs and extensions are made with reasonable diligence. (1983 Code §
13.02.040)
13-1-5: WORK TO BE DONE IN WORKMANLIKE MANNER:
All work done in, under, upon, over and across the present and future streets,
avenues, alleys, highways, bridges, easements and other public places in the
city by grantee for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this
franchise shall be done and performed in a good and workmanlike manner. When
any street, alley, or other public place in said city is excavated or damaged
by grantee by reason of such work, the grantee shall restore such street,
alley, or public place to its former condition as early as practicable.
If, at any time, a change in the grade or plan of any street, alley, or public
place shall be made by order of the proper city officials, the grantee shall,
without expense to the city, make such changes in the location of its pipes and
facilities as the change of the grade or plan of the street, alley, or public
place makes necessary, which said change shall be made as soon as possible
after said grantee shall have received notice from the proper city official
having the same in charge. (1983 Code § 13.02.050)
13-1-6: CITY TO BE HELD HARMLESS:
Grantee shall hold the city harmless from all costs and damages which shall or
may accrue to said city by reason of the neglect, default, or misconduct of the
grantee in connection with the exercise of its rights hereunder. (1983 Code §
13.02.060)
13-1-7: ASSIGNMENT OF FRANCHISE:
Grantee is hereby given the right and authority to make assignments of this
right, privilege, or franchise, and its rights hereunder; all assignees to be
bound to the same extent as the original grantee. (1983 Code § 13.02.070)
13-1-8: DUTIES OF CITY:
The city shall pass all ordinances necessary or suitable to protect the
property and rights of said grantee and to enable said grantee to enforce any
of its reasonable rules and regulations for the management, operation and
control of the service hereunder, and shall pass any reasonable ordinance or
ordinances that may be necessary or suitable in order fully to confirm to said
grantee the rights herein or hereby granted or intended so to be. (1983 Code §
13.02.080)
13-1-9: FRANCHISE NOT EXCLUSIVE:
Nothing in this chapter contained shall be held or construed to grant any
exclusive rights or privileges, but the city reserves to itself the right at
any time to make such other grants or extend such other privileges to any other
person or persons, company, or corporation for the use of its streets, alleys,
or other public places, or any thereof for the purposes in this chapter
expressed or for any other valid purpose as the city council may by ordinance
from time to time determine. (1983 Code § 13.02.090)
13-1-10: FORFEITURE OF FRANCHISE:
Failure on the part of grantee to comply in any substantial respect with any of
the provisions of this franchise shall be grounds for forfeiture thereof, but
no such forfeiture shall take effect if the reasonableness or the propriety
thereof is protested by grantee until and unless a court of competent
jurisdiction (with right of appeal in either party) shall have found that said
grantee has failed to comply in a substantial respect with any of the
provisions of this franchise, and grantee shall have six (6) months after the
final determination of said question to make good the default before a
forfeiture shall result, with the right in the city council, at its discretion,
to grant such additional time to the grantee for compliance, as necessities in
the case may require. (1983 Code § 13.02.100)
CHAPTER 2
TCI CABLEVISION 1
SECTION:
13-2-1: Definitions
13-2-2: Grant
13-2-3: Term
13-2-4: Conditions Of Street Occupancy
13-2-5: Required Shared Use With Utilities
13-2-6: Reservation To Regulate
13-2-7: Use Of Public Ways
13-2-8: Franchise Fee
13-2-9: Late Payment Fee
13-2-10: Grantor Inspection Right
13-2-11: Renewal Of Franchise
13-2-12: Transfer Of Franchise
13-2-13: Insurance Requirements
13-2-14: Indemnification
13-2-15: Bonds And Other Surety
13-2-16: Notice Of Violation
13-2-17: Grantee's Right To Cure Or Respond
13-2-18: Public Hearings
13-2-19: Notice
13-2-20: Extensions Of Service
13-2-21: Customer Service
13-2-22: Street Work
13-2-23: Removal Or Abandonment
13-2-24: Reports, Records And Plans
13-2-25: Misdemeanor
13-2-26: Severability
13-2-27: Use Of Proceeds
13-2-28: Documents Incorporated And Made A Part Hereof
13-2-29: Preemption
13-2-30: Actions Of Franchise Authority
 
Notes
  1. Franchise assigned from TCI Cablevision to Bresnan Communications, LLC, by
1 agreement dated April 17, 2002, and agreed to by the city. On August 2, 2004,
  and agreement was entered into with Bresnan Communications, LLC, by the city
  for an initial term of 20 years.
13-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and
abbreviations shall have the meaning below. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the
plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number
include the plural number:
AFFILIATE: An entity which owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is
under common ownership with grantee.
BASIC CABLE: The tier of service regularly provided to all subscribers that
includes the retransmission of local broadcast television signals.
CABLE ACT: The cable communications policy act of 1984, as amended.
CABLE SERVICE:
   A.   The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other
programming service; and
   B.   Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of
such video programming or any other lawful communication service.
CABLE SYSTEM: A facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and
associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment or other
communications equipment that is designed to provide cable service and other
service to subscribers.
FCC: Federal communications commission, or successor governmental entity
thereto.
FRANCHISE: The initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the
franchise authority, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise,
permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, or otherwise, which
authorizes construction and operation of the cable system for the purpose of
offering cable service or other service to subscribers.
FRANCHISE AUTHORITY: The city of Belgrade, Montana, or the lawful successor,
transferee, or assignee thereof.
GRANTEE: TCI Cablevision of Montana, Inc., or the lawful successor, transferee,
or assignee thereof.
GROSS REVENUES: The monthly cable service revenues received by grantee from
subscribers of the cable system; provided, however, that such phrase shall not
include: a) revenues received from any national advertising carried on the
cable system; b) any taxes on cable service which are imposed directly or
indirectly on any subscriber which are collected by the grantee on behalf of
such governmental unit or agency.
PERSON: An individual, partnership, association, joint stock company, trust
corporation, or governmental entity.
PUBLIC WAY: The surface of, and the space above and below, any public street,
highway, freeway, bridge, land path, alley, court, boulevard, sidewalk,
parkway, way, lane, public way, drive, circle, or other public right of way,
including, but not limited to, public utility easements, dedicated utility
strips, or rights of way dedicated for compatible uses and any temporary or
permanent fixtures or improvements located thereon now or hereafter held by the
franchise authority in the service area which shall entitle the franchise
authority and the grantee to the use thereof for the purpose of installing,
operating, repairing, and maintaining the cable system. Public way shall also
mean any easement now or hereafter held by the franchise authority within the
service area for the purpose of public travel, or for utility or public service
use dedicated for compatible uses, and shall include other easements or rights
of way as shall within their proper use and meaning entitle the franchise
authority and the grantee to the use thereof for the purposes of installing or
transmitting grantee's cable service or other service over poles, wires,
cables, amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and other property as may be
ordinarily necessary and pertinent to the cable system.
SERVICE AREA: The present municipal boundaries of the city, and shall include
any additions thereto by annexation or other legal means.
SERVICE TIER: A category of cable service or other services, provided by
grantee and for which a separate charge is made by grantee.
SUBSCRIBER: A person or user of the cable system who lawfully receives cable
services or other service therefrom with grantee's express permission.
VIDEO PROGRAMMING: Programming provided by, or generally considered comparable
to programming provided by, a television broadcast station. (Ord. 94-4, 8-1-
1994)
13-2-2: GRANT:
   A.   The franchise authority hereby grants to grantee a nonexclusive
franchise to construct and operate a cable system and offer cable service and
other services in, along, among, upon, across, above, over, under, upon,
across, or along any public way and all extensions thereof and additions
thereto, such poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults,
manholes, pedestals, amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and other related
property or equipment as may be necessary or appurtenant to the cable system.
   B.   This franchise does not relieve the grantee of any requirement of the
franchise authority pursuant to its lawful police power or of any applicable
ordinance the provisions of which are not inconsistent herewith and that do not
place an addition material burden on grantee including, but not limited to, any
ordinance, rule, regulation, or specification of the franchise authority,
including, but not limited to, any requirement relating to street work, street
excavation permits, or the use, removal or relocation of property in streets.
   C.   Any privilege claimed under this franchise by the grantee in any street
shall be subordinate to any prior lawful occupancy of the street. The franchise
authority reserves the right to reasonably designate where a grantee's
facilities are to be placed within the public way.
   D.   The grantee shall operate and maintain its cable system in full
compliance with the standards set forth by the FCC.
   E.   This franchise shall not relieve the grantee of any obligations
involved in obtaining pole or conduit space from any department of the city,
utility company, or from others maintaining utilities in public ways.
   F.   Any privilege claimed under this franchise in any public right of way
or other public property shall be subordinate to the public use.
   G.   The franchise authority reserves the right to join with one or more of
the other local area city and/or county governments in the formation and
operations of an intergovernmental administrative franchising authority for the
purpose of joint administration of this franchise. The grantor reserves the
right to assign the administration of the provisions of any franchise granted
pursuant to this chapter to such a duly established joint authority, and to
join with other members of the authority in developing such intergovernmental
agreement bylaws, rules, and regulations as necessary for the proper
administration of the joint authority.
   H.   This franchise shall not become effective for any purpose unless and
until written acceptance thereof shall have been filed with the Belgrade city
clerk. Written acceptance which shall be in the form and substance approved by
the Belgrade city attorney, shall also be and operate as an acceptance of each
and every term and condition and limitation contained in this franchise or
otherwise specified as herein and therein provided.
   I.   The written acceptance shall be filed by grantee within forty five (45)
days after notifying the franchise authority verbally of acceptance. In the
event this day falls on a nonworking day, then the next working day will
suffice.
   J.   In default of the filing of such written acceptance as herein required,
the grantee shall be deemed to have rejected and reputed the franchise.
Thereafter, the acceptance of the grantee shall not be received or filed by the
city of Belgrade clerk. The grantee shall have no rights, remedies, or redress
in the premises unless and until the franchise authority, by resolution, shall
determine that such acceptance be received or filed, and then upon such terms
and conditions as the franchise authority may impose.
   K.   In the event the franchise authority enters into a franchise, permit,
license, authorization, or other agreement of any kind with any other person or
entity other than grantee to enter into the service area streets and public
ways for the purpose of constructing or operating a cable system or providing
cable service to any part of the service area, the material provisions thereof
shall be reasonably comparable to those contained herein, in order that one
operator not be granted an unfair competitive advantage over another, and to
provide all parties equal protection under the law. (Ord. 94-4, 8-1-1994)
13-2-3: TERM:
The franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be for an initial term of
ten (10) years from its passage and final adoption.
Pursuant to the terms of subsections
13-2-16A and
13-2-18A, B and C of this chapter, the franchise authority may terminate this
franchise in the event of the wilful failure, refusal or neglect by the grantee
to do or comply with any material requirement or limitation contained in this
franchise, or other applicable rule or regulation of the franchise authority
insofar as such rule or regulation does not conflict with the provisions of the
franchise, subject to the provisions hereof. In any event the franchise
authority shall not take any punitive action or commence any action at law
without first conducting a public hearing. Grantee shall be notified of the
time and place of such hearing and have an opportunity to be heard. (Ord. 94-4,
8-1-1994)
13-2-4: CONDITIONS OF STREET OCCUPANCY:
All transmissions and distribution structures, poles, other lines and equipment
installed or erected by the grantee pursuant to the terms hereof shall be so
located so as to cause a minimum of interference with the proper use of public
ways and with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who own
property that adjoins any of said public ways. (Ord. 94-4, 8-1-1994)
13-2-5: REQUIRED SHARED USE WITH UTILITIES:
Whenever, in the judgment of the franchise authority, it is deemed
impracticable to permit erection of poles or construction of underground
conduit system by any utility which may at the time have authority to construct
or maintain a conduit or poles in street areas, the franchise authority may
require the grantee to afford to such utility the right to use such poles or
facilities of the grantee as the franchise authority finds practicable in
common with the grantee, so long as the use of such poles or facilities does
not interfere with the grantee's present and future use of such poles or
facilities. (Ord. 94-4, 8-1-1994)
13-2-6: RESERVATION TO REGULATE:
The franchise authority reserves the right to enact reasonable regulations
pertaining to the use of the franchise authority's streets and poles within the
service area; providing, however, that such additional regulation shall not
conflict with or, alter in any manner the rights granted herein, and shall not
conflict with laws of state of Montana, the laws of United States of America,
or rules, regulations, and policies of FCC, which may include, but is not
limited to:
   A.   Construction and use of poles;
   B.   Use of poles and conduits by city;
   C.   Common user;
   D.   Reservation of street rights;
   E.   Restoration of streets; and
   F.   Movement of facilities. (Ord. 94-4, 8-1-1994)
13-2-7: USE OF PUBLIC WAYS:
   A.   Restoration Of Public Ways: If during the course of grantee's
construction, operation or maintenance of the cable system there occurs a
disturbance of any public way by grantee, it shall, at its expense, replace and
restore such public way to a condition reasonably comparable to the condition
of the public way existing immediately prior to such disturbance.
   B.   Traffic Conditions; Public Safety; Street Construction: Upon its
receipt of reasonable advance notice, not to be less than five (5) business
days, the grantee shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily
disconnect, relocate in the public way, or remove from the public way, any
property of the grantee when lawfully required by the franchise authority by
reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street abandonment, freeway and
street construction, change or establishment of street grade, installation of
sewers, drains, gas or water pipes, or any other type of structures or
improvements by the franchise authority; but, the grantee shall in all cases
have the right of abandonment of its property. If public funds are available to
any company using such street, easement, or right of way for the purpose of
defraying the cost of any of the foregoing, such funds shall also be made
available to the grantee.
   C.   Relocation At Request Of Third Party: The grantee shall, on the request
of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the franchise
authority, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of such
building, provided: 1) the expense of such temporary raising or lowering of
wires is paid by said person, including, if required by the grantee, making
such payment in advance; and 2) the grantee is given not less than ten (10)
business days' advance written notice to arrange for such temporary wire
changes.
   D.   Trimming Of Trees And Shrubbery: Grantee shall have authority to trim
trees or other natural growth overhanging any of its cable system in the
service area which exists on public property or public rights of way so as to
prevent said growth from coming into contact with grantee's wires, cables, or
other equipment. If neither the franchise authority or the private property
owner does not alleviate the obstacle within fifteen (15) days, grantee shall
have the authority to remove said obstacles. Grantee shall be permitted to
charge the property owner for the cost of removal of the trees and natural
growth if similar charges are assessed and paid to utilities or the franchise
authority for such work. The grantee shall reasonably compensate the franchise
authority or the property owner for any damages done pursuant to said tree or
bush removal or, in its discretion, replace trees or shrubs damaged as a result
of any removal or construction undertaken by the grantee.
   E.   Use Of Grantee's Equipment By Franchise Authority: Subject to any
applicable state or federal regulations or tariffs, the franchise authority
shall have the right to make additional use, for any public purpose, of any
poles or conduits controlled or maintained exclusively by or for the grantee in
any public way; provided that:
      1.   Such use by the franchise authority does not interfere with a
current or future use by the grantee;
      2.   The franchise authority holds the grantee harmless against and from
all claims, demands, costs, or liabilities of every kind and nature whatsoever
arising out of such use of said poles or conduits, including, but not limited
to, reasonable attorney fees and costs; and
      3.   At grantee's sole discretion, the franchise authority may be
required either to pay a reasonable rental fee or otherwise reasonably
compensate grantee for the use of such poles, conduits, or equipment; provided,
however, that grantee agrees that such compensation or charge shall not exceed
those paid by it to public utilities pursuant to the applicable pole attachment
agreement, or other authorization, relating to the service area.
   F.   Safety Requirements: Construction, installation, and maintenance of the
cable system shall be performed in an orderly and workmanlike manner. All such
work shall be performed in substantial accordance with applicable FCC or other
federal, state, and local regulations. The cable system shall not unreasonably
endanger or interfere with the safety of persons or property in the service
area.
   G.   Aerial And Underground Construction: In those areas of the service area
where all of the transmission or distribution facilities of the respective
public utilities providing telephone communications and electric services are
underground, the grantee likewise shall construct, operate, and maintain all of
its transmission and distribution facilities underground; provided, that such
facilities are actually capable of receiving grantee's cable and other
equipment without technical degradation of the cable system's signal quality.
In those areas of the service area where the transmission or distribution
facilities of the respective public utilities providing telephone
communications and electric services are both aerial and underground, grantee
shall have the sole discretion to construct, operate, and maintain all of its
transmission and distribution facilities, or any part thereof, aerially or
underground. Nothing contained in subsection F of this section shall require
grantee to construct, operate, and maintain underground any ground mounted
appurtenances such as subscriber taps, line extenders, system passive devices
(splitters, directional couplers), amplifiers, power supplies, pedestals, or
other related equipment. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in
subsection F of this section, in the event that all of the transmission or
distribution facilities of the respective public utilities providing telephone
communications and electric services are placed underground after the effective
date hereof, grantee shall only be required to construct, operate, and maintain
all of its transmission and distribution facilities underground if it is given
reasonable notice and access to the public utilities' facilities at the time
that such are placed underground. (Ord. 94-4, 8-1-1994)
13-2-8: FRANCHISE FEE:
   A.   Payment: Grantee shall pay to the franchise authority a franchise fee
equal to five percent (5%) of the quarterly gross revenue received by grantee
from operating the cable system on a quarterly basis. The franchise fee shall
be due and payable forty five (45) days after close of quarter. Each payment
shall be accompanied by a report from a representative of grantee showing the
basis for the computation.
   B.   Limitation On Franchise Fee Actions: The period of limitation for
recovery of any franchise fee payable hereunder shall be five (5) years from
the date on which payment by the company is due. Unless, within five (5) years
from and after said payment due date, the franchise authority initiates a
lawsuit for recovery of such franchise fees in the court of competent
jurisdiction, such recovery shall be barred and the franchise authority shall
be estopped from asserting any claims whatsoever against the company relating
to any such alleged deficiencies. No acceptance of any payment or partial
payment by the franchise authority shall be construed as a release or as an
accord and satisfaction of any claim the franchising authority may have for
further or additional sums payable under this franchise agreement for the
performance of any obligation hereunder, within the said five (5) year
limitation. (Ord. 94-4, 8-1-1994)
13-2-9: LATE PAYMENT FEE:
Should the grantee ever fail to pay any sums of money to the franchise
authority owing to the grantor, under provisions of this agreement when such
sum becomes due and payable, grantee shall pay interest to the franchise
authority on the delinquent sum until it is fully paid, at two (2) interest
points above the prime rate of interest charged in Belgrade city area as
calculated by the franchise authority. (Ord. 94-4, 8-1-1994)
13-2-10: GRANTOR INSPECTION RIGHT:
The grantee agrees that the franchise authority may review such of its books
and records, during normal business hours and as is reasonably necessary to
monitor compliance with the terms hereof. Such records shall include, but shall
not be limited to, any public records required to be kept by the grantee
pursuant to the rules and regulations of the FCC. The franchise authority or
its representative shall have the right to inspect the grantee's records to
determine if proper payments have been made to the franchise authority. The
costs of such audits shall be borne by grantee if same results in increasing,
by more than two percent (2%), the grantee's annual payment to the franchise
authority. The franchise authority agrees to treat any information disclosed by
the grantee to it as confidential and only to disclose it to employees,
representatives, and agents thereof that have a need to know, or in order to
enforce the provisions hereof. (Ord. 94-4, 8-1-1994)
13-2-11: RENEWAL OF FRANCHISE:
The franchise authority and the grantee agree that any proceedings undertaken
by the franchise authority that relate to the renewal of the grantee's
franchise shall be governed by and comply with the provisions of section 626 of
the cable act (as such existed as of the effective date of the cable act),
unless the procedures and substantive protection set forth therein shall be
deemed to be preempted and superseded by the provisions of any subsequent
provisions of federal or state law.
In addition to the procedures set forth in said section 626(a), the franchise
authority agrees to notify grantee of its preliminary assessments regarding the
identity of future cable related community needs and interests, as well as, the
past performance of grantee under the then current franchise term. The
franchise authority further agrees that such a preliminary assessment shall be
provided to the grantee prior to the time that the four (4) month period
referred to in subsection (c) of section 626 is considered to begin.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this section 13-2-11, the
grantee and franchise authority agree that at any time during the term of the
then current franchise, while affording the public appropriate notice and
opportunity to comment, the franchise authority and grantee may agree to
undertake and finalize negotiations regarding renewal of the then current
franchise and the franchise authority may grant a renewal thereof. The grantee
and the franchise authority consider the terms set forth in this section to be
consistent with the express provisions of section 626 of the cable act. A
reproduction of section 626 of the cable act as such existed as of the
effective date of the cable act is attached hereto as schedule 1 and
incorporated herein by this reference. (Ord. 94-4, 8-1-1994)
13-2-12: TRANSFER OF FRANCHISE:
Grantee's right, title, or interest to the franchise shall not be sold,
transferred, assigned or otherwise encumbered, other than to an affiliate of
the grantee, without the prior consent of the franchise authority, such consent
not to be unreasonably withheld. No such consent shall be required, however,
for a transfer in trust, by mortgage, by other hypothecation, or by assignment
of any right, title, or interest in grantee in the franchise or cable system in
order to secure indebtedness. (Ord. 94-4, 8-1-1994)
13-2-13: INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
Grantee shall maintain in full force and effect, at its own cost and expense,
during the term of the franchise, comprehensive general liability insurance in
the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined single limit for
bodily injury, and property damage. Said insurance shall designate the
franchise authority as an additional insured. Such insurance shall be
noncancelable except upon thirty (30) days' prior written notice to the
franchise authority. (Ord. 94-4, 8-1-1994)
13-2-14: INDEMNIFICATION:
The grantee agrees to indemnify, save and hold harmless, and defend the
franchise authority, its officers, boards and employees, from and against any
liability for damages and for any liability or claims resulting from property
damage or bodily injury (including accidental death), which arise out of the
grantee's construction, operation, or maintenance of its cable system,
including, but not limited to, reasonable attorney fees and costs. (Ord. 94-4,
8-1-1994)
13-2-15: BONDS AND OTHER SURETY:
Except as expressly provided herein, grantee shall not be required to obtain or
maintain bonds or other surety as a condition of being awarded the franchise or
continuing its existence. The franchise authority acknowledges that the legal,
financial, and technical qualifications of grantee are sufficient to afford
compliance with the terms of the franchise and the enforcement thereof. Grantee
and franchise authority recognize that the costs associated with bonds and
other surety may ultimately be borne by the subscribers in the form of
increased rates for cable services. In order to minimize such costs, the
franchise authority agrees to require bonds and other surety only in such
amounts and during such times as there is a reasonably demonstrated need
therefor. The franchise authority agrees that in no event, however, shall it
require a bond or other related surety in an aggregated amount greater than ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00), conditioned upon the substantial performance of
the material terms, covenants, and conditions of the franchise. Initially, no
bond or other surety will be required. In the event that one is required in the
future, the franchise authority agrees to give grantee at least sixty (60)
days' prior written notice thereof stating the exact reason for the
requirement. Such reason must demonstrate a change in the grantee's legal,
financial, or technical qualifications which would materially prohibit or
impair its ability to comply with the terms of the franchise or afford
compliance therewith. (Ord. 94-4, 8-1-1994)
13-2-16: NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
In the event that the franchise authority believes that the grantee has not
complied with the terms of the franchise, it shall notify grantee, in writing,
of the exact nature of the alleged noncompliance. (Ord. 94-4, 8-1-1994)
13-2-17: GRANTEE'S RIGHT TO CURE OR RESPOND:
Grantee shall have thirty (30) days from receipt of the notice described in
section
13-2-16 of this chapter to: a) respond to the franchise authority contesting
the assertion of noncompliance, or b) to cure such default or, in the event
that, by the nature of default, such default cannot be cured within the thirty
(30) day period, initiate reasonable steps to remedy such default and notify
the franchise authority of the steps being taken and the projected date that
they will be completed. (Ord. 94-4, 8-1-1994)
13-2-18: PUBLIC HEARINGS:
   A.   Failure To Comply; Hearing Scheduled: In the event that grantee fails
to respond to the notice described in section
13-2-16 of this chapter pursuant to the procedures set forth in section
13-2-17 of this chapter, or in the event that the alleged default is not
remedied within sixty (60) days after the grantee is notified of the alleged
default pursuant to section
13-2-16 of this chapter, the franchise authority shall schedule a public
meeting to investigate the default. Such public meeting shall be held at the
next regularly scheduled meeting of the franchise authority which is scheduled
at a time which is no less than five (5) business days therefrom. The franchise
authority shall notify the grantee with an opportunity to be heard.
   B.   Enforcement: Subject to applicable federal and state law, in the event
the franchise authority, after such meeting, determines that grantee is in
default of any provision of the franchise, the franchise authority may:
      1.   Foreclose on all or any part of any security provided under this
franchise, if any, including, without limitation, any bonds or other surety;
provided, however, the foreclosure shall only be in such a manner and in such
amount as the franchise authority reasonably determines is necessary to remedy
the default;
      2.   Commence an action at law for monetary damages or seek other
equitable relief;
      3.   In the case of a substantial default of a material provision of the
franchise, declare the franchise agreement to be revoked; or
      4.   Seek specific performance of any provision, which reasonably lends
itself to such remedy, as an alternative to damages.
The grantee shall not be relieved of any of its obligations to comply promptly
with any provision of the franchise by reason or any failure of the franchise
authority to enforce prompt compliance.
   C.   Acts Of God: The grantee shall not be held in default or noncompliance
with the provisions of the franchise, nor suffer any enforcement or penalty
relating thereto, where such noncompliance or alleged defaults are caused by
strikes, acts of God, power outages, or other events reasonably beyond its
ability to control. (Ord. 94-4, 8-1-1994)
13-2-19: NOTICE:
Unless expressly otherwise agreed between the parties, every notice or response
to be served upon the franchise authority or grantee shall be in writing, and
shall be deemed to have been duly given to the required party five (5) business
days after having been posted in a properly sealed and correctly addressed
envelope by certified or registered mail, postage prepaid, at a post office or
branch thereof regularly maintained by the U.S. postal service. The notices or
responses to the franchise authority shall be addressed as follows:
City of Belgrade
88 N. Broadway
Belgrade, Montana 59714
The notices or responses to the grantee shall be addressed as follows:
TCI Cablevision of Montana, Inc.
P.O. Box 1925
Bozeman, MT 59771-1925
with a copy to:
TCI Cablevision of Montana, Inc.
P.O. Box 91220
Bellevue, WA 98009-9220
The franchising authority and the grantee may designate such other address or
addresses from time to time by giving notice to the other. (Ord. 94-4, 8-1-
1994)
13-2-20: EXTENSIONS OF SERVICE:
   A.   Required Extensions Of Service: The cable system as constructed as of
the date of the passage and final adoption of this chapter substantially
complies with the material provisions hereof. Grantee is hereby authorized to
extend the cable system as necessary, as desirable, or as required pursuant to
the terms hereof within the service area. Whenever grantee shall receive a
request for service from at least fifteen (15) subscribers within two thousand
six hundred forty (2,640) cable bearing strand feet (1/2 cable mile) of its
trunk or distribution cable, it shall extend its cable system to such
subscribers at no cost to said subscribers for system extension, other than the
usual connection fees for all subscribers; provided, that such extension is
technically feasible, and if it will not adversely affect the operation,
financial condition, or market development of the cable system, or as provided
for in this subsection.
   B.   Subscriber Charges For Extensions Of Service: No subscriber shall be
refused service arbitrarily. However, for unusual circumstances, such as a
subscriber's request to locate his cable drop underground, existence of more
than one hundred fifty feet (150') of distance from distribution cable to
connection of service to subscribers, or a density of less than fifteen (15)
subscribers per two thousand six hundred forty (2,640) cable bearing strand
feet of trunk or distribution cable, cable service or other service may be made
available on the basis of a capital contribution in aid of construction,
including cost of material, labor, and easements. For the purpose of
determining the amount of capital contribution in aid of construction to be
borne by grantee and subscribers in the area in which cable service may be
expanded, grantee will contribute an amount equal to the construction and other
costs per mile, multiplied by a fraction whose numerator equals the actual
number of potential subscribers per two thousand six hundred forty (2,640)
cable bearing strand feet of its trunks or distribution cable, and whose
denominator equals fifteen (15) subscribers. Potential subscribers will bear
the remainder of the construction and other costs on a pro rata basis. Grantee
may require that the payment of the capital contribution in said construction
borne by such potential subscribers be paid in advance. (Ord. 94-4, 8-1-1994)
13-2-21: CUSTOMER SERVICE:
The grantee shall maintain a business office and service center with toll free
telephone numbers so that subscribers may report service outages or
deficiencies at any time. The office shall maintain an adequate staff such that
subscribers may transact all necessary business during regular business hours.
Grantee's employees shall maintain a high standard of courtesy in customer
relations at all times. (Ord. 94-4, 8-1-1994)
13-2-22: STREET WORK:
The grantee at his expense shall protect, support, temporarily disconnect,
relocate, or remove any property of grantee when required by the grantor or
other relevant governmental unit by reason of traffic conditions, public
safety, street vacation, freeway or street construction; change or
establishment of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, water pipes,
power lines, structure or improvements by governmental agencies whether acting
in a governmental or proprietary capacity, or any other structure of public
improvement, including, but not limited to, movement of buildings, urban
renewal and redevelopment, and any general program under which the grantor or
other relevant governmental unit shall undertake to cause all such properties
to be located beneath the surface of the ground; provided, that grantee shall
in all cases have the privileges and be under the obligations as to the
abandonment of franchise property in places which are provided in the
appropriate sections hereof. (Ord. 94-4, 8-1-1994)
13-2-23: REMOVAL OR ABANDONMENT:
   A.   In the event the use of any grantee property is permanently
discontinued, or upon expiration of or within twelve (12) months after any
termination of a franchise, and subject to applicable federal or state law, the
grantee shall promptly remove from the streets all property involved, other
than that which the franchise authority may, at its sole option, permit to be
abandoned in place.
   B.   A permit to abandon in place must be obtained from franchise authority.
Nothing hereunder shall be deemed as taking of the property of grantee, and
grantee shall be entitled to no surcharge by reason of anything hereunder.
(Ord. 94-4, 8-1-1994)
13-2-24: REPORTS, RECORDS AND PLANS:
The grantee shall at all times make and keep at its Bozeman office full and
complete plans and records showing the exact location of all cable
communications system equipment installed or in use in the streets and other
public places in Belgrade city. The grantee shall also keep at its Bozeman
office, a current map or set of maps drawn to scale showing all cable
communications system equipment installed and in place in streets and other
public places in the service area. (Ord. 94-4, 8-1-1994)
13-2-25: MISDEMEANOR:
   A.   In addition to those criminal and civil remedies provided by state and
federal law, it shall be a misdemeanor for any person, firm, or corporation to
create or make use of any unauthorized connection, whether physically,
electrically, acoustically, inductively, or otherwise, with any part of the
cable system without the express consent of the grantee. Further, without the
express consent of grantee, it shall be a misdemeanor for any person to tamper
with, remove, or injure any property, equipment, or part of the cable system or
any means of receiving cable services or other services provided thereto.
   B.   Subject to applicable federal and state law, the franchise authority
shall incorporate into its criminal code, if not presently a part thereof,
criminal misdemeanor law which will enforce the intent of this section. (Ord.
94-4, 8-1-1994)
13-2-26: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, sentence, paragraph, term or provision hereof is determined to
be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, by any court of competent jurisdiction
or by any state or federal regulatory authority having jurisdiction thereof,
such determination shall have no effect on the validity of any other section,
sentence, paragraph, term or provision hereof, all of which will remain in full
force and effect for the term of the franchise or any renewal or renewals
thereof. (Ord. 94-4, 8-1-1994)
13-2-27: USE OF PROCEEDS:
Grantor shall place all revenue received pursuant to this chapter in the
Belgrade city general fund. (Ord. 94-4, 8-1-1994)
13-2-28: DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED AND MADE A PART HEREOF:
The following documents shall be incorporated herein by this reference, and in
the case of a conflict or ambiguity between or among them, the document of
latest date shall govern:
   A.   Any enabling ordinance in existence as of the date hereof; and
   B.   Any proposal submitted by grantee pursuant to a franchise renewal
procedure, as amended and supplemented during the franchise renewal negotiation
process;
   C.   Any franchise agreement between grantee and franchise authority
reflecting the renewal of the franchise, if any. (Ord. 94-4, 8-1-1994)
13-2-29: PREEMPTION:
If the FCC or any other federal or state body or agency shall now or hereafter
exercise any paramount jurisdiction over the subject matter of the franchise,
then to the extent such jurisdiction shall preempt and supersede or preclude
the exercise of the like jurisdiction by the franchise authority, the
jurisdiction of the franchise authority shall cease and no longer exist. (Ord.
94-4, 8-1-1994)
13-2-30: ACTIONS OF FRANCHISE AUTHORITY:
In any action by the franchise authority or representative thereof mandated or
permitted under the terms hereof, such party shall act in a reasonable,
expeditious, and timely manner. Furthermore, in any instance where approval or
consent is required under the terms hereof, such approval or consent shall not
be unreasonably withheld. (Ord. 94-4, 8-1-1994)
